THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Siiniles,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
literature,   on  the   Verses  of  the    Bible 


BY 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


SAINT  LUKE,  Vol.  I 


New  York         Chicago         Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

London    and    Edinburgh 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homilelic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Lfterattire^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible^  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  OctaTO.  Cleth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volumo,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sges  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
eusd  as  yet." — Christian. 

"iSvery  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  words,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes  with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
In  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  i.  I.    and    II.    Chronicles,  Isaiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxx. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  Ezra,   Nehemiah    and  Jeremiah,  Vol.  I:  i-xxii.   _ 

Exodus.  Esther.  Jeremiah,    Vol.    II:  xxiil- 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs.                                  lii. 

Deuteronomy.  The    Psalms,  Vol.  I:  i-  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  I. 

Joshua.  Judges  AMD  Ruth.  xxvi.  Minor  Prophets,  Vol.  II. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

8t.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Coi/Msiams. 

St.  Makk.  Thdssalonians. 

8t.  Lvkb,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Lukb,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timotht,   TraVB,  am© 

St.  Luke,   Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  L  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Judb. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

lodez  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 
Send  for  our  oireular  giving  apeeial  offers. 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL     COMPANY 

NEW     YORKi    J58   Fifth  Avenue  CHICAGO:   80   Wabash  Avenue 

TORONTO  LONDON  EDINBURGH 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE , 

Th»  Wbitbb  ot  ih»  Third  Qosnsh. — Of  the  writer  of  the  third  Gospel  nothing 
whatsoever  is  known,  except  that  he  was  the  faithful  friend  and  companion  of  St. 
Paul.  L  Scripture  notices.  Luke  is  mentioned  by  name  three  times  in  the 
Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  and  always  with  affection  (Col.iv.  14;  2  Tim.  iv.  11;  Philemon. 
24).  From  Col.  iv.  11,  where  the  companions  of  Paul,  "  who  are  of  the  cironm- 
ciflion,"  are  distinguished  from  those  afterwards  named,  we  gather  that  he  mast 
have  been  before  his  conversion  a  Gentile.  His  name  is  Gentile — Lucanns, 
shortened  into  Lucas.  These  are  the  only  places  in  which  he  is  mentioned,  but 
there  can  be  not  the  smallest  doubt  that  frequently  in  the  narrative  of  the  Acts  he 
includes  himself  amongst  the  companions  in  travel  of  St.  Paul,  by  changing  the 
pronoun  to  the  first  person  plural  (See  Acts  xvi.  xx.  xxi.).  We  gather  from  the 
same  use  of  the  first  person  plural  that  Luke  was  a  fellow-voyager  with  St.  Paul  to 
Bome,  and  was  shipwrecked  with  him.  There  is  good  reason  also  to  suppose  that 
St.  Paul  alludes  to  St.  Luke  in  2  Cor.  viii.  18.  If  an  account  of  our  Lord's  Birth, 
Life,  Death,  and  Resurrection  was  then  called  "the  Gospel " — and  I  do  not  see  why 
it  should  not  have  been  so  called — then  the  allusion  is  most  natural  and  becoming  ^ 
otherwise  it  is  difl5cnlt  to  understand  what  St.  Paul  means  by  "praise  in  the 
Gospel,"  for  his  name  is  not  mentioned  in  any  Gospel,  nor  is  his  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  with  eloquence  ever  alluded  to,  as  that  of  Apollos  is.  II.  Early  Fathers, 
1.  Eusebius.  "  Luke,  who  was  bom  at  Antioch,  and  by  profession  a  physician, 
being  for  the  most  part  connected  with  Paul,  and  familiarly  acquainted  with  the 
rest  of  the  apostles,  has  left  us  two  inspired  books,  the  institutes  of  that  spiritual 
healing  art  which  he  obtained  from  them.  One  of  these  is  his  Gospel,  in  which  he 
testifies  that  he  has  recorded  *  as  those  who  were  from  the  beginning  eye-witnesses 
and  ministers  of  the  Word  delivered  unto  him,'  whom  also,  he  says,  he  has  in  all 
things  followed.  ...  It  is  also  said,  that  Paul  usually  referred  to  his  Gospel,  when- 
ever in  his  Epistles  he  spoke  of  some  particular  Gospel  of  his  own,  saying, 
*  according  to  my  Gospel.' "  "  In  his  own  Gospel  he  delivered  the  certain  account 
of  those  things  that  he  himself  had  fully  received  from  bis  intimacy  and  stay  with 
Paul,  and  also  his  intercourse  with  the  other  apostles."  2.  Irenseus  refers  to  him 
frequently  by  name,  as  book  iii.  ch.  i. :  "Luke  also,  the  companion  of  Paul, 
recorded  in  a  book  the  Gospel  preached  by  him."  Again,  Irenseus,  speaking  ot  the 
Bacerdotal  aspect  of  Christ,  given  by  St.  Luke,  writes,  book  iii.  ch.  xi.  8 :  *•  But 
that  according  to  Luke,  taking  up  his  priestly  character,  commenced  with  Zacharias 
the  priest  offering  sacrifice  to  God."  3.  Tertnllian.  "  Luke's  form  of  the  Gospel 
men  nsoally  ascribe  to  Paul."  4.  Origen,  quoted  by  Eusebius,  writes :  "  And  the 
third,  according  to  Luke,  the  Gospel  commended  by  Paul,  which  was  written  for 
the  converts  from  the  Gentiles."  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  His  foreign  extraction 
b  confirmed  also  by  the  character  of  his  style,  which  approaches  nearer  to  th& 
•tandard  of  classical  Greek  than  that  of  any  other  writer  of  the  New  Testament, 
except  St  Paul.  This  feature  of  his  language  renders  it  probable  that  he  was  of 
Greek  origin.    Bome  have  inferred  this  ako  from  hiB  Greek  name ;  but  it  was  noi 


vl  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE. 

uncommon  for  Jews,  as  well  as  Bomans  and  other  foreigners,  to  assume  such  namet 
at  this  period.  Whether  he  was  a  proselyte  to  Judaism  before  his  conversion  to 
Christianity  or  not,  is  a  question  on  which  critics  differ.  The  supposition  that  ha 
adopted  first  the  Jewish  religion,  and  had  done  so  perhaps  in  early  Ufe,  accounts 
best  for  his  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  opinions  and  customs  of  the  Jews,  his 
knowledge  of  the  Septuagint,  and  the  degree  of  Hebraistic  tendency  which  shows 
itself  in  his  style.  Of  the  manner  in  which  he  was  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
Gospel,  we  have  no  information.  The  suggestion  of  some  of  the  later  fathers  that 
he  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples,  is  not  only  without  ground,  but  opposed  to  his 
own  statement  in  the  introduction  of  his  Gospel,  where  he  distinguishes  himself 
from  those  who  had  been  personal  attendants  on  the  ministry  of  Christ.  Of  his 
history  subsequent  to  the  close  of  the  Acts,  nothing  authentic  has  been  preserved. 
The  traditions  which  relate  to  this  period  are  uncertain  and  contradictory.  Accord- 
ing to  Gregory  Nazianzen,  whom  several  later  writers  follow,  he  suffered  maitv r- 
dom ;  according  to  others,  and  those  whose  testimony  has  greater  weight,  he  died 
a  natural  death.  {H.  B.  Racket,  D.D.)  Combining  the  traditional  element 
with  the  scriptural,  the  uncertain  with  the  certain,  we  are  able  to  trace  the  follow- 
ing dim  outline  of  the  Evangelist's  life.  He  was  born  at  Antioch  in  Syria 
(Eusebius,  Hist.  iii.  4)  ;  in  what  condition  of  life  is  uncertain.  That  he  was 
taught  the  science  of  medicine  does  not  prove  that  he  was  of  higher  birth  than  the 
rest  of  the  disciples;  medicine  in  its  earlier  and  ruder  state  was  sometimes 
practised  even  by  a  slave.  The  well-known  tradition  that  Luke  was  also  a  painter, 
and  of  no  mean  skill,  rests  on  the  authority  of  Nicephorus  (ii.  43),  of  the  Menology 
of  the  Emperor  Basil,  drawn  up  in  980,  and  of  other  later  writers;  but  none  of 
them  are  of  historical  authority  :  and  the  Acts  and  Epistles  are  wholly  silent  upon 
a  point  so  likely  to  be  mentioned.  He  was  not  bom  a  Jew  (comp.  Col.  iv.  11  with 
ver.  14).  The  date  of  his  conversion  is  uncertain.  He  was  not  indeed  "  an  eye- 
witness and  minister  of  the  Word  from  the  beginning  "  (Luke  i.  2),  or  he  would 
have  rested  his  claim  as  an  evangelist  upon  tbat  ground.  Still,  he  may  have  been 
converted  by  the  Lord  Himself,  some  time  before  His  departure ;  and  the  statement 
of  Epiphanius  and  others,  that  he  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples,  has  nothing  very 
improbable  in  it ;  whilst  that  which  Theophylact  adopts,  that  he  was  one  of  the 
two  who  journeyed  to  Emmaus  with  the  risen  Kedeemer,  has  found  modern 
defenders.  Tertullian  assumes  that  the  conversion  of  Luke  is  to  be  ascribed  to 
Paul ;  and  the  balance  of  probability  is  on  this  side.  The  first  ray  of  historical 
light  falls  on  the  Evangelist  when  he  joins  St.  Paul  at  Troas,  and  shares  his 
journey  into  Macedonia.  .  .  .  He  again  appears  in  the  company  of  Paul  in  the 
memorable  journey  to  Rome  (Acts  xxvii.  1).  He  remained  at  his  side  during  his 
first  imprisonment  (Col.  iv.  14  ;  Philem.  24) ;  and  if  it  is  supposed  that  the  Second 
Epistle  to  Timothy  was  written  during  the  second  imprisonment,  then  the  testi- 
mony of  that  Epistle  (iv.  11)  shows  that  he  continued  faithful  to  the  Apostle  to  the 
end  of  his  afflictions.  After  the  death  of  St.  Paul,  the  acts  of  his  faithful  com- 
panion are  hopelessly  obscure  to  us.  .  .  .  It  is,  as  perhaps  the  EvangeUst  wishes  it 
to  be :  we  only  know  him  whilst  he  stands  by  the  side  of  his  beloved  Paul ;  when 
the  master  departs,  the  history  of  the  follower  becomes  confusion  and  fable. 
{Archbishop  Thomson). 

LxjKE,  THE  Physicun. — A  physiciaii  indeed,  and,  like  so  many  physicians,  a  man 
of  wide  sensibility,  culture,  and  intelligence.  If  an  Antioohene,  he  probably  met 
Paul  at  Antioch,  and  seems  to  have  been  drawn  very  close  to  him  about  a.d.  62, 
when  the  Apostle  was  recovering  from  the  severe  attack  of  ophthalmia  which 
prostrated  him  for  a  time  in  Galatia.  Luke's  profession,  probably,  took  him  much 
on  board  the  ships  that  plied  between  Troas  and  Philippi,  and  all  round  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKB.  vU 

JBgean  coast.  It  was,  perhaps,  natural  that  he  should  sail  in  the  same  ship  with 
Paul  from  Troas  to  Philippi ;  but  it  is  soon  evident  that  no  chance  association 
hound  him  to  Paul.  If  he  left  him,  it  was  not  for  long,  and  when  he  joined  him 
«gain,  some  seven  years  later,  it  was  to  share  with  him  shipwreck  and  imprison- 
ment, and  to  part  with  him  on  earth  no  more.  "  Luke,  the  beloved  physician," 
was  doubtless  in  constant  requisition.  Paul  was  always  suffering  from  his  eyes — 
always  overworking  himself — sometimes  prostrated  with  what  we  should  perhaps 
call  epileptic  fits.  Indeed,  there  could  be  no  more  suitable  companion  than  a 
travelling  doctor  for  one  whose  "outward  man  was  perishing,"  and  who  "died 
daily."  His  wide  acquaintance  with  men,  and  the  varied  experiences  of  a  doctor's 
life,  made  Luke  peculiarly  fit  to  record  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  (as  he  does  in  the 
Acts)  amongst  men  of  different  nations.  For,  Gentile  as  he  was,  he  was  pretty 
fair  to  the  Jaws  and  in  hearty  sympathy  with  the  Soman  Government,  whilst 
having  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Greeks,  especially  of  Asia  Minor.  He 
nowhere  mentions  himself  by  name,  and  seldom  even  alludes  to  himself  at  all. 
Beneath  the  modest  "we,"  which  occurs  in  a  few  chapters  of  the  Acts,  the 
beloved  physician  is  effaced  rather  than  concealed,  but  the  pathos  of  those  few 
words — dictated  by  such  an  one  as  "Paul,  the  aged,"  in  prison — "Only  Luke  is 
^th  me,"  are  sufficient  to  make  his  name  dear  and  immortal,  even  if  he  had  not 
left  behind  him  such  a  priceless  diary  as  the  Acts,  and  such  a  prose  poem  as  the 
Gospel  which  bears  his  name.  {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  St.  Luke  is  eminently 
the  psychologist  among  the  Evangelists.  He  was,  as  we  know,  a  physician. 
Perhaps  we  may  trace  this  in  his  tone  of  speaking  of  their  art — "  which  had  spent 
all  her  living  upon  physicians,  neither  could  be  healed  of  any  " — compared  with 
the  severer  words  of  St.  Mark,  "  and  had  suffered  many  things  .  .  .  rather  grew 
worse."  We  can  scarcely  doubt  that  the  beautiful  saying  preserved  by  him  in 
<5ommon  with  the  other  Synoptics,  "  They  that  are  whole,"  &o.,  must  have  been 
specially  affecting  to  one  who  had  himself  been  a  physician.  Certainly  we  find 
throughout  that  symptoms  of  diseases  were  more  carefully  described  by  one  who 
had  been  trained  to  observe  them,  and  who,  though  he  could  neitaer  have  been  a 
disciple  of  our  Lord,  nor  an  eye-witness,  was  thus  prepared  to  understand  many  of 
the  miracles  better  (See  ch.  iv.  38,  40  ;  v.  12 ;  vi.  17,  18 ;  ix.  2  ;  xxii.  50,  51).  The 
physician  is,  perforce,  something  of  a  psychologist.  This  may  arise  from  the 
mysterious  connection  between  mind  and  body,  and  from  the  opportunities  which 
he  possesses  of  observing  the  subtler  traits  of  many  temperaments  in  the  hours 
when  we  are  the  least  able  to  disguise  our  real  selves.  In  those  hours,  when  we 
are  so  weak  and  fretful,  the  physician  learns  something  more  than  our  diseases  ; 
he  learns  our  characters.  The  most  delicate  psychological  skill  St.  Luke  cer- 
tainly possessed.  I  might  refer  you  to  the  perplexity  of  Herod  about  our  Lord  ; 
to  the  exquisite  penetrating  satire  in  those  touches  preserved  by  this  Evangelist— 
"  He  that  showed  mercy  on  him,"  because  the  lawyer  would  not  pronounce  the 
Samaritan's  hated  name,  and  "  The  Pharisee  prayed  thus  with  himself,"  when 
there  was  no  prayer ;  to  the  delineation  of  Zaccheus ;  to  Pilate  and  Herod  making 
friends  together;  to  the  disciples  believing  not  for  joy  and  wondering,  and  returning 
to  Jerusalem  with  great  joy  after  their  Lord  had  left  them.  I  might  refer  to  the  way 
in  which  he  binds  his  materials  together  by  an  idea,  as  in  the  incident  about  Mary 
and  Martha,  which  immediately  follows  the  parable  of  the  Good  Samaritan,  for  the 
purpose  of  completing  the  picture  of  the  Christian  life  ;  and  in  the  passage  at  close 
of  chap,  ix.,  where  we  have  three  different  natures  dealt  with  by  Jeaus.  He  loves, 
too,  to  tell  what  women  did  for  Jesus.  I  need  only  mention  the  names  of  Elizabeth, 
the  Virgin  Mother,  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner,  Mary  Magdalene  and  others  who 
miniatered  to  Him  of  their  substance,  Martha  and  Mary,  the  weeping  daughters  ut 
Jerusalem.    Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  without  irreverence,  that  this  pByeholofl;i/><U 


'»HI  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE. 

skill  finds  its  highest  application  in  writing  of  the  saored  humanity  of  onr  Lord. 
From  St.  Luke's  Gospel  we  learn  mach  that  is  truest  and  deepest  in  relation  to  the 
Man,  Ghzist  Jesus.  There  is  traced  the  successive  development  of  "the  Holy 
Thing  bom  of  Mary,"  "  the  fruit  of  her  womb,"  into  the  Babe,  the  Child,  the  Man 
(ch.  i.  85,  42 ;  iL  16, 43).  There  are  the  statements,  which  sometimes  seem  inoom> 
prehensible,  and  sometimes  degrading,  as  applied  to  one  like  Him,  but  which 
always  •*  requite  studious  regard  with  opportune  delight."  For  instance  :  "  When 
the  time  was  come  that  He  should  be  received  up," — ^what  can  this  mean,  standing 
where  it  does,  and  speaking  of  the  time  before  His  death  T  Faith  reads  the  riddlo. 
** Evangelitta  stylus  imitatur  sensum  Jesu."  Again,  "His  sweat  was,  as  it  were, 
great  drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground."  The  academic  Shimeis  of  England, 
and  France,  and  Germany,  may  seek  for  stones  to  fling  at  Him,  from  the  dust  of 
the  garden.  The  French  man  of  letters  may  cross  Eedron,  and  wave  out  his 
scented  blasphemies,  leaving  the  unwholesome  taint  of  Parisian  patchouli  under 
the  Olives  of  Gethsemane.  Why  that  agony,  those  big  drops,  that  burst  of  sorrow 
in  which  He  was  withdrawn  from  His  own  ?  Why  was  He  less  firm  than  th& 
martyrs,  than  Socrates,  than  the  Stoics,  than  the  Indian  brave  1  A  man  who  does 
not  understand  love  and  purity,  sacrifice  and  self-denial,  the  fearfulness  of  sin,  the 
holiness  of  God,  the  blessedness  of  communion  with  the  Father  to  the  sinless 
man,  and  therefore  the  fearfulness  of  its  suspension,  cannot  understand  Gethsemane 
as  represented  by  St.  Luke.    {Bishop  William  Alexander.) 

Datb  or  THB  Thibd  Gospel. — From  Acta  i.  1,  it  is  clear  that  it  was  written 
before  the  Acts,  which  (see  Acts  zxviii.  30, 81)  must  have  been  completed  about  the 
end  of  the  second  year  of  St.  Paul's  imprisonment,  that  is,  about  a.d.  68.  How 
much  earlier  this  "former  treatise"  may  have  been  written  is  uncertain.  But 
Dean  Alford  remarks  that  the  words  imply  some  considerable  interval  between  the 
two  productions.  The  opinion  of  the  younger  Thiersch  thus  becomes  very  probable, 
that  it  was  written  at  Gsesarea  during  St.  Paul's  imprisonment  there,  a.i>.  58-60. 
The  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  was  probably  written  about  the  same  time ;  and  neither 
Evangelist  appears  to  have  used  the  other,  although  both  made  use  of  that  form  of 
oral  teaching  which  the  apostles  had  gradually  come  to  employ.  {Archbishop 
Thomson.) 

Lbadino  Ohasaotkiiistios  or  thb  Thibd  Gosfbl. — L  St.  Luke  was  a  Gentile; 
hence  one  leading  idea  of  his  Gospel  is  the  rejection  of  the  Jews.  This  idea 
breathes  sadly  through  Simeon's  Song :  "  This  child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising 
again  of  many  in  Israel,"  the  first  hint  of  opposition  from  unbelief  which  occur» 
in  this  Gospel.  It  appears  in  St.  Luke's  account  of  the  Baptist's  terrible  words, 
not  only  as  in  St.  Matthew  "  to  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,"  but  to  "  the  multitude 
that  came  forth  to  be  baptized  of  him,  0  generation  of  vipers !  the  axe  is  laid  unto 
the  root  of  the  trees."  It  pervades  the  close  of  our  Lord's  discourse  in  the 
synagogue  at  Nazareth.  It  is  typified  in  that  final  rejection  of  the  Holy  One,  when 
He  was  led  to  the  brow  of  the  Mount  of  Precipitation,  the  first  prelude  of  another 
more  tragic  and  final.  It  gives  solemn  pathos  to  those  words  of  the  weeping 
Saviour:  "Because  thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."  II.  This  Gentile 
Evangelist,  possibly  writing  his  Gospel  from  Eome,  the  capital  of  the  Gentile  world, 
and  impressed  with  the  rejection  of  the  Jews,  brings  before  us  the  Gospel  as  the 
Gospel  of  Humanity,  the  Saviour  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Bom  in  a  stable, 
nnder  the  Boman  Emperor,  He  who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  bom  of 
the  Virgin  Mary  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men.  His  genealogy  is  brought  up  to  Adam, 
the  head  of  our  Humanity,  not  to  Abraham,  the  progenitor  of  the  Jewish  people. 
While  St.  Matthew  speaks  ohiefly  of  the  Twelve  as  representatives  of  the  twelve 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE.  i« 

tribes,  St.  Lake  lays  more  stress  upon  the  sending  of  the  Seventy,  that  nnmbet 
being  the  symbol  of  the  nations  under  the  Theocracy.  The  great  episode  of  the 
so-called  "Journey  Report"  (Luke  ix.  61,  xviii.  30)  mentions  a  journey  through 
Samaria  to  Judaea  and  Jerusalem.  We  may  note  in  it  tenderness  to  the  Samaritans, 
in  refusing  to  bring  down  fire  from  heaven,  and  in  choosing  the  Samaritan  as  the 
embodiment  of  charity  in  that  story  whose  beauty  has  never  been  exceeded  but  by 
another,  "  of  which  Jesus  is  not  the  narrator,  but  the  subject."  Note,  too,  that 
breathing  of  deathless  hope  over  Tyre  and  Sidon  (ch.  x.  ver.  13).  And,  above  all, 
the  Parables  of  the  Lost  Sheep  and  the  Prodigal  Son,  which  touch  upon  the  exile 
and  the  return  of  God's  self-banished  children  with  such  tender  and  tearful  love. 
IIL  Pauline  colouring.  1.  Of.  St,  Luke's  account  of  the  institution  of  the  Holy 
Communion  with  that  of  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xi.  2.  The  words  x«P«?  and  Triarig,  bo 
frequently  used  by  St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul,  are  seldom  used  by  other  New  Testament 
writers.  3.  All  readers  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles  must  have  been  arrested  by  the  con- 
trast drawn  in  Bom.  v.  and  1  Cor.  xv.  between  the  first  man,  who  is  from  the  earth, 
of  dust,  and  the  Second  Man,  whose  origin  is  from  Heaven.  Is  not  the  germ  of 
this  great  thought  in  the  last  clause  of  the  genealogy  in  Luke  iii. :  "  Which  was 
the  son  of  Adam,  which  was  the  son  of  God  "  ?  4.  What  aspect  of  the  Redeemer's 
work  is  most  present  to  St.  Paul  ?  What  note  of  the  trumpet  is  it  that  thrills  as 
most  ?  Forgiveaess,  pity,  grace.  "  Non  gratia  ex  operibus,  sed  opera  ex  gratia." 
This  is  throughout  a  fundamental  conception  of  St.  Luke,  in  those  passages  which 
are  peculiar  to  him.  All  is  Christ's  gift.  So  is  it  with  the  lower  blessings  of 
healing.  •'  Unto  many  that  were  blind  He  gave  sight."  So  much  more  with  the 
higher  gift  of  pardon  and  peace.  Does  not  this  apply  to  the  story  of  the  sinful 
woman  who  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus ;  to  the  Parables  of  the  love  of  God  the  Sou 
in  seeking  the  lost,  and  of  God  the  Father  in  going  to  meet  the  prodigal,  when  he 
is  yet  a  great  way  off  ?  .  .  .  This  Gospel,  whose  key-note  and  leading  idea  is  for* 
giveness ;  which  has,  as  its  own  peculiar  treasures,  the  forgiveness  of  the  fallen 
woman,  of  the  publican,  of  the  crucifiers,  of  the  dying  thief,  of  a  world  if  that 
world  will  receive  it ;  comes  well  from  the  Gentile  Evangelist,  the  friend  of  St. 
Paul  the  great  Doctor  of  Grace,  who  wrote  his  Gospel  under  St.  Paul's  guidance 
and  encouragement.  {Bishop  William  Alexander.)  I.  St.  Luke  must  be  ranked 
as  the  first  Christian  hymnologist.  (See  ch.  i.  28-33,  46-55,  68-79 ;  ii.  14,  29-32). 
Li  these  Canticles  (Benedictus,  Magnificat,  Nunc  Dimittis)  the  New  iBon  is  repre- 
sented not  merely  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  Old,  but  also  as  a  Kingdom  of  the  Spirit ; 
as  a  spring  of  life  and  joy  opened  to  the  world;  as  a  mystery,  prophesied  of  indeed 
because  it  is  eternal,  but  now  in  the  appointed  time  revealed  to  men.  U.  In  this 
Gospel  thanksgiving  is  also  prominent.  *'  The  Gospel  of  the  Saviour  begins  with 
hymns,  and  ends  with  praises ;  and  as  the  thanksgivings  of  the  meek  are  accorded 
in  the  first  chapter,  so  in  the  last  we  listen  to  the  gratitude  of  the  faithful."  (See 
eh.  ii.  20 ;  v.  25  ;  viL  16 ;  xiii.  13  ;  xvii.  15 ;  zviii.  43 ;  xziii.  47).  IIL  It  also 
gives  special  prominence  to  prayer.  1.  It  alone  preserves  to  ns  the  fact  that  our 
Lord  prayed  on  six  distinct  and  memorable  occasions — at  Baptism,  after  cleansing 
the  leper,  before  calling  the  Twelve,  at  Transfiguration,  on  Cross  for  murderers, 
and  with  last  breath.  2.  St.  Luke,  too,  like  St.  Paul,  insists  on  the  duty  ol 
unceasing  prayer  as  taught  by  Christ ;  and  emphasizes  this  instruction  by  alone 
recording  the  two  parables  which  encourage  as  to  a  persistent  energy,  a  holy 
importunity,  a  storming  of  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  by  violence  in  our  prayerg 
(ch.  xL  5-13 ;  xviiL  1-8).  IV.  But  the  Gospel  is  marked  mainly  by  its  presentation 
of  the  Good  Tidings  in  their  universality  and  gratuitousness.  In  St.  Luke,  towards 
every  age,  towards  either  sex,  towards  all  nations,  towards  all  professions,  towards 
men  of  every  opinion  and  every  shade  of  character,  oar  Blessed  Lord  appears  ai 
Christus  Oonsolator;  the  Good  Physician  of  bodies  and  of  sools;  the  Gospelley 

I* 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE. 

of  the  poor ;  the  Brother  who  loves  all  His  brethren  in  the  great  family  of  man  ; 
the  unwearied  Healer  and  Ennobler  of  sick  and  suffering  humanity  ;  the  Desire  of 
all  nations;  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  who  "went  about  doing  good."  In  accor- 
dance with  this  conception — V.  St.  Luke  reveals  especially  the  sacredness  of 
infancy.  He  alone  tells  us  of  the  birth  and  infancy  of  the  Baptist ;  the  Annuncia- 
tion ;  the  meeting  of  Mary  and  Elisabeth;  the  songs  of  the  herald  Angels;  the 
Circumcision ;  the  Presentation  in  the  Temple  ;  the  growth  in  universal  favour  and 
sweet  submission.  And  he  alone  preserves  the  one  anecdote  of  the  Confirmation 
of  Jesus  at  twelve  years  old,  which  is  the  solitary  flower  gathered  from  the  silence 
of  thirty  years.  VI.  He  dwells  especially  on  Christ's  ministry  to  the  world ;  that 
He  was  to  be  a  Light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  as  well  as  the  glory  of  His  people 
Israel.  VII.  St.  Luke's  is  specially  the  Gospel.of  Womanhood,  and  he  prominently 
records  the  graciousness  and  tenderness  of  Christ  towards  many  women.  Vlli. 
He  seems  to  delight  in  all  the  records  which  told  of  the  mercy  of  the  Saviou* 
towards  the  poor,  the  humble,  the  despised  (ch.  ii.  24 ;  vi.  20-25,  30 ;  viii.  2.  3 ; 
xii.  16-21,  33  ;  xvi.  13, 19-25  ;  xiv.  12-15).  IX,  Further,  it  is  specially  the  Gospel 
of  the  outcast— of  the  Samaritan  (ch.  ix.  52-56  ;  xvii.  11-19),  the  publican,  the 
harlot,  and  the  prodigal.  Jesus  came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost 
(xix.  10).  See  instances  in  Zaccheus,  the  Prodigal  Son,  Mary  of  Magdala,  the 
woman  with  the  issue  of  blood,  the  dying  robber.  X.  Lastly,  it  is  the  Gospel  of 
tolerance.     (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

St.  Luke's  Portrait  of  oxjr  Lord. — A  well-known  tradition  makes  St.  Luke  a 
painter.  This  tradition  is  not  very  ancient.  It  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  writer 
before  the  sixth  century.  It  is  the  thirteenth  century  before  he  appears  as  the 
patron  saint  of  painters.  .  .  .  The  oldest  tradition  in  Justin  Martyr  would  seem 
to  have  believed  that  the  Son  of  Man  had  literally  no  form  or  comeliness.  There 
are  two  types  of  the  image  of  the  Son  of  Man  in  Christendom.  In  one.  He  is 
hard  and  stern,  wan  and  worn  ;  in  the  other.  He  has  a  soft,  fair  beauty,  with 
chestnut  hair.  .  .  .  Whatever  His  form  and  features  may  have  been.  He  must  have 
looked  beautiful  who  said,  "  And  He  layeth  it  on  His  shoulders."  Weary  as  He 
was  and  wan,  white  with  exhaustion  and  dropped  with  blood.  He  must  have  looked 
beautiful,  who  said,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  So  the  Evangelist  who  never  painttd 
the  form  of  the  Son  of  Man  on  canvas,  or  laid  it  in  rich  enamel,  has  given  us  the 
most  attractive  picture  of  Him.  In  St.  Matthew,  He  is  Israel's  Monarch  ;  in  St. 
Mark,  He  is  the  Son  of  God  ;  in  St.  John,  He  is  the  Everlasting  Word  made  Flesh  ; 
in  St.  Luke  (while  the  title  of  the  Lord,  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  most  frequently  found) 
we  are  almost  tempted  to  think  the  emblem  of  the  Man  more  appropriate  than 
that  of  the  Ox,  which  yet  suits  so  well  the  priestly  story  at  the  beginning,  and  the 
overpowering  conviction  of  the  Sacrifice  at  the  end.  For  in  St.  Luke,  He  is  pre- 
eminently the  Son  of  Man;  loving,  pitying,  pardoning  a  fallen  race;  anointed  to 
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor;  leaving  the  ninety  and  nine  that  He  may  bear  the 
lost  with  all  the  strength  and  tenderness  of  that  Divine  Manhood ;  dying,  and 
rising  again,  that  repentance  and  remission  may  be  preached  to  all.  .  .  .  Not 
written  by  a  painter,  this  is  yet  a  painter's  Gospel.  From  it  come  the  favourite 
subjects :  The  Virgin  and  Child,  Simeon,  the  Scene  with  the  Doctors  in  the 
Temple,  the  Ascension.     (Bishop  William  Alexander.) 

Authenticity  of  the  Third  Gospeii. — The  authenticity  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel  ifl 
well  established.  There  are  some  allusions,  or  what  seem  to  be  such,  to  its  contents 
in  the  writings  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers ;  and  Justin  Martyr,  who  died  soon  after 
the  middle  of  the  second  century,  quotes  from  it,  and  alludes  to  it  several  times. 
In  a  fragment  "  On  the  Besurrection,"  which  is  about  the  same  date  as  the  works 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  LUKE,  a 

of  Justin,  there  is  allusion  made  to  three  verses  out  of  the  last  chapter  of  St.  Luke. 
Hegesippus,  contemporary  with  Justin,  has  two  quotations  from  this  Gospel  in  the 
scanty  fragments  of  his  writings  which  have  been  preserved  to  us  by  Eusebius ;  and 
it  is  mentioned  in  the  list  of  New  Testament  writings  in  the  Muratorian  fragment 
on  the  canon,  about  170  a.d.  The  enemies  of  the  faith  also  have  left  us  evidence 
of  the  same  kind.  Marcion,  a  heretical  teacher,  who  flourished  in  the  first  half  of 
the  second  century,  desired  to  represent  Christianity  as  utterly  unconnected  with 
Judaism.  He  taught  that  the  Jewish  law  had  its  origin  from  the  Demiurge  (so  he 
styled  the  God  of  the  Jews),  and  that  from  his  influence  Christ  camo  to  set  men 
free.  With  these  opinions  to  support,  Marcion  must  reject  a  large  portion  of  the 
New  Testament,  and  he  accepted  only  ton  Epistles  of  St.  Paul,  and  such  parts  of  the 
Gospel  of  St.  Luke  as  suited  with  his  ideas.  The  heretical  mutilation  which  he 
wrought  in  the  Third  Gospel  has  furnished  satisfactory  testimony  to  its  genuine- 
ness and  authenticity,  and  has  proved  the  early  recognition  of  what  has  been  already 
alluded  to — that  this  Gospel  is  largely  pervaded  by  the  spirit  of  the  "Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles." — (Prof.  Lumby.) 

Contents  of  thb  Third  Gospel. — The  Gospel  contains — 1.  A  prefaee  p.  1-4). 
2.  An  account  of  the  time  preceding  the  ministry  of  Jesus  (i.  5  to  ii.  62).  3. 
Several  accounts  of  discourses  and  acts  of  our  Lord,  common  to  Luke,  Matthew, 
and  Mark,  related  for  the  most  part  in  their  order,  and  belonging  to  Capernaum 
and  the  neighbourhood  (iii.  1  to  ix.  50).  4.  A  collection  of  similar  accounts, 
referring  to  a  certain  journey  to  Jerusalem,  most  of  them  peculiar  to  Luke  (iz.  51 
to  xviii.  14).  5.  An  account  of  the  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus, 
eoramon  to  Luke  with  the  other  Evangelists,  except  as  to  some  of  the  accounts  of 
whai  took  place  after  the  resorreetion  (xviii.  16  to  the  end).     {ArchbUhop  ThoimoH.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB. 

8T.    LUKE. 

OHAPTEB  I. 

Tm.  1-4.  Foiasmnidi  as  many  have  taken  In  hand. — Si.  ZAik^t  frefaet  .t— TkaM 
Cow  Terses  are  a  preface,  and  a  very  valuable  preface,  becaose  they  are  a  deelaratioa 
from  the  author  himself  of  the  manner  in  which  we  ate  to  regard  his  work.  I.  St. 
Luke  gives  as  to  understand  that  hx  himself  was  not  ah  btb-withsss  or  thi  ■vhm 
HX  n  ABOUT  TO  BBOOBD,  but  that  he  had  taken  pains  to  inquire,  and  had  a  perfect 
onderstanding  of  all  tiie  history  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  II.  St.  Luke  tdls  as 
HaaX  he  had  undertaken  to  write  his  Gospel  bsoadsb  mant  had  uhdbbtaksii  to  oo 
TBB  HAMB  THiMO  BSTOBB.  The  question  arises  whether  he  means  us  to  understand 
that  he  is  adding  one  more  to  authentic  and  trustworthy  histories  already  existing, 
or  whether  he  intended  rather  to  supersede  and  correct  unauthorized  and  imperfect 
histories.  Possibly  neither  the  one  view  nor  the  other  is  entirely  and  exclusively 
tme.  It  may  be  that  St.  Luke  was  aware  that  authentic  histories  were  already  ia 
czistenee,  but  he  may  have  known  also  that  other  and  spurious  accounts  had  been  eom> 
posed,  and  therefore  have  been  desirous  of  helping  Theophilus  to  choose  the  tme  and 
reject  the  false  by  setting  down  for  his  use  such  an  orderly  account  of  the  life  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  he  himself  had  been  able  to  collect.  IIL  Again,  who  was  TanoPHiLusr 
Some  have  thought  that  the  name,  signifying  as  it  does  "one  who  is  dear  to  God," 
does  not  refer  to  any  one  particular  person ;  it  is  probable,  however,  that  Theophilug 
was  a  real  person,  perhaps  an  important  man  at  Antioch,  St.  Luke's  eity,  for  whose 
confirmation  in  the  faith  St.  Luke  was  induced  to  write.  Quite  in  keeping  with 
the  general  scheme  of  €k)d's  government  that  this  should  have  been  so.  Works 
which  are  instinct  with  the  Spirit  of  God  often  go  far  beyond  their  immediate  aim. 
The  Epistles,  which  are  the  precious  inheritance  of  the  universal  Church,  wera 
addressed  originally  to  particular  portions  of  the  Church,  some  of  them  only  to 
individuals,  and  the  greater  number  of  them  were  called  forth  by  circumstances 
which  have  long  passed  away.  And  so  we  need  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  a 
Gospel  addressed  to  Theophilus  has  become  the  possession  of  all  throughout  tha 
world  who  foUow  his  good  example.  lY.  Lastly,  l^t  it  be  noticed  that  St.  Luke 
did  not  write  to  Theophilus  with  the  purpose  of  giving  him  his  first  notions  of 
Christian  truth,  but  only  of  establishimo  hih  im  thb  enowlbdob  of  tho&b  things 
or  which  hb  had  bben  aiababy  instbuctbd  OB  catechized.  This  was  almost  of 
necessity  the  course  which  would  be  followed  in  the  time  of  the  apostles ;  but  it  is 
also  the  course  which  is  generally  followed  by  ourselves  now :  we  do  not  gain  our 
first  notions  of  Christian  truth  from  Scripture  or  indeed  from  any  written  book ; 
we  are  instructed  and  catechized  by  our  fathers  and  mothers  and  teachers,  and 
when  we  come  to  years  of  discretion,  and  are  able  to  think  for  ourselves,  we  find 
from  careful  study  of  God's  Holy  Word  that  those  things  which  we  have  learnt  as 
children  are  indeed  the  truth  of  God  which  is  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation 
through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (Bishop  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  purpose  of  the 
Gospel :—  I.  The  introduction  to  this  Gospel  is  the  highest  authority  fob  thb 
ACCOUNT  OF  the  PURPOSE  OF  ITS  COMPOSITION.  Thcophilus,  whoevsT  he  was,  was 
already  a  disciple,  and  had  been  instructed  in  the  things  which  were  most 
surely  believed  in  the  Church.  He  desired  to  know  the  certainty  of  those  things, 
St.  Luke  believed  that  it  was  his  vocation  to  give  him  what  he  wanted.    If  Theo« 

\ 


9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (CH1».  I. 

philus  was  an  individual,  he  represented  the  need  of  the  Church  generally.  That 
^vhich  was  good  for  him  might,  if  God  pleased,  be  good  for  ages  to  come.  IL 
Many,  St,  Luke  bats,  had  attempted  this  task  before  hih.  They  had  taken  in 
hand  to  set  forth  a  declaration  of  the  things,  &o.  The  declaration  had  been  madfl 
already— contained  in  the  preaching  of  the  apostles  and  their  helpers.  What  was 
wanted  was  a  continuous  narrative  of  the  things  which  made  the  substance  of  the 
declaration,  for  it  was  a  declaration  of  things,  not  of  opinions.  The  preaching 
concerned  a  Person,  the  narrative  must  exhibit  a  Person.  Who  the  "  many  "  were 
St.  Luke  does  not  say.  Nor  does  he  pronounce  upon  the  merits  or  demerits  of  his 
predecessors.  That  was  not  his  calling.  There  was  a  better  judge  than  he  of  the 
genuine  and  the  spurious.  We  may  safely  affirm  that  he  was  not  afraid  if  the 
experiments  to  produce  a  life  of  our  Lord  were  ever  so  numerous ;  if  some  of  them 
were  ever  so  confused  and  erroneous.  He  could  not  believe  the  word  which  he 
preached  unless  he  had  confidence  that  what  was  true  would  Uve,  that  what  was 
false  would  be,  sooner  or  later,  divided  from  it.  III.  The  next  clause  of  the  intro- 
duction has  perplexed  many,  perhaps  has  given  pain  to  some.  What  I  are  wb  not 
about  to  read  the  story  of  an  eye-witness?  St.  Luke  does  not  claim  that 
character.  He  has  received  these  records  from  those  who  were  eye-witnesses.  He 
has  examined  their  reports  carefully.  He  does  not  say  that  he  ever  saw  Christ  whilst 
He  was  walking  in  Galilee  or  Judtea.  He  seems  to  imply  the  contrary.  Now  here  is 
a  difference  between  him  and  some  of  the  other  evangelists,  perhaps  between  him  and 
all  the  other  three.  Is  it  a  difference  which  puts  him  below  them?  According  to  their 
own  j  udgment  and  confession,  assuredly  it  is  not.  They  tell  us  that  they  did  not  under- 
Btarid  the  words  and  acts  of  Jesus  whilst  they  were  walking  with  Him,  whilst  they 
were  eye-witnesses  of  what  He  did.  They  misapprehended  the  particular  words 
and  acts.  They  misapprehended  their  relation  to  each  other.  They  misappre- 
hended the  Person  who  was  the  Speaker  of  the  words  and  the  Doer  of  the  acts. 
What  they  all  say — what  no  one  says  so  frequently  as  the  beloved  disciple — is,  that 
the  things  which  they  could  not  understand  at  first  came  to  them  with  full  power 
and  revelation  when  they  saw  Him  no  more.  No  doubt  to  be  eye-witnesses  of  a 
fact  or  a  person  is  an  honourable  distinction,  but  an  eye-witness  may  glorify  him- 
self on  that  distinction,  and  attribute  a  worth  to  it  which  no  careful  student  of 
evidence  will  coucede.  There  are  qualities  necessary  in  an  eye-witness  besides  his 
eyes.  One  who  possesses  these  qualities  may  tell  us  what  they  do  not  tell,  may 
open  to  us  the  very  sense  and  purpose  of  what  they  do  tell.  It  is  so  in  all  cases : 
if  we  believe  the  evangelists — those  of  them  who  were  eye-witnesses — ^it  is  pre- 
eminently so  in  this  case.  IV.  What  does  St.  Luke  mean  by  the  Word  ?  If  the 
expression  occurred  in  St.  John's  Gospel  it  would  cause  no  perplexity.  We  should 
assume  at  once  that  he  was  speaking  of  the  Word  which  was  in  the  beginning  and 
was  made  flesh.  But  it  has  been  customary  to  assume  that  no  other  of  the 
evangelists  ever  fell  into  this  kind  of  language.  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  apostle 
who  survived  to  the  end  of  the  age  was  specially  appointed  to  remove  confusions 
which  had  haunted  the  readers  of  the  earlier  Gospels.  But  every  Jew  could  read, 
as  well  as  St.  John,  that  the  Word  of  God  had  come  to  Isaiah,  or  Jeremiah,  or 
Ezekiel.  Every  Jew  who  read  their  prophecies  believed  they  had  conversed  with 
this  Word  as  with  a  living  person.  The  thought,  "  He  with  whom  we  have  con- 
versed is  that  same  Person — He  has  in  human  flesh  revealed  Himself  to  us,"  was 
not  a  strange  speculation,  the  refinement  of  a  later  age.  It  was  the  simplest  way 
of  connecting  the  old  world  with  their  day.  It  was  the  great  escape  from  the  rab- 
binical traditions  which  buried  the  Divine  Person  under  the  mere  letter  of  the 
books.  Formally  to  assert  the  force  of  the  prophetical  phrase — to  make  it  pro- 
minent before  all  others — was  not  St.  Luke's  calling.  The  King,  the  Christ,  is  his 
subject.  If  we  admit  any  direction  of  the  minds  of  those  who  wrote  these  books — 
indeed,  any  special  callings  of  men  in  this  world  at  all — we  can  perceive  why  the 
tasks  of  the  different  evangelists  should  be  different.  We  can  perceive  also  why 
each  should  inevitably  at  times  adopt  forms  of  speech  which  appear  more 
characteristic  of  another.  V.  "  It  seemed  good  to  me  also."  Some  may  cry, 
"  Was  he  not  then  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  "  I  imagine  that  he  who  described 
the  Day  of  Pentecost,  and  referred  the  whole  existence  and  work  of  the  Church  to 
the  Spirit  of  God,  had  quite  as  awful  a  feeling  of  His  government  over  himself  as 
any  of  us  can  have.  The  freedom  of  his  language  shows  me  bow  strong  his  feeling 
was ;  our  sensitiveness  and  unwillingness  to  connect  the  Spirit  with  the  operations 
of  the  human  intellect,  indicate  the  weakness  of  ours.  We  ask  for  distinctions 
about  the  desrees  and  measures  in  which  the  Spirit  has  been  or  will  be  youohsafed. 


.  1.]  ST.  LUKE. 


Th«  Evangelisti  make  no  saoh  distinctions.  I  think  they  dared  not.  YI.  The 
next  clause  teaohea  as  maoh  on  this  subject,  and  would  teach  us  more  if  it  had  not 
been  unhappily  perverted  in  our  version.  What  St.  Luke  says  is  that  it  seemed 
good  to  hJxa  to  write,  havino  roLLOWBD  out  au.  thinos  with  cabefttl  diuoencb 
raoH  THBiB  socBOB,  just  as  a  man  traces  the  source  of  a  river  from  its  mountain* 
bed  through  all  its  windings.  Instead  of  being  absolved  from  this  diligence  by  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  Spu.it,  he  felt  himself  obliged  by  that  Spirit  to  spare  no 
labour,  not  to  omit  the  most  solicitous  examination  of  what  he  heard,  not  to  give 
himseli  credit  for  understanding  it  at  the  first,  but  to  wait  for  that  clear,  pene- 
trating light  which  could  distinguish  between  his  own  impressions  and  the  truth 
of  ^ings.  YII.  There  is  one  word  more  in  this  preface  which  I  cannot  pass  by. 
St.  Luke  professes  to  write  to  Theophilus  m  obdeb.  The  narrative  is  to  be  an 
orderly  or  continuous  one.  Can  we  then  discover  that  order  ?  Clearly  it  is  very 
different  from  that  of  common  biographers.  I  think  you  will  find  that  what  the 
evangelist  traces  are  the  steps  by  which  a  King  claimed  dominion  over  his  subjects ; 
how  they  were  prepared  for  Him ;  how  He  was  prepared  for  going  forth  among 
them ;  how  He  manifested  the  powers  of  His  kingdom ;  how  He  illustrated  the 
nature  of  it ;  what  kind  of  opposition  He  eucountered ;  what  battles  He  fought ; 
who  stood  by  Him ;  who  deserted  Him ;  how  He  seemed  to  be  vanquished ;  how 
He  prevailed  at  last.  The  more  steadily  we  keep  before  ourselves  the  thought  of  a 
Kingdom  of  Heaven — a  kingdom  actual  in  the  highest  sense,  explaining  the  nature 
and  forces  of  every  kingdom  that  has  existed  on  the  earth,  showing  what  in  those 
kingdoms  must  abide,  what  must  pass  away — the  more  shall  we  adhere  to  the  letter 
of  the  Gospels,  the  more  shall  we  enter  into  their  spirit.  {F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.) 
Pulpit  Notes : — 1.  The  reason  which  Luke  gives  for  writing  this  Gospel  would  seem 
at  &CBt  sight  to  be  an  excellent  reason  for  not  writing.  It  is  thought  by  superficial 
persons  to-day  that  there  are  already  sufficient  religious  books  before  the  world. 
What  is  the  error  of  such  reasoning  ?  Forgetf ulness  of  the  fact  that  Christianity 
presents  different  aspects  to  different  minds,  so  that  no  statement  of  it  can  ever 
exhaust  its  intellectual  and  spiritual  riches.  Every  Christian  student  writes  a  life 
of  Christ  for  himself.  The  facts  of  Christianity  are  few  and  simple,  but  the  truths 
arising  out  of  them  are  innumerable  and  profound.  The  preaching  of  the  Word 
ean  never  be  the  same  by  any  two  men  who  diligently  inquire  into  its  meaning  for 
themselves  and  fearlessly  express  the  results  of  their  investigation.  2.  At  the  time 
of  Luke's  writing,  the  facts  of  Christianity  were  not  only  known  as  matters  of 
eorrent  rumour — they  were  most  surely  believed.  Not  enough  that  the  events  of 
the  Christian  history  be  not  discredited.  They  must  be  received  with  all  faith  and 
love,  and  become  elements  of  our  own  spiritual  life.  When  this  is  realized  a  new 
emphasis  will  characterize  the  tone  of  the  Church.  3.  Noticeable  th&4;  Luke  enters 
npon  his  work  with  the  utmost  candour  and  fearlessness.  Does  not  propose  to 
evade  anything  or  skilfully  slur  over  anything.  Distinctly  says  that  he  will  begin 
at  the  beginning,  and  trace  the  whole  history  through  all  its  windings,  difficulties, 
and  saccesses.  This  is  precisely  what  is  wanted  for  our  own  day,  viz.,  a  distinct 
and  complete  idea  of  the  ground  which  is  occupied  by  Christian  history.    4.  The 

Srinoiple  of  tradition  runs  through  this  prefatory  note  in  a  remarkable  manner, 
'irst  of  all  come  the  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  Word ;  then  come  the 
writers  with  whom  they  were  immediately  associated  ;  then  come  such  men  as  are 
represented  by  the  "most  excellent  Theophilus;  "  and  afterward  would  come  the 
persons  to  whom  Theophilus  communicated  the  information  with  which  he  had 
been  put  in  trust.  Thus  one  age  becomes  the  debtor  of  another,  and  we  ourselves 
are  to-day  the  treasurers  of  the  ages.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  preface  to  the 
Go$pel : — L  From  this  preface  to  St.  Luke's  Gospel  we  learn,  first,  that  thebe  webb 
aiiBeady  existing  in  the  evanoeust's  DAT  MANY  "  GOSPELS  " :  "  Forasmuch  as  many 
have  undertaken  to  draw  up  a  consecutive  account  concerning  those  matters  which 
have  been  fuUy  established  among  us."  Christianity  has  ever  been  the  grand  inspirer 
of  Christendom's  literature.  Probably  more  has  been  written  about  Jesus  Christ, 
His  character  and  teaching  and  work,  than  about  all  other  things  put  together. 
For  it  is  not  in  religious  books  alone  that  we  see  the  signs  of  His  presence  and 
■way.  We  can  scarcely  take  up  a  volume  on  any  grave  subject — ethical,  philo- 
sophical, historic,  biographic,  sBsthetic — without  ever  and  anon  catching  at  least 
glimpses  of  the  passing  shadow  of  the  Son  of  Mary.  The  unconscious  tributes  of 
literatore  to  Jesus  the  Nazarene  are  surprisingly  many  and  emphatic.  And, 
observe,  oar  evangelist  does  not  censure  these  attempts  at  biography.  He  does  not 
bint  that  these  memorabilia  are  to  be  rejected.    For  aught  we  know,  some  of  these 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [esAr.  t, 

sketehes  were  ai  truly  inspired  as  the  Gospel  of  St.  Luke  himself.    What  though 
they  have  not  come  down  to  us  ?    There  is  reason  for  believing  that  some  Scrip> 
tures — for  instance,  a  letter  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Corinthians — ^have  been  lost.    But 
.this  does  not  detract  from  the  worth  of  those  we  do  have.     Eternity  will  not 
exhaust  what  memoirs  of  the  Divine  Man  we  do  have.    II.  From  this  preface  to 
St.  Luke's  Gospel,  we  learn,  tbe  soubcb  ot  the  Gospbls:  "  Even  as  they  delivered 
them  unto  us,  who  from  the  beginning  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the 
"Word."    The  source  and  basis,  then,  of  these  primitive  Gtospels  was  the  eontem* 
poraneouB  oral  gospel  or  tradition  of  the  original  apostles.    Need  I  add  that  it  is  still 
the  only  kind  of  tradition  which  the  Church  is  at  liberty  to  accept  as  the  authorized 
gospel  and  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ  1    III.  From  this  preface  to  St.  Luke's  Gospel, 
we  learn,  thit  inspibation  is  compatible  with  free-will  :  "  It  seemed  good  to  m« 
also  to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent  Theophilus."     So  far  as  his  own 
consciousness  was  concerned,  he  seems  to  have  set  himself  to  his  task  spon- 
taneously, and  arranged  his  narrative  as  seemed  to  him  best.    Yet  the  judgment  of 
the  Christian  sense  from  the  beginning  has  been  that  in  thus  composing  his  recital 
he  was  Divinely  inspired.    These  facts  cast  light  on  the  doctrine  of  inspiration. 
They  show  that  one  may  be  inspired,  and  yet  act  with  entire  freeness.    The  sacred 
writers  have  often  been  compared  to  ^olian  harps,  played  on  by  the  Holy  Spirit  ox 
Divine  Breath  of  God.     The  comparison  is  beautiful  and  just,  so  far  as  it  goes. 
But  it  does  not  oover  the  whole  truth ;  it  fails  to  recognize  the  human  element  in 
inspiration.    But  let  the  sacred  writers  be  compared  to  different  musical  instru- 
ments, for  example,  a  flute,  a  cornet,  a  trumpet,  an  organ,  c&c.,  played  on,  indeed, 
by  one  and  the  same  Divine  Breath,  but  giving  forth  different  melodies,  according 
to  the  character  of  each  distinct  instrument ;  and  the  comparison  becomes  more 
complete  and  just.     The  source  of  the  melody  is  Divine,  and  common  to  them  all ; 
the  character  of  the  melody  is  human,  varying  according  to  the  temperament  and 
peculiarity  of  the  writer.    lY.  From  this  preface  to  St.  Luke's  Gospel  we  learn 
THAT  OUB  EVANOBLiST  WAS  QTJALHTiED  TO  WHITE  A  GosPEL :  "  Having  traced  the  course 
of  all  things  accurately  from  the  first."    His  habits  of  observation  as  a  physician 
would  naturally  lead  him  to  scrutinize  closely  all  alleged  facts.    He  at  least  would 
know  whether  the  Church  of  his  day  was  following  cunningly  devised  myths.    In 
short,  he  exercised  the  "critical  faculty."    V.  From  this  preface  to  St.  Luke's 
Gospel  we  learn  oub  evakgelist's  pdbpose  in  wbitino  :  "  That  thou  mightest  know 
tiie  certainty  concerning  the  things  wherein  thou  wast  instructed."    For  knowledge 
of  facts  rather  than  theories  was  then,  as  it  still  is,  the  need  of  the  times.    Such  is 
the  preface  to  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Luke.    And  as  St.  John's  prologue  may 
be  taken  as  the  prologue  to  the  Gospel,  so  St.  Luke's  preface  may  be  taken  as  the 
preface  to  the  Gospels.    And  this  suggests  our  first  concluding  thought:   The 
advantage  of  having  several  Gospels.  And  herein  is  an  immense  advantage.    First, 
the  having  several  Gospels  is  a  key  to  the  detection  of  imposture :  where  the  testi- 
mony is  false,  it  is  perilous  to  multiply  witnesses.    Again,  the  having  several 
Gospels  helps  us  to  understand  better  the  myriad-sided  Divine  Man.     And  yet  the 
four  Gospels  are  but  one  Gospel.    This  is  the  circumstance  which  makes  it  so  pro- 
fitable for  us  to  study  the  Gospels  in  synchronous  lessons.    The  habit  protects  us 
from  partial  and  unsymmetrical  views  ;  for  the  Gospels,  like  stones  in  mosaic,  are 
mutually  complemental.      Secondly,  let  us  thank  God  that  He  prompted  His 
servants  to  note  down,  so  early  in  the  Christian  era,  statements  of  the  apostolio 
testimony ;  for  the  rich  result  is  that,  instead  of  uncertain  and  fickle  tradition,  we 
have  permanent  contemporary  records.    Lastly,  be  thoa  thyself  a  Theophilus, 
Friend  of  God ;  and  the  Spirit  will  write  a  Gospel  to  thee  also.    {G.  D.  BoardTtian.) 
Introductory  cmuiderations : — The  four  evangelists  are  so  called,  not  in  same 
sense  as  Eph.  iv.  11,  but  to  designate  them  as  evangelical  historians.    The  nature 
and  degree  of  correspondence  between  the  four  furnish  a  strong  proof  of  the  credi- 
bility of  each  and  all.    I.  The  authob  of  this  Gospel  unxveesallt  acenowledqed 
TO  BB  LuEB.    Companion  of  St.  Paul  (Acts  xvi.  to  end ;  2  Tim.  iv.  11).   A  physician 
(Col.  iv.  14).     Said  also  to  have  been  a  painter,  but  no  more  authority  than  a  very 
late  tradition  for  this  statement.     If,  however,  he  did  not  paint  the  faces  of  the 
Virgin  and  her  Son  with  the  colours  of  the  limner,  he  did  what  was  of  much  more 
importance ;  he,  in  this  book,  drew  to  the  life  an  exquisite  portraiture  of  their 
character,  which  continues  with  us  long  after  the  masterpieces  of  the  ancient 
painters  have  vanished,  and  which  will  continue  to  the  end  of  time — the  antidote 
of  superstition,  the  guide  of  the  serious  inquirer,  and  the  admiration  of  all  good 
men.    II.  The  Dithib  auihobitt  or  xbu  Qospbi>.    1.  The  Church  took  great  eara 


.  X.]  ST.  LUKE, 


io  difltingaish  gennine  Gospels  from  Bparions.     Clear  testimony  to  the  miiTenal 
reception  of  these  ioxa,  and  only  these,  as  canonical  from  the  beginning,    i.  If 
Luke  was  one  of  "  the  seventy,"  then  was  he  also  miracoloasly  quaMed  tooomposa 
this  history ;  if  not,  yet  both  his  human  and  Divine  qnalifications  for  the  work 
might  be  safely  rested  solely  on  his  being  called  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and  to  act 
and  write  nnder  the  eye  and  approval  of  St.  Paul.    3.  Various  circumstantial  par* 
ticulars  respecting  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  foretold  in  this  Gospel,   and 
nowhere  else,  have  been  exactly  fulfilled.    4.  Mutual  dependence  and  connection 
of  this  Gospel  and  the  other  three.     (Jaa.  Foote,  M.A.)        The  power  of  truth : — 
St.  Luke  had  no  authority  to  suppress  these  other  Gospels,  nor  does  he  reprehend 
or  calumniate  them ;  but  he  writes  the  truth  simply,  and  leaves  it  to  outswear 
falsehood ;  and  so  it  has  done.    Moses'  rod  has  devoured  the  conjurors'  rods,  and 
St.  Luke's  story  still  retains  the  majesty  of  the  Maker,  and  theirs  are  not.    {Dr. 
Donne.)        Luke  and  Theophilus  : — Luke  a  physician,  like  the  few ;  Theophilas  • 
patient,  like  the  many.    (J'.  J,  Van  Ootterzee,  D.D,)        Historical  belief  in  the 
Divine  truth  of  Christianity : — 1.   Its  necessity.    2.  Its  certainty.    3.   Its  insof* 
fioiency  when  anaccompanied  by  a  living  faith.    {Ibid.)        Luke  is — 1.  The  prede- 
eessor  of  believing  searchers.     2.  The  condemner  of  unbelieving  searchers  of 
Scripture.     {Ibid.)        The  highest  aim  tehich  a  Christian  author  can  propose  to 
himself: — 1.  To  correct  what  is  faulty.    2.  To  strengthen  what  is  weak.    8.  To 
arrange  what  is  confused.     {Ibid.)        Most  excellent  Theophilus  ^ — Civil  dignities 
and  hononrs  not  destroyed,  bat  ennobled,  by  citizenship  in  the  kingdom  of  Ood. 
(Ibid.)        The  fear  of  God  makes  men  truly  great  and  excellent.    (Starke.)        8t, 
Luke's  preface : — Luke  is  the  only  one  of  the  synoptists  who  begins  nis  Gospel  with 
a  preface.     His  preface  is  histcrico-critical,  while  the  introduction  of  John  Is 
faistorico-doctrinaL     The  prominent  points  in  this  short  preface  are — 1.  It  cautions 
OS  against  erroneoas  or  defective  statements  of  facts.     2.  It  directs  us  to  the 
apostles  as  eye-witnesses  of  the  life  of  Christ.     8.  It  proves  the  faithfulness  of  (ha 
evangelist  in  tracing  the  facts  to  the  primitive  source.    4.  It  brings  out  the  bonuui 
ride  ia  the  origin  of  the  eacred  writings.    6.  It  teaches  that  "  faith  oometh  bj 
hearing,"  and  that  the  gospel  was  first  taught  by  catechetical  instruction  or  onu 
tradition,  but  then  written  down  by  reliable  witnesses  for  all  ages  to  come.    This 
written  Gospel  is  essentially  the  same  with  the  preached  Gospel  of  Christ  and  tha 
apostles,  and  together  with  the  Epistles  is  to  us  the  only  pure  and  infallible  Bonroe 
of  primitive  Christianity.     {P.  Schaff,  D.D.)        The  order  in  Divine  things  : — ^From 
faith  to  knowledge;  from  knowledge  to  still  firmer  faith.    {Van  Oosterzee.)       Other 
narratives  of  Christ's  life : — It  appears  from  this  that  narratives  of  the  actions  ol 
Jesus,  and  of  the  events  connected  with  His  life  and  ministry,  had  been  written  1^ 
many  individuals  before  Luke  composed  his  history.    This  fact  proves  that  tfaa 
actions  ascribed  to  Jesus  had  made  a  great  noise  in  the  world,  and  that  a  high 
degree  of  curiosity  had  been  excited  to  peruse  everything  recorded  concerning  Him. 
Can  we  then  suppose  that  Luke  refers  to  these  writings  or  to  the  other  Gospels  ? 
We  have  reason  to  believe  that  Matthew's  Gospel  was  originally  written  in  Syro- 
Chaldaio,  which  was  the  language  spoken  by  the  Jews  in  our  Saviour's  time,  and 
that  it  was  not  translated  into  Greek  till  some  time  afterwards.    Mark's  Gospel 
was  short,  and  John's  was  not  published  till  many  years  had  elapsed  after  tho 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.    But  as  the  evangelist  says  that  many  had  undertaken 
to  record  the  actions  attributed  to  Jesus,  it  is  evident  that  he  alludes  to  more  than 
one  or  two  productions.    Besides,  though  not  asserted,  it  is  implied,  that  the 
writings  referred  to  were  either  defective  or  incorrect,  for  if  they  contained  no 
errors,  nor  were  marked  by  great  defects,  the  fact  that  they  were  numerous  was  a 
reason  against  adding  to  their  number.     We  conclude,  then,  that  Luke  does  not 
here  refer  to  any  of  the  other  Gospels.    Who,  then,  could  be  the  writers  of  those 
narratives  of  which  the  evangelist  did  not  approve  ?    Were  they  the  friends  or  the 
enemies  of  Christianity  ?    There  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  ventured  to  publish  anything  in  writing  against  Jesus  or  His  religion. 
They  seem  at  first  to  have  been  satisfied  by  circulating  false  reports  respecting  His 
Eesurrection,  and  afterwards  by  endeavouring  to  overwhelm  Christianity  by  the 
strong  arm  of  persecution.    It  is  probable,  therefore,  that  the  objectionable  nar- 
ratives to  which  Luke  refers  were  written  by  the  friends  of  Christianity.    But  the 
zeal  of  friends  has  frequently  been  more  injurious  to  the  Christian  religion  than 
the  malice  of  its  enemies.    We  can  easily  conceive  the  pernicious  consequences 
that  may  have  arisen  from  erroneoas  statements,  exaggerated  facts,  and  fancifoi 
explanations,  given  by  honest  but  ignorant  or  ill-informed  writers.    The  most 


e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  I. 

judicioua  and  effectual  remedy  was  accordingly  adopted  by  St.  Luke.  It  consisted 
in  making  a  proper  selection  and  accurate  statement  of  the  most  important  facts 
as  procured  from  the  moat  undoubted  authority.  This,  accordingly,  was  done; 
and  the  consequence  has  been  that  all  the  defective  or  erroneous  accounts  of  our 
Saviour  which  were  then  circulated  have  entirely  disappeared,  as  darkness  flies  at 
the  approach  of  the  morning  sun,  while  the  Gospels  which  contained  the  only 
correct  history  have  been  duly  valued,  copied,  and  preserved.  (Jas.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
Many  workers  needed : — Luke  undertook  to  be  very  minute  and  exhaustive  in  hi» 
Etatement  of  gospel  facts.  He  was  going  to  do  better  than  many  other  writers  had 
done.  He  says  so  with  cool  frankness  :  *'  Forasmuch  ....  to  me  also."  That 
is  a  curious  expression.  We  expected  him  to  say,  Forasmuch  as  many  have  done 
this  work,  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  do  it.  But  he  makes  the  very  fact  that  there 
•were  other  writers,  a  reason  why  there  should  be  one  more.  That  was  good 
reasoning ;  it  should  prevail  in  all  the  lines  and  departments  of  Christian  life  and 
action.  The  contrary  policy  often  supersedes  it,  and  brings  ministers  and  churches 
into  great  discomfort  and  enfeeblement.  Men  will  say,  You  have  so  many  helpers, 
you  have  no  need  of  me.  They  are  always  more  or  less  dishonest  men — net  inten- 
tionally so;  intentional  dishonesty  is  perfectly  vulgar  and  wholly  detestable,  and 
nobody  lays  claim  to  it ;  but  when  men  say.  There  are  so  many  preachers,  I  need 
not  be  one  :  so  many  deacons,  I  need  not  be  another:  bo  many  helpers,  there  is  no 
need  of  me — they  are  not  conducting  a  Christian  argument,  they  are  with  all  theiz 
graciousness  unconsciously  jealous  and  spiteful.  Luke  reasoned  in  the  right  way  ; 
he  eaid.  Many  men  are  taking  up  this  subject,  I  will  do  what  I  can  in  it ;  I  think 
I  can  beat  some  of  them.  (Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  The  preface  the  best  part  oj 
the  book : — Will  the  book  be  as  good  as  the  preface?  I  fancy  not — when  the  subject 
is  Jesus  Christ  The  first  sentence  is  often  the  best.  Why?  Because  the  subject 
grows.  No  man  can  ever  prepare  his  imagination  for  the  glory  of  that  theme. 
The  young  preacher  feels  tbis  ;  he  buckles  to  with  a  brave  heart,  and  says  he  will 
^vork  honestly  all  day,  a^d  pray  most  of  the  night,  and  produce  such  discourses  as 
will  satisfy  his  best  ambition.  He  empties  his  inkhorn,  does  all  he  can,  and  then 
puts  his  young  hand  upon  his  mouth  and  says,  Unprofitable  I  I  have  failed.  I 
had  an  ambition  high  as  heaven,  bright  as  the  unclouded  noon  ;  but  I  have  failed  1 
He  does  not  do  justice  to  himself.  The  Lord  does  not  pronounce  that  judgment 
upon  him.  He  says.  Thou  hast  not  failed;  industry  never  fails;  conscience 
always  succeeds  ;  thou  hast  won  a  right  bright  crown  1  Cheer  thee  I  It  is  not  the 
man  who  has  failed ;  it  is  the  God  who  has  exceeded  all  ever  thought  of  in  prayer, 
all  ever  dreamed  of  in  poetry.  Still,  we  expected  more  from  Luke  than  from  the 
others,  and  we  get  more.  He  does  not  see  some  things  as  Mark  saw  them.  It  is 
fashionable — shall  we  say,  with  due  mental  reservation,  pedantic  ? — to  point  ont 
that  Luke  was  the  observing  writer.  Mark  observed  a  good  many  things  that  Luke 
never  saw,  or  at  least  never  recorded.  Matthew  also  had  his  own  way  of  looking 
at  things ;  and  as  for  St.  John,  what  was  he  looking  at  ?  Apparently  at  nothing, 
for  his  inner  eyes  were  fastened  on  the  soul  of  Christ.  If  Luke  had  sharp  eyes, 
what  ears  John  hadl  for  he  heard  whisperings  of  the  heart,  throbbings  and 
beatings  and  sighings  :  and  what  a  gift  of  expression  1  for  he  turned  all  that  he 
heard  into  noble,  sweet  BEinsic  for  the  soul's  comforting  in  all  the  cloudy  days  of 
Church  time.  But  Luke  says  he  will  set  down  things  "  in  order"  ;  the  others  have 
been  good  historians,  hut  a  little  wanting  in  the  power  of  grouping  and  classifying  j 
good  historians,  but  poor  editors  ;  Luke  will  break  things  up  into  chapters,  and 
verses,  find  paragraphs,  and  sections,  and  he  will  attend  to  chronological  sequence. 
We  need  mechanical  men  in  the  Church,  people  who  know  when  to  begin  a  new 
paragraph,  and  to  codify  laws,  and  to  do  a  good  many  useful  little  things.  {Ibid.) 
Jieligion  a  reality  : — In  spite  of  our  professions  and  general  convictions,  we  do  not 
give  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel  their  full  weight  as  infallible  certainties ;  we  do  not 
embrace  them  as  realities.    I.  It  is  a  reality  that  God  is  supreme  ;  the  universal 

BOVEREIGN,  AND  THAT    He    RIGHTFULLY  CLAIMS   THE   LOVE  AND    THE    ENTIRE  ALLEGIANCH 

OF  ALL  His  creatures.     II.  It  is  a  most  awful  fact  that  a  positivb  bebellioh 

AGAINST  the  ETERNAL  KiNG  HAS  TAKEN  PLACE  IN  THIS  WORLD,  AND  THAT  WB  ABB  iUt 
DEEPLY  INVOLVED  IN  ITS  CONSEQUENCES.  III.  ThK  REDEMPTION  OF  SINNERS,  UNDEB  THS 
ALARMING  CIRCUMSTANCES  ABOVE  DESCRIBED,  BY  THE  SON  OP  GOD  18  A  MOST  MEBCDTJIi  FACT 
ANiTOUNCED  TO  US  IN  THE  HoLY  SCRIPTURES.  IV.  ThAT  THE  ACCEPTANCE  OF  THIS  OBXAV 
BEDEMPTION,  ON  YOUR  PART,  MUST  BE  A  REALITY.    V.  EeLIGION  IS  A  REALITY  IN  ITS  QBEAT 

AND  HAPPY  EFFECTS,  WHICH  ARE  SANCTiFicATiON  AND  SALVATION.  {Esscx B.emembraneer,\ 
To  write  unto  thee  in  order. — In  order : — A  work  well  shaped  into  an  artistic  whols  t 


xmtr.  I.)  ST.  LUKE.  t 

•  history  advancing  by  well-marked  steps,  and  systematically  progressive;  an 
inter-connection  easily  perceptible  of  causes  and  effects — these  for  a  Greek  mind 
constituted  the  best  material  for  carrying  conviction.  Now  it  is  precisely  this  kind 
of  evidence  which  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  third  Gospel.  And  the  preamble  leads 
ns  even  to  think  that  such  was  the  deliberate  intention  of  the  author.  (Professor 
Godet.)  If  it  be  said  that  Luke  says  that  he  wrote  "  in  order  "  {tv  ra^it),  I  answer 
that  there  are  other  orderly  arrangements  besides  those  of  time  and  place ;  and 
that  if  a  work  is  a  religious  memoir,  the  arrangement  would  be  regulated,  though 
rot  exclusively,  by  the  reference  of  the  facts  to  the  religious  end  in  view. 
(Prebendary  Bow.)  Most  excellent  Tbeophilus. — Most  excellent  Theophilus: — 
The  person  to  whom  the  Gospel  is  addressed.  The  name  "  Theophilus  "  signifiea 
a  lover,  or  beloved  of  God  ;  but  it  would  be  very  unnatural  to  suppose,  with 
eome,  that  the  word  is  here  used  as  a  feigned  name,  to  signify  any  Christian. 
Though  this  method  has  been  adopted  by  other  writers,  it  is  not  agreeable  to  the 
practice  of  the  inspired.  Theophilus  is  plainly  the  same  real  individual  to  whom 
the  book  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  also  is  addressed.  He  is  here  styled  ♦•  most 
excellent."  This  was  an  honorary  title  bestowed  on  persons  high  in  office,  and  of 
nobility,  somewhat  similar  to  the  title  of  "  excellency  "  with  us.  Thus  it  is  given 
to  Felix  (Acts  xxiii.  26)  and  to  Festus  (Acts  xxvi.  25).  Theophilus,  therefore,  was 
not  only  a  Christian,  but  a  nobleman,  and  probably  high  in  office.  Thus,  though 
•'  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  were  called,"  yet  some  such  were  called  from 
the  first ;  and  thus  some  such  are  still  found  among  the  faithful.  Such  instances 
are  highly  important  and  pleasing.  Not  but  that  the  soul  of  the  meanest 
peasant  is,  in  itself,  as  precious  as  the  soul  of  the  most  illustrious  nobleman — not 
but  that  the  salvation  of  every  soul  transcends  in  importance  every  worldly  con- 
Bideration  ;  but  in  reference  to  the  probable  effect  on  others,  there  is  an  undeniable 
difference.  Every  good  man  may  be  of  some  service  to  the  cause  of  Christ ;  but 
when  rank,  office,  wealth,  and  talent  are  engaged,  God  may  be  considered  as  Him- 
self putting  more  powerful  means  in  operation ;  and  when  His  own  blessing  is 
superinduced,  the  good  effects  are  correspondingly  extensive.  {Jas.  Foote,  M.A.) 
Courtesy : — From  this  form  of  address,  used  by  an  inspired  writer,  may  be  fairly 
deduced  the  lawfulness  and  propriety,  generally  speaking,  of  giving  to  men  the 
ordinary  titles  of  respect.  As  to  our  Lord's  teaching  His  disciples  not  to  be  called 
rabbi,  and  to  call  no  man  father,  or  master,  on  earth.  Scripture  must  be  interpreted 
consistently  with  itself,  and  that  passage,  of  course,  consistently  with  such  as 
this ;  and  this  rule  of  interpretation  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  Christ  forbade, 
not  the  use  of  common  terms  in  common  life,  but  the  assumption,  on  the  one 
hand,  and  the  yielding,  on  the  other,  of  any  human  atithority  in  matters  of  religion 
which  might  at  all  interfere  with  His  own.  They  err,  therefore,  who  think  there 
is  any  propriety  or  religion  in  assuming  a  singularity  in  such  things,  or  in  sturdily 
refusing  what  are  usually  considered  marks  of  civility  and  respect.  It  is  unworthy 
at  once  of  the  Christian  and  of  the  man  to  be  guilty  of  hollow  hypocrisy  or 
fawning  servility ;  but  it  is  both  dutiful  and  adorning  to  be  courteous,  and  to  give 
honour  to  whom  honour  is  due.  {Ibid.)  Dedication  of  books : — It  has  been 
nsual  with  authors  to  dedicate  their  works  to  particular  persons,  sometimes  with 
the  design  of  securing  their  patronage,  sometimes  merely  as  a  mark  of  respect  and 
affection,  and  sometimes  with  a  particular  view  to  the  benefit  of  the  individuals 
themselves.  The  dictates  of  inspiration  needed  not,  it  is  true,  the  support  of  any 
human  authority ;  yet  it  would  not  have  been  unworthy  of  Divine  wisdom  to  have 
adopted  such  secondary  means.  While  this  dedication  is  (1)  an  obvious  expres- 
sion of  high  regard  to  Theophilus,  it  distinctly  states  that  (2)  his  personal 
improvement  was  what  Luke  greatly  desired.  Though  immediately  addressed  to 
Theophilus,  this  book,  Uke  the  rest  of  Scripture,  comes,  with  the  stamp  of  Divine 
authority,  for  the  edification  of  all  who  may  peruse  it.     (Ibid.)  Most  excellent 

Theophilus: — L  Human  titles  havb  a  peculiab  siqnificancb!  when  applied  to 
BBLiQiOTis  MEN.  Many  called  "  excellent "  ;  this  "  friend  of  God "  was  "  most 
excellent."  II.  Beligiods  men  may  be  illustrious,  tet  little  known.  III. 
Titled  belibvbrs  few  in  numbeb — one  Theophilus.  IV.  Well  to  have  a  good 
kame — "Theophilus";  better  to  deserve  it  —  "most  excellent."  V.  Suoh 
■xOELtENCB  HAS  ITS  MASKS.  1.  Auxious  to  know  things  of  Christ  from  beginning. 
8.  To  know  their  certainty.  VI.  Such  excellence  has  its  advantages.  1. 
Approved  of  God — such  friendship  is  not  one-sided.  2.  Approval  of  the  highest 
crdar  of  men — Lake.  8.  The  honour  of  having  an  authentic  and  insfnred  history 
d  (Blldst  dedioated  to  ^i™,     4.   Hia  name  thus  rescued  from  utter  oblivion. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [OHA».  ti 


{Biblicsl  Museum.)  TheopMlvs  .-—ThiB  name,  of  Grecian  origin,  though  it  if 
sometimes  used  lay  the  Jews,  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the  noble  person  who  bort 
it  was  a  Greek.  We  must  add  that,  in  dedicating  this  work  to  him,  St.  Luke  wai 
probably  not  thinking  only  of  the  use  he  would  personally  make  of  it.  The  publi- 
cation of  a  book  was  at  that  time  a  much  more  costly  undertaking  than  it  is  now, 
since  every  copy  had  to  be  made  by  hand.  By  accepting  the  manuscript  which 
was  dedicated  to  him,  the  wealthy  Theophilus  became  what  was  called  the  patron 
or,  as  we  should  now  say,  the  sponsor  of  the  book.  He  undertook  to  make  it 
known,  to  have  copies  made  of  it,  and  to  circulate  these  amongst  those  about 
him,  or  who  belonged  to  the  same  nation  as  himself.  The  ancient  JudaBo- 
Christian  romance,  entitled,  "  The  Clementines,"  of  about  the  year  160,  makes 
Theophilus  a  man  of  high  position  in  Antioch,  who,  after  having  listened  to  the 
preaching  of  Peter,  gave  up  his  palace  to  be  used  as  a  church.  {Professor  Godet.) 
The  certainty  of  those  things. — Certainties : — Part  of  the  value  of  this  short 
and  simple  introduction  consists  in  its  quite  undesigned  manifestation  of  the 
true  historic  character  of  Christianity.  In  the  good  sense  Luke  was  a  sceptio 
first,  in  order  that  he  might  be  a  rational  and  strong  believer.  Anything  more 
truly  scientific  than  his  method  I  cannot  imagine.  It  is  the  method  of  every 
candid  historian  who  wishes  to  set  down  only  what  is  genuine  and  authentic. 
When  he  speaks  here  of  "  the  certainty  "  of  some  particular  things,  he  means 
substantially  what  the  Apostle  Paul  means  when  he  speaks  of  "the  gospel  of 
God,"  "  the  gospel  of  which  he  was  not  ashamed,"  and  of  "  Jesus  Christ 
and  Wrn  crucified."  Is  that  first  ••  certainty  "  enough  for  us  still  ?  Everything, 
we  are  told,  is  being  tried  by  this  practical  test,  by  what  it  can  do,  and  by  the 
honest  feeling  men  have  to  it,  and  we  must  not  complain  if  the  test  is  applied  even 
to  supernatural  religion.  We  do  not  complain.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  ought  to 
be  able  by  this  time  to  furnish  much  practical  corroboration  of  the  truth  and  worth 
of  Christianity  which  did  not  and  could  not  exist  in  the  apostolic  days.  I  will 
therefore  mention  some  of  the  practical  and  secondary  "  certainties  "  which,  when 
duly  considered,  will  tend  greatly  to  confirm  and  enforce  those  which  are  primary 
and  principal.  I.  It  is  cebtain  that  no  sttlb  ob  type  of  human  chabactbb  is 
HiGHEB  than  THE  Chbistian  TYPE  ;  THAT  NONE  IS  SO  HIGH.  Theoretically  it  ought 
to  be  so.     Practically  it  is  so.     II.  It   is  ceetain  that  the  Chbistian  taith 

ENABLES  those  WHO  BE  ALLY  HAVE   IT  TO  BEAB  THE  STRAIN  AND   PBESSURE  OF  LITB — the 

sorrow,  the  pain,  whatever  they  may  be,  as  they  could  not  be  borne  without  it;  and 
it  is  quite  certain  that  we  do  not  know  of  anything  else  which  has  the  same 
upholding  and  consolatory  power.     III.  It  is  cebtain  that  Chbistlaiuty  alonb 

KEEPS  AN  OPEN  DOOB  FOB  US  OUT  OF  THIS  WOULD  INTO  ANOTHEB  AND  A  BETTBB. 
IV.  It  18  CEETAIN  THAT,  AT  THIS  MOMENT,  THEEE  IS  ONLY  ONE  BELIGION  IN  THE  WOBLD 
THAT  CAN,  FEOM  ITS  VERY  NATUBE,  BE  EXTENDED  TO  EVEBY  PAET  OF  IT;  Only  OUS 

religion  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  being  diffused  by  those  who  believe  in  it  and 
adhere  to  it,  in  a  spirit  of  entire  impartiality,  "  among  all  nations,  kindreds, 
peoples,  and  tongues,"  Christianity  is,  as  it  has  ever  been,  the  only  really  mis- 
sionary religion  in  the  world.  The  poor  Turk  has  no  missionary  in  any  Christian 
country.  Educated  Hindoos  come  to  our  universities,  but  although  they  can  speak 
our  language  as  well  as  we  ourselves,  and  although  they  know  that  there  is  entire 
religious  freedom  in  this  country,  who  among  them  preaches  BQndooism,  or  seeks 
a  footing  for  it  among  the  English  people  ?  On  the  other  hand,  every  Christian 
individual  and  every  Christian  community  stand  committed,  in  simple  fidelity  to 
their  Master,  and  in  obedience  to  the  very  law  of  their  life,  to  go  into  all  the  world 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  {Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  tone  of 
the  New  Testament  on  certainty  in  religion  : — The  more  closely  this  tone  of  certainty 
is  studied  the  more  soul-striking  the  phenomenon  becomes,  both  in  its  substance 
and  in  its  accessories.  What  led  these  four  evangelists,  and  these  writers  of  the 
letters  on  doctrine  and  life,  to  speak  one  and  all  in  this  uniform  style  of  intense 
belief  t  Was  it  the  blind  certainty  of  ignorant  fools  ?  Was  it  feigned  all  through? 
Were  they  deceived  by  appearances  ?  They  at  least  believed  what  they  wrote. 
They  seem  utterly  regardless  of  calumny  and  misrepresentation,  Uke  men  who 
know  that  they  are  right.  They  speak  with  a  strength  of  persuasion  and  assertion 
which  still  moves  the  world.  They  teach — 1.  That  man  has  lost  himself  by  losing 
the  knowledge  of  his  God ;  and  that  he  can  recover  himself,  with  the  knowledge  ol 
his  own  nature  and  eternal  destiny,  only  by  recovering  the  knowledge  of  hii 
Maker.  2.  That  God  is  to  be  loved  through  being  known  in  His  work  of  nature  and 
redemption.  8.  That  certainty  is  essenti^  for  the  peace  of  the  soul.  4.  That  certain 


trntr.  z.]  8T.  LUKE,  9 

Imowledge  of  God's  works  and  ways  is  essential  to  growth  in  Christian  character. 
6.  That  the  quality  of  the  moral  excellence  required  by  the  gospel  under  such  a 
character  is  impossible  of  attainment  apart  from  coodGidence  in  the  possession  of 
God's  love  and  life  eternal.  (Edward  White.)  Importance  of  a  firm  religious 
belief: — I  envy  no  quality  of  the  mind  or  intellect  in  others,  be  it  genius, 
power,  wit,  or  fancy ;  but  I  should  prefer  a  firm  religious  belief  to  every  other 
blessing,  for  it  makes  life  a  discipline  of  goodness;  creates  new  hopes,  when 
all  earthly  hopes  vanish  ;  and  throws  over  the  decay,  the  destruction  of 
existence,  the  most  gorgeous  of  all  lights ;  awakens  life  even  in  death,  and  from 
corruption  and  decay  calls  up  beauty  and  divinity;  makes  an  instrument  of 
torture  and  shame  the  ladder  of  ascent  to  Paradise  ;  and,  far  above  all  combina- 
tions of  earthly  hopes,  calls  up  the  most  delightful  visions  of  palms  and  amaranths, 
the  gardens  of  the  blest,  the  security  of  everlasting  joys,  where  the  sensuahst  and 
the  sceptic  view  only  gloom,  decay,  annihilation,  and  despair.  {Davy. )  Th^  Bible 
really  believed: — The  son  of  Selina,  the  Countess  of  Huntingdon,  whose  zeal  in 
the  extension  of  the  gospel  is  well  known,  was  unhappUy  an  unbeliever,  but 
reverenced  his  pious  and  venerable  mother.  "  I  wish,"  said  a  peer  to  him,  "  you 
would  speak  to  Lady  Huntingdon ;  she  has  just  erected  a  preaching-place  close  to 
my  residence."  His  lordship  replied,  ♦'  Gladly,  my  lord;  but  you  will  do  me  the 
favour  to  inform  me  what  plea  to  urge,  for  my  mother  really  believes  the  Bible." 
{Baxendale's  lUtutrations.)  The  Christian  faith  is  founded  on  facts: — It  is 
important  from  time  to  time  to  be  reminded  that  the  real  claims  of  the  Christian 
faith,  speaking  of  it  in  its  largest  sense,  upon  our  obedience  and  reverence  are 
founded  on  facts  which  hardly  any  one  of  any  name  or  fame  disputes,  and  which, 
in  fact,  have  hardly  ever  been  disputed.  {Dean  Stanley.)  The  tone  of  certainty : — 
Apart  from  criticism  as  to  its  cause,  this  is  the  most  wonderful  phenomenon  in  all 
literature.  If  the  New  Testament  is  not  "  the  judge  that  ends  the  strife,  when  wit 
and  reason  fail,"  at  least  it  speaks  in  that  tone  of  absolute  and  invariable  cer- 
tainty which  we  should  expect  to  accompany  a  revelation  from  the  living  God. 
And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  this  certainty  which  armed  the  martyrs  of  Christ  in 
the  early  centuries  to  confront  the  direst  sufferings  in  defence  of  the  faith ;  as  it  is 
also  this  which  makes  it  so  exceedingly  difficult  in  our  times  to  overthrow 
Christianity  by  a  aet  of  mere  critical  peradventures,  which  are  like  brittle  glass 
spears  hreaiing  against  a  shield  of  diamonds.  {E.  White.)  The  witnesses  of  th$ 
gospel  facts: — These  first  spectators  of  "the  heavenly  vision  "  of  *' God  manifest 
in  the  flesh "  are  themselves  gradually  raised  into  transcendent  certainty ;  and 
then  their  testimony,  and  teaching,  and  life,  transfuse  that  certitude  into  those 
who  receive  their  word.  That  is  according  to  the  general  law  of  life.  The  genera- 
tions of  men  are  related  intellectually  and  spiritually.  There  is  a  vital  unity  in 
humanity — what  the  French  call  a  solidarity.  What  human  nature  once  really 
saw,  subjected  to  every  test,  and  was  compelled  to  believe,  humanity  still  sees 
through  the  organs  and  perceptions  of  its  former  members.  Inheritance  in  all 
departments  runs  through  the  world.  We  believe  all  our  national  histories 
because  "  our  fathers  have  told  us."  But  this  is  only  the  first  stage  of  belief. 
Honest  souls  can  test  the  traditional  and  historical  by  spiritual  insight,  and  then 
they  say — to  the  aU-perceiving  and  all-reporting  humanity — "  Now  we  believe  not 
because  of  thy  saying,  for  we  have  seen  Him  ourselves,  and  know  that  this  is 
indeed  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the  world."  {Ihid.)  Testimonies  of  experience  : — 
At  night,  when  a  railroad  train,  having  stopped  at  a  station,  is  about  to  start  again, 
in  order  that  the  conductor  may  know  that  everything  is  as  it  should  be,  the 
brakeman  on  the  last  car  calls  out  through  the  darkness,  "All  right  here  1 "  and 
the  next  man  takes  up  the  word,  "  All  right  here  1  "  and  the  next  echoes,  "  All 
right  here  I  "  and  so  it  passes  along  the  line,  and  the  train  moves  on.  It  does  me 
good  to  sit  here  while  you  speak  of  the  life  you  are  guiding  through  the  world's 
darkness,  and  pass  the  word  from  one  to  another,  "All  right  here  I  "  All  is  right 
everywhere  when  the  heart  is  right.     (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Power  of  personal 

testimony  : — Thomas  Bilney  was  an  ardent  young  convert,  and  longed  to  do  some- 
thing  for  his  Master.  Hugh  Latimer  was  a  zealous  Roman  Catholic  priest,  who 
preached  against  the  Eeformation.  Bilney  went  to  him,  and  told  him  that  h© 
wished  to  confess.  In  the  privacy  of  the  confessional,  he  told  him  the  whole  burn- 
ing story  of  his  conviction,  conversion,  and  new-found  happiness.  The  Spirit 
helped,  and  Latimer's  heart  was  probed  and  changed.  From  that  hour  Latimer 
gave  hig  life  to  the  cause  he  had  before  opposed,  and  sealed  his  testimony  with  hia 
bloodr        Infidels  neglect  to  examine  the  Bible : — Sir  Isaac  Newton  set  out  in  life  • 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ma.U 

clamorous  infidel ;  but,  on  a  nice  examination  of  the  evidences  for  Christianity,  ha 
found  reason  to  change  his  opinion.  When  the  celebrated  Dr.  Edmund  Halley 
was  talking  infidelity  before  him,  Sir  Isaac  Newton  addressed  him  in  these  or  the 
like  words:  "Dr.  HaUey,  I  am  always  glad  to  hear  you  when  you  speak  about 
astronomy,  oi  other  parts  of  the  mathematics,  because  that  is  a  subject  yon  have 
studied,  and  well  understand ;  but  you  should  not  talk  of  Christianity,  for  you 
have  not  studied  it.  I  have ;  and  am  certain  that  you  know  nothing  of  the 
matter."  This  was  a  just  reproof,  and  one  that  would  be  very  suitable  to  be  given 
to  half  the  infidels  of  the  present  day,  for  they  often  speak  of  what  they  have 
never  studied,  and  what,  in  fact,  they  are  entirely  ignorant  of.  Dr.  Johnson, 
therefore,  well  observed  that  "  no  honest  man  could  be  a  Deist,  for  no  man  could 
be  so  after  a  fair  examination  of  the  proofs  of  Christianity."  On  the  name  of 
Hume  being  mentioned  to  him,  "  No,  sir,"  said  he,  '*  Hume  owned  to  a  clergyman 
in  the  Bishopric  of  Durham  that  he  had  never  read  the  New  Testament  with 
attention."  (StudenVs  Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.)  Examination  convinc- 
ing : — Conspicuous  in  John  Eandolph's  library  was  a  family  Bible.  Surrounding 
it  were  many  books,  some  for,  and  others  against,  its  truthfulness  as  an  inspired 
revelation.  One  day  Mr.  Bandolph  had  a  clergyman  as  his  guest,  and  the  family 
Bible  became  a  topic  of  conversation.  The  eccentric  orator  said,  "  I  was  raised 
by  a  pious  mother  (God  bless  her  memory !),  who  taught  me  the  Christian  religion 
in  all  its  require>ments.  But  alas  1  I  grew  up  an  infidel — if  not  an  infidel  com* 
plete,  yet  a  decided  Deist.  But  when  I  became  a  man,  in  this,  as  well  as  in 
political  and  all  other  matters,  I  resolved  to  examine  for  myself,  and  never  to  pin 
my  faith  to  any  other  man's  sleeve.  So  I  bought  that  Bible ;  I  pored  over  it ;  I 
examined  it  carefully.  I  sought  and  procured  those  books  for  and  against  it ;  and 
when  my  labours  were  ended,  I  came  to  this  irresistible  conclusion — the  Bible  is 
true.  It  would  have  been  as  easy  for  a  mole  to  have  written  Sir  Isaao 
Newton's  treatise  on  "Optics,"  as  for  uninspired  men  to  have  written  the  Bible." 
Christianity  courts  examination: — But  I  am  anxious  you  should  never  let  sUp 
the  fact  that  Christianity  itself  puts  the  scales  and  weights  into  your  hands, 
and  starts  you  on  this  universal  verifying  process.  When  I  was  a  senior 
scholar  I  was  dazed  and  bewildered  by  a  man  three  times  my  age  seeking 
to  shake  my  faith  in  the  Gospel  by  assuring  me  that  the  Bible  was  averse  to 
investigation,  shrunk  from  the  fuU  light  of  day,  and  could  only  maintain  its 
ground  with  those  who  were  prejudiced  in  its  favour.  Glad  was  I  to  find  that 
Christianity  rejoices  in  all  light,  welcomes  it  from  every  quarter,  accepts  vriih 
thankfulness  the  aid  of  all  the  sciences  and  arts,  and  urges  us  to  imitate  the 
Bereans,  who  did  not  assent  to  Paul's  words  without  searching  the  Scriptures  and 
using  the  best  test  they  knew,  so  that  they  might  only  believe  what  was  absolutely 
true,  and  hold  nothing  fast  except  that  which  was  undeniably  good.  Forget  not, 
then,  it  is  Christianity  itself  that  says,  "  Prove  all  things.  Examine  thoroughly. 
Get  at  the  core  of  things.  Be  not  deceived  by  appearances.  Go  from  facts  to 
principles,  from  the  letter  to  the  spirit.  Be  not  cheated  by  any  alloys.  Light  the 
fires  of  examination,  put  on  your  crucible,  cast  in  your  metallic  ores,  and  heat  the 
furnace  to  its  hottest,  and  then  take  away  with  you  the  pure  gold  of  goodness  and 
truth."  (J.  Clifford,  B.I).)  The  Bible  tested:— The  Bible  has  been  tried  in  the 
ages  of  the  past  by  godless  men  like  Voltaire ;  it  has  been  tried  by  the  best  classes 
like  Wilberforce ;  it  has  been  tried  by  educators  like  Alexander ;  it  has  been  tried 
by  men  in  every  conceivable  position,  in  prosperity  and  in  adversity,  and  it  has 
stood  the  test.  You  need  not  be  afraid  to  build  your  hopes  upon  it  for  time  and  foi 
eternity.  (Dr.  John  Hall.)  Afraid  of  being  convincfd  : — At  Cairo,  Gobat  enter- 
tained high  hopes  of  the  conversion  of  a  learned  Mohammedan  teacher.  Sheik 
Ahmed,  which  were  doomed  to  disappointment.  After  many  interviews,  in  which 
he  appeared  deeply  impressed  and  ready  to  receive  Christ  as  his  Saviour  and  God, 
•Gobat  lost  sight  of  him.  Three  months  later  he  says,  "  I  met  him  one  day  in  the 
street.  I  asked  him  why  he  had  not  called  for  so  long  a  time,  to  which  he  naively 
replied,  •  The  last  time  I  was  with  you  I  felt  that  if  I  went  to  you  again  I  should 
be  convinced  of  the  truths  of  Christianity,  and  be  consequently  obliged  to  avow 
myself  a  Christian,  for  which  I  should  have  been  killed.  I  therefore  resolved  to 
see  you  no  more  until  my  heart  should  be  hardened  against  your  arguments.' *' 
{Memoirs  of  Bishop  Gobat.)  Triumph  of  the  Word: — In  the  diamond  fields  of 
South  Africa  a  diamond  was  found,  celebrated  lately  under  the  title  of  fly-stone ; 
placed  under  a  magnifying  glass  you  see  enclosed  in  all  its  brilliancy  a  little  fly, 
frith  body,  wings,  and  eyes  in  the  most  perfect  state  of  preservation.    How  it  ( 


'.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  11 

4here  no  one  knows  ;  but  no  human  skill  can  take  it  out.  So  in  Holy  Scriptora 
the  Spirit  of  God  is  found  in  a  place  from  which  no  power  of  man  can  remove  it. 
Infidelity  and  criticism  have  now  done  their  utmost,  and  it  is  a  kind  of  satisfaction 
to  know  that  more  powerful  advocates  of  infidelity  can  hardly  be  found  in  the 
tatuxe  than  there  have  been  in  the  past.  All  kinds  of  weapons  have  been 
employed,  bat  the  result  has  been  triumph  for  the  Word.    (Dr.  McEwan.) 

Yer.  5.  A  certain  priest  named  Zachaiias. — Mark  how  immediately  the  historian 
betakes  himself  to  the  collateral  line.  Something  very  suggestive  in  this.  No  one 
life  independent  of  other  lives.  As  every  text  has  its  context,  so  every  life  has 
relationships  and  associations  which  must  in  some  degree  be  understood  before 
itself  can  be  made  altogether  intelligible.  Hence  we  find  that  biography  is  much 
indebted  to  its  background  of  contemporary  and  incidental  events.  The  particu- 
larity of  Luke's  statements  is  noticeable.  He  does  not  hurry  his  reader  over  names 
and  circumstances  which  a  critical  inquirer  would  like  to  know  something  about. 
On  the  contrary,  he  sets  down  the  names  of  kings,  priests,  and  others,  and  so  gives 
the  critic  the  utmost  opportunity  of  testing  his  accuracy  by  the  light  of  collateral 
history.  {Dr.  Joseph  Parker.)  The  priestly  descent  of  the  Forerunner: — Whereas, 
mlike  in  narrative  and  apostolic  argument,  the  Lord  Himself  is  "  separated  "  in  His 
lineage  from  the  priestly  race  (see  Heb.  vii.  14),  it  is  otherwise  with  John  the 
Baptist.  By  father  and  by  mother  he  was  descended  in  the  "  priestly  "  line.  This 
twofold  fact  seems  tc  me  worth  accentuating  in  three  elements  of  it.  1.  It  strikingly 
differentiates  historically  the  priesthood  of  our  Lord  from  the  ancient  priesthood, 
which  was  a  thing  simply  of  inheritance  by  blood.  2.  It  is  to  be  emphasized  in  that 
John  the  Baptist  never  claimed  that  priestly  succession  that  he  might  have  done  as 
the  son  of  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth.  Surely  this  declinature  to  enter  himgelf  heir 
to  so  august  an  office  is  extremely  noticeable  1  It  was  self -chosen,  but  also  Divinely- 
ordered,  seeing  that  John  was  to  usher  in  that  very  kingdom  of  grace  that  was 
destined  to  unconsecrate  and  abolish  the  old  order  of  things.  3.  I  call  attention  to 
it  further,  because  it  could  scarcely  fail  that  the  "  blue  blood  "  of  the  priesthood  in 
John  would  have  its  influence  in  winning  him  audience  and  giving  him  authority 
with  the  multitudes  who  flocked  (later)  to  his  imperious  summons.  (Dr.  Grosart.) 
Priesthood  in  the  days  of  our  Lord : — As  the  office  was  hereditary,  the  number  of 
the  priesthood  had  become  very  great  in  the  days  of  our  Lord,  so  that,  according  to 
the  Talmud,  in  addition  to  those  who  lived  in  the  country,  and  came  up  to  take 
their  turn  in  the  temple  services,  there  were  no  fewer  than  24,000  settled  in  Jerusalem, 
and  half  that  number  in  Jericho.  This,  however,  is  no  doubt  an  exaggeration. 
Josephns  is  more  likely  correct  in  estimating  the  whole  number  at  somewhat  over 
20,000.  But  even  this  was  an  enormous  proportion  of  clergy  to  the  population  of 
a  country  like  Judsea.  They  must  have  been  a  more  familiar  sight  in  the  streets 
of  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  towns  and  villages,  than  the  seemingly  countless  eccle- 
riastics  in  the  towns  and  cities  of  Spain  or  Italy  at  this  time.  (Dr.  Geikie.)  "  Of 
the  course  of  Abia  "  : — Abia — Abijah  in  the  Old  Testament.  When  the  priests  had 
become  numerous,  David  divided  the  whole  body  into  twenty-four  classes  or 
"courses,"  which  were  appointed  to  do  service  in  weekly  rotation,  so  that  each  of 
the  courses  had  to  attend  at  the  temple  twice  in  the  year  for  a  week  each  time.  Of 
the  twenty-four  courses  that  of  Abijah  was  the  eighth.  Of  the  number  that  went 
into  captivity  only  four  of  the  courses  returned,  and  that  of  Abijah  was  not  one  of 
them.  But  these  four  were  divided  into  twenty -four,  in  order  to  reproduce  the 
former  distribution ;  and,  to  render  the  analogy  more  complete,  they  received  the 
Bame  names  as  the  original  courses.  (Dr.  Kitto.)  Tlte  priestly  orders: — The 
word  ephemeria  means  first  '•  a  daily  ministry  "  (Heb.  Mishmereth),  and  then  a 
class  of  the  priesthood  which  exercised  its  functions  for  a  week.  Aaron  had  four 
sons,  bat  the  two  elder,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  were  struck  d^ad  for  using  strange  fire 
in  the  sanctuary  (Lev,  x.).  From  the  two  remaining  sons,  Eleazar  and  Ithamar, 
had  sprung  in  the  days  of  David  twenty -four  families,  sixteen  from  the  descendants 
of  Eleazar,  and  eight  from  those  of  Ithamar.  To  these  David  distributes  by  lot 
the  order  of  their  service  from  week  to  week,  each  for  eight  days  inclusively  from 
•abbath  to  sabbath  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  1-19 ;  2  Chron.  xxxi.  2),  After  the  Babylonish 
exile  only  four  of  the  twenty-four  courses  returned — a  striking  indication  of  the 
truth  of  the  Jewish  saying,  that  those  who  returned  from  the  exile  were  but  the 
ehaff  in  comparison  of  the  wheat.  The  four  families  of  which  the  representatives 
fetarned  were  those  of  Jedaiah,  Immer,  Pashur,  and  Harim  (Ezra  ii.  36-39).  But 
ib«  JewB  oonoaaled  the  heavy  loss  by  subdividing  these  four  families  into  twenty- 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OBMa,  U 

four  eonrses,  to  which  they  gave  the  original  names,  and  this  is  alluded  to  la 
Neh.  xiii.  30  ("  I  .  .  .  appointed  the  wards  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  every 
one  in  his  business ").  This  arrangement  continued  till  the  fall  of  Jerusalem 
(a.d.  70),  at  which  time,  on  the  ninth  of  the  month  Abib  (August  5th),  we  are  told 
by  JosephuR  that  the  course  in  waiting  was  that  of  Jehoiarib.  Beckoning  back  from 
this,  we  find  that  the  course  of  Abijah  went  out  of  oflBce  on  October  9,  b.o-  6.  The 
reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  our  received  era  for  the  birth  of  Christ  was  only 
fixed  by  the  abbot  Dionysius  Exiguus  in  the  sixth  century,  and  is  probably  four 
years  wrong.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  There  may  be  succession  in  a  forsaken  Churob. 
It  remained  when  Christ  was  cracififid,  the  Spirit  quenched.    (Fan  Doren.) 

Ver.  6.   Both  righteous  before  God. — Ohservance  of  QocTb  ordinaneet : — By  ••  walk* 

ing  in  the  ordinances,"  they  walked  likewise  "  in  aU  the  commandments  of  the- 
Lord ;  "  that  being  the  means  whereby  they  did  this.  (Bishop  Beveridge.)  Per- 
formance of  duties  : — God  communicates  Himself  with  great  variety  to  His  saints, 
now  in  this  ordinance  and  now  in  that,  on  purpose  that  He  may  keep  up  the  esteem 
of  all  in  our  hearts.  Take  heed,  therefore,  Christian,  that  thou  neglect  not  any 
one  duty.  How  knowest  thou  but  that  is  the  door  at  which  Christ  stands,  waiting 
to  enter  into  thy  soul  (John  xx.  24 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  16)  ?  (W.  Gumall.)  All  God's 
commands  to  be  observed  : — God's  commandments  hang  together ;  they  are  knit  and 
woven  together  like  a  fine  web,  wherein  you  cannot  loosen  a  single  stitch  without 
danger  of  unravelling  the  whole.  If  a  man  lives  in  the  breach  of  any  one  of  God's 
commandments,  it  he  allows  himself  to  indulge  in  any  one  sin,  none  can  tell  where 
he  will  stop.  There  is  no  letting  any  one  devil  into  our  souls  without  the  risk  of 
his  going  and  fetching  "  seven  other  devils  wickeder  than  himself "  ;  and  the  purer 
the  house  may  hitherto  have  been,  the  more  eager  will  they  be  to  come  and  lodge 
in  it.     (A.  W.  Hare.)  Unity  of  Zacharias  and  EUsabeth: — They  were  one  in — 

1.  Affection.  2.  Interest.  S.Christ.  (Van  Doren.)  A  model  couple : — Observe 
here — 1.  The  sweet  harmony  of  this  religious  couple  in  the  ways  of  God ;  they  both 
walked  in  the  commandments  of  God.  It  is  a  happy  match  when  husband  and 
wife  are  one,  not  only  in  themselves,  but  in  the  Lord.  2.  The  universality  of  their 
holiness  and  obedience  :  they  walked,  not  in  some,  but  in  aU  the  ordinances  and 
commandments  of  the  Lord.  Such  as  will  approve  themselves  to  be  sincerely 
religious  must  make  conscience  of  every  known  duty,  and  endeavour  to  obey  every 
precept  and  command  of  God.  3.  The  high  commendation  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God  gives  of  this  their  religious  course  of  holiness  and  obedience :  they  are  pro- 
nounced blameless.  To  live  without  gross  sin  is  our  holiness  on  earth ;  to  live 
without  any  sin  will  be  our  happiness  in  heaven.  Many  sins  may  be  in  him  that 
has  true  grace ;  but  he  that  has  truth  of  grace  cannot  allow  himself  in  any  sin. 
Truth  of  grace  is  our  perfection  on  earth  ;  but  in  heaven  we  shall  have  perfection 
as  well  as  truth.  4.  A  pattern  for  their  imitation  who  wait  at  God's  altar,  and  are 
employed  in  and  about  holy  things.  All  ministers  of  the  gospel  ought  to  be  what 
Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  are  here  said  to  be,  blameless ;  that  is,  very  innocent  and 
inoffensive  in  their  daily  conversation.  ( W.  Burkitt,  M.A .)  Like  stock,  like  fruit : — 
It  is  not  in  the  power  of  parents  to  traduce  holiness  to  their  children ;  it  is  the 
blessing  of  God  that  feoffs  them  in  the  virtues  of  their  parents,  as  they  feoff  them 
in  their  sins.  There  is  no  certainty,  but  there  is  a  likelihood  of  a  holy  generation 
when  the  parents  are  such.  Elisabeth  was  just  as  well  as  Zachary,  that  the  fore- 
runner of  a  Saviour  might  be  holy  on  both  sides.  If  the  stock  and  the  graff  be  not 
both  good,  there  is  much  danger  of  the  fruit.  It  is  a  happy  match  when  the  hus- 
band and  the  wife  are  one,  not  only  in  themselves,  but  in  God;  not  more  in  flesh 
than  in  the  Spirit.  Grace  makes  no  difference  of  sexes  ;  rather  the  weaker  carries 
away  the  more  honour  because  it  has  had  less  helps.  {Bishop  Hall.)  It  may  or 
may  not  carry  benediction  with  it  to  be  born  into  a  household  historically  and  by 
hereditary  office  renowned ;  but,  coeteris  paribus,  it  is  a  beatitude  to  have  both 
father  and  mother  "righteous"  as  before  God,  and  "blameless"  as  before  the 
world.  How  mournful  to  very  tragedy  is  falsification  of  such  a  godly  lineage,  words 
are  poor  to  tell !  It  is  to  set  the  whole  home-life  to  sweetest  music  to  have  husband 
and  wife,  father  and  mother,  agreed  in  religious  faith  and  character,  as  it  is  to 
introduce  inevitable  discords  when  both  are  not  so — when,  perchance,  children  and 
servants  see  the  husband  (father)  living  "without  God,"  and  the  wife  (mother) 
bearing  an  aching  heart  as  she  enforcedly  goes  alone  to  "  the  sanctuary,"  and  alone 
has  "  prayer  "  in  the  household.  (Dr.  Grosart.)  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth : — 
Parentage  of  great  men  interesting.     Parental  influence  generally  determines  intel- 


OTAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  13 

lectual,  social,  and  largely  moral  standing.  Introducing  the  story  of  one  who  was 
pronounced  by  the  highest  authority  to  have  no  superior  among  his  predecessors  or 
contemporaries  (Matt.  xi.  11),  the  sacred  writer  detains  us  a  little  with  the  character 
o£  his  parents.  View  the  text  as  a  beautiful  exhibition  of  personal  and  family 
religion.  I.  A  bepbesentation  op  personaii  religion.  Their  religion  was — 1. 
Sincere — "  before  God."  2.  Irreproachable — "  blameless  "  (Phil.  ii.  15).  3.  Practical 
— "  walking  in  all,"  <fec.  II.  A  picture  and  jledge  of  family  relioion.  What  is 
said  of  one  is  said  of  "  both  " — a  pious  pair.  Look  at  this  in  its  bearing  upon — 1. 
Their  mutual  comfort.  Christian  young  men  and  women,  let  this  be  one  of  the 
first  things  at  which  you  look  seriously  when  you  begin  to  contemplate  the  life- 
nnion.  2.  Their  domestic  life.  Imagine  them  at  their  rural  home  in  the  hill- 
country.  Mutual  kindness,  united  prayer,  quiet  ways  of  doing  good,  &c.  3.  Theii 
parental  duties.  Surely  their  personal  piety  had  something  to  do  with  their  selec- 
tion as  parents  of  forerunner.  Personal  religion  the  main  qualification  for  training 
of  children.  {John  Rawlinson.)  Characteristics  of  true  righteousness  : — In  ordei 
to  this  we  must  be  "justified  by  faith  through  f)ur  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  for  "the 
man  unto  whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin,  is  he  whose  transgression  is  for- 
given."  Another  characi eristic  of  the  righteous  man  is  that,  "  in  his  spirit  there 
is  no  guile,"  or,  as  the  Irish  boy  expressed  this,  he  must  be  "  clane  inside."  See 
how  David  prayed  for  these  blessings  (Psa.  li.  1,  7,  10).  Then  those  who  are 
righteous  have  all  right  principles  in  them  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  A  king  of  England 
once  took  a  Romish  fighting-bishop  prisoner.  The  Pope  sent  a  demand,  "  Set  my 
son  free."  In  reply,  the  king  sent  the  bishop's  helmet  and  coat  of  mail,  and  asked, 
"  Is  this  thy  son's  dress  ?  "  Those  who  are  righteous  before  God  will  also  be 
righteous  before  men.      (ET.  R.  Bu7-ton.)  Transparent  in  character: — In  the 

cathedral  of  St.  Mark,  in  Venice — a  marvellous  building,  lustrous  with  an  Oriental 
splendour  far  beyond  description — there  are  pillars  said  to  have  been  brought 
from  Solomon's  Temple  ;  these  are  of  alabaster,  a  substance  firm  and  durable 
as  granite,  and  yet  transparent,  so  that  the  light  glows  through  them.  Be- 
hold an  emblem  of  what  all  true  pillars  of  the  Church  should  be — firm  in 
their  faith,  and  transparent  in  their  character ;  men  of  simple  mould,  ignorant 
of  tortuous  and  deceptive  ways,  and  yet  men  of  strong  will,  not  readily  to  be 
led  aside,  or  bent  from  their  uprightness  !  A  few  such  alabaster  men  we  know ; 
may  the  great  Master  Builder  place  more  of  them  in  His  temple  !  {C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
The  blameless  pair : — I.  To  consider  and  illustrate  the  character  described  in  the 
text ;  and — II.  To  present  some  reasons  why  all  who  have  entered  the  marriage 
state  should  endeavour  to  make  it  their  own.  1.  The  first  thing  which  demands 
attention  in  the  character  of  this  truly  excellent  and  happy  pair  is,  that  they  were 
righteous  before  God.  It  is,  indeed,  very  easy  to  be  righteous  in  our  own  estima- 
tion ;  nor  is  it  very  difficult  to  be  righteous  in  the  estimation  of  our  fellow  creatures ; 
but  it  is  by  no  means  equally  easy  to  be  righteous  in  the  estimation  of  God.  He  is 
constantly  with  us ;  He  sees  our  whole  conduct ;  nay,  more,  He  reads  our  hearts. 
To  be  righteous  before  Him,  then,  is  to  be  really,  inwardly,  and  uniformly  righteous. 
It  is  to  be  the  same  persons  in  every  situation,  and  on  all  occasions  :  the  same  at 
home  and  abroad,  in  solitude  and  in  society.  Try  yourselves  by  this  rule.  Would 
men  think  you  righteous,  did  they  know  you  as  perfectly  as  God  knows  you  ? 
2.  Again:  this  pair  walked  in  all  God's  commandments  and  ordinances  blameless. 
It  is  mentioned  as  an  effect  and  a  proof  of  their  being  righteous.  These  two  words, 
though  nearly  synonymous,  are  not  perfectly  so.  The  commands  of  God  are  His 
moral  precepts,  or  those  precepts  which  are  designed  to  regulate  our  temper  and 
conduct  on  all  occasions.  By  His  ordinances  are  meant  those  religious  rites  and 
institutions  which  He  has  directed  us  to  observe.  Some  pretend  to  obey  God's 
commands,  while  they  neglect  His  ordinances.  Others  visibly  observe  His 
ordinances,  bat  neglect  His  commands.  The  term  walk  signifies  a  course  of  life. 
To  walk  in  God's  commandments  and  ordinances,  is  to  have  the  heart  and  life 
constantly  regulated  hy  them.  It  is  not  to  step  occasionally  into  the  path  of  duty, 
and  then  take  many  steps  in  a  different  path ;  but  it  is  to  pursue  this  path  with  unde- 
viating  steadiness  and  perseverance.  This  pious  pair  did  not  select  such  command- 
ments as  were  easy,  or  reputable,  and  neglect  others.  Nor  did  they  observe  those  only, 
which  they  had  little  temptation  to  omit ;  but,  to  use  the  language  of  the  psalmist, 
they  had  respect  to  all  God's  commandments.  What  is  now,  under  the  Christian 
dispensation,  implied  in  walking  in  all  the  ordinances  and  commandments  of  the 
Lord,  blamelessly?  1.  It  implies  the  exercise  of  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith 
in  oar  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Thesv  are  the  two  first  and  great  commands  of  the 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ORit.  ti 

gospel.  Until  we  begin  to  perform  these  duties,  we  cannot  be  righteona  before 
God,  nor  walk  in  any  of  His  commandments  or  ordinances  ;  for  inspiration  bath 
declared,  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  Him.  2.  Walking  in  all  God's 
commandments  and  ordinances  blamelessly,  implies  great  diligence  in  seeking  a 
knowledge  of  them.  No  man  can  regulate  his  conduct  by  a  rule,  with  which  he  ia 
unacquainted.  As  well  might  a  mariner  find  his  way  to  a  distant  port,  withont 
ever  looking  to  bis  chart  or  compass.  That  copy  of  the  Old  Testament,  which 
Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  possessed,  was  doubtless  worn  with  frequent  use.  It 
must  have  been  their  daily  counsellor  and  guide.  3.  Walking  in  all  God's  com> 
mandments  and  ordinances  blamelessly,  implies  a  careful  performance  of  all  the 
duties  which  husbands  and  wives  owe  each  other.  4  Walking  in  all  the  com* 
mandments  and  ordinances  of  God  blamelessly,  implies  a  careful  performance,  on 
the  part  of  parents,  of  all  the  parental  duties  which  He  has  enjoined.  6.  Walking 
in  all  God's  ordinances  and  commandments  blamelessly,  implies  the  maintaining 
of  the  worship  of  God  in  the  family.  6.  Walking  in  all  the  commandments  and 
ordinances  of  the  Lord  blamelessly,  implies  a  suitable  concern  for  the  present  and 
future  happiness  of  servants,  apprentices,  and  dependents.  7.  Walking  in  the 
commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blamelessly,  implies  a  careful  per. 
formance  of  all  the  duties  which  we  owe  our  neighbours.  8.  Walking  in  all  the 
commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blamelessly,  implies  a  proper  use  o£ 
the  temporal  good  things  which  are  entrusted  to  our  care.  Lastly :  Walking  in  all 
the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord  blamelessly,  implies  a  sacred 
observance  of  the  Sabbath,  a  diligent  attendance  on  the  public  worship  of  God,  and 
a  commemoration  of  Christ  at  His  table.  Having  thus  considered  and  illustrated 
the  character  brought  to  view  in  the  text,  I  proceed,  as  was  proposed — II.  To  state 
some  reasons  why  all  who  have  entered  the  marriage  state  should  endeavour  to 
make  it  their  own.  1.  God  approves,  and  requires  you  to  possess,  such  % 
character.  He  commands  you  to  be  righteous  before  Him.  2.  Consider  how 
much  it  would  promote  your  present  happiness  to  possess  such  a  character. 
Where  can  happiness  be  found  on  earth,  if  not  in  such  a  family  as  has  now 
been  described?  3.  Permit  me  to  remind  you  how  greatly  such  a  family  would 
honour  God  and  adorn  religion.  It  would,  indeed,  in  such  a  world  as  this,  be 
like  one  of  those  ever  verdant  islands,  which  rise  amidst  the  wide  ocean  of 
Arabian  sands,  and  whose  constant  verdure  leads  the  weary  and  thirsty  traveller 
to  seek  for  the  hidden  spring  which  produces  it.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  for 
an  insulated  individual  to  exhibit  all  the  beauty  and  excellence  of  Christianity; 
because  much  of  it  consists  in  the  right  performance  of  those  relative  duties, 
which  he  has  no  opportunity  to  perform.  But  in  a  religious  family,  a  family 
where  both  husband  and  wife  are  evidently  pious,  religion  may  be  displayed  in  all 
its  parts,  and  in  the  fulness  of  its  glory  and  beauty ;  and  one  such  family  will  do 
more  to  recommend  it,  and  to  soften  the  prejudices  of  its  enemies,  than  can  be 
effected  by  the  most  powerful  and  persuasive  sermon.  {E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
Domestic  life  : — In  this  short  account  there  is  much  to  interest  and  instract  na  ; 
*'  they  were  both  righteous."  The  priest  maintained  the  sanctity  of  his  character 
by  marrying  a  daughter  of  Aaron ;  a  daughter  of  Aaron's  piety  as  well  as  of  his 
flesh.  The  union,  cemented  by  affection,  was  strengthened  by  piety.  Thrioe 
happy  pair  I  united  to  God  and  to  each  other  I  who  can  separate  you  ?  what  can 
harm  you  ?  Life  with  all  its  trials ;  death  with  all  its  terrors ;  all  things  shall 
work  together  for  your  good.  If  congeniality  is  necessary  to  happiness  in  any 
state,  surely  in  that  which  is  most  interesting  and  important.  "  How  can  two 
walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  Besides,  if  the  families  of  God's  people 
are  to  be  the  nurseries  for  the  Church,  it  is  indispensable  that  both  parents  should 
be  righteous.  I.  The  principle  of  their  obedience — "  They  were  righteous  before 
God."  II.  The  role  of  their  obedience — "  The  commandments  and  ordinances 
of  the  Lord."  III.  The  universality  of  their  obedience — "  Walking  in  all  the 
commandments,"  &c.  Religion,  wherever  it  exists,  will  leave  its  own  entire 
impression  upon  the  character ;  not  one  feature,  but  every  feature  of  the  "  new 
man  "  vfiW  be  developed  ;  the  duties  to  man,  as  well  as  those  we  owe  to  God,  will 
be  conscientiously  regarded.  IV.  The  consistency  of  theib  obedience.  The 
text  adds  to  the  preceding  description  of  their  character  "  blameless ; "  not  sinless. 
Happy  is  it  for  the  interests  of  the  Church  when  a  blameless  consistency  marks  its 
professors,  more  especially  when  its  professors,  like  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth^ 
sustain  public  and  important  stations;  the  priest  emphatically  ahonld  h» 
w  blameless ;  "  if  the  tongue  of  slander  should  attack  him,  it  should  meet  with  nt 


«BAP.  L]  8T.  LUKE.  IS 

weond  ftcenser.    To  be  thaa  "  blameless  "  requires  a  oonstant  dependence  apon 
the  grace  of  God.    (Etsex  Bemembrancer.) 

Ver.  7.  And  they  had  no  child. — Virtue  rewarded  after  long  trial: — Observe  here 
— I.  This  holy  pair,  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth,  were  fruitful  in  holy  obedience,  but 
barren  in  children ;  s  fruitful  soul  and  a  barren  womb  are  consistent,  and  often 
meet  together.  This  religious  couple  made  no  less  progress  in  virtue  than  in  age,  and 
yet  their  virtue  did  not  make  their  age  fruitful.  II.  Elisabeth  was  barren  in  the 
flower  of  her  age,  but  much  more  so  in  old  age.  Here  was  a  double  obstacle,  and 
consequently  a  double  instance  of  Divine  power  in  the  birth  of  John  the  Baptist, 
showing  him  to  be  a  prophet  very  extraordinary,  and  miraculously  sent  by  God. 
III.  When  Almighty  God  in  old  time  did  long  delay  to  give  the  blessing  of  children 
to  holy  women.  He  rewarded  their  expectation  with  the  birth  of  some  eminent  and 
extraordinary  person.  Thus  Sarah,  after  long  barrenness,  brought  forth  an  Isaac  ; 
Rebecca,  a  Jacob  ;  Eaohel,  a  Joseph ;  Hannah,  a  Samuel ;  and  Elisabeth,  St.  John 
Baptist.  When  God  makes  His  people  wait  long  for  a  particular  mercy,  if  He 
sees  it  good  for  them,  He  gives  it  at  last  with  a  double  reward  for  their  expectation. 

iW.    Burkitt,    M.A.)  Opposite   wonders  in    the   conception  of   Christ  and  of 

'ohn: — A  just  soul  and  a  barren  womb  may  well  agree  together.  Among  the  Jews 
barrenness  was  not  a  defect  only,  but  a  reproach  ;  yet,  while  this  good  woman  was 
fruitful  of  holy  obedience,  she  was  barren  of  children  ;  as  John,  who  was 
miraculously  conceived  by  man,  was  a  fit  forerunner  of  Him  that  was  conceived  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  so  a  barren  matron  was  meet  to  make  way  for  a  virgin.  (Bis)iop 
Hall.)  Here  was  desolation  without  murmuring.  Blessings  long  withheld  are 
more  intensely  prised.  (W.  H.  Van  Daren,  D.D.)  The  society  of  children  : — 
We  are  all  brought  nearer  to  Christ  through  childhood.  Dr.  Arnold  used  to  say 
that  no  one  could  continue  long  in  a  healthy  religious  state  unless  his  heart  was 
kept  tender  by  mingling  with  children,  or  by  frequent  intercourse  with  the  poor  and 
the  suffering.  The  grief  of  being  childless : — But,  notwithstanding  all  the  satis- 
faction and  inward  peace  of  innocent  and  godly  lives,  in  spite  of  the  natural  pride 
they,  doubtless,  felt  in  the  consideration  that  must  have  been  shown  them,  as  born 
of  a  priestly  ancestry,  stretching  back  through  fifteen  hundred  years,  and  though 
they  must  have  had  round  them  the  comforts  of  a  modest  competency,  there  was  a 
secret  grief  in  the  heart  of  both.  Elisabeth  had  no  child,  and  what  this  meant  to 
a  Hebrew  wife  it  is  hard  for  us  to  fancy.  Eachel's  words,  *'  Give  me  children,  or 
else  I  die,"  were  the  burden  of  every  childless  woman's  heart  in  Israel.  The  birth  of 
a  child  was  the  removal  of  a  reproach.  Hannah's  prayer  for  a  son  was  that  of  all 
Jewish  wives  in  the  same  position.  To  have  no  child  was  regarded  as  a  heavy 
punishment  from  the  hand  of  God.  How  bitter  the  thought  that  his  name  should 
perish  was  for  a  Jew  to  bear,  was  seen  in  the  law  which  required  that  a  childless 
widow  should  be,  forthwith,  married  by  a  dead  husband's  brother,  that  children 
might  be  raised  up  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the  childless  man,  by  being  accounted 
his.  Nor  was  it  enough  that  one  brother  of  a  number  acted  thus  :  in  the  imaginary 
instance  given  by  the  Sadducees  to  our  Lord,  seven  brothers,  in  succession,  took  a 
dead  brother's  wife,  for  this  object.  The  birth  of  a  child  was  therefore  a  special 
blessing,  as  a  security  that  the  name  of  his  father  "  should  not  be  cut  off  from 
among  his  brethren,  and  from  the  gate  of  his  place,"  and  that  it  should  not  be 
"put  out  of  Israel."  Ancient  nations,  generally,  seem  to  have  had  this  feeling, 
and  it  is  still  so  strong  among  Orientals,  that  after  the  birth  of  a  first-born  son,  a 
father  and  a  mother  are  no  longer  known  by  their  own  names,  but  as  the  father 
and  mother  of  the  child.  There  was,  besides,  a  higher  tliought  of  possible  rela- 
tions, however  distant,  to  the  great-expected  Messiah,  by  the  birth  of  children  ; 
but  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  had  reason  enough  to  sorrow  at  their  childless  home, 
even  on  the  humbler  ground  of  natural  sentiments.  They  had  grieved  over  their 
misfortune,  and  had  made  it  the  burden  of  many  prayers,  but  years  passed, 
and  they  had  both  grown  elderly,  and  yet  no  child  had  been  vouchsafed  them. 
{Dr,  Oeikie.) 

Vers.  8-10.  While  ho  executed  the  priest's  olBce. — The  priest's  office:— Tho 
duties  of  the  priests  were  many  and  various.  It  was  their  awful  and  peculiar 
honour  to  *'  come  near  the  Lord"  (Exod.  xix.  22).  None  but  they  could  minister 
before  Him  in  the  Holy  place  where  He  manifested  His  presence :  none  others 
could  "come  nigh  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  or  the  altar."  It  was  death  for 
any  one  not  a  priest  to  usury  these  saored  prerogatives.     They  offered  the  morning 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cdaf.  U 

and  evening  incenae ;  trimmed  the  lamps  of  the  golden  candlestick,  and  filled 
them  with  oil ;  kept  up  the  fire  on  the  great  altar  in  front  of  the  Temple ;  removed 
the  ashes  of  the  sacrifices ;  took  part  in  the  slaying  and  ontting  ap  of  victims,  and 
especially  in  the  sprinkling  of  their  blood,  and  laid  the  offeriDgs  of  all  kinds  on 
the  altar.  They  also  announced  the  new  moons,  which  were  sacred  days  like  the 
Sabbaths,  by  the  blowing  of  trumpets.  But  this  was  a  small  part  of  their  duties. 
They  had  to  examine  all  cases  of  ceremonial  uncleanness,  especially  leprosy, 
clearing  those  who  were  pure,  and  pronouncing  others  unclean  ;  to  estimate,  for 
commutation,  the  value  of  the  countless  offerings  made  to  the  Temple,  and  to 
watch  the  interior  of  the  Temple  by  night.  They  were  required,  moreover,  to 
instraot  the  people  in  the  niceties  of  the  law,  and  to  give  decisions  on  many  points 
teserved,  among  ns,  to  magistrates.  The  priests,  in  fact,  were,  within  certain 
limits,  the  judges  and  magistrates  of  the  land,  though  the  Sanhedrim,  which  was 
the  supreme  court  in  later  Jewish  history,  was  composed  of  chief  priests,  laymen, 
and  scribes,  or  Babbis,  in  apparently  equal  numbers.  {Ibid.)  His  lot: — 
When  a  course  came  up  to  relieve  the  one  that  had  served  the  preceding  week,  the 
particirlar  services  of  the  priests  were  determined  by  lot.  Certain  services  were 
accounted  more  honourable  than  others,  and  in  this  way  all  contention  respecting 
them  was  avoided.  The  most  honourable  of  all  was  that  of  going  into  the  Holy  place  to 
offer  incense  upon  the  golden  altar.  And  on  the  occasion  before  us  this  distinguished 
oflSce  devolved  upon  the  aged  Zacharias.  (Dr.  Kitto.)  The  providence  in  dtanee : — 
How  often  it  happens  that  that  which  falls  to  our  lot  by  apparent  chance,  does  in 
teality  so  fall  by  the  guidance  of  God's  hand  !  (Bishop  Goodwin.)  Priestly  funC' 
tiotu : — How  solemn  Uie  service  in  which  Zacharias  is  now  employed  I  The  saorifica 
being  slain,  whose  smoke  was  now  ascending  to  heaven,  and  every  preparation  being 
made  in  the  court,  he  proceeds  to  transact  for  the  nation,  and  particularly  for  the 
assembled  multitude,  whom  he  leaves  behind  him.  Advancing  with  slow  and 
solemn  step,  and  with  the  smoking  censer  in  his  hand,  towards  the  sanctuary,  he 
pnts  aside  the  outer  curtain  and  disappears  from  their  sight.  Imagination  follows 
him  in,  where,  except  on  pain  of  destruction,  no  other  mortal  could  enter.  What 
must  be  his  feelings  in  going  on  with  the  service  of  the  incense  I  All  without  !■ 
silent  as  death,  and  all  within  is  so  stilly  impressive,  that  he  is  almost  afraid  to 
draw  his  breath.  No  mortal  eye  beholds  his  conduct ;  but  the  eternal  Jehovab* 
who  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  draw  nigh,  surrounds  him  with  His  more 
immediate  presence.  Take  heed,  Zacharias,  to  thy  demeanour,  lest  thon  be 
smitten  in  the  greatness  of  thine  iniquity,  or  lest  thy  hand,  stretched  forth  rashly 
be  withered ;  or  lest,  through  any  fault  of  thine,  the  Lord  deny  His  blessing 
to  the  people.  He  places  on  the  golden  altar  the  censer  with  the  incense,  with 
whose  eloudy  perfume  the  apartment  is  filled  and  rendered  fragrant,  that  the 
Lord  may  smell  a  sweet  savour.  {Jot.  Foote,  M.A.)  Zachariah's  prayer  heard  ;— 
The  answer  to  Zachariah's  prayer  was — 1.  Earnestly  desired.  2.  Long  delayed. 
8.  Promised  in  a  surprising  manner.  4.  Incredulously  waited  for.  5.  Gloriously 
Tonchsafed.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  Order  in  the  performance  of  religiotu  duties: — 
Here  note — 1.  That  none  but  a  son  of  Aaron  might  offer  incense  to  God  in  the 
temple ;  and  not  every  son  of  Aaron  either ;  nay,  not  any  of  them  at  all  seasons. 
God  is  a  God  of  order,  and  hates  confusion  no  less  than  irreligion.  And  as  imder 
the  law  of  old,  so  under  the  gospel  now,  no  man  ought  to  take  this  honour  upon 
him  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron.  2.  That  there  were  courses  of 
ministration  in  the  legal  services,  in  which  the  priests  relieved  one  another  weekly. 
God  never  purposed  to  burden  any  of  His  servants  with  devotion,  nor  is  He 
pleased  when  His  service  is  made  burdensome,  either  to  or  by  His  ministers. 
3.  That  morning  and  evening,  twice  a  day,  the  priests  offered  up  their  incense  to 
God,  that  both  parts  of  the  day  might  be  consecrated  to  Him  who  was  the  Maker 
and  Giver  of  their  time.  This  incense  offered  under  the  law,  represents  our  prayers 
offered  to  God  under  the  gospel.  The  ejaculatory  elevations  of  our  hearts  should 
be  perpetual ;  but  if  twice  a  day  we  do  not  present  God  with  our  solemn  invoca- 
tions, we  make  the  gospel  less  officious  than  the  law ;  and  can  we  reasonably 
think  that  Almighty  God  will  accept  of  less  now  that  would  content  Him  then ? 
{W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Joint  offering  of  priest  and  people  : — 1.  While  the  incense 
was  burning,  the  people  were  praying :  while  the  priest  sends  up  his  incense  in 
the  temple  within,  the  people  send  up  their  prayers  in  the  court  without.  The 
inoense  of  the  priest  and  the  prayers  of  the  people  meet,  and  go  up  to  heaven 
together.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  when  both  minister  and  people  jointly  offer  up 
fiieir  prayers  for  each  other  at  the  same  throne  of  grace,  and  mutually  strive 


.  i]  ST,  LUKE.  17 

together  in  their  snpplioations,  one  with,  and  one  for,  another.  2.  Observe  how 
both  priest  and  people  keep  their  place  and  station :  the  priest  burns  incense  in 
the  holy  place,  and  the  people  offer  up  their  prayers  in  the  outward  court.  Th« 
people  might  no  more  go  into  the  Holy  place  to  offer  up  their  prayer,  than  Zaohary 
might  go  into  the  Holy  of  Holies  to  burn  incense.  Whilst  the  partition-wall  stood 
betwixt  Jew  and  Gentile,  there  was  also  a  partition  betwixt  the  Jews  themselves. 
Bat  now  under  the  gospel,  every  man  is  a  priest  to  God,  and  may  enter  the  Holy 
of  Holies  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  But,  Lord  1  what  are  we  the  better  for  this  great 
and  gracious  freedom  of  access  to  Thee,  if  we  want  hearts  to  prize  and  improve 
our  privilege  from  Thee  ?     (Ibid.)  Supplication  the  Church's  power : — At  the 

moment  when  the  effectual  work  of  propitiation  and  intercession  goes  forward 
within  the  temple — what  is  seen  without  ?  The  whole  multitude  or  the  people, 
bending  in  silent  awe,  seconding  the  priestly  office  and  making  it  in  some  sense 
their  own,  joining  their  faith  to  the  sacrifice,  and  lifting  their  hearts  with  the 
rising  incense-cloud,  are  in  supplication  before  God.  This  can  represent  nothing 
else  than  the  power  of  the  united  prayers  of  the  Christian  congregation,  aiding 
and  supporting  the  official  work  of  the  threefold  ministry  and  the  holy  offices  of 
the  Church,  in  declaring  Christ  to  the  world.  The  question  before  us,  then, 
thrown  open  in  its  broadest  form,  will  be  this  :  Are  we  usmg  the  devotional  power 
of  the  Church  in  due  proportion  to  its  other  powers  ?  If  in  any  of  our  under- 
takings we  fail,  there  is  very  little  doubt  that  we  fail  because  we  did  not  expect 
enough  and  ask  enough  of  God — for  that  expectation  is  only  another  name  for 
faith  ;  and  that  asking  is  prayer.  Men  say,  "Beligion  is  a  thing  between  a  man 
and  his  Maker  "  ;  and  though  it  is  often  said  to  palliate  some  inexcusable  neglect 
of  an  open  religious  confession  before  men,  yet  it  is  profoundly  true.  There  are 
two  parties,  and  only  two.  The  business  of  religion,  therefore,  is  to  bring 
offerings  to  Him,  and,  in  answer  to  our  prayers,  to  take  blessings  from  Him.  This, 
with  the  sacred  sentiments,  affections,  and  actions  which  belong  to  that  holy 
intercourse,  is  the  first  business  of  the  Church.  So,  Christians,  we  stand,  in  this 
■acred  and  redeemed  creation,  always  at  a  temple  door.  No  doubt  there  are 
mysteries.  What  temple  was  ever  without  its  suggestion  of  mystery  ?  Even  a 
very  deep  and  strong  human  love  has  its  mysteries.  But  nevertheless,  the  Light 
falls  down  from  the  Throne.  God  is  there.  The  door  is  swung  open.  We  are 
near  to  Him ;  He  is  near  to  us.  The  Mediator  and  Intercessor  is  praying  there 
for  us.  Our  prayers  are  joined  with  His.  The  reconciliation  is  accomplished. 
The  next  step  follows  irresistibly.  Every  movement  of  religious  life  among  us 
must  get  its  power  and  direction  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  If  you  would  find  the 
true  secret  of  spiritual  success,  you  need  not  seek  for  it  in  the  admirablenees  of 
the  plan,  the  shrewdness  of  the  management,  the  numbers  that  subscribe,  or  the 
eloquence  of  the  advocates.  You  might  better  seek  it  in  some  very  obscure 
chambers,  some  out-of-the-way  corners,  some  closets  with  the  doors  shut,  where 
men  or  women,  or  children  in  whose  breasts  God  has  a  Temple  of  His  own — 
never  heard  of  at  the  public  meetings,  poor  and  simple-hearted  and  of  stammering 
lips — kneel  with  their  great-hearted  and  prevailing  petitions,  not  discouraged  by 
the  slowness  of  the  answer,  trusting  not  in  themselves  but  only  in  the  Lord 
Almighty.  These  are  the  '♦  multitude  praying  without."  The  finest  and  firmest 
machinery  in  the  world  is  so  much  dead  material  without  these  prayers.  I 
suppose  most  of  you  have  seen  some  elaborate  and  costly  specimen  of  mechanism, 
standing  still :  every  little  screw  and  bolt  of  the  complicated  system  in  its  place ; 
every  post  and  bar,  flange  and  transom,  secure;  every  bright  lever  and  arm, 
wheel  and  tooth,  tempered  and  tested— the  whole  a  splendid  embodiment  and 
trophy  of  intellectual  ingenuity  and  determination — yet  silent  and  inert  as  icicles, 
till  some  lifted  gate  or  open  valve  lets  in  the  mysterious  motive-power  which  makes 
it  a  sure  and  mighty  servant  of  a  purpose  beyond  it.  So  are  all  our  best  religious 
measures,  till  the  breath  of  the  church's  prayers  joins  them  to  the  Spirit  from  on 
high.  We  look  into  the  Bible  records  of  the  beginnings  and  growth  of  God's 
kingdom  on  the  earth.  On  every  spot  where  that  kingdom  struck  root  we  see  a 
group  of  men  bending  in  prayer.  When  the  Eastern  magi  were  brought  by  the 
itar  to  Bethlehem,  all  their  intellectual  strength  bowed  itself  down  to  a  little 
ChUd ;  they  taught  nothing,  proposed  nothing — they  did  not  even  speak  ;  it  was 
■imply  an  offering ;  the  signification  of  it  was  the  submission  of  knowledge  to 
faith.  It  was  worship.  From  page  to  page,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  they 
An  shown  to  us  togeUier  looking  upward.  When  an  order  in  the  ministry,  an 
■fotrtle,  or  a  missionaxy,  was  to  be  set  apart  or  sent  out,  special  prayer  flignalised 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  I> 

the  oerenKoxiy.  At  the  meeting  and  parting  of  Christian  friends,  on  their  saored 
errands,  they  knelt  and  prayed.  If  one  of  their  number  was  imprisoned,  prayez 
was  made  for  him  day  and  night.  The  whole  fiery  heart  of  the  Chnrch  of  Christ 
was  in  instant  oommunication  with  its  ascended  Head.  And  Irhat  followed  f 
Why,  this  was  the  period  when  the  Church  grew  before  men's  eyes  with  such 
swiftness  that  a  thousand  converts  were  gathered  in  the  time  that  it  takes  us  to 
gather  ten.  And  so  the  periods  of  prayer  have  always  been  the  periods  of  life. 
A  lingering  doubt  casts  up  its  faithless  suggestion  at  these  words:  "Is  not  the 
Church  constantly  praying  ?  Yet  where  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  t "  The 
answer  is  found  under  another  word,  "  the  prayers  of  faith."  We  may  be  but* 
that  the  measure  of  the  faith  is  the  measure  of  the  power  of  the  prayer,  and  that 
the  measure  of  such  prayer  is,  sooner  or  later,  the  measure  of  the  blessing  we 
receive.  We  very  often  mistake  the  strength  of  our  desire  for  the  strength  of  onr 
faith.  {Bishop  F.  D.  Huntingdon.)  Symbol  of  united  prayer : — ^In  some  of  our 
most  familiar  illustrated  newspapers  tbere  were,  a  little  while  ago,  beautifol 
pictures  of  the  recently-completed  Cologne  Cathedral.  Looking  at  it  very 
attentively  there  came  back  to  mind  thoughts  and  suggestions  which  are  always 
started  by  the  presence  of  a  large  Gothic  building ;  and  these  have  been  so  long 
associated  with  our  cathedrals  and  spired  churches,  that  we  have  almost  ceased 
to  question  whether  they  reaUy  embody  the  essential  idea  of  the  Gothic  archi- 
tecture.  Surely  such  a  building  as  we  have  in  mind  is  the  illustration  in  stone  of 
the  idea  of  "  United  Prayer."  It  is  a  series  of  points  and  pinnacles,  from  the 
ground  to  the  top  of  the  great  spire.  Every  window  is  a  pointed  arch ;  every 
buttress  goes  up  to  a  point ;  every  roof  ridge  is  guided  oft  into  little  nplifting 
spires  ;  the  great  roof  itself  points  up ;  and  the  whole  building  seems  to  nnita 
in  the  great  spire,  which  pierces  away  into  the  sky,  and  seems  to  carry  the  nnited 
cry  of  the  whole  building  up  to  God.  (R.  Tuck.)  Remarkable  effect  of  united 
prayer : — Well-known  are  the  immediate  and  lasting  effects  of  the  sermon,  entitled 
"  Sinners  in  the  Hands  of  an  Angry  God,"  which  President  Edwards  preached  at 
the  time  of  "  The  Great  Awakening."  It  was  believed  that  the  sermon  owed 
much  of  its  success  to  the  earnest  petitions  of  a  few  believing  persons,  who 
spent  the  whole  of  the  previous  night  in  a  prayer-meeting  in  the  vicinity  (Enfield). 
These  prayers  were  made  the  more  earnest  by  the  fear  that  God,  who  waa 
blessing  other  places,  would  in  just  indignation  pass  them  by.  {Hervey'g 
*'  Manual  of  Revivals.")  The  tocial  feeling*  in  large  gatherings  : — If  we  wero 
all  cold  units  Uke  stones,  and  could  take  our  places  side  by  side  with  no  sense  or 
consciousness  of  the  presence  of  another,  how  chUled  the  thing  would  be  I  If, 
eomiug  together,  each  was  conscious  that  on  his  right  or  left  was  an  enemy  present 
— a  carping  critic,  a  cold  atheist — how  those  who  care  at  all  for  the  thing  would 
be  chilled  and  withered!  You  aU  feel  that,  having  a  common  purpose  and  A 
living  sympathy,  heart  blends  with  heart  and  mind  with  mind.  Ay,  and  thns 
Divine  mercy  uses  and  sanctifies  one  of  the  mightiest  forces  of  human  life.  Men 
never  know  the  fulness  of  their  life  and  force  except  in  sympathy.  They  catoh 
the  contagion  of  a  prevailing  temper.  They  grow  warm  by  friction  with  those 
who  are  in  active  movement.  They  become  confident  and  resolved  by  reason  of 
the  concensus  of  numbers.  The  drops  that  make  up  the  ocean  wave  become 
mighty  and  resistless  when  united  and  swayed  in  one  direction.    {J.  Aldi$.) 

Ver.  11.  An  angel  of  the  Lord. — Angelic  visits : — The  angels  will  come  to  ni 
when  we  are  doing  the  Lord's  business — even  though  that  business  be  routine,  and 
we  have  become  slmost  weary  with  its  mechanical  repetition,  yet  the  radiant 
messenger  can  find  us  in  our  obscurity,  and  open  before  us  new  and  enchanting 
prospects.  Are  yon  impatient  for  the  coming  of  the  angel  t  Then  by  so  much  yoa 
are  leaving  incomplete  the  work  to  which  yon  have  been  Divinely  called.  It  if 
better  to  work  steadily  for  the  Master  than  to  be  waiting  fretfully  for  the  vision  of 
angels.  (Dr.  Parker.)  Absence  from  the  sanctuary : — Suppose  Zacharias  had 
not  been  there.  Suppose  that  bis  functions  had  been  to  him  nothing  except 
perfunctory  services,  and  he  had  absented  himself.  Might  not  the  great  annimoia- 
tion  have  been  transferred?  Instead  of  Zacharias  might  not  Simeon  have  been 
chosen  r  and  instead  of  Elisabeth,  Anna  ?  I  pause  to  put  the  question,  for  I  wish 
to  aroase  your  half-day  attendants  in  God's  house,  to  a  recognition  of  how  possible 
it  is  to  miss  of  a  special  blessing  when  we  are  not  in  the  way,  and  place,  and  timft 
of  religious  duty.  I  knew  of  a  case  wherein  an  "  anxious  inquirer  "  would  haTt 
heard  the  sermon  that  brought  deliverance  and  peace  to  her  five  years  soones  had 


eHir.  I.]  8T.  LUKE.  19 

the  been  in  God't  hoase  on  the  day  it  was  originally  preached.  As  it  was  she 
\ralked  for  five  years  in  gloom,  and  at  last  heard  it  semi-accidentally.  (Dr. 
Grosart.)  Intercourse  between  visible  and  invisible  world  : — The  narrative  of  an 
angelio  visitation  does  not  bring  us  into  a  supernatural  region.  We  are  in  one 
already.  The  Temple-worship  meant  nothing  if  there  were  not  an  actual  estab- 
lished intercourse  between  the  visible  and  invisible  world.  (F.  D.  Maurice.) 
Angels  present  in  church: — I  think  I  see  in  this  passage  that  a  more  special 
blessing  attends  the  prayers  offered  up  by  God's  ministers  at  the  hours  appointed 
by  the  Church,  and  that  angels  are  more  particularly  present  to  carry  up  the 
sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  then  offered  by  the  priest,  on  which  hang  (as  it  were) 
the  supplications  of  the  whole  congregation.  Consider  this,  0  my  soul,  and  let  it 
be  a  constant  incitement  to  thee  never  to  forsake  the  house  of  thy  God,  when 
opportunity  offers  for  thee  to  join  thy  prayers  with  those  of  all  thy  fellow- 
Christians.  {Dean  Hook.)  The  angels  as  observers  and  witnesses  : — The  holy 
angels  of  God  are  observers  of  our  prayers  and  good  actions  on  earth,  and  the 
relaters  and  remembrancers  of  them  in  heaven.  Not  but  that  the  all-seeing  God 
of  EUmself  knows  and  takes  notice  of  all  the  good  actions  of  men,  and  records 
them  to  perpetuity  in  the  most  faithful  register  of  His  Omniscience  ;  but  He  would 
have  His  holy  angels  to  be  conscious  of  our  good  actions,  not  only  that  they  might 
congratulate  our  happiness,  as  fellow-servants  and  members  with  us,  under  Christ, 
their  and  our  Lord  and  Head,  but  also  and  especially  that  they  might  be  the 
witnesses  of  His  righteous  judgment  at  the  last  day,  when  His  Son  shall  come  in 
His  glory  with  millions  of  His  holy  angels  to  judge  the  world.  (Bishop  Bull.) 
Seeing  the  angels : — According  to  Holy  Scripture,  we  are  surrounded  by  angels 
(2  Kings  vi.  17;  Psa.  xxxiv.  7),  whom  God  employs  to  defend  us;  but  in  our 
ordinary  condition  we  have  not  the  perception  necessary  to  make  us  aware  of  their 
presence.  For  this  we  need  a  peculiar  state  of  receptivity.  That  was  the  state  of 
Zacharias  at  this  time.  He  had  been  prepared  for  it  by  the  sanctity  of  the  place, 
by  the  solemnity  of  the  service  which  he  was  about  to  fulfil,  by  his  lively  sympathy 
with  those  who  prayed  for  national  deliverance,  and  finally  by  the  sense  of  his  own 
domestic  trial.  (Prof.  Godet.)  Reality  of  the  spirit  world: — To  me  the  spirit 
world  is  tangible.  It  is  not  peopled  with  ghosts  and  spectres,  shadows  and  outlines 
of  beings,  but  with  persons  and  forms  palpable  to  the  apprehension.  Its  multitudes 
are  veritable,  its  society  natural,  its  language  audible,  its  companionship  real,  its 
love  distinct,  its  activities  energetic,  its  life  intelligent,  its  glory  discernible ;  its 
union  is  not  that  of  sameness,  but  of  variety  brought  into  moral  harmony  by  the 
great  law  of  love,  like  notes  which,  in  themselves  distinct  and  different,  make, 
when  combined,  sweet  music.  Death  will  not  level  and  annul  those  countless 
differences  of  mind  and  heart  which  make  us  individual  here.  Heaven,  in  all  the 
mode  and  manner  of  expression,  will  abound  with  personality.  There  will  be 
choice,  and  preference,  and  degree  of  affinity  there.  Each  intellect  will  keep  its 
natural  bias,  each  heart  its  elections.  Groups  there  will  be,  and  circles ;  faces, 
known  and  unknown,  will  pass  us ;  acquaintance  will  thrive  on  intercourse,  and 
love  deepen  with  knowledge;  and  the  great  underlying  laws  of  mind  and  heart 
prevail  and  dominate  as  they  do  here,  save  in  this,  that  sin,  and  all  the  repellance 
and  antagonisms  that  it  breeds,  will  be  unknown,  and  holiness  supply  in  perfect 
measure  the  opportunity  and  bond  of  brotherhood.  (Murray. )  Character  of  the 
angeli : — "  The  very  names  assigned  to  angels,"  says  Dwight,  "  by  their  Creator, 
convey  to  us  ideas  pre-eminently  pleasing,  fitted  to  captivate  the  heart  and  exalt 
the  imagination ;  ideas  which  dispel  gloom,  banish  despondency,  enliven  hope,  and 
awaken  sincere  and  unmingled  joy.  They  are  living  ones;  beings  in  whom  life  is 
inherent  and  instinctive;  who  sprang  up  under  the  quickening  influence  of  the 
Sun  of  Bighteousness,  beneath  the  morning  of  everlasting  day ;  who  rose,  expanded, 
and  blossomed  in  the  uncreated  beam,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  life,  and  were 
nourished  by  the  waters  of  immortality.  They  are  spirits,  winged  with  activity, 
and  formed  with  power,  which  no  labour  wearies  and  no  duration  impairs ;  their 
faculties  always  fresh  and  young,  their  exertions  unceasing  and  wonderful,  and 
their  destination  noble  and  delightful,  without  example,  and  without  end.  They 
are  burning  ones,  glowing  with  a  pure  and  serene,  with  an  intense  and  immortal 
flame  of  Divine  love ;  returning,  without  ceasing,  the  light  and  warmth  which  they 
have  received  from  the  great  central  Sun  of  the  universe,  reflecting  with  supreme 
b€»aty  the  image  of  that  Divine  luminary ;  and  universally  glorious,  although 
differing  from  each  other  in  glory."  The  annunciation  to  Zacharias: — Ah, 
friends,  if  Ood  ware  as  strict  to  punish  as  for  our  distrust  ol  His  word  as  he  was 


»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  loHi».  I. 

to  pnnish  Zaeharias  for  his,  how  many  of  as  also  would  He  strike  dnmb  1  Who 
knows  but  that  some  of  the  calamities  which  befall  us  are  really  punishments  for 
oar  own  unbelief?  This  incident  of  the  annunciation  to  Zaeharias  is  rich  in 
lessons.  I  will  mention  but  two.  First,  the  ministration  of  angels.  In  fact, 
the  Bible  from  beginning  to  end  is  radiant  with  angels.  And  as  it  was  in  the  past, 
80  it  is  to-day.  Angels  are  still  ministers  of  God,  executing  His  will  alike  in  the 
physical  and  in  the  spiritual  world.  What  though  we  do  not  see  angels  7  It  doe» 
not  follow  that,  because  they  are  invisible,  they  are  therefore,  according  to  oar 
scientific  tests,  unreal  or  inoperative.  In  fact,  it  is  the  invisible  things  which  are 
the  most  real.  Did  any  human  being  ever  see  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  Yet  what  Christian 
doubts  His  existence?  Were  our  spiritual  eyes  open,  as  were  the  eyes  of  Elisha's 
servant  at  Dothan,  doubtless  we  also  would  see  all  around  us  horses  and  chariots  of 
fire  circling  to  protect  us.  Lastly :  Hours  of  worship  are  hours  of  angels'  annun- 
ciation. Not  that  we  may  ever  expect  in  this  aeon  of  the  world  to  behold  visions  of 
angels ;  for  ours  it  is  to  have  something  better  than  to  have  glimpses  of  BupemataiAl 
figures ;  ours  it  is  to  have  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself. 

Ver.  12.  He  was  troubled. — Terrifying  effect  of  tupematural  appearanee$  :— 
Such  has  usually  been  the  effect  of  supernatural  appearances,  even  on  good  men, 
as  is  exemplified  in  Manoah,  David,  Paul,  and  others.  1.  Man's  weakness  ii 
incapable  of  easily  bearing  the  glory  of  such  appearances.  2.  His  sinfulness 
naturally  makes  him  afraid  that  the  heavenly  messenger  may  be  sent  to  him  in 
displeasure.  Hence  appear  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  in  employing,  as  the 
heralds  of  gospel  salvation,  not  angels  but  human  beings,  whose  terror  does  not 
make  as  afraid.  If,  however,  we  shall  be  so  wise  for  ourselves  as  to  receive  the 
gospel,  and  to  take  the  Lord  of  angels  for  our  Lord,  then  we  shall  be  prepared 
without  fear  to  meet,  not  one  angel,  or  a  few  angels,  but  the  whole  angelic  host, 
with  the  Lord  at  their  head — that  host  from  which  the  ungodly  will  shrink  in 
dismay,  but  which  the  ransomed  shall  gladly  join  round  about  the  throne,  to  the 
number  of  tea  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands  of  thousands.  {Jas. 
Foote,  M.A.)  Angelic  glory  awakening  fear: — It  was  partly  the  suddenness, 
partly  the  unexpectedness,  and  partly  the  glory  of  the  apparition,  that  affrighted 
this  good  man.  Glorious  and  sudden  apparitions  do  affright  even  the  holiest  and 
best  of  men.  We  cannot  bear  the  sight  and  presence  of  an  angel  without  conster- 
nation and  fear,  in  our  frail  and  sinful  state.  0  happy  hour  when,  mortality  and 
sin  being  taken  out  of  our  natures,  we  shall  not  only  behold  the  glorified  angels 
without  fear,  but  the  glorious  God  with  delight  and  love  1  Lord  I  let  me  now  see 
Thee  by  faith,  hereafter  by  sight.  (W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Sight  rather  than  faith 
the  cause  of  fear : — He  that  had  wont  to  live  and  serve  in  the  presence  of  the 
Master,  was  now  astonished  at  the  presence  of  the  servant ;  bo  much  difference  is 
there  betwixt  our  faith  and  our  senses  that  the  apprehension  of  the  God  of  spirits 
by  faith  goes  down  sweetly  with  us,  whereas  the  sensible  apprehension  of  an  angel 
dismays  us.  Holy  Zachary,  that  had  wont  to  live  by  faith,  thought  he  should  die, 
when  his  sense  began  to  be  set  on  work  ;  it  was  the  weakness  of  him,  that  served 
the  altar  without  horror,  to  be  daunted  with  the  face  of  his  fellow-servant.  In 
vain  do  we  look  for  such  ministers  of  God  as  are  without  infirmities  when  jost 
Zachary  was  troubled  in  his  devotions  with  that  wherewith  he  should  have  been 
comforted  :  it  was  partly  the  suddeimess  and  partly  the  glory  of  the  apparition  thttt 
affrighted  him.     {Bishop  Hall.) 

Ver.  13.    But  the  angel  said  onto  blm.  Fear  not. — Human  life  on  earth  known  in 

heaven  : — From  the  speech  of  Gabriel  it  is  clear  that  human  hfe,  in  its  beginning, 
Bourse,  purpose,  and  destiny,  is  known  in  heaven  before  it  is  manifested  on  earth. 
This  is  not  the  case  with  exceptional  men  only,  but  with  all  men.  This  should 
throw  a  joyous  solemnity  around  life.  Human  life  is  intended  to  be  the  realization 
of  a  heavenly  plan.  Inquire  what  it  is,  accept  it  with  all  thankfulness  or  submis- 
sion, as  the  case  may  be,  and  Uve  in  God.  John  was  to  be  as  conspicuous  amongst 
men  as  a  mountain  is  conspicuous  amongst  the  lowlands.  But  did  not  God  make 
the  valleys  as  well  as  the  hills  ?  In  great  lives  we  only  see  the  lines  of  Divine 
movement  and  purpose  more  clearly  because  of  their  apparent  exaggeration ;  in 
humbler  lives  the  Unes  are  all  there.  This  communication  made  by  Gabriel  sng- 
gests  two  inquiries.  1.  Has  every  life  a  guardian  angel  f  2.  Is  every  life  reported 
in  heaven  by  the  angelic  watcher  7  {Dr.  Parker.)  Light  mil  arise  in  dtu  time  .^-> 
The  barrenness  necessitated  the  annunciation.     The  annanoiation  transfigoxei 


CHAP.  I.J  ST.  LUKE.  Si 

the  barrenness.  Is  it  not  often  exactly  thus  with  trying  and  bitter  and  "  reprcach"- 
bringing  experiences  of  the  believer  ?  "We  are  denied  what  we  fain  would  have  ;  w» 
have  what  we  would  fain  have  been  denied.  We  feel  ourselves  of  those  who  "  walk 
in  the  darkness,"  and  have  "  no  light."  Well !  do  we  "  trust "  in  the  Lord,  and 
"  stay  ourselves  upon  God  "  ?  K  only  we  do,  sooner  or  later,  I  am  satisfied  increas- 
ingly, "  light  will  arise."  It  may  not  come  when  we  wished  it,  nor  as  we  wished  it,  but 
come  it  does.  {A.B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  Consider  the  exquisite  connexion  of  the  whole, 
the  gradually-attained  climax  of  the  Divine  message  from  the  lips  of  the  angel  from 
before  the  throne.  The  messenger  of  joy  begins  with  the  mention  of  the  accepted 
prayer,  promises  a  son,  gives  him  a  high  name,  foretells  for  him  a  distinguished 
office.  But  the  greatest  tidings  are  yet  to  come :  the  longed-for  coming  of  the 
Messiah,  whose  forerunner  this  child  is  to  be.  To  quote  Pfenninger  :  "  How  tenderly 
interwoven,  how  intimately  connected,  the  Divine  with  the  human  story  I  It  is  one 
of  the  chief  perfections  of  a  drama  that  all  its  occurrences  should  essentially  hang 
together;  that  none  of  them  should  appear  extraneous  or  isolated;  and  where  are 
these  conditions  better  observed  than  in  the  Divine  narratives  of  Holy  Writ  ?  The 
grandest,  Divinest  story  in  the  world  blended  at  its  lirst  most  human  commence- 
ment with  the  human  heart-history  of  a  childless  wedded  pair,  who  pray  to  God  for 
a  son."  This  is  certainly  true,  although  the  prayer  here  referred  to  can  hardly 
have  been  confined  to  such  a  petition.  The  heavenly  message,  however,  retrospec- 
tively includes  former  prayers,  and  has  three  separate  clauses — first,  the  birth  of  a 
Bon  to  Zacharias ;  last,  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Himself ;  and  as  connecting  link 
between  the  two,  the  announcement  that  this  son  shall  make  ready  the  way  of  this 
very  Lord.  (Rudolf  S tier.)  The  "  Fear-nots"  of  the  Bible :— The  "Fear-nots" 
of  the  Bible  provide  an  all-sufficient  vade-mecum  for  the  timid  and  distressed.  There 
is  no  apprehension  possible  to  man  which  has  not  its  complementary  reassuring 
promise  in  God's  Word.  (Anon)  Long-offered  prayers  : — The  prayer  of  Zach- 
arias was  most  probably  an  old  prayer,  going  back  mauy  years,  ere  Elisabeth  was 
old.  But  apparently  unanswered  prayers  are  not  disregarded  prayers.  Old,  very 
old  prayers  often  and  often  bring  down  blessings  unexpected.  (J .  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.) 
The  Bible  abounds  in  assurances  that  all  faithful  earnest  prayer  will  be  heard,  cannot 
but  be  heard.  And  Christian  experience  proves  the  truth  of  the  Divine  assurance. 
Let  ua  rejoice  (1)  That  we  are  permitted  to  pray  ;  (2)  That  we  are  commanded  to 
pray ;  (3)  That  all  true  prayer  is  heard  ;  (4)  That  with  God  to  hear  is  to  answer 
and  help.  Disappointed  and  weary  suppliant,  fear  not,  thy  prayer  is  heard.  And 
to  know  that  it  is  heard  is  to  know  that  in  God's  good  way  and  time  it  shall  be 
answered.  (Anon.)  Prayer  heard  though  not  immediately  answered  : — I  can  stand 
in  the  rooms  of  my  office  in  New  York,  and  communicate  with  the  men  in  the  fifth 
story.  If  I  want  to  speak  to  the  foreman  of  the  printing  office,  I  go  and  blow  the 
whistle,  and  talk  through  the  tube.  And  I  know  that  the  message  has  got  up  there 
and  that  he  heard  it.  I  do  not  see  him,  and  he  does  not  answer  back ;  but  I  have 
no  doubt  that,  having  received  the  message,  he  will  attend  to  my  wants.  So  it  seems 
to  me  that  sometimes  we  speak  to  God  in  heaven,  as  it  were  through  an  invisible 
medium.  He  does  not  answer  immediately,  but,  nevertheless,  we  know  that  He  ia 
there,  and  that,  even  if  we  do  not  conceive  of  Him,  He  conceives  of  us  ;  and  we  send 
our  thought  or  prayer  up,  and  let  it  alone,  and  do  not  fret  or  worry  about  it. 
(U.  W.  Beecher.)  Unanswered  prayer  accepted : — Prayers  which  are  not  answered  at 
once,  nor,  perhaps,  for  a  long  time  afterwards,  may  nevertheless  be  accepted.  God'a 
people  are  apt  to  forget  this  ;  and  that  it  is  with  prayer,  to  borrow  an  illustration 
from  commercial  transactions,  as  with  a  bill,  which,  though  accepted,  is  often  not 
paid  till  months  or  years  have  elapsed.  Our  heavenly  Father  knows  best  what  to 
give  ;  and  also  how,  and  where,  and  when  to  give  it.  Were  its  answer  always  to 
follow  prayer,  as  the  peal  roars  upon  the  flash,  I  suspect  that  we  would  be  as  ready 
in  spiritual  as  we  are  in  earthly  matters  to  look  only  to  secondary  causes,  and  for- 
get God's  hand— coming  to  look  upon  our  prayers  as  being  the  cause  of  the  answer, 
as  mnch  as  we  are  in  the  habit  of  regarding  the  flash  of  lightning,  without  any 
reference  to  God,  as  the  cause  of  the  peal  of  thunder.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  And  thy 
wife  Elisabeth. . .  John : — This  promised  son  is  added  to  a  series  whose  birth  has  al- 
ready been  miracalously  foretold.  Isaac,  Samson,  Samuel.  The  significant  names 
of  both  Zacharias  [The  Lord  remembers]  and  Elisabeth  [God  of  the  oath,  or  co- 
venant] are  mentioned  by  the  angel,  to  point  out  the  rich  fulfilment  of  their 
prophetic  meaning,  but  the  appointed  name  of  this  promised  son  transcends  theirs* 
An  era  of  new  and  fuller  grace  begins  with  him.  Later,  the  name  (=the  grace  of 
^od)  receives  its  special  explanation,  in  that  the  stem  preacher  of  repentance  ia 


29  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fouf.  U 

found  only  to  lead  from  grace  to  grace.  John  is  the  last  but  one  of  the  seven  name* 
[Tshmael,  Isaac,  Solomon,  Josiah,  Cyrus,  John,  Jesus]  given  by  God  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture to  those  still  unborn,  and  the  seventh  name  is  Jesus.  (Rudolf  Stier.)  Angelie 
tolicitude : — 1.  Observe  how  apprehensive  this  good  angel  was  at  Zachary's  sur- 
prising fear,  and  encourages  him  against  it.  The  holy  angels,  though  they  do  not 
express  it  in  words,  yet  pity  our  frailties,  and  suggest  comfort  to  us.  The  evil 
angels,  if  they  might,  would  kill  us  with  terror  ;  the  good  angels  labour  together  for 
our  tranquility  and  cheerfulness.  2.  The  comfortable  words  spoken  by  the  angel 
to  Zacharias.  God  sometimes  hears  our  prayers,  and  bestows  His  mercies,  when 
we  least  expect ;  yea,  when  we  have  given  over  looking  for  what  we  asked.  3  The 
name  which  the  angel  directed  Zachary  to  give  his  son :  John,  which  signifiea 
gracious  ;  because  he  was  to  open  the  kingdom  of  grace,  and  to  preach  the  grace  of 
the  gospel  through  Jesus  Christ.  The  giving  of  significant  names  to  children  haa 
been  an  ancient  and  pious  practice  ;  names  which  either  carried  a  remembrance  ot 
duty  or  of  mercy  in  them.  (W.  Burkitt,  M.A)  Acceptable  prayer  defined:— 
Prayer  is  the  offering  of  our  sincere  desires  to  God.  It  involves  a  sense  of  our  un- 
worthiness  and  necessities.  1.  Penitence  (Psa.  li.  17).  2.  Faith  (Heb.  xi.  6h  3» 
Sincerity  (Jer.  xxix.  13).  4.  Fervency  (Jas.  v.  16).  5.  Love  (1  Tim.  ii.  8).  6. 
Delight  in  God  (Isa.  xxv.  9).  7.  Perseverance  (Eph.  vi.  18).  8.  Humble  submis- 
eion  to  God's  will  (Micah  vii.  7).  9.  In  the  name  of  Christ  (Eph.  iii.  12).  10. 
With  confession  of  our  sins  (1  John.  i.  9).  Jewish  prayers  were  chiefly  praise  and 
benedictions.  Always  answered,  but  in  God's  sovereign  way.  ( W.  H.  Van  Doren^ 
D.D.)  The  efficacy  of  prayer : — "  Then  you  have  not  been  modified  in  any  way 
as  to  the  efficacy  of  prayer  ?  "  asked  his  visitor.  Mr.  Spurgeon  laughed.  •'  Only  in 
my  faith  growing  far  stronger  and  firmer  than  ever.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  faith 
with  me,  but  of  knowledge,  and  everyday  experience.  I  am  constantly  witnessing 
the  most  unmistakable  instances  of  answers  to  prayer.  My  whole  Ufe  is  made  up 
of  them.  To  me  they  are  so  familiar  as  to  cease  to  excite  my  surprise ;  but  to  many 
they  would  seem  marvellous,  no  doubt.  Why,  I  could  no  more  doubt  the  efi&cacy 
of  prayer  than  I  could  disbelieve  in  the  law  of  gravitation.  The  one  is  as  much  a 
fact  as  the  other,  constantly  verified  every  day  of  my  life.  Elijah,  by  the  brook 
Cherith,  as  he  received  his  daily  rations  from  the  ravens,  could  hardly  be  a  more 
likely  subject  for  scepticism  than  I.  Look  at  my  Orphanage.  To  keep  it  going 
entails  an  annual  expenditure  of  about  £10,000.  Only  £1400  is  provided  for  by 
endowment.  The  remaining  £8000  comes  to  me  regularly  in  answer  to  prayer.  I 
do  not  know  where  I  shall  get  it  from  day  to  day.  I  ask  God  for  it,  and  He  sendt 
it.  Mr.  Miiller,  of  Bristol,  does  the  same  on  a  far  larger  scale,  and  his  experience 
is  the  same  as  mine."  (Pall  Mall  Gazette.)  Prayers  answered  at  last: — During 
a  long  course  of  years,  even  to  the  closing  fortnight  of  his  life,  in  his  last  sickness. 
Dr.  Judson  lamented  that  all  his  efforts  in  behalf  of  the  Jews  had  been  a  failure. 
He  was  departing  from  the  world  saddened  with  that  thought.  Then,  at  last,  there 
came  a  gleam  of  light  that  thrilled  his  heart  with  grateful  joy.  Mrs.  Judson  was 
sitting  by  his  side  while  he  was  in  a  state  of  great  languor,  with  a  copy  of  the  Watch- 
man and  Reflector  in  her  hand.  She  read  to  her  husband  one  of  Dr.  Hague's  letters 
from  Constantinople.  That  letter  contained  Bome  items  of  information  that  filled 
him  with  wonder.  At  a  meeting  of  missionaries  at  Constantinople,  Mr.  Schauffler 
stated  that  a  little  book  had  been  published  in  Germany  giving  an  account  of  Dr. 
Jud  son's  life  and  labours  ;  that  it  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  some  Jews,  and  had 
been  the  means  of  their  conversion ;  that  a  Jew  had  translated  it  for  a  community 
of  Jews  on  the  borders  of  the  Euxine,  and  that  a  message  had  arrived  in  Constan- 
tinople asking  that  a  teacher  might  be  sent  to  show  them  the  way  of  life.  When 
Dr.  Judson  heard  this  his  eyes  were  filled  with  tears,  a  look  of  almost  unearthly 
solemnity  came  over  him,  and,  clinging  fast  to  his  wife's  hand  as  if  to  assure  him- 
self of  being  really  in  the  world,  he  said,  "  Love,  this  frightens  me,  I  do  not  know 
what  to  make  of  it."  "  To  make  of  what  ?  "  said  Mrs.  Judson.  ♦'  Why,  what  you 
have  just  been  reading,  I  never  was  deeply  interested  in  any  object,  I  never  prayed 
sincerely  and  earnestly  for  anything,  but  it  came ;  at  some  time — no  matter  how 
distant  the  day — somehow,  in  some  shape,  probably  the  last  I  should  have  devised, 
it  came  I  "  What  a  testimony  was  that  I  It  lingered  on  the  lips  of  the  dying  Jud- 
son ;  it  was  enbalmed  with  grateful  tears,  and  is  worthy  to  be  transmitted  as  • 
legacy  to  the  coming  generation.  The  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted.  Pray 
and  wait.  The  answer  to  all  true  prayer  will  come.  In  Judson's  case  the  news  m 
the  answer  came  before  he  died,  but  it  was  answered  long  before.  So  we  may  know 
of  the  results  of  prayers  and  toils  even  while  we  sojourn  here ;  but  if  not,  whali 


CHAT.  L]  ST.  LUKE.  tt 

iweet  sorprisea  shall  await  Q8  in  the  great  beyond  1    (North-Weitem  Chrittiam 
Advocate.) 

Ver.  14.  Many  shall  rejoice  at  his  birth. — An  ideal  child ;— Conld  some  parents 
foresee  how  wicked  some  of  their  children  would  become,  instead  of  rejoicing,  they 
would  grieve  at  their  birth  ;  they  would  wish  they  had  never  been  born.  John,  how- 
ever, was  to  be  a  great  comfort  and  honour  to  his  parents.  And  many  besides  of 
their  acquaintances,  and  of  the  people  at  large,  were  to  rejoice  when  they  should  see 
that  the  circumstance  of  his  birth,  and  of  his  early  life,  prognosticated  that  he  was 
to  become  a  public  blessing.  Four  leading  particulars  are  mentioned,  on  account 
of  which  men  should  rejoice.  1.  His  eminence  in  wisdom  and  piety.  "  Great  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord."  A  holy  and  devoted  servant  of  God,  and  preacher  of  right- 
eousness. 2.  His  unworldliness.  A  Nazarite  (Num.  vi.).  Not  only  the  ministers,  but 
all  the  people  of  God,  should  abstain  from  sin,  be  temperate  in  all  things,  superior 
to  earthly  pleasures  and  cares,  and  a  peculiar  people  in  all  respects,  distinguished 
from  men  of  the  world.  3,  His  spiritual-mindedness.  Conceived  in  sin  like  others, 
yet  "  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  from  his  mother's  womb."  Argument  in 
favour  of  infant  baptism  :  born  in  sin,  and  capable  of  regeneration,  why  should  they 
not  be  admitted  to  the  sacrament  ?  Happy  they  who  are  indeed  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  sanctified  from  infancy  1  They  never  know  what  it  is  to  have  a 
mind  altogether  dark,  or  a  heart  altogether  depraved.  They  cannot  remember  the 
time  when  there  was  not  in  them  a  prevalent  tendency  to  what  is  good.  4.  His 
usefulness.  Eesembling  Elijah  (a)  in  the  bent  of  his  mind ;  {b)  in  the  success  of  his 
ministry.  (Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  Prophetic  description  of  the  Baptist: — Here  the 
angel  declares  to  Zachary,  what  kind  of  son  should  be  born  unto  him,  even  one  ol 
eminent  endowments,  and  designed  for  extraordinary  services.  The  proof  of  chil- 
dren makes  them  either  the  blessings  or  crosses  of  their  parents.  What  greater 
comfort  could  Zachary  desire  in  a  child,  than  is  here  promised  to  him  ?  1.  Ha 
hears  of  a  son  that  should  bring  joy,  to  himself  and  many  others  ;  even  to  all  who 
expected  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  whose  forerunner  the  Baptist  was.  2,  That 
he  should  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord :  that  is,  a  person  of  great  eminence  and 
great  usefulness  in  the  Church.  A  person  of  great  riches  and  reputation  is  great  in 
&ie  sight  of  men ;  but  the  man  of  great  ability  and  usefulness,  integrity  and  service- 
ableness,  is  truly  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  They  are  little  men  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  who  live  in  the  world  to  little  purpose ;  who  do  httle  service  to  God,  and 
bring  little  honour  and  glory  to  Him.  3.  It  is  foretold  that  he  should  drink  neither 
wine  nor  strong  drink  ;  that  is,  he  should  be  a  very  temperate  and  abstemious  person, 
living  after  the  manner  of  the  Nazarites,  though  he  was  not  separated  by  any  vow 
of  his  own,  or  his  parents,  but  by  the  special  designation  and  appointment  of  God 
only.  It  was  forbidden  the  priests  under  the  law  to  drink  either  wine  or  strong 
drink,  upon  pain  of  death,  during  the  time  of  their  ministration  (Lev.  x.  9).  And 
the  ministers  of  Christ  under  the  gospel  are  forbidden  to  be  lovers  of  wine  (1  Tim. 
iii.  3).  4.  He  shall  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's  womb ;  that  is, 
he  shall  be  furnished  abundantly  with  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
vhich  shall  very  early  appear  to  be  in  him,  and  upon  him.  5.  His  high  and  hon- 
ourable office  is  declared ;  that  he  should  go  before  the  Messiah,  as  His  harbinger 
and  forerunner,  with  the  same  spirit  and  zeal  and  courage  against  sin,  which  was 
found  in  the  old  prophet  Elias,  whom  he  so  nearly  resembled.  6.  The  great  success 
of  his  ministry  is  foretold  ;  that  he  should  "  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers,"  &c. 
{W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Social  joys : — There  is  a  joy  which  overflows  the  domestio 
goblet,  and  goes  out  to  make  strangers  glad.  Every  life  ought  to  be  a  social  bless- 
ing. The  religious  man  always  is  so — necessarily,  because  he  does  not  live  unto 
himself.  {Dr.  Parker.)  Useful  lives : — How  many  I  could  quote  to  whose  labours 
we  owe  the  precious  discoveries  which  daily  add  to  our  welfare  and  our  comfort  I 
Who  has  not  rejoiced  at  the  birth  of  him  who  discovered  the  art,  at  once  so  wonder- 
ful, and  so  easy,  of  printing.  What  an  agent  of  progress  that  man  has  been,  and 
what  treasures  of  knowledge  he  has  helped  to  spread  all  over  the  world.  And  which 
of  us,  when  hurried  along  at  full  speed  over  some  of  our  railways  towards  those  we 
love,  or  on  a  pleasant  trip  to  some  beautiful  country,  has  not  blessed  the  memory 
of  Papin,  the  unlucky  inventor  of  the  steam  engine,  who  suffered  so  mach  for  the 
lake  of  science.    {A.  Decoppel.) 

Vers.  16,  16.  For  he  shall  be  great  In  the  slglit  of  the  Lord. — True  preatneti  ;— 
What  is  greatness  ?     Scarcely  two  persons  among  us  would  give  the  same  reply  to 


9i  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [AHAP.  I. 

that  qnestion.    All  ■woald  admit  that  it  denotes  pre-eminence,  but  each  would  have 
his  own  preference  as  to  the  department  in  which  it  was  to  be  manifested.     Some 
would  associate  it  with  power,  some  with  courage,  some  with  eloquence,  and  some, 
perhaps,  with  wealth ;  yet  each  would  think  of  it  as  conferring  an  advantage  on 
its  possessor,  and  so  putting  others  at  a  corresponding  disadvantage.     The  really 
great  man  is  he  whom  holiness  and  love  combine  to  inspire  for  the  service  of  his 
generation  by  the  will  of  God.     1.  He  who  wins  this  greatness  does  not  attain  it 
at  the  expense  of   others.     2.  We  may  win  this  greatness  anywhere.     3.  This 
greatness  is  satisfying  to  its  possessor.     The  highest  commendation  one  can  earn 
is  this — "He  hath  done  what  he  could  ; "  and  the  noblest  hfe-record  is  that  which 
comes  nearest  to  His  of  whom  it  was  said  that  "  He  went  about  doing  good." 
That  is  fame,  though  no  earthly  herald  may  trumpet  it  abroad,  for  Christ  shall 
proclaim  it  on  the   day  of   days  before  the  asaembled   universe.     (Dr.    W.   M. 
Taylor.)        Character  of  John  the  Baptist : — He  was  no  selfish  lover  of  his  own 
Boul,  too  fearful  of  pollution  to  touch  society,  but  a  magnanimous  reformer,  great 
in  his  love  aUke  of   man  and  of  righteousness.    He  was  too  much  the  pupil  of 
Pivine  freedom  and  discipline  to  be  the  child  of  any  school,  the  spokesman  of  any 
Beet.    His  faith  was  the  fruit  of  inspiration  as  opposed  to  experience.     His  educa- 
tion made  him  a  preacher  who  lived  as  he  believed,  possessed  of  the  courage  to 
summon  men  to   a  like  life  and  faith.     (A,  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D.)        A  strange 
greatness  : — The  child  was  to  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.     According  to  the 
verdict  of  our  Lord  passed  afterwards,  he  was  the  greatest  of  those  bom  of  women 
until  His  time.    Yet  what  a  strange  greatness  I     A  poor  man,  living  in  the  wilder- 
ness the  life  of  an  anchorite,  and  at  length  beheaded  by  a  wicked  king,  buried  by 
his  disciples,  and  nothing  more  heard  of  him  1    There  is  another  person  mentioned 
in  this  chapter  who  was  also  called  great.     Herod  the  king,  mentioned  in  the  fifth 
verse,  is  commonly  known  as  Herod  the  Great,  but  he  was  not  great  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  only  great  in  the  sight  of  himself  and  of  his  court,  and  of  those  who 
admired  his  skill  in  adding  to  his  kingdom.    Which  was  the  really  great  man  f 
Which  will  appear  to  be  great  when  the  magnitude  of  men  is  tested  by  God,  and 
when  men  are  weighed  in  the  righteous  balances  of  God's  judgment?    {Bishop 
Goodwin.)         In  the  sight  of  the  Lord  : — We  are  what  we  are  in  God's  sight,  not 
what  men  think  us,  not  what  we  think  ourselves,  but  what  He  sees  and  knows  that 
we  are,  nothing  more,  nothing  less.     {Dean  Church.)        And  shall  drink  neither 
wine  nor  strong  drink : — His  drink  was  water  of  the  river.     He  lived  on  locusts  and 
wild  honey.     Men  felt  in  him  that  power  of  mastery  which  is  always  granted  to 
perfect  self-denial.     {Archdeacon  Farrar.)        And  he  shall  be  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost : — Take  it  as  a  broad  fact  in  nature  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  emptiness. 
If  any  comer  of  the  world  is  vacated  even  for  an  instant,  something  else  will  come 
in  instantaneously  to  fill  up  the  empty  space.     So  by  the  constitution  of  human 
nature  there  is  no  possibility  of  emptiness  in  the  soul  of  man.     The  spiritual 
nature  "  abhors  a  vacuum."    If  a  man  will  not  let  good  into  his  life,  evil  must  and 
will  possess  it.    If  he  would  eject  evil  from  his  life,  he  can  only  do  so  by  letting 
good  into  it.    The  most  striking  recognition  of   the  principle  occurs  in  Paul's 
letter  to  the  Christians  at  Ephesus.    He  is  taking  them  to  task  with  reference  to 
certain  abuses   which  had  crept  into  their   Church.      Prominent  among  these 
was  drunkenness.     "Be  not  drunk  with  wine,"  says  the  apostle,  "but  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit."    Wine  versus  the  Spirit  I    The  disease  was  not  drunkenness. 
The  drunkenness  was  a  casual  episode.     The  souls  of  these  men  had  an  empty 
chamber  which  most  be  filled.     Their  legitimate  food  was  God.     This  was  rejected 
or  neglected.    But  the  void  remained.     That  could  not  be  neglected.    It  must  be 
filled  with  God  or  with  a  substitute.    We  may  choose  this  substitute  for  ourselves, 
but  we  cannot  not-choose  it,  for  nature  abhors  a  vacuum.    The  Ephesians  had 
made  their  choice — it  was  wine.     This  was  what  Paul  saw.     To  cure  it  how 
was  he  to  proceed?    He  could  not  enjoin  abstinence.      The  problem  was  not 
the  drink,  but  the  vacuum.    He  must  make  some  proposal,  therefore,  about  the 
vacuum.    "  Fill  yourselves,"  he  says,   •'  with  the   Spirit  of   God."     There  is  a 
valid  relation  between  the  stimulus  of  intoxicants  and  the  stimulus  of  religion. 
Either,  so  far,  will  carry  out  the  law  of  filling  the  vacuum.    But  merely  to  adjure 
a,  man  not  to  be  filled  with  wine  is  to  command  an  impossibiUty.    Yon  mast  give 
him  another  stimulus  equally  absorbing,  intenser,  richer,  and  when  the  sensaal 
passion  is  high  and  strong  yoor  substitute  must  be  supreme.    There  is  only  ona 
thing  which  will  absorb  it  quite — the  more  abundant  life  of  Qod.    {Profe$$0r 
Dnmmond.)        The  choice  is  not  between  Ood  and  an  empty  heart,    luo  if  Ukl 


OHA*.  I.]  ST.  LUKE,  S5 

a  house  situated  between  two  winds.     On  the  one  side  comes  the  wind  from 

a  dreary,  bleak  desert,  laden  with  fog  and  disease,  blowing  across  things  foul 

and  rotten.    The  other  side  of  the  house  fronts  the  sunlight,  and  winds  that 

blow  from    the    wide,   fresh    sea,   and    over    gardens,   orchards,   and    blooming 

fields.    Every  one  must  decide  to  which  side  he  is  going  to  open.    Both  doora 

cannot  be  shut.    You  can  only  get  the  dismal,  fatal  door  shut  by  opening  wide  the 

door  that  looks  to  the  sea  of  eternity,  and  the   sunshine  of   God.     The  wind 

blowing  in  through  this  open  door  keeps  that  door  of  ruin  shut.     (Dr.  Joseph 

Leckie.)       And  many  of  the  children  of  Israel,  &c. : — I.  To  be  "  children  of  Israel" 

not  necessarily  equivalent  to  being  spiritually  "  sons  of  Abraham  "  (John  viM.  39). 

II.  As  a  historical  fact  the  children  of  Israel  over  and  over  again  turned  from 

the  Lord,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  Baptist's  ministry  nearly  the  whole  nation 

had    sunk   into    religious  formalism.      III.  But  repentance    was    still    possible 

to  Israel  after  ages    of    unfaithfulness.      Still  they  might    turn   to    the    Lord 

their  God.    John's  message  was   "Bepentl"   and  his  preaching  produced  the 

effects  here  foretold  (see  Luke  iii.  7-14).    IV.  "He   shall  turn."    Eecognition 

of   human  instrumentality  in   the  doing  of  the  work  which  only  the  Spirit  of 

God  can  do — the  production  of  conviction  leading  to  conversion.     (J.  B,.  Bailey.) 

Goodness  U  greatness: — "Nothing  can  make  a  man  truly  great,  but  being  truly 

good,  and  a  partaker  of  God's  holiness."    "A  dram  of  goodness  is  worth  more 

than  all  worldly  greatness."    Wealth,  honour,  power,  may  constitute  a  person 

great  in  the  estimation  of  man  ;  but  faith,  love,  and  true  holiness  are  necessary  to 

secure    for    us    God's    approbation.       (Henry    R.    Burton.)  Abstinence    and 

promotion : — When  General  Grant  was  in  command  of  the  army  before  Vicksburg, 

a  number  of  of&cers  were  gathered  at  his  headquarters.     One  of  them  invited 

the  party  to  join   in  a  social  glass;    all  but  one  accepted.     He  asked  to  be 

excused,   saying  that  he   "never  drank."      The  hour  passed,   and    each  went 

his  way  to  his   respective   command.    A  few  days   after  this  the  officer  who 

declined  to  drink  received  a  note  from  General  Grant  to  report  at  headquarters. 

He  obeyed  the  order,  and  Grant  said  to  him,  "  You   are  the  officer,  I  believe, 

who  remarked   the   other  day  that  you  never  drank?"      The  officer  modestly 

answered  that  he  was.     "  Then,"   continued  the  General,  "  you  are   the  man 

I  have  been  looking  for  to   take  charge  of   the   Commiirsary  Department,  and 

I  order  that  you  be  detailed  to  that  duty."     He  served  all  through  the  war  ia 

that    responsible    department,    and    afterwards,    when    General    Grant    became 

President,  the  officer  who  never  drank  was  again  in  request.      The   President, 

needing  a  man  on  whom  he  could  rely  for  some  important  business,  gave  him 

the  appointment.     (Christian   Chronicle.)        Abstinence  and    health : — Before    I 

became  an  abstainer  I  was  much  subject   to  fainting  fits.     I  even  fainted  in 

the  pulpit,  and  my  life  was   a  burden;    and  when  I  had  made  up  my  mind 

to  abstain   my  medical  man  came  from  London   and   said,   "  If    you   do  you 

will  probably  die.    You  want  the   •  whip '   for  your  constitution."     I  did    not 

believe  him,  and  I  said,  "  Very  well,  doctor,  then  I'll  die,  and  there's  an  end 

of  it."    But  I  have  not  died.    And  when  I  met  that  medical  man   in  London 

three  days  since  I  said,  "Now,   doctor,  what  do  you  think  of  it?"    He  said, 

"You  beat  me  altogether.     I  was  never  more   mistaken  in    any  case  in  my 

life.    And  now  let  me  tell  you   that  if   there  was  no   such  thing  as  alcohol 

I  ^ould  have  to  put  up  my  shutters.      Nearly  all    the    illnesses  that  come 

before  me  have,  in  one  sense  or  another,  come  from   that ;    not  always  from 

the  personal  indulgence  of  the  patients,  but  because  this  is  hereditary."     (Canon 

Basil  Wilberforce. )        A  great  man  : — A  man  who  can  be  satisfied  with  nothing 

less  than  that  which  is  real  and  right ;  who  is  content  to  count  all  things  loss 

for  the  attainment  of  a  spiritual  aim,  and  to  fight  for  it  against  all  enemies ; 

who  deems  truth  the  bread  of  life  and  makes  its  pursuit  his  daily  labour — he 

is  a  great  man.        Personal  influence   in  conversion: — Dr.   Tyng,   speaking  of 

personal  influence,  mentions  a  young  lady  whom  no  storms  of   snow  or  rain 

ever  kept  from  her  class.     One  after  another  of   her  scholars,  he  says,  would 

oome  to  him,  and  when  he  would  ask  the  question,  "What  has  led  you  to 

seek  a  Saviour's  love  ? "   they  would  mention  her    name,   until,   he  says,   "  I 

traced  twenty-five,  at  least,  of  my  young  people  who  were  converted  through  her 

trayers  and  labours,  and  among  them  that  beloved  son  of  mine,  at  whose  bedside 
sat  for  sixteen  long  hours,  wondering  why  God  had  taken  him  and  left  ma 
behind.  This  was  the  character  of  that  girl.  Nothing  kept  her  back." 
CoMMTtion  must  be  a  complete  surrender: — When  Henry  VIIL  had  determined 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  L 

to  make. himself  head  of  the  English  Church,  he  insisted  upon  it  that  OonTOca> 
iion  should  accept  his  headship  without  limiting  and  modifying  clauses.  He 
refuged  to  entertain  any  compromises,  and  vowed  that  "he  would  have  no 
tantrums,"  as  he  called  them.  Thus  when  a  sinner  parleys  with  his  Saviour 
he  would  fain  have  a  little  of  the  honour  of  his  salvation,  he  would  save 
alive  some  favourite  sin,  he  would  fain  amend  the  humbling  terms  of  grace ; 
but  there  is  no  help  for  it,  Jesus  will  be  all  in  all,  and  the  sinner  must  be 
nothing  at  all.  The  surrender  must  be  complete,  there  must  be  no  tantrums, 
but  the  heart  must  without  reserve  submit  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Redeemer, 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Importance  of  one  conversion : — It  is  impossible  to  overrate 
the  importance  of  the  conversion  of  one  soul  to  Christ,  or  of  the  hardening 
of  one  heart  in  sin.  .  .  .  An  old  Puritan  doctor  writes  a  book  more  than  two 
hundred  years  ago,  called  "The  Bruised  Reed,"  which  falls  into  the  hands 
of  Richard  Baxter,  and  leads  his  penitent  spirit  to  its  trust  in  Christ.  Baxter's 
ministry  is  like  that  of  a  giant  in  his  strength,  and  when  he  dies  his  "  Call 
to  the  Unconverted  "  goes  preaching  on  to  thousands  to  whom  Baxter  himself 
had  never  spoken  with  human  tongue.  Philip  Doddridge,  prepared  by  his 
pious  mother's  teaching,  hears  this  piercing  "Call,"  devotes  the  summer  of 
his  life  to  God,  and  becomes  a  "  burning  and  a  shining  light. "  Doddridge's 
''Rise  and  Progress"  fell  into  the  hands  of  Wilberforce,  and  led  him  to 
thought  and  to  prayer.  Wilberforce's  "Practical  View"  cleared  the  faith 
and  tired  the  zeal  of  a  clergyman  in  the  sunny  douth,  and  he  wrote  the  simple 
annal  of  a  Methodi&t  girl,  which  has  borne  fruit  of  blessing  in  every  quarter  of 
the  globe ;  for  who  has  not  heard  of  Legh  Richmond  and  "  The  Dairyman's 
Daughter"?  And  then  the  same  book  had  a  ministry  in  the  bleak  North,  and  in 
a  country  parish  found  out  a  Scottish  clergyman  who  was  preaching  a  gospel  which 
he  did  not  know,  and  he  embraced  the  fulness  of  the  glad  tidings,  and  came  forth 
a  champion  for  the  truth,  "  furnished  in  all  things  and  ready,"  until  all  Scotland 
rang  with  the  eloquence  of  Thomas  Chalmers.  {W.  M.  Punshon,  D,D.)  Character 
and  work  of  John : — Much  of  the  wisdom  of  Providence  appears  in  fitting  the  instru- 
ment to  the  work.  The  work  appointed  to  John  was  to  reclaim  the  nation  from  its 
departure  from  God,  to  rouse  a  people  sunk  in  insensibility  and  impenitence,  to 
preach  repentance,  to  proclaim  the  approach  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  to  usher 
in  a  higher  economy,  a  new  dispensation ;  and  for  all  this  he  was  admirably 
qualified.  He  was  endued  with  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elias.  His  spirit  was 
undaunted  and  unyielding;  he  rebuked  the  pride  of  kings.  He  was  indifferent 
and  insensible  alike  to  the  charms  of  pleasure,  the  allurement  of  pomp,  the  smiles 
of  power,  and  the  frowns  of  greatness.  His  whole  soul  was  concentrated  in  his 
object.  He  was  superior  to  the  world  ;  its  forms  and  fashions  made  no  impression 
on  his  mind,  and  left  no  traces.  He  was  austere  in  his  manner,  abstemious  in  his 
food,  rustic  in  his  apparel ;  he  partook  of  the  wildness  of  the  wilderness  in  which 
he  first  made  his  appearance.     {Robert  Hall.) 

Ver.  17.  The  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children. — Drawing  lightning : — Sciene* 
tells  us  that  the  best  defence  against  lightning  in  a  thunderstorm  is  found,  not  in  de- 
fiance of  it,  but  in  a  silent  discharge  of  it.  Go  right  towards  it  fearlessly  with  a  pointed 
platina  wire,  and  it  will  follow  a  fixed  law  of  harmless  dispersion.  Is  there  any 
way  by  which  the  power  of  one  of  God's  curses  can  be  drawn,  so  as  to  avert  the 
terrible  stroke  of  Divine  wrath  ?  Let  us  see.  This  text  refers  us  directly  back  to 
the  final  utterance  of  the  Old  Testament.  There  are  four  books  in  the  Bible 
which  end  with  a  curse :  Malachi,  Lamentations,  Isaiah,  and  Ecclesiastes.  The 
Hebrew  scribes  were  always  accustomed  to  repeat  the  verse  just  before  the  last  in 
these  cases,  so  as  to  close  the  reading  with  something  besides  a  malediction.  It  is 
not  easy  to  see  how  that  helps  the  matter  in  the  present  instance,  for  the  preceding 
prediction  seems  to  have  been  uttered  merely  to  introduce  the  warning.  And 
perhaps  it  is  just  as  profitable  to  believe  that  the  best  way  to  avoid  the  judgments 
of  God  is  to  guard  carefully  against  deserving  them.  After  the  last  seer  under  the 
ancient  dispensation  had  spoken  the  words  which  the  evangelist  quotes,  th« 
heavens  were  closed  for  four  hundred  years.  Jehovah  had  not  another  message  to 
Bend.  His  people  had  offended  him.  Justice  comes  almost  fiercely  forth,  and  ban 
the  gate  of  revelation,  because  children  are  despised.  And  not  until  four  centuries 
of  silence  had  given  time  for  repentance,  would  those  bolts  be  withdrawn.  Even 
then  it  is  a  little  child  who  advances  to  turn  the  massive  key.  History  wanden 
fadly  in  oonfusioo  among  the  captivities  and  Maccabean  usurpations.    Only  ui 


'.  1.]  ST.  LUKE. 


Infant  ean  join  the  Testaments.  Luke  is  the  next  man  to  Malachi.  The  sternest 
of  all  Israel's  prophets  reappears  in  the  sternest  of  all  heralds  to  the  Church.  .  .  . 
A  wild  threat,  four  hundred  years  old,  is  suddenly  removed  in  a  flash  of  benedic- 
tion. The  curse  of  Malachi  is  omitted  in  Luke — the  lightning  is  drawn.  The 
gospel  fulfils  the  law  when  it  accepts  children.  God  receives  the  fathers  into 
favour  and  communion  again,  when  their  hearts  are  turned  to  their  offspring.  .  .  . 
Bow  much  are  you  doing  in  this  day  of  gospel  privilege  to  bring  the  hearts  of 
fathers  back  to  their  children?  Do  we  need  another  prophet,  with  his  hairy 
raiment  and  his  leathern  girdle,  to  come  forth  from  the  wilderness?  (C.  S. 
Bobinson,  D.D.)  The  pioneer  of  the  gospel: — "Whereas  Matthew  and  Mark 
introduced  John  Baptist  to  the  notice  of  their  readers  at  the  advanced  period  of  his 

£  reaching  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea,  and  his  baptising  his  followers  in  Jordan, 
luke  commences  with  the  Baptist's  genealogy  and  birth,  and  states  many  par- 
ticulars relating  to  his  early  history,  which,  though  they  had  been  far  less  remark- 
able in  themselves,  would  have  been  interesting  in  reference  to  one  who  afterwards 
became  so  conspicuous,  but  which  are  peculiarly  important  as  additional  evidences 
of  the  Divine  mission,  and  additional  illustrations  of  the  office  both  of  the  Baptist 
himself,  and  of  that  illustrious  Deliverer  and  King  before  whom  he  was  to  pro- 
ceed as  a  pioneer  to  clear  the  way.  {Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)  The  prepared  people  : — 
All  life  is  a  preparation  to  meet  God.  This  is  the  clue  of  life's  labyrinth.  Pre- 
parations are  olten  confused  things.  They  are  times  of  unsettling,  full  of  noise 
and  disorder,  and  apparent  contradiction ;  till  the  end  comes,  and  explains  it  all. 
So  this  world — it  is  made  up  of  strange  things,  which  move  above  us  and  within 
us,  and  seem  to  have  little  purpose  and  no  concert.  They  range  wildly.  There 
are  beginnings  without  endings ;  and  there  are  endings  without  beginnings.  A 
great  many  things  do  not  fit.  It  is  hard  to  tell  what  it  all  means.  It  is  a  pleasant 
thought  to  remember  that  your  preparation,  as  it  goes  on,  day  by  day,  is  only  a 
reflection  of  what  is  going  on  in  the  other  world.  There,  too,  it  is  all  preparation. 
The  saints  and  the  angels  are  all  busy  preparing.  The  preparations  of  earth  are 
to  meet  the  preparations  of  heaven.  He  has  prepared  His  mercy,  and  He  has 
prepared  His  truth.  It  is  a  prepared  heaven  ;  it  is  a  prepared  kingdom  ;  a  pre- 
pared city  ;  a  prepared  throne ;  a  prepared  seat.  And  when  both  preparations  are 
complete — a  prepared  soul,  and  a  prepared  heaven — what  perfectness  1  what  love  ! 
what  rest  I  what  quietness !  What  and  if  the  Pure  should  come,  and  find 
imparity?  What  and  if  the  Holy  should  come  and  find  irreverence  ?  What  and 
if  the  Spirit  come,  and  find  nothing  but  flesh?  What  and  if  Wisdom  come, 
and  find  ignorance?  What  and  if  Love  come,  and  find  selfishness  and 
tmkindness?  First,  you  must  be  prepared  to  know  your  Lord  when  He 
oomes.  This  John  taught  very  expressly.  He  placed  the  people  in  a  position  that 
they  should  know  and  recognize  Christ  when  He  should  arrive.  You  must  have 
read  Him  in  the  prophecies — you  must  have  walked  with  Him  in  the  gospel — you 
must  have  sat  with  Him  in  all  the  manifestations  of  His  grace — you  must  have 
traced  Him  in  His  reflections  about  the  universe — you  must  have  felt  His  inward 
dwelling  in  you  by  the  Holy  Ghost.    Then  He  will  be  no  new,  strange  Christ  to 

Jon  when  He  comes.  And  if  you  would  be  "  prepared  for  the  Lord,"  yoa  must 
ave  a  deep  sense  of  sin.  "  Eepent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand." 
Ho  one  must  stand  there  who  has  not  learnt  to  stoop  very  low.  Thirdly,  you 
must  be  exact,  faithful,  diligent  in  your  daily  proper  duties — doing  whatever  you 
^o  heartily — a  man  of  large  charities — a  man  of  unselfish  habits — a  man  of  strict 
integrity  in  business — a  man  of  self-government — a  man  of  moderation — a  man 
of  content — a  man  of  humility.  "  He  that  hath  two  coats,  let  him  impart  to 
him  that  hath  none  ;  and  he  that  hath  meat,  let  him  do  likewise."  "  Exact  no 
more  than  that  which  is  appointed  you."  Fourthly,  you  must  be  baptized — not 
with  the  baptism  of  water  only,  but  with  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit ;  and  not  with 
the  baptism  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit  only,  but  with  the  baptism  of  shame,  of 
•corn,  of  suffering,  of  death — '•  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  fire." 
And  fifthly,  you  must  be  much  in  the  use  of  the  ordinances — loving  the  shadows 
till  the  substance  comes.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A)  The  spirit  and  power  of  the 
Baptist : — The  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah  rested  upon  the  Baptist,  and  the  same 
gift  is  needed  by  us  now.  For,  what  is  the  end  and  purpose  of  all  the 
religious  activity  we  see  abroad  and  at  home,  but  to  turn  people's  hearts 
to  wisdom,  to  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  Lord  ?  Let  us  see, 
then,  what  was  this  spirit  and  power  which  made  the  Baptist  so  aueoess- 
InlP    And   notice,  to   begin   with,  it  was  nothing   wonderful,  nothing  oat  of 


S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  u 

the  way.  We  are  expressly  told  that  "  John  did  no  miracle."  The  spirit 
and  power  of  the  Baptist  is,  therefore,  a  gift  within  the  reach  of  every  on« 
of  us.  I.  Observe,  first,  his  decision  fob  God.  No  halting  between  two 
opinions.  The  Baptist  was  not  "  a  reed  shaken  with  the  wind,"  but  one  who  had 
considered  matters  well,  and  comes  to  a  firm  decision  respecting  the  salvation  of 
God.  II.  Notice,  next,  his  separation  from  the  world.  He  Hved  as  much  as 
possible  in  retirement,  communing  with  his  own  soul  and  with  God.  While  in  the 
world,  he  was  never  of  the  world.  III.  Consider,  onck  more,  his  bold,  con- 
sistent testimony  to  the  truth.  1<  Before  all  classes  of  his  countrymen,  from 
the  lowest  to  the  highest.  2.  In  spite  of  opposition  and  persecution.  Conclusion : 
Such  qualities  as  these  made  the  Baptist  a  power  for  good,  and  thus  was  he  in  the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elias.  Are  we  following  m  his  steps  ?  There  must  be  found 
in  us  these  same  qualities,  if  our  life  is  to  be  as  grand  a  moral  success  as  was  his. 
1.  The  same  decision.  Half-heartedness  is  of  no  use  at  all  in  what  concerns  the 
Boul.  2.  The  same  unworldliness.  Not  necessarily  separation  from  the  world— 
that  is  for  the  few  ;  but  (what  is  found  by  many  to  be  a  far  harder  thing)  living  in 
the  world,  doing  its  duties  faithfully  and  well,  and  at  the  same  time  living  the 
higher  life  that  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God,  and  looking  for  the  new  heaven  and 
the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  3.  The  same  stedfast  witnessing  to 
the  truth.  (1)  In  heart.  (2)  In  word.  (3)  In  action.  An  upright  and  honest 
life  is  the  best  testimony  to  the  spirit  and  power  in  which  we  move,  and  it  will 
carry  us  triumphantly  over  every  obstacle  and  difidculty  that  we  encounter,  antil 
we  reach  the  peaceful  haven  where  we  would  be,  and  bask  in  the  perpetual  sunshine 
of  the  presence  of  God.  {George  Low,  M.A.)  The  wisdom  of  the  just : — Let  us 
try  the  wisdom  of  the  religious  choice  by  the  happiness  which  follows.  I.  There  is 
a  content  and  satisfaction  in  the  mind,  from  the  very  consciousness  and  remem* 
brance  of  our  having  listened  to  the  voice  from  heaven.  II.  I  next  observe,  that 
the  gospel  brings  happinness  to  every  sincere  behever,  by  giving  him  the  blessing 
of  peace  in  the  assurance  of  pardon.  III.  The  wisdom  of  the  just,  however  it 
may  be  called  in  question,  however  reviled,  by  unconverted  or  ungodly  men,  who 
cannot  possibly  appreciate  or  understand  it,  is  manifested  through  the  whole  course  of 
the  believer's  life.  "  He  that  walketh  uprightly,  walketh  surely."  "  The  way  of  the 
wicked  is  as  darkness  :  they  know  not  at  what  they  stumble :  "  they  are  continually 
encompassed  with  evil,  without  ascertaining  the  cause  or  the  cure.  "  But  the  path 
of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 
day."  IV.  But  the  wisdom  of  the  just  is  not  to  be  fully  known  on  this  side  the 
grave.  There  will  come  a  day,  when  it  will  appear  even  to  the  slowest  of  belief, 
without  a  shadow  and  without  a  doubt.  "When  the  Lord  comes  to  make  up 
His  jewels,"  the  preciousness  of  those  jewels,  and  the  joy  of  being  gathered 
amongst  them,  will  be  perfectly  manifest,  both  to  friends  and  foes ;  to  the  one,  by 
their  admission  into  His  heavenly  kingdom ;  to  the  other,  by  their  being  cast  away. 
(J.  Slade,  AI.A.)  The  spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  whom  John  closely  resembled 
in — 1.  The  endowments  of  his  mind.  2.  The  habits  of  his  life.  3.  The  exercise 
of  his  ministry,  (G.  Simeon.)  How,  and  in  what  sense,  was  Malachi's  predic- 
tion of  the  Messenger  fulfilled  in  John  the  Baptist  ?  To  this  question  the  New 
Testament  furnishes  a  singularly  full  and  abundant  reply.  It  really  seems  as 
though,  not  only  the  mind  of  the  Baptist,  but  also  the  minds  of  all  who  speak  of 
him,  were  steeped  in  the  prophecy  of  Malachi,  and  saturated  with  it.  There  is 
hardly  a  word  said  of  or  by  him  which  does  not  take  new  meaning  and  force  80 
soon  as  we  read  it  in  the  light  of  Malachi's  lamp.  In  St.  Matthew's  Gospel 
(chap,  iii.),  we  have  our  fullest  account  of  the  Baptist's  appearance  and  ministry. 
We  are  there  told  that  his  first  word,  his  master-word,  was  "  Kepent,  for  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand " ;  that  is,  "Take  a  new  view;  get  a  new  mind; 
think  ;  think  back  on  your  habits  and  ways,  and  mend  them  ;  for  the  King,  long 
promised  to  your  fathers,  is  about  to  appear."  This  was  the  very  mission  which 
Malachi  ascribed  to  the  messenger  of  the  Lord.  John's  peculiar  mode  of  life,  as 
described  in  the  same  chapter,  tends  to  the  same  conclusion  (Matt.  iii.  4). 
Doubtless  John  assumed  these  outward  marks  of  resemblance  to  the  great  Tisn- 
bite,  in  order  to  call  attention  to  the  inward  resemblance  between  them  as  a  siga 
that  he  had  come  "  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah,"  The  same  reason  for  a  sad 
and  austere  life  existed  in  both  cases  The  "preacher  of  repentance"  should 
himself  be  a  penitent.  Elijah  and  John,  each  in  his  turn,  came  forth  as  • 
personification  of  repentance,  showing  the  people,  in  his  own  conduct,  what  their 
conduct  should  be.    Both  these  austere  voices  from  the  vildemess  called  men 


OHAi-.  I.J  ST.  LUKE.  S9 

to  repent,  both  sought  to  "  turn  the  hearts  of  men  back  again  "  to  God.  {8amu,el 
Cox,  D.D.)  A  father  reconciled  to  his  son : — A  mother  in  New  York  whose  son 
had  got  into  dissipated  and  abandoned  habits,  after  repeated  remonstrances  and 
threats,  was  turned  out  of  doors  by  his  father,  and  he  left  vowing  he  would  never 
return  unless  his  father  asked  him,  which  the  father  said  would  never  be.  Grief 
over  her  son  soon  laid  the  mother  on  her  dying  bed,  and  when  her  husband  asked  if 
there  was  nothing  he  could  do  for  her  ere  she  departed  this  life,  she  said,  "  Yes, 
you  can  send  for  my  boy."  The  father  was  at  first  unwilling,  but  at  length,  seeing 
her  so  near  her  end,  he  sent  for  his  son.  The  young  man  came,  and  as  he 
entered  the  sick-room  his  father  turned  his  back  upon  him.  As  the  mother  was 
sinking  rapidly,  the  two  stood  on  opposite  sides  of  her  bed,  all  love  and  sorrow  for 
her,  but  not  exchanging  a  word  with  each  other.  She  asked  the  father  to  forgive 
the  boy ;  no,  he  wouldn't  until  the  son  asked  it.  Turning  to  him,  she  begged  of 
him  to  ask  his  father's  forgiveness ;  no,  his  proud  heart  would  not  let  him  take 
the  first  step.  After  repeated  attempts  she  failed,  but  as  she  was  just  expiring, 
with  one  last  effort  she  got  hold  of  the  father's  hand  in  one  hand,  and  her  son's 
in  the  other,  and  exerting  all  her  feeble  strength,  she  joined  their  hands,  and,  with 
one  last  appealing  look,  she  was  gone.  Over  her  dead  body  they  were  reconciled, 
but  it  took  the  mother's  death  to  bring  it  about.  So,  has  not  God  made  a  great 
sacrifice  that  we  might  be  reconciled — even  the  death  of  His  own  dear  Son? 
{D.  L.  Moody.) 

Vers.  19-23.  I  am  Gabriel,  that  stand  in  the  presence  of  God. — *'  I  am  OabrUl.** 

Names  of  angeh : — The  name  Gabriel  signifies  "The  mighty  messenger  of  God." 
The  Bible  knows  of  only  two  heavenly  personages  who  are  invested  with  a  name : 
Gabriel  (Dan.  viii.  16  ;  ix.  21),  and  Michael  (Dan.  x.  13;  Jude  9,  &c.).  This  latter 
name  signifies,  "  Who  is  like  God  ?  "  Here  the  critic  asks  sarcastically  whether 
Hebrew  is  spoken  in  heaven  ?  But  these  names  are  evidently  symbolical ;  they 
convey  to  us  the  character  and  functions  of  these  personalities.  When  we  speak 
to  any  one,  it  is  naturally  with  a  view  to  be  understood.  When  heaven  communi- 
oates  with  earth,  it  is  obliged  to  borrow  the  language  of  earth.  According  to  the 
name  given  him,  Gabriel  is  the  mighty  servant  of  God,  employed  to  promote  His 
work  here  below.  It  i«  in  this  capacity  that  he  appears  to  Daniel  when  he  comes 
to  announce  to  him  the  restoration  of  Jerusalem  ;  it  is  he  also  who  promises  Mary 
the  birth  of  the  Saviour.  In  all  these  circumstances  he  appears  as  the  heavenly 
evangelist.  The  part  of  Gabriel  is  positive  ;  that  of  Michael  is  negative.  Michael 
is,  as  his  name  indicates,  the  destroyer  of  every  one  who  dares  to  equal,  i.e.,  to 
oppose  God.  Such  is  his  mission  in  Daniel,  where  he  contends  against  the  powers 
hostile  to  Israel ;  such  also  is  it  in  Jude  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  where  he  fights,  as 
the  champion  of  God,  against  Satan,  the  author  of  idolatry.  Gabriel  builds  up ; 
Michael  overthrows.  The  former  is  the  forerunner  of  Jehovah  the  Saviour ;  the 
latter,  of  Jehovah  the  Judge.  {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  "And  Zacharias  said  unto  the 
angel,"  &c.: — The  circumstances  under  which  Zacharias  doubted,  seem  to  have 
been  very  much  like  those  under  which  Abraham  believed ;  and  as  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  righteousness  ;  so  Zacharias  disbelieved, 
and  it  was  counted  to  him  for  sin.  And  if  it  be  thought  that  such  a  sin  was 
heavily  punished,  it  is  to  be  observed  (1)  that  we  are  not  sufficient  judges  of  any 
sin  and  of  the  punishment  due  to  it ;  (2)  that  the  dumbness  of  Zaehariah  was  not 
merely  a  punishment,  but  also  a  sign  ;  it  was  a  punishment  for  want  of  faith,  but 
it  was  at  the  same  time  a  medicine  to  strengthen  and  confinn  him.  So  it  may 
often  be,  in  the  merciful  providence  of  God,  that  the  bitter  draughts  of  His  dis- 
pleasure are  tonics  for  the  soul's  health.  (Bishop  Goodwin.)  "  I  am  Gabriel" 
<fcc. — We  have  heard  of  this  angel  before,  and  we  lose  something  unless  we  look 
back  to  the  circumstances  with  which  he  was  previously  connected.  This,  then, 
was  the  same  angel  who  appeared  to  Daniel,  to  explain  to  him  the  time  that  was  to 
elapse  until  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  (Dan.  ix.  21-27).  This  being  the  case,  we 
see  at  once  the  special  fitness  that  the  same  angel  should  be  employed  to  announce 
the  near  accomplishment  of  that  which  he  had  so  long  predicted.  It  is  the  same 
angel,  moreover,  who  was  sent  a  few  months  later  to  announce  the  birth  of  the 
Messiah  Himself,  as  now  of  His  harbinger.  The  same  considerations  apply  to  both 
transactions.  (Dr.  Kitto.)  The  judgment  on  Zacharias : — Zacharias  is  a  striking 
example  of  the  ills  a  good  man  may  have  to  suffer  as  the  result  of  his  unbelief.  I. 
CoNsiDEB  HIS  CHABACTEB  AND  POSITION.  He  was  a  genuine  believer.  He  was  well 
instructed  and  greatly  enlightened.    He  held  a  high  ofi&ce  as  priest.     He  had  been 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

peculiarly  favoured.  Soothing  comfort  had  just  been  administered  to  him.  This 
comfort  had  been  given  in  answer  to  his  own  petition.  He  staggered  at  a  promise 
which  others  implicitly  believed.  II.  What  then  was  the  fault  of  Zachariab  ? 
His  fault  was  that  he  looked  at  the  difficulty.  III.  Consideb  his  penalty.  Mercy 
tempered  judgment.  He  was  not  struck  dead,  and  the  chastisement  did  not 
invalidate  the  promise.  Do  not  be  satisfied  with  being  weak  in  faith.  Let  the 
Qtter  unbeliever  tremble.  If  a  good  man  was  struck  dumb  for  unbelief,  what  will 
become  of  you  who  have  no  faith  at  all  ?  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  If  incredulity,  much 
more  open  doubt  and  disbelief,  were  now  thus  dealt  with,  how  awfully  numerous 
would  be  the  additions  to  the  family  of  the  dumb  I  {A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  He 
had  teen  a  vision : — But  evidently  this  was  not  the  ecstasy  of  a  visionary  man 
who  imagined  simply  what  he  desired ;  for  when  the  promise  was  made,  he  doubted 
and  questioned.     (Lyman  Abbot.)        "  He  beckoned  unto  them  "  ; — 

To  have  a  child  thou  deem'st  so  strange  a  thing, 

That  thou  art  made  a  child  for  wondering. 

Whilst  for  a  sign  too  eagerly  thou  dost  call, 

Except  by  sign  thou  canst  not  ask  at  aU.    (Richard  CraeJiaie.) 

**  Remained  tpeechless  " ; — That  tongue  which  moved  the  doubt,  must  be  tied  up. 
He  shall  ask  no  more  questions  for  forty  weeks.  (Bishop  Hall.)  Telling  the  nevt 
at  home : — I  can  conceive  the  ra^nd  gladness  with  which  Zacharias,  when  his  office 
for  the  week  was  fulfilled,  sped  up  Olivet  and  across  the  rolling  plain  towards 
Bethlehem,  and  up  to  the  hill-country  of  Judsa,  with  the  strange  and  wondrous 
message  that  a  twenty  or  thirty  years'  old  prayer  was  about  to  be  answered  in  God's 
giftof  a  son  to  them.  How  Elisabeth  received  the  intelligence  is  left,  with  fine  modesty, 
m  silence.  His  "  stylus"  would  teU  what  his  tongue  could  not.  (A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.) 
Orieving  because  of  unbeliej : — 1.  Christians  are  saying  to  tiie  world  either  that 
God  is  false  to  his  promises,  or  that  God  is  true.  You  dishonour  him  by  unbelief. 
Ton  honour  him  by  faith,  the  utmost  honour  you  can  give  him.  A  German  writer 
gives  this  incident  in  the  life  of  Johannes  Bruce,  the  founder  of  the  order  of  the 
Carmelites,  who,  though  a  Eomish  priest,  was  a  saint  indeed,  distinguished  for  his 
love  to  God  and  his  faith.  The  convent  was  poor ;  and  the  friars,  dependent  on 
charity  for  daily  bread,  were  often  compelled  to  console  themselves  with  the 
passage,  "  Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone."  One  day  the  brethren  found,  when 
they  had  assembled  for  dinner,  that  their  whole  stock  of  food  was  a  single  piece  of 
dry  bread.  They  sat  down ;  they  asked  God's  blessing  upon  their  crust.  Then 
Johannes  arose,  and  poured  forth  such  words  of  encouragement  and  consolation 
concerning  the  love  of  Christ  and  the  great  promises  He  had  given  His  people,  that 
all  of  them  arose  delighted  and  refreshed,  and,  without  partaking  of  their  bread, 
returned  to  their  cells.  They  had  scarcely  reached  them,  when  the  bell  rang  at 
the  convent-gate,  and  a  man  entered  with  a  large  basket  cf  provisions,  which  were 
carried,  with  a  letter,  to  the  prior,  who  was  on  his  knees  praying.  He  read,  the 
letter  dropped  from  his  hands,  and  he  began  to  weep  bitterly.  The  porter,  sur- 
prised, said,  "  Why  do  you  weep  ?  Have  you  not  often  said  that  we  should  weep 
for  nothing  but  our  sins?"  Johannes  replied,  "Brother,  I  do  not  weep  without 
reason.  Think  how  weak  the  Lord  must  see  our  faith  to  be,  since  He  is  unwilling 
to  see  us  suffer  want  a  single  day  without  sending  visible  aid.  He  foresaw  that 
before  evening  we  should  despond,  unless  He  sent  immediate  help  to  our  faith  by 
means  of  this  charitable  gift.  It  is  becase  we  possess  so  little  confidence  in  the 
rich  Lord  in  whom  we  are  encouraged  to  trust,  that  my  tears  flow."  (From  sermon 
by  Charles  Finney.)  Unbelief  a  sin: — Mr.  Marshall,  author  of  a  treatise  on 
Sanctification,  in  his  early  years,  was  under  great  distress  for  a  long  time,  through 
a,  consciousness  of  guilt  and  a  dread  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  At  last,  mentioning 
his  case  to  Dr.  Thomas  Goodwin,  and  lamenting  the  greatness  of  his  sins,  that 
able  divine  replied,  •'  You  have  forgotten  the  greatest  sin  of  all,  the  sin  of  unbelief, 
in  refusing  to  believe  in  Christ,  and  rely  on  His  atonement  and  righteousness  for 
your  acceptance  with  God."  This  word  in  season  banished  his  fears.  He  looked 
to  Jesus,  and  was  filled  with  joy  and  peace  in  believing  !  (Handbook  to  Scripture 
Doctrines.)  As  soon  as  the  days  of  his  ministration  were  accomplished :  Trusting 
God  and  continuing  in  duty  : — A  friend  of  mine  once  asked  the  wife  of  Havelock 
how  her  husband  bore  himself  during  the  terrible  conflicts  in  India.  She  replied, 
"  I  know  not.  But  I  know  he  is  trusting  in  God  and  doing  his  duty  "  These 
glorious  words  may  bind  us  all  together  ;  wherever  we  are,  if  those  who  know  u* 


'.  1.]  ST.  LUKE.  81 

beet  can  say  with  certainty,  when  asked  aboat  ns,  "  They  are  trnsting  in  God  and 
doing  their  duty,"  we  shall  have  the  blessed  peace  that  was  given  to  Havelock. 
{Dean  Stanley.)  Sticking  to  duty  : — An  artilleryman  at  Waterloo  was  asked  what 
ne  had  seen.  He  replied  that  he  saw  nothing  but  smoke.  The  artilleryman  wag 
next  asked  what  he  had  been  doing.  He  replied  that  he  had  "  just  blazed  away  at  his 
own  gun."  {T.  Outhrie,  D.D.)  Dumb : — Here  is  a  sign  for  incredulity :  he  had  been 
as  good  have  believed  without  a  sign.  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  Belief: — If,  then,  utter 
nnbelief  is  utter  repression  of  the  best  in  man,  and  if  further  partial  belief  is  partial 
escape  from  this  galling  bondage,  what  must  complete  faith  in  God  be,  entire 
acceptance  of  His  Son  as  Eternal  Kighteousness,  unclouded  hope  in  the  perpetuated 
life  of  the  soul,  but  the  free  expression,  the  joyous  utterance,  the  complete  realiza- 
tion of  the  whole  spiritual  life  of  man  ?  Whatever  destroys  the  best  in  human  life 
cannot  be  true.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  best  life  of  the  individual,  the 
family,  the  nation  ;  it  la  impossible  to  believe  that  the  heroism  of  the  solitary  soul 
fighting  its  solitary  but  momentous  battles,  the  purity  and  sweetness  and  self- 
caoriiice  of  home,  the  advancing  righteousness  of  our  land  and  all  lands— spring 
oat  of  beliefs  that  are  a  fountain  of  lies.  Whatever  destroys  human  hfe  must  be 
a  lie ;  whatever  builds  it  into  strength  and  beauty  must  be  true.  Human  life,  in 
order  to  complete  realization  of  its  best  possibilities,  needs  a  God,  needs  a  Christ, 
needs  a  hereafter,  needs  Supreme  Love  as  its  minister,  needs  a  supreme  manifesta- 
tion of  that  Love,  and  a  timely  future  in  which  to  do  its  will  and  enjoy  its  minis- 
trations. The  Jewish  priest  asked  for  a  sign  whereby  he  might  know  the  angel's 
message  to  be  true.  The  sign  came.  Dumbness  was  bis  sign.  The  amazed  soul, 
trying  to  believe,  and  yet  afraid,  in  accepting  the  faith  of  its  fathers,  of  building  its 
hope  upon  a  dream,  asks  for  a  sign.  The  sign  is  given  ;  the  dumbness  that  falls 
upon  the  speaking,  singing  spirit  is  the  sign  that  unbelief  is  disease.  The  priest 
eilent  at  the  altar,  with  his  prayers  unsaid,  his  thoughts  unspoken,  his  praise 
onsung,  his  worship  unuttered,  is  but  the  type  of  the  soul  in  the  dumbness  of 
doubt,  in  the  paralysis  of  unbelief,  its  whole  best  life  denied  expression,  and 
shrivelling  under  the  doom  of  an  eternal  sentence  of  repression  and  death.  The 
priest  at  the  altar,  but  no  longer  silent ;  the  priest  at  the  altar,  naming  his  first- 
bom,  his  tongue  loosed  and  uttering  in  sublime,  prophetic  strains  his  whole 
grateful  life — is  a  type  of  the  soul  that  has  found  the  utterance  of  faith,  from 
which  all  paralysis,  all  dumbness,  has  passed  away,  whose  thought,  feeling,  and 
volition,  mind,  heart,  and  will,  are  winning  their  noblest  expression  ;  whose  whole 
life  is  in  the  attainment  of  its  eternal  satisfaction.     (G.  A.  Gordon.) 

Ver.  24.  And  Md  herself  five  months. — Modesty  a  retiring  grace: — Desirous  of 
plncking  one  of  the  elegant  sea-anemones,  you  extend  your  hand;  but,  at  the 
slightest  touch,  its  beautiful  coronet  begins  to  curl,  and  incurve  in  the  form  of  a 
cup.  If  further  annoyed,  the  rim  of  this  cup  contracts  more  and  more,  until  the 
animated  blossom,  now  transformed  into  a  shrivelled,  shapeless  mass,  aud  receding 
all  the  time  from  the  rude  assault,  retires  under  the  cover  of  its  rocky  fortress,  or 
elings  with  such  tenacity  to  the  stone  to  which  it  is  attached,  that  you  will  sooner 
tear  it  to  pieces  than  make  it  forego  its  grasp.  (Hartwig.)  Modesty: — Virgil, 
who  was  called  the  Prince  of  the  Latin  Poets,  was  naturally  modest  and  of  a 
timorous  nature  when  people  crowded  to  gaze  upon  him,  or  pointed  at  him  with 
the  finger  with  raptures :  the  poet  blushed,  and  stole  away  from  them,  and  often 
hid  himself  in  shops  to  be  removed  from  the  curiosity  and  admiration  of  the 
public.  The  Christian  is  called  indeed  to  let  his  light  shine  before  men ;  but  then 
it  must  be  with  all  meekness,  simplicity,  and  modesty.     (Buck.) 

Vers.  26-30.  And  the  virgin's  name  was  Mary. — The  Annunciation : — 1.  The 
messenger  sent  from  heaven  to  publish  the  news  of  the  conception  of  the  Son  of 
God — an  angel.  An  evil  angel  was  the  first  author  of  our  ruin ;  a  good  angel  could 
not  be  the  author  of  our  restoration,  but  is  the  joyful  reporter  of  it.  2.  The  angol's 
name — Gabriel,  the  power  of  God.  3.  The  place  the  angel  is  sent  to — Nazareth. 
An  obscure  place,  little  taken  notice  of  ;  yea,  a  city  in  Galilee,  out  of  which  arise£ 
no  prophet :  even  there  the  God  of  prophets  condescends  to  be  conceived.  No 
blind  comer  of  Nazareth  can  hide  the  blessed  virgin  from  the  angel.  The  favours 
nf  God  will  find  out  His  children  wherever  they  are  withdrawn.  4.  The  person  to 
whom  the  angel  ia  sent — a  virgin  espoused.  For  the  honour  of  virginity  Christ 
ehose  a  virgin  for  His  mother ;  for  the  honour  of  marriage,  a  virgin  espoused  to  a 
luuband.    6.  The  message  itself.     The  angel  salutes  the  virgin  as  a  saint ;  he  doea 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  b 


not  pray  to  her  as  a  goddess.  Full  of  grace  she  was  then  ,  full  of  glory  she  is  now. 
6.  The  effect  which  the  sight  and  salutation  of  the  angel  had  upon  Mary — sbe  was 
afraid.  But  in  her  case,  as  in  all,  the  fears  of  holy  persons  end  in  comfort.  7.  The 
character  which  the  angel  giv«s  of  Him  who  should  be  born  of  her—"  Great  .  .  . 
Son  of  the  Highest."  Great  in  respect  of  (1)  His  person,  (2)  offices,  (3)  kingdom. 
(W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Mary's  home-life  : — We  have  very  little  to  guide  us  in  our 
conception  of  the  scene.  Scripture  never  quite  withdraws  the  veil  which  protects, 
quite  as  much  as  it  conceals,  the  life  of  the  mother  of  our  Lord  ;  but  we  venture 
reverently  to  arrange  and  draw  together  some  side-lights  which  it  is  permitted  ua 
to  catch ,  There  is  quiet  Nazareth  itself,  nestling  (as  only  villages  in  Palestine  do) 
high  up'  in  a  circlet  of  protecting  hills,  Uke  one  of  those  flower-baskets,  with 
creepers  hanging  over  the  sides,  which  we  see  sometimes  caught  up  between  pro- 
jecting points  in  a  rockery  garden.  Nazareth,  so  still,  so  shut  in  from  the  world 
around,  that  it  is  not  once  mentioned  in  connection  with  any  single  event  in  the 
whole  of  the  Old  Testament ;  not  once  in  the  Talmud,  where  names  of  obscure 
places  occur  in  plenty ;  not  once  even  in  the  pages  of  garrulous  Josephus,  who 
enumerates  no  less  than  204  towns  and  cities  in  Galilee.  "  Verily,  Thou  art  a  God 
that  hidest  Thyself,"  we  feel  constrained  to  say,  as  we  contemplate  the  future  home 
of  Jesus ;  and  we  ask  for  nothing  better  than  to  enter  into  the  tranquil  spirit  of  the 
hush  of  the  httle  mountain  town  as  we  venture  now  to  look  more  closely  at  her 
whose  home  it  was.  Mary  was  a  "  virgin  betrothed  " ;  that  is  all,  as  yet,  that  wo 
know  about  her.  To  us  she  is  literally  "  without  father,  without  mother,  without 
descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  Ufe."  We  have  absolutely 
no  clue  at  all  to  the  interior  or  the  surroundings  of  her  village  home.  Was  she 
spinning  at  her  wheel,  or  grinding  at  the  miU,  or  reading  some  roll  of  the  prophets  t 
Or  was  she  just  then  sitting  and  musing  over  the  great  event  of  the  last  few  days — 
her  betrothal  ?  The  last  we  fancy  most  likely  ;  for  angels'  visits,  like  dreams  that 
are  hallowed,  argue  a  preoccupation  of  the  mind  in  some  direction  kindred  to  their 
holy  purpose.  So  Mary  may  have  been  looking  back  and  looking  forward :  back  on 
the  past  even,  uneventful  life,  over  which  now  there  has  moved  a  spirit  of  change, 
and  which  she  can  scarcely  believe,  perhaps  does  not  even  wish,  ever  to  be  quite 
the  same  again  :  and  forward  to  she  hardly  knows  what ;  only  she  is  vaguely  con- 
scious of  new  aspirations,  timid  forecastings,  undefined  fears.  And  then,  as  all 
faithful  Jewish  women  rightfully  might,  she  would  allow  herself  in  some  dim 
dreams  of  motherhood,  and  it  might  even  be  —  for  coming  events  cast  their 
shadows  before — that  the  unbidden  thought  would  just  creep  across  her  mind  that 
her  betrothed  husband  and  herself  were  both  of  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  and  was  she  to 
blame  for  taking  to  herself  the  sacred  hope  which  was  the  heritage  of  every  mother 
who  belonged  to  the  tribe  that  Jacob  had  blessed  ?  Then  came  the  angel,  familiar 
to  us  now  in  name  and  mission,  but  none  the  less  a  sign  and  a  wonder  at  his 
actual  appearance.  What  form  did  the  angel  take  ?  In  what  voice  did  he  speak  ? 
How  was  he  known  to  be  an  angel  at  all  ?  are  questions  which  rush  into  our 
minds  at  once.  They  will  never  be  answered ;  we  know  no  more  than  is  written, 
and  the  inspired  narrative  lays  upon  us  the  responsibility  of  unquestioning  faith. 
One  point  is  left  to  our  imagination — the  angel's  look.  We  fancy  that  his  kind, 
steady,  searching  gaze  must  have  been  more  eloquent  almost  than  his  prefatory 
words  :  "  Hail,  Accepted,  the  Lord  be  with  thee  ;  blessed  thou  among  women."  {E. 
T.  Marshall,  M.A.)  Angelic  visitations : — Their  airy  and  gentle  coming  may  well  be 
compared  to  the  glory  of  colours  flung  by  the  sun  upon  the  morning  clouds,  that 
seem  to  be  born  just  where  they  appear.  Like  a  beam  of  light  striking  through 
some  orifice,  they  shine  upon  Zacharias  in  the  Temple.  As  the  morning  light 
finds  the  flowers,  so  they  found  the  mother  of  Jesus  ;  and  their  message  fell  en  her 
pure  as  dewdrops  on  the  lily.  To  the  shepherds'  eyes  they  filled  the  midnight 
arch  like  auroral  beams  of  light ;  but  not  as  silently,  for  they  sang  more  marvel- 
lously than  when  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God  shouted 
for  joy.  They  communed  with  the  Saviour  in  His  glory  of  transfiguration, 
sustained  Him  in  the  anguish  of  the  garden,  watched  Him  at  the  tomb ;  and  as 
they  had  thronged  the  earth  at  His  coming,  so  they  seem  to  have  hovered  in  the  air 
in  multitudes  at  the  hour  of  His  ascension.  The  occasions  of  their  appearing  are 
grand,  the  reasons  weighty,  and  their  demeanour  suggests  and  befits  the  highest 
conception  of  superior  beings.  Their  very  coming  and  going  k  not  with  earthly 
movement.  They  are  suddenly  seen  in  the  air,  as  one  sees  white  clouds  round  out 
from  the  blue  sky  on  a  summer's  day,  that  melt  back  even  while  one  looks  upon 
ihem.     {H.  W.  Beecher.)         The  mother  of  Jesus — a  woman's  sermon  to  women :-^ 


CHAP,  t.]  ST.  LUKE.  83 

All  we  know  about  Mary  should  appeal  very  forcibly  to  the  heart  and  the  imagina- 
tion.  The  Child,  and  not  the  mother,  is  the  chief  theme  of  our  talk  and  our 
thought,  it  is  true ;  but  no  woman,  and  certainly  no  mother,  can  talk  of  the  won- 
derful events  of  Bethlehem  without  thinking  with  tenderness  as  well  as  awe  of 
Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus.  From  first  to  last  she  holds  our  eyes  and  moves  our 
hearts,  presenting  us,  as  she  does,  with  a  perfect  delineation  of  womanhood  and 
motherhood  ;  and  our  lives  would  probably  be  more  full  of  love  and  helpful  minis- 
tries if  we  gave  more  time  to  the  study  of  her  character.  It  may  be  asked.  Why, 
when  every  pious  Hebrew  matron  would  have  been  thankful  for  the  high  and 
unique  honour  of  being  the  mother  of  the  Messiah,  a  poor,  unknown,  and  retired 
virgin  should  hav3  been  chosen.  A  very  little  thought  will  suffice  to  show  the 
Buitability  of  Mary,  and  will  also  direct  the  mind  to  the  womanly  qualities  which 
God  honours.  1.  Humility.  It  was  this  which  made  Mary  great.  Never  did  she 
obtrude  herself  upon  the  world,  or  try  to  get  to  herself  the  least  share  of  her  Son's 
glory.  The  part  given  her,  she  was  content  to  perform  with  absolute  self-abnega- 
tion and  obedience.  Lowly  she  was  when  the  angel  made  his  wonderful  announce- 
ment to  her  ;  and  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  she  remained  to  the  end.  2.  Submission. 
She  accepted  her  lot,  whatever  it  might  be,  without  any  complaint,  or  any  attempt 
to  have  things  otherwise.  3.  Quietness.  She  was  always  more  ready  to  be  silent 
than  to  speak.  From  how  many  mistakes  must  she  thus  have  been  saved !  4. 
Fidelity.  Not  only  at  first,  but  to  the  very  last,  she  rose  to  the  tasks  imposed  upon 
her,  and  fulfilled  the  commands  of  God.  "  Not  what  I  wish,  but  what  I  ought  to 
do,"  was  the  rule  she  followed.  {Marianne  Farningham. )  Mary  to  be  held  in 
honour : — Probably  there  was  never  any  created  being  of  all  the  created  worlds,  put 
in  such  honour  as  this  woman,  chosen  to  be  the  Lord's  mother ;  all  the  more  truly 
our  mother,  that  from  her  begins  the  new-born  human  race.  To  her  it  is  given, 
even  to  grow  the  germ-life  of  the  Divine  Man,  Son  of  the  Father,  in  its  spring. 
And  her  behaviour  is  beautiful  enough  to  even  meet  an  occasion  so  high.  That 
grace  of  bearing,  that  sweet,  devout  modesty,  such  as  became  the  motberhood  of 
everlasting  innocence ;  that  watching  of  her  miraculous  Boy,  that  could  so  easily 
be  telling  His  wonders,  with  a  weak  mother's  fondness,  in  the  street,  but  which  still 
she  was  treasuring  in  her  heart ;  that  wondrous  propriety  of  silence  at  the  cross, 
allowing  her  no  wail  of  outcry  in  that  hour,  lest  she  might  be  making  herself  a  part 
of  the  scene.  0  ye  lilies  and  other  white  harbingers  of  spring,  culled  so  often  by 
art  to  be  symbols  of  her  unspotted  motherhood,  what  can  ye  show  of  silent  flower- 
ing in  the  white  of  purity,  which  she  does  not  much  better  show  herself  ?  We 
seem  just  now,  in  these  modern  times,  to  be  assuming  that  Mary  is  gone  by,  and 
the  honours  paid  her  ended  ;  and  if  we  choose  to  let  our  hearts  be  barbarized  in 
the  coarse,  unappreciating  prejudices  that  have  been,  so  far,  our  bitter  element, 
there  certainly  are  finer  moulded  ages  to  come.  Is  it  too  soon  even  now  to  admit 
Bome  feeling  of  rational  shame,  that  we  have  been  weak  enough  to  let  our  eyes  be 
80  long  plastered  with  this  clay  ?  Doubtless  it  must  be  the  first  thing  with  us, 
after  we  have  entered  the  great  world  before  us,  to  get  cleared,  and  assured,  and  at 
home  in  our  relations  to  the  Son  of  Man  Himself.  After  that  our  next  thing,  as  I 
think,  will  be  to  know  our  mother,  the  mother  of  Jesus  ;  for  no  other  of  the  king- 
dom, save  the  King  Himself,  has  a  name  that  signifies  more.  And  I  make  no 
question  that,  when  the  great  hierarchs  and  princes  of  other  worlds  and  ages,  who 
are  challenged  to  pay  their  hosannas  in  the  highest,  throng  in  to  meet  us,  they  will 
ask,  first  of  all,  for  the  woman  by  whom,  under  God's  quickening  overshadow, 
Christ  the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  obtained  His  life-connection  with  the  race,  and  His 
birth  into  practical  brotherhood  with  it.  As  the  sages  of  the  East,  guided  by  the 
star,  brought  out  their  tribute  to  the  Child  at  her  knee,  so  these  ancients  of  God 
will  come  in  with  us,  wanting  above  all  to  know  the  woman  herself,  at  whose  royal 
motherhood,  and  by  it,  Immanuel  the  King  broke  into  the  world  and  set  up  His 
kingdom.  And  higher  still  is  she  raised  by  the  recognition  of  her  Son  Himself ; 
for  as  she  is  yearning  always  fondly  after  Him,  so  will  He  never  disallow  His  old- 
time  filial  feeling  towards  her,  but  will  ever  clothe  her  with  such  honours,  really 
Divine,  as  fitly  crown  the  part  she  bore  in  His  wonderful  story.  {Horace  Bush- 
mil,  D.D.)  Mary's  true  -place  in  Christian  esteem : — It  is  impossible  to  worship  the 
Virgin,  because  the  very  exquisiteness  of  her  character  stands  in  her  being  a  perfect 
tjrpe  of  human  nature,  pure  and  simple  ;  her  native  womanly  grace  and  innocence 
are  her  chief  charm.  Deify  her,  and,  besides  other  things,  yoa  wrong  the  whole 
hnman  race ;  you  depose  her  from  her  rightful  place  at  the  head  of  Christian 
women ;  yoa  eheat  Christ's  sisters  of  their  sweet  queen,  and  say,  in  effect,  that  yoa 

8 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOB.  [cha?.  I. 

can  do  nothing  with  a  pure  life  and  a  humble  spirit  but  make  an  idol  of  it.  Give  n« 
back  the  mother  of  our  Lord  ;  we  want  her  here  with  us  on  earth,  that  our  maidena 
and  our  matrons,  feeling  her  to  be  one  of  themselves,  may  learn  from  her,  in  each 
event  of  life,  how  to  receive  God's  will  about  themselves.  It  is  a  presumptuous 
Interference  with  God's  own  ordering  of  the  Incarnation,  to  take  the  mother  of 
Jesus  out  of  the  category  of  earthly  women,  and  to  set  her  already  on  a  throne  in 
heaven.  Was  Christ  born  of  a  woman  or  was  He  not  ?  If  He  was,  let  us  accept 
the  mystery  with  all  its  consequences,  reverently  limiting  our  thoughts  and  fancies 
by  the  extent  to  which  God  has  thrown  back  the  veil.  ...  It  should  be  equally 
impossible  to  tolerate  unscriptural  legends  about  Mary.  Men  do  not  gild  gold,  or 
paint  white  frames  for  snow-wreaths  ;  and  do  they  not  see  what  violence  they  do 
to  the  most  retiring  character  in  the  world  by  dragging  it  to  the  front,  and  setting 
it  on  a  throne,  and  making  it  an  arbiter  of  the  destinies  of  men  ?  It  is  because  we 
feel  so  strongly  that  Mary  is  just  as  God  would  have  her  in  herself  that  we  resent 
all  apocryphal  accounts  of  her  doings,  and  deplore  all  unauthorized  additions  to  her 
life  ;  these  fancied  embellishments  of  the  loveliest  of  womankind,  only  serve  to 
hide  from  us  what  she  really  and  genuinely  was  from  God.  We  can  forgive  the  false 
taste  of  a  worship  which  professes  to  be  sensuous ;  but  we  feel  bound  to  protest 
against  the  tampering,  in  faith  and  doctrine,  with  the  character  and  very  being  of 
her  who  is  the  cherished  heritage  of  every  Christian  soul.  {E.  T.  Marshall,  M.A.) 
Tlie  blessed  among  women : — 1.  Poor,  yet  rich.  2.  Troubled,  yet  meditative.  3. 
Proud,  as  a  virgin,  yet  obedient  as  a  wife.  4.  First  doubtful,  then  believing.  (Van 
Oosterzee.)  Blessed  of  God  : — The  angel's  salutation  of  Mary  may  be  applied  to 
Christians  in  all  the  holy  seasons  of  life,  such  as  baptism,  confirmation,  the  time 
of  chastening,  the  day  of  death.      (Wallin.)  Encouragement  to  the  humble: — 

It  ought  to  be  highly  encouraging  to  those  whose  lot  is  cast  in  the  quiet  walks  of 
life — who  occupy  quiet,  private,  and  unobtrusive  stations — to  observe  how  great 
honour  was  put  on  one  humble  as  themselves ;  and  how,  in  the  faithful  discharge 
of  simple  duties,  and  the  making  use  of  the  appointed  means,  such  piety  has  been 
attained  as  has  never  been  surpassed,  and  perhaps  rarely  equalled.  Mary  had  un- 
doubtedly poverty  to  struggle  with,  and  she  was  not  placed  in  any  conspicuous  part, 
where  great  things  were  to  be  done  and  endured  for  God.  Up  to  the  time  of  the 
visit  from  the  angel  she  had  probably  lived  in  the  unaffected  life  which  presents 
daily  the  same  duties — perhaps  daily  the  same  hardships — the  life  of  that  great 
mass  of  human  beings  of  whom  the  world  never  hears — who,  some  with  more, 
others  with  less,  of  external  pressure,  rise  in  the  morning  to  begin  a  round  of 
humble  occupations,  of  which,  if  night  brings  the  close,  the  morrow  will  bring  the 
repetition.  Yet,  living  such  a  life  as  tl'is,  performing  the  daily  duties  which  devolve 
on  members  of  low,  and  perhaps  straitened,  families — duties  on  which  there  is 
nothing  to  throw  splendour,  and  which  may  seem  little  favourable  to  deep 
epiritnality — did  Mary  grow  so  rich  with  the  graces  of  piety,  as  to  be  the  fittest  for 
the  high  honour  which  God  had  in  store  for  woman.  After  this,  let  no  one  repine 
at  not  being  called  to  eminent  station,  as  though  it  were  necessary  to  be  great  in 
office  in  order  to  being  great  in  the  virtues  or  rewards  of  religion.  It  has  been  well 
said  that  no  man  is  to  complain  of  want  of  power  or  opportunity  for  religious  per- 
fection. The  devout  woman  in  her  closet,  praying,  with  much  zeal  and  affection, 
for  the  conversion  of  souls,  is  in  the  same  order  of  arrangement,  as  to  grace  in 
general,  as  he  who,  by  excellent  doctrines,  put  it  into  a  more  forward  position  to 
be  actually  performed.  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Blessed  among  women  : — Next  to  the 
blessed  Child,  the  Virgin  Mother  is  the  central  figure  of  the  Nativity.  She  is  one 
of  the  rolilest  and  loveliest  characters  in  the  Bible.  I.  The  saddest  page  in  th« 
world's  history,  is  the  stoky  of  woman's  wbongs.  The  law  of  strength  has  been 
always  the  world's  rule  of  conduct,  thewtaker  has  had  to  go  to  the  wall.  Woman, 
because  of  her  more  delicate  physical  organization,  has  been  the  victim  of  man's 
superior  strength,  the  prey  of  his  basest  passions,  the  slave  of  his  injustice  and 
tyranny.  To  justify  himself  in  his  oppression  he  has  represented  her  as  worthy 
only  of  contempt.  Hesiod  calls  women  "  an  accursed  brood,  chief  scourge  of  the 
human  race."  ^schylus  speaks  of  her  as,  "the  direst  evil  of  State  and  home." 
Socrates  thanked  God  daily  that  he  had  been  born  a  human  being  and  not  an 
animal ;  free  and  not  a  slave ;  a  man  and  not  a  woman.  "Slacken  the  rein,"  said 
Cato,  "  and  you  will  afterward  strive  in  vain  to  check  the  mad  career  of  that  un- 
pjasoning  animal."  Seneca  calls  her,  "  an  imprudent,  wild  creature,  incapable  of 
self-control."  The  Eomans  habitually  spoke  of  the  majesty  of  man,  the  imbecility, 
weakness,  and  frivolity  of  women.     "  Better  that  a  thousand  women  should  perish. 


CHAP,  u]  ST.  LUKE.  35 

than  that  one  man  should  cease  to  see  the  light."  But  with  Christianity  new 
ideas  of  the  dignity  and  glory  of  womanhood  came  into  life.  The  Son  of  God  was 
bom  of  a  woman.  "Christ,"  says  Augustine,  "was  born  of  a  woman,  that  neither 
sex  might  despair,"  By  its  reverence  for  the  Virgin  Mother  the  Christian  Church 
wove  into  its  deepest  thought  a  new  conception  of  womanhood,  and  did  much  to 
cancel  the  contempt  thrown  upon  her  in  the  person  of  Eve.  If  woman  was  guilty 
of  the  world's  first  sin,  on  her  breast  its  liedeemer  was  nourished ;  and  Beth- 
lehem atoned  for  Eden.  Eve  was  withdrawn  as  the  representative  of  woman,  and 
the  mother  of  Jesus  replaced  her.  Hence  among  the  early  Christians  the  position 
of  woman  was  greatly  changed.  She  shared  with  man  the  responsibilities  of 
religion,  the  sufferings  of  persecution,  the  love  of  God,  the  hope  of  Heaven.  II. 
But  this  is  not  all  that  the  worship  of  the  Virgin  meant.     Before  Christ  came,  ix 

WAS  THE  QUALITIES  ESPECIALLY  CHARACTEKISTIC  OF  THE  MALE  SEX  WHICH  WERE  WOR- 
SHIPPED AS  Divine.  Force,  strength,  courage,  mental  concentration — these  were 
the  qualities  regarded  as  of  highest  worth.  But  Christ  proclaimed  the  Divine 
nature  of  qualities  quite  the  opposite  of  these — meekness,  gentleness,  patience, 
purity,  obedience,  love.  It  is  the  peculiar  feature  of  Christianity,  tliat  it  exalts, 
not  strength,  intellect,  courage,  but  gentleness,  lovingness,  helpfulness,  purity. 
But  these  are  especially  womanly  virtues — qualities  of  character  in  which  women 
usually  surpass  men.  So  this  worship  of  the  virgin  grew  up  in  a  world  wearied 
by  violence  and  passion  and  selfish  strength,  of  masculine  ambitions  and  grasping 
resolves,  sighing  for  some  form  of  strength  and  glory  which  should  be  consistent 
with  tenderness,  and  gentleness,  and  sweet  aliection.  In  a  world  trodden  by 
armies,  corrupted  by  lust,  dominated  by  ambition,  this  worship  of  the  Virgin  was  a 
strong  and  living  protest  against  force  and  war  and  sensuality  ;  a  silent  assertion  of 
the  glory  of  purity,  goodness,  and  love.  When  the  attributes  of  God  and  Christ  were 
lost  from  view,  that  sweet  and  beautiful  idea  of  womanhood  shed  gentle  lustre 
amid  dungeons  and  scaffolds  aud  battlefields,  and  did  something  at  loast  to  mitigate 
their  cruelties.  It  hung  upon  the  walls  of  the  churches,  it  looked  down  from 
chamber  and  from  hall,  it  pleaded  at  the  corners  of  the  street,  and  it  melted 
through  the  imagination  of  cruel  and  sensual  men,  as  a  heavenly  vision  pleading 
for  humanity.  Mrs.  Jameson,  in  her  "Legends  of  the  Madonna,"  says  :  "  In  the 
perpetual  repetition  of  that  beautiful  image  of  the  Woman  highly  favoured,  there, 
where  others  saw  only  pictures  or  statues,  I  have  seen  this  great  hope  standing  like 
a  spirit  beside  the  visible  form — in  the  fervent  worship  once  given  to  that  gracious 
presence  I  have  beheld  an  acknowledgment  of  a  hi-^her  as  well  as  a  gentler  power 
than  that  of  the  strong  hand,  aud  the  might  which  makes  right;  and  in  every 
earnest  votary  one  who,  as  he  knelt,  was  in  this  sense  pious  beyond  the  reach  of  his 
thought,  and  devout  beyond  the  meaning  of  his  will."  And  woman  greatly 
encourages  his  error  when  she  accepts  his  estimate  of  worth  rather  than  Christ's, 
and  bestows  her  admiration  upon  the  lower  and  more  masculine  attributes,  instead 
of  recognizing  the  higher  gloiy  of  her  own  womanhood.  Gail  Hamilton's  sarcasm, 
"Come  girls,  let  us  be  men,"  finds  an  echo  in  much  of  the  life  of  to-d;iy,  when  it 
ought  to  carry  its  own  refutation.  The  Bible  gives  woman  a  glory  of  her  own. 
Let  her  take  up  and  wield  the  spiritual  sovereignty  that  is  her  everlasting  birth- 
right. Let  man  learn  to  be  grateful  to  woman  for  this  undoubted  achievement  of 
her  sex — that  she,  often  in  despite  of  him,  has  kept  Christendom  from  lapsing  into 
barbarism,  has  kept  mercy  and  love  from  being  overborne  by  those  two  greedy 
monsters,  money  and  war.  Let  him  remember  that  almost  every  great  soul,  which 
has  led  forward  and  lifted  up  the  race,  has  been  inspired  by  some  noble  woman.  "  A 
man  discovered  America,  but  a  woman  equipped  him  for  the  voyage."  The  noblest 
qualities  of  both  are  blended  in  Jesus  Christ.  In  Him  is  the  woman's  heart  and  the 
man's  brain ;  womanly  gentleness,  manly  strength.  We  do  not  worship  Christ  and 
Mary,  for  in  Christ  we  find  aU  that  was  sought  in  Mary.  III.  There  is  still  another 
truth  striving  for  utterance  in  this  worship  of  the  Virgin,  and  this  is,  the  need 

WHICH      THE      human      HEART     FEELS     OF     A      HUMAN     AS     WELL     AS     DiVINE     SaVIODR. 

(J.   H.   Mcllvaine,  D.D.)  The  Annunciation: — In   the  introduction  of  Jesus 

Christ  to  the  world  it  would  seem  as  if  all  laws  of  nature  were  to  be  suspended, 
that  He  Himself  might  be  the  crowning  miracle  of  the  universe.  Even  in  the 
birth  of  His  forerunner,  God  took  the  case  into  His  own  hand  in  a  manner  which 
excited  the  surprise  and  provoked  the  unbelief  of  servants  who  were  walking  in  all 
His  own  ordinances  and  commandments  blameless.  In  the  birth  of  Christ  law  waa 
Dot  only  suspended,  but  treated  as  if  it  had  never  had  any  existence,  showing  how 
eaaj  U  would  have  laeen  for  the  Almighty  to  have  founded  society  upon  a  totally 


8b  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  I. 


new  basis.  The  value  of  these  miracles  is  seen  as  to  their  scope  or  pnrpose  most 
vividly  in  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  From  the  very  beginning,  in  itself  and  in  its 
surroundings  it  was  to  be  a  life  distinct  from  all  other  existence.  The  manner  in 
which  both  Elisabeth  and  Mary  received  the  communications  is  precisely  that  in 
which  the  heart  receives  the  tidings  of  the  great  salvation.  The  idea  of  salvation 
overpowers  all  who  apprehend  it  with  any  distinctness.  It  would  seem  as  if  every 
Boul  had  to  undergo  a  period  of  questioning  and  doubt  and  wondering  before  it 
realizes  the  ineffable  peace  and  cloudless  radiance  of  perfect  trust.  The  reply 
which  the  angel  made  to  Mary's  question,  "  How  shall  this  be  ?  "  shows  distinctly 
that  there  are  questions  arising  out  of  spiritual  revelation  which  may  be  put  with- 
out violating  the  Divine  purpose  of  secrecy.  Mary's  point  of  rest  must  be  ours ; 
wonder  was  not  allayed,  nor  was  difficulty  removed,  yet  the  heart  was  given  up  to 
the  possession  of  the  Almighty.  The  gospel  is  to  be  received  in  the  same  way. 
Its  doctrines  will  excite  surprise  and  provoke  inquiries,  and  it  is  possible  that  the 
answers  to  human  questioning  may  but  carry  the  mind  to  some  higher  plane  of 
mystery.  There  it  must  rest,  not  in  knowledge,  but  in  faith,  and  the  eyes  of  the 
heart  must  be  opened  when  the  vision  of  the  understanding  is  unequal  to  the  light. 
The  whole  incident  may  be  used  as  teaching — 1.  That  human  life  is  accessible  to 
angelic  ministry.  2.  That  the  great  surprises  of  life  should  be  held  in  check  by 
religious  faith,  lest  they  unbalance  the  mind,  and  unfit  it  for  ordinary  occupations. 
3.  That  the  omnipotence  of  God  should  be  regarded  as  the  solution  of  all  mystery 
and  the  guarantee  of  all  safety.     {Dr.  Parker.)        Mary ,  the  mother  of  Jesus  : — 

1.  There  has  been  a  large  recoil  of  unbelief  from  these  first  chapters  of  Matthew 
and  Luke.  How  comes  it,  many  ask,  if  this  be  any  proper  history  of  facts,  that  it 
is  made  up  so  largely  of  poetic  material  ?  (1)  First,  we  must  observe,  there  is  a 
great  facility  of  verse  in  the  Hebrew  and  Syriac  tongues,  so  that  minds  but  a  very 
little  excited  almost  naturally  break  into  the  couplet  form  of  utterance.  (2)  Next, 
the  Incarnation  itself  is  an  event  so  conspicuous  and  glorious,  that  everybody 
knowing  it  ought  to  be  taken  by  some  great  mental  commotion,  lifted  by  some 
unwonted  inspiration.  (3)  Furthermore,  I  will  even  dare  to  aver  that  the  manner 
of  this  Incarnation-story  is  natural,  and  is  cast  in  a  form  of  the  strongest  possible 
self-affirmation.     It  comes  to  pass  in  just  the  only  way  conceivable  or  credible. 

2.  At  this  point  my  subject,  which  is  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  takes  a  most  re- 
markable turn.  Suddenly  she  drops  out  of  improvising,  out  of  song  and  singing 
joy,  into  a  very  nearly  total  and  dumb  silence  ;  giving  us  to  hear  no  spoken  word 
again,  save  in  a  very  few  syllables,  and  but  twice  in  her  whole  after-life.  Not  by 
the  poverty  of  her  nature  that  she  is  silent.  Self-retention  is  the  almost  in- 
fallible  token  of  a  strong,  deep  character.  3.  Jesus,  a  Man  of  thirty  years  old, 
goes  to  a  wedding.  And  there  we  are  let  into  a  new  chapter,  at  the  very  hinge  of 
His  public  life,  and  the  new  relation  He  is  to  have  to  His  mother.  No  reprimand, 
however,  in  His  words  to  her  ("  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  ")  save 
under  the  English  idiom.  4.  Look  now  for  a  moment  at  the  home-basis  Mary  has 
provided  for  Jesus  in  the  prosecution  of  His  ministry.  We  see  His  mother's  family 
all  engaged  for  Him  and  with  Him,  and  even  if  they  do  not  believe  in  Him,  they 
will  stick  fast  by  Him,  we  can  see,  in  divinest  and  most  faithful  love.  5.  Mary's 
behaviour  at  the  cross  fitly  ends  her  story.  She  "  stood  " — a  word  of  strong  com- 
posure. Doubtless  she  remembers  the  word  of  Simeon — "  Tea,  a  sword  shall 
pierce  through  thine  own  soul  also."  But  there  she  stands,  in  the  beloved  disciple's 
company,  holding  fast  the  decencies  of  sorrow,  as  if  the  proprieties  of  the  worlds 
v,'ere  upon  her.  How  loDg  after  this  she  lived  we  do  not  know.  But  we  could 
most  easily  believe  that  when  her  mind  was  opened  at  the  Pentecost,  to  the  mean- 
ing of  her  Son's  great  mission,  she  was  at  once  so  astounded  and  exalted  by  the 
awful  height  of  her  relationship,  that  her  soul  took  wing  in  the  uplift  of  her  felt 
affinity  with  the  Highest,  and  was  gone  I  But  we  have  no  such  traditions.  6.  Her 
disappearing  from  us,  however,  does  not  bring  her  story  to  an  end;  it  only  prepares 
our  final  appearing  to  her,  on  a  higher  plane  of  life,  where  she  will  most  assuredly 
be  the  centre  of  a  higher  feeling  than  some  of  us  may  have  imagined.  Probably 
there  was  never  any  created  being  of  all  the  created  worlds  put  in  such  honour 
as  this  woman,  chosen  to  be  the  Lord's  mother ;  all  the  more  truly  our  mother, 
that,  from  her  begins  the  new-born  human  race.  "  Hail,  thou  highly  favoured  1  " 
"Blessed  art  thou  among  women."  {Horace  Bushnell,  D,D.)  *'  TJwu  hast  found 
favour"  &c. : — Mary  is  not  a  dispenser  of  favour,  but  a  recipient  of  it,  with  and 
for  the  rest  of  us ;  the  type  and  germ  of  the  Church.  (Rudolf  Stier.)  Mary  a  typical 
Jewesi : — Being  of  royal  lineage,  Mary  undoubtedly  cherished  in  her  bosom  th« 


«Btf.  1.]  ST.  LUKE.  37 

traditions  of  her  house  with  that  secret  fervour  which  belongs  to  enthusiastio 
natures.  Like  all  Judean  women,  we  are  to  suppose  her  intensely  national  in  her 
feelings.  She  identified  herself  with  her  country's  destiny,  lived  its  life,  suffered 
its  sufferings,  and  waited  and  prayed  for  its  deliverance  and  glories.  This  was  a 
time  of  her  nation's  deep  humiliation.  The  throne  and  sceptre  had  passed  from 
Judah.  Conquered,  trodden  down,  and  oppressed,  the  sacred  land  was  under  the 
rule  of  Pagan  Eome;  and  Herod,  the  appointed  sovereign,  was  a  blaspheming, 
brutal  tyrant,  using  all  his  power  to  humiliate  and  oppress ;  and  we  may  imagine 
Mary  as  one  of  the  small  company  of  silent  mourners,  like  Simeon,  and  Anna 
the  prophetess,  who  pondered  the  Scriptures  and  "looked  for  salvation  in  Israel." 
{Harriet  B.  Stowe.)  Mary  the  flower  of  a  selected  race ;— In  part,  our  conception 
of  the  character  of  Mary  may  receive  light  from  her  nationality.  A  fine  human 
being  is  never  the  product  of  one  generation,  but  rather  the  outcome  of  a  growth 
of  ages.  Mary  was  the  offspring  and  flower  of  a  race  selected,  centuries  before, 
from  the  finest  physical  stock  of  the  world ;  watched,  trained,  and  cultured,  by 
Divine  oversight,  in  accordance  with  every  physical  and  mental  law  for  the  pro- 
duction of  sound  and  vigorous  mental  and  bodily  conditions.  Her  blood  came  to 
her  in  a  channel  of  descent  over  which  the  laws  of  Moses  had  established  such 
a  watchful  care — a  race  where  marriage  had  been  made  sacred,  family  life  a  vital 
point,  and  motherhood  invested  by  Divine  command  with  an  especial  sanctity.  As 
Mary  was,  in  a  certain  sense,  a  product  of  the  institutes  of  Moses,  so  it  is  an 
interesting  coincidence  that  she  bore  the  name  of  his  sister,  the  first  and  most 
honoured  o-f  the  line  of  Hebrew  prophetesses — Mary  being  the  Latin  version  of  the 
Hebrew  Miriam.  She  had  also,  as  we  read,  a  sister,  the  wife  of  Cleopas,  who  bore 
the  same  name,  a  custom  not  infrequent  in  Jewish  families.  It  is  suggested  that 
Miriam,  being  a  sacred  name,  and  held  in  high  traditionary  honour,  mothers  gave 
it  to  their  daughters,  as  now  in  Spain  they  call  them  after  the  Madonna  as  a  sign 
of  good  omen.  (Ibid.)  God^s  presence  with  His  people: — How  important  to  have 
God  with  us  everywhere !  The  late  John  Wesley,  after  a  long  life  of  labour  and 
usefulness,  concluded  his  course  in  perfect  peace  and  holy  triumph.  A  short  time 
before  his  departure,  when  a  person  came  into  his  room  he  tried  to  speak  to  him, 
but  could  not.  Finding  his  friend  could  not  understand  him  ;  he  paused  a  little, 
and  then  with  all  his  remaining  strength  he  cried  out,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is 
with  us."  And  then  raising  his  feeble  voice,  and  lifting  up  his  dying  arm  in  token 
of  victory,  he  again  repeated,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us."  Paul,  when  a 
prisoner,  had  the  presence  of  God.  Turn  to  2  Timothy  iv.  16,  17 :  "  At  my  first 
answer  no  man  stood  with  me,  but  all  men  forsook  me :  I  pray  God  that  it  may  not 
be  laid  to  their  charge.  Notwithstanding,  the  Lord  stood  with  me,  and  strengthened 
me."  It  was  a  noble  saying  of  his  {Eom.  viii.  31) :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  ?  "  {Henry  R.  Burton.)  The  glory  of  Mary  : — No  woman  that 
€ver  lived  on  the  face  of  the  earth  has  been  an  object  of  such  wonder,  admiration,  and 
worship,  as  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord.  Around  her,  poetry,  painting,  and  musio 
have  raised  clouds  of  ever-shifting  colours,  splendid  as  those  around  the  setting  sun. 
Exalted  above  earth,  she  has  been  shown  to  us  as  a  goddess,  yet  a  goddess  of  a  type 
wholly  new.  She  is  not  Venus,  not  Minerva,  not  Ceres,  nor  Vesta.  No  goddess  of 
classic  antiquity,  or  of  any  other  mythology,  at  all  resembles  that  ideal  being  whom 
Christian  art  and  poetry  presents  to  us  in  Mary.  Neither  is  she  like  all  of  them 
united.  She  differs  from  them  as  Christian  art  differs  from  classical,  wholly  and 
entirely.  Other  goddesses  have  been  worshipped  for  beauty,  for  grace,  for  wisdom, 
for  power.  Mary  has  been  the  goddess  of  poverty  and  sorrow,  of  pity  and  mercy, 
and  as  suffering  is  about  the  only  certain  thing  in  human  destiuy,  she  has  numbered 
her  adorers  in  every  land,  and  climate,  and  nation.  In  Mary,  womanhood,  in  its 
highest  and  tenderest  development  of  the  mother,  is  the  object  of  worship.  Mother- 
hood, with  large  capacities  of  sorrow,  with  the  memory  of  bitter  sufferings,  with 
sympathies  large  enough  to  embrace  every  anguish  of  humanity  I  Such  an  object 
of  veneration  has  inconceivable  power.      (Harriet    B.    Stowe.)  Calmness    of 

Mary : — "We  see  in  aU  this  that  serious,  calm,  and  balanced  nature  which  was 
characteristic  of  Mary.  Habitually  living  in  the  contemplation  of  that  spirit- world 
revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  it  was  no  very  startling  thing  to  her  to  see  an  angel 
standing  by  her ;  her  thoughts  had  walked  among  the  angels  too  long  for  that,  but 
his  enthusiastic  words  of  promise  and  blessing  agitated  her  soul.  (Ibid.)  Absence 
ofself-cojisciousne$s: — One  morning,  according  to  the  old  legend,  "as  she  went  to 
draw  water  from  the  spring  or  well  in  the  green  open  space  at  the  north-west 
sztremity  of  the  town,"  the  Angel  met  her  with  the  Salutation.    And  Mary  wat 


3S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  t. 

troubled  at  the  tidings  and  the  praise.  It  was  the  trouble  of  a  beautiful  nneonscioaS' 
ness.  She  had  never  thought  of  herself,  never  asked  herself  whether  she  were 
pure  or  lovely,  did  not  care  what  people  thought  of  her,  made  no  effort  to  appear 
to  the  little  world  of  Nazareth  other  than  she  was.  A  rare  excellence  in  man  or 
woman,  this  fair  unconsciousness ! — rarer  than  ever  now.  Our  miscalled  education* 
which  looks  chiefly  to  this,  how  a  young  girl  may  make  a  good  figure  in  society, 
destroys  often  from  the  earliest  years  the  beauty  of  unconsciousness  of  self.  There 
are  many  who  have  never  had  a  real  childhood,  never  been  unconscious,  who 
possess  already  the  thoughts  and  airs  of  womanhood,  and  who  are  applauded  aa 
objects  to  admire,  instead  of  being  pitied  as  victims  of  an  unnatural  training. 
Their  manners,  conversation,  attitudes,  are  the  result  of  art.  Already  they 
tremble,  as  we  do,  for  the  verdict  of  the  world.  They  grow  up  and  enter  into 
society,  and  there  is  either  a  violent  reaction  against  conventionality,  or  a  paralyzing 
sensitiveness  to  opinion,  or  a  dull  repose  of  character  all  but  equivalent  to  stag- 
nation. We  see  many  who  are  afraid  of  saying  openly  what  they  think  or  feel,  it 
it  be  in  opposition  to  the  accredited  opinions  of  the  world ;  we  see  others  who 
rejoice  in  shocking  opinion  for  the  sake  of  making  themselves  remarkable — perhape 
the  basest  form  of  social  vanity,  for  it  gives  pain,  and  does  not  spring  from  con* 
viction.  Both  forms  arise  from  the  education  which  makes  the  child  self-conscious. 
It  is  miserable  to  see  how  we  actually  take  pains  to  root  out  of  our  children  the 
beauty  of  the  Virgin's  early  life,  the  beauty  of  a  more  Divine  life  in  Christ — the 
beauty  of  unconsciousness  of  self.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  Mary's  piety  :— 
The  Angel  does  not  say,  observe,  that  the  favour  of  God  has  found  her,  but  that 
she  has  found  favour  with  Him.  The  expression,  it  is  true,  may  be  used  in  either 
way,  to  indicate  what  God  has  undertaken  to  do  for  her,  or  what  she  has  obtained 
by  the  suit  of  her  gentle,  sweet-minded  prayers.  It  is  most  naturally  taken  in  this 
latter  way ;  giving  us  to  see  how  she  has  been  waiting  before  Him,  from  her  tender 
girlhood  onward,  asking  of  Him  grace  for  a  good  life,  and  questioning  His  oraclfr 
as  to  what  she  is  to  do,  or  to  be.  She  has  read  the  prophets  too,  as  we  may  judge, 
and  her  feeling,  like  all  the  religious  feeling  of  her  nation,  is  leavened  in  this 
manner,  by  infinite  yearnings  for  the  coming  of  that  wonderful  unknown  Being 
called  Messiah.  And  so  her  opening  womanly  nature  has  been  stretching  itself 
Messiahward,  and  configuring  itself  inwardly  to  what  the  unknown  Great  One  is  to 
be.  Sighing  after  Him  thus,  in  the  sweet  longings  of  her  prayers,  she  is  winning 
such  favour,  and  becoming  inwardly  akin  to  Him  in  such  degree,  as  elects  her  to 
bear  the  promised  Child  of  the  skies,  and  be  set  in  a  properly  Divine  mother- 
hood before  the  worlds  1  Ah,  yes,  Mary,  canst  thou  believe  it  ?  That  which  th» 
prophets  of  so  many  ages  drew  you  into  praying  for;  that  which  angels  in  God's 
highest  and  most  ancient  realms  have  been  peering  from  above  to  look  into,  that 
for  which  the  fulness  of  time  has  now  come — that  special  thing  of  God's  counsel, 
supereminent  favour,  His  greatest  miracle.  His  unmatched  wonder.  His  one  thing 
absolute,  which  lets  nothing  ever  come  to  pass  that  can  be  put  into  class  with  it — 
even  that  thou  hast  gotten  a  call  from  God  to  mediate  for  the  world,  bearing  it  aS' 
thy  Holy  Thing,  the  fruit  of  thy  sweet  and  maidenly  prayers.  (Horace  Bxuhnell,  D.D.) 

Ver.  81.  Call  His  name  Jesus. — The  name  "  Jetut " ; — Bernard  has  delightfully 
said  that  the  name  "  Jesus  "  is  honey  in  the  mouth,  melody  in  the  ear,  and  joy  in 
the  heart.  I  rejoice  in  that  expression  on  my  own  account,  for  it  gives  me  my  shar» 
of  the  delight,  and  leads  me  to  hope  that,  while  I  am  speaking,  the  sweetness  of  that 
precious  name  may  fill  my  own  mouth.  Here  also  is  a  portion  for  you  who  are 
listening :  it  is  melody  in  the  ear.  If  my  voice  should  be  harsh,  and  my  words 
discordant,  you  will  yet  have  music  of  the  choicest  order,  for  the  name  itself  is 
essential  melody,  and  my  whole  sermon  will  ring  with  its  silver  note.  May  both 
speaker  and  hearer  join  in  the  third  word  of  Bernard's  sentence,  and  may  we  all 
find  it  to  be  joy  in  our  hearts,  a  jubilee  within  our  souls.  Jesus  is  the  way  to  God, 
therefore  will  we  preach  Him  ;  He  is  the  truth,  therefore  will  we  hear  of  Him  ;  He 
is  the  life,  therefore  shall  our  hearts  rejoice  in  Him.  His  transporting  name  is  an 
ointment  poured  forih,  and  its  scent  is  varied  so  as  to  contain  the  essence  of  all 
fraf^rances.  I.  The  name  of  Jesds  is  a  name  divinely  ordered  and  expounded. 
Like  Himself  it  came  down  from  heaven,  for  an  angel  brought  it.  1.  It  is  the  best 
name  He  could  bear.  To  be  the  "  Saviour  "  is  His  glory.  2.  It  is  the  most  appro- 
priate name  He  could  receive.  God  the  Father,  who  knows  Him  best,  sees  this  to 
be  His  grand  characteristic,  that  He  is  the  "  Saviour,"  and  is  best  represented  by 
this  name.    d.  It  is  a  name  which  must  be  true,  since  Infinite  Wisdom  has  selected 


•BAP.  I.]  8T.  LUKE.  8» 

it,  A  "  Saviour "  He  must  be  upon  a  grand  scale,  continually,  abundantly.  II, 
OtJR  Lord  was  actualijT  cAiiLED  by  the  name  "  Jesus  "  by  man.  The  God  of  heaven 
by  His  angel  appoints  the  Child's  name,  but  He  leaves  it  to  Joseph  and  Mary  to 
announce  it.  Those  who  are  taught  of  God,  joyfully  recognize  that  Christ  i» 
salvation,   and  without  a  question  name  Him  thus.      IIL  Thb  name  bad  been 

TTPICAIiLT  WORN  BY  ANOTHER,  BUT  IS  NOW  RESERVED  FOR  HiM  ALONB.     JcSUS  and  Joshua 

are  the  same  word :  Joshua  the  Hebrew  form,  Jesus  the  Greek.  The  son  of  Nua 
was  a  type  of  the  son  of  Mary.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  alone  can  save  fully  from  sin, 
IV.  This  name  identifies  our  Lord  with  His  people.  He  declares  His  relation  to 
them.  It  is  to  them  that  He  is  a  Saviour  (Matt.  i.  21).  V.  The  name  "  Jesus  "  is 
one  which  indicates  His  main  work.  1.  He  "  saves  "  by  taking  all  the  sins  of  His. 
people  upon  Himself.  2.  He  "  saves  "  His  people  by  bearing  the  penalty  due  to> 
their  sins.  3.  He  "saves"  by  driving  out  the  vipers  of  sin  from  the  heart,  and. 
implanting  in  their  stead  fresh  and  holy  objects,  ambitions,  motives.  VI.  Tma 
NAME  IS  ONE  WHICH  13  COMPLETELY  JUSTIFIED  BY  FACTS.  Givcn  Him  before  He  had 
done  anything,  wiiile  yet  a  babe,  has  He  not  earned  it  ?  Does  He  not  well  deserve 
the  name  He  bears?  VII.  This  name  is  Christ's  personal  name  for  evbe.  1.  It 
is  a  home  name.  Given  Him  by  His  own  mother.  2.  It  is  a  heart  name.  Full  of 
the  music  of  love — moving  our  affections,  and  firing  our  souls.  3.  It  was  His  death, 
name.  Written  over  the  cross.  4.  It  is  His  resurrection  name.  5.  It  is  His  gospeL 
name.  6.  It  is  His  heaven  name.  There  He  is  ever  adored  as  the  "  Saviour."  Lei 
ns  go  and  tell  of  this  name ;  let  us  continually  meditate  upon  it ;  let  us  love  it 
henceforth  and  for  ever.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Incarnation  : — The  Incarnation 
was — 1,  A  fact,  revealed  in  life,  words,  works.  2.  An  unfathomable  miracle,  unpre- 
cedented, intimate,  voluntary  union  of  Divinity  with  humanity.  3.  A  glorious- 
benefit  ;  it  is  the  glory,  the  light,  the  life  of  men.  {Van  Doren.)  Signification  of 
the  name  Jesus : — Means  Saviour.  Salvation  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  revelation. 
Substance  of  gospel  truth.  1.  Light.  2.  Life.  3.  Liberty.  4.  Pardon.  5.  Sanc- 
tification.  6.  Comfort.  7.  Peace.  8.  Hope.  9.  Triumph.  Cliiifit  was  and  is  a 
Saviour  such  as  the  world  needs,  not  as  the  Jews  expected.  [Ibid.)  The  name 
of  Jesus  : — 1.  Jesus,  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem.  2.  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  the  world. 
8.  Jesus,  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  4.  Jesus,  the  Judge  of  all  man- 
kind. {A.  F.  Barfield.)  The  miraculous  conception : — Had  the  narrative  of  the 
miraculous  conception  occurred  in  the  literature  of  a  heathen  natK-u,  it  would  justly 
have  raised  doubts.  But  in  the  sober  verses  of  the  Gospels,  written  by  Jews,  it 
takes  a  far  different  character.  The  idea  was  altogether  foreign  to  the  Jewish 
mind.  The  Hebrew  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God,  and  of  the  infinite  elevation  of 
the  Divine  Being  above  man,  the  profound  regard  of  the  Jews  for  the  married 
state,  and  their  abhorrence  of  unwedded  life,  make  it  impossible  to  imagine  how 
such  a  thought  could  ever  have  risen  among  them.  The  improbability  of  its  being  in- 
vented by  a  Jew  is  heightened  by  the  fact,  that,  though  lofty  thoughts  of  the  nature 
oi  the  Messiah  were  not  wanting  in  some  Israelites,  the  almost  universal  belief  was 
that  He  was  to  be  simply  a  man,  who  would  receive  miraculous  endowments  on  His 
formal  consecration  as  Messiah.  (Dr.  Geikie.)  The  name  '^Jesris^' : — An  old 
divine  has  somewhere  said  :  "  There  is  majesty  implied  in  the  name  '  God.'  There 
is  independent  being  in  '  Jehovah.'  There  is  power  in  '  Lord.'  There  is  unc- 
tion in  '  Christ. '  There  is  affinity  in  '  Immanuel ;  *  intercession  in  '  Mediator ; ' 
and  help  in  '  Advocate  ; '  but  there  is  salvation  in  no  other  name  under  heaven  but 
the  name  of '  Jesus '  "  (Acts  iv.  12).  A  Freedman's  teacher  writes  of  a  coloured  woman 
who,  having  learned  ner  alphabet,  said,  "  Now  I  want  to  learn  to  spoil  Jesus,  for 
'pears  like  the  rest  will  come  easier  if  I  learn  to  spell  the  blessed  name  first." 
A  good  many  things  "  come  easier  when  we  learn  that  name  first."  [Student^ s  Hand- 
hook  to  Scripture  Doctrine.)  Fulness  of  meaning  in  the  name  Jesus  : — So  the  name 
of  "Jesus,"  the  Saviour — a  word  often  pronounced  with  little  estimate  of  its  mean- 
ing— will  grow  in  the  experience  of  believing  hearts,  the  hearts  of  the  redeemed,  as 
%\\  "  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth  "  of  its  unspeakable  tenderness, 
and  patience,  and  love,  are  more  and  more  in  the  lapse  of  ages  disclosed  to  faith  ;. 
till  that  name  shall  be  as  much  more  precious  than  all  human  names  of  tenderness- 
and  love,  as  the  whole  material  universe,  if  crystalized  into  one  huge  diamond,  would 
be  more  precious  than  one  atom  of  common  dust  I  Do  not  think  we  exaggerate.  II 
is  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  glory  of  the  love  "  which  passeth  knowledge,"  the 
▼alue  of  the  " riches  "  which  are  "  unsearchable."  [G.  W.  Heacock.)  The  lock 
cf  the  heart : — A  lock  was  shown  to  Gotthold,  constructed  of  ring,=:,  which  were 
MTerally  inscribed  with  certain  letters,  and  could  be  turned  round  until  the  letters 


40     .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [<JH1».  C 

represented  the  name  '•  Jesus."  It  was  only  when  the  rings  were  disposed  in  tbii 
manner  that  the  lock  could  be  opened.  The  invention  pleased  him  beyond  measure; 
and  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh  that  I  could  put  snch  a  lock  as  this  upon  my  heart  1 "  Our 
hearts  are  already  locked,  no  doubt,  but  generally  with  a  lock  of  quite  another  kind. 
Many  need  only  to  hear  the  words  "gain,"  "honour,"  "pleasure,"  "riches,"  "  re- 
venge," and  their  heart  opens  in  a  moment ;  whereas  to  the  Saviour  and  to  His  holy 
name  it  continues  shut.  The  divinity  of  the  name  Jesus  : — "Jesus  "  was  to  be 
the  special  and  peculiar  name  of  the  virgin's  Son.  It  fulfilled  prophecy  (Isa.  xlii. 
2).  1.  This  name  was  new  to  the  Saviour,  who  was  before  called  "  The  Word  of 
God,"  "  The  Son  of  God,"  "  The  Wisdom  of  the  Father,"  &o.  2.  It  now  gained  « 
significance  it  never  heretofore  possessed.  3.  It  became  the  antitype.  Joshua  as 
leader  of  the  chosen  people  into  the  Promised  Land,  and  Josedech  as  high  priest, 
are  eminent  types  of  Jesus  Christ.  By  Divine  appointment  our  Lord  received  thia 
name,  implying — I.  The  subordination  of  the  Son.  A  name  to  be  imposed  upon 
any  one,  implies  the  subordination  of  the  recipient  to  the  giver.  God  the  Father 
alone  could  have  any  proper  right  or  authority  over  Jesus  Christ.  II.  The  peefect  • 
KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  Father.  He  alono  perfectly  knew  the  ofiBce,  end,  and  effects  of 
the  Son  coming  into  this  world.  III.  A  sign  of  special  privilege.  A  God- 
given  name  always  means  special  favour  and  goodwill  to  the  person  it  is  bestowed 
on.  Abraham,  Jacob,  Samson,  Peter,  Paul,  &c.  Conclusion :  This  name  of  Jesus 
being  Divine  must  be — 1.  Reverenced  and  honoured.  2.  Loved.  3.  Obeyed.  Then 
will  its  salvation  become  our  own.     (James  Marchant.)  The  preciousTiess  of  the 

name  Jesus  : — Jesus  1  Name  stupendous  and  venerable  ;  a  font  of  mercy ;  an 
abyss  of  judgment ;  wishing  to  be  loved  rather  than  feared.  He  took  the  name  of. 
Saviour  rather  than  that  of  Judge.  The  sinner  must  hide  as  did  Adam,  or  despair 
as  did  Cain,  when  he  is  without  Jesus ;  but  with  Him  he  repents  in  hope,  and  re- 
joices in  pardon  and  grace.  This  name  of  Jesus  is — 1.  Of  the  highest  import  to  the 
faithful  (John  i.  12).  The  power  by  no  work  of  ours  ;  which  we  cannot  take  away; 
a  grace  given  to  the  willing  only  ;  by  the  conformation  of  the  will  and  love  wholly 
to  God.  2.  The  one  refuge  for  the  penitent.  8.  The  security  in  conflict.  This 
name  supported  many  martyrs  in  their  fierce  trials.  It  acts  upon  the  unseen  powers 
of  sin.  4.  A  loving  yearning  in  those  using  it.  It  brings  before  the  mind  all  the  cost, 
agony,  and  suffering  by  which  our  salvation  was  wrought  out  by  Jesus.  6.  An  in- 
effable joy  to  those  loving  it.  It  tells  of  a  past  work,  a  present  gain,  a  future  glory. 
(P.  von  Hartung.)  The  efficacy  of  this  name  : — The  name  of  Jesus — 1.  Consoles 
the  afflicted.  Honey  in  the  mouth  ;  melody  in  the  ear ;  joy  in  the  heart.  It  speaks 
of  love,  pardon,  peace.  2.  Arms  against  dangers.  3.  Quiets  the  soul.  4.  Renders 
all  prayer  profitable.  Engrave  this  name  on  thy  tongue,  and  if  that  fail  on  thy 
heart,  have  it  ever  in  thy  hand ;  by  it  direct  thy  every  thought,  word,  deed.  {M. 
Faber.)  The  name  of  Jesus  a  New  Year  watchword : — Name  of  Jesus  a  watch- 
word for  New  Tear.  An  excellent  and  precious  treasure ;  a  treasure-house,  full  of 
all  help,  guidance,  and  comfort.  1.  To  prodigals,  unconverted,  ungodly  (Acts  iv. 
12 ;  iii.  16).  2,  To  disciples — partakers  of  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him — full 
of  fightings  without  and  fears  within,  "  the  name  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (Prov.  xviii.  10). 
3.  To  Christian  Church-workers  (Col.  iii.  17).  4.  To  the  bereaved  and  afflicted, 
missing  this  year  from  the  family  and  Church  well-beloved  names  (Heb.  xiii.  8). 
Take  this  watchword  in  four  different  applications.  I.  In  Church  life.  Perilous 
times,  owing  to  sinful  lives  and  divided  interests  of  those  belonging  to  the  Church. 
Ship  toiling  through  heaving  waves,  storm-tossed,  timbers  strained,  sails  rent ;  but 
look  at  her  name,  "  Jesus,"  and  know  that  she  must  crest  every  wave,  and  weather 
every  storm,  till  the  haven  be  reached.  The  name  of  Jesus  teaches  of  holiness  and 
unity  ;  truly  borne,  it  will  rebuke  sin  and  division  ;  known  in  its  saving  power,  it 
will  make  Christians  holy  in  Him,  and  one  in  Him.  II.  Ik  the  world.  We  have 
to  live  in  the  world,  unsympathizing,  scoffing,  persecuting.  We  must  not  tolerate 
or  countenance  sin.  Go  into  the  world  with  the  name  of  Jesus  in  your  heart,  and 
let  it  not  be  tainted  with  evil ;  hallow  the  world's  work  by  it,  and  let  the  world's 
habits  and  customs  testify  of  it.  As  Columbus  leaped  to  plant  the  banner  of  Spain 
upon  the  new-found  world,  plant  on  the  unknown  land  of  the  New  Tear  the  Cross 
— seize  the  year  for  Jesus ;  carry  His  name  everywhere ;  let  everything  bear  its 
impress.  The  name  of  Jesus  teaches  of  purity  and  resolution  ;  truly  known  it  will 
make  the  Christian  in  the  world  pure  in  heart,  and  resolved  to  stand  his  ground. 
III.  In  times  of  trouble.  That  were  a  strange  year  which  should  bring  as  no 
trouble.  As  well  might  we  look  for  a  year  of  nndimmed  sunshine,  without  olonds  or 
raia.    There  will  be  dark,  dreary  days,  biting  frosts,  heavy  storms  and  tempests ; 


o«A».  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  4S 

and  it  is  for  our  good  in  reaping  the  fruits  of  the  earth  that  it  is  so.  In  like 
manner  afflictions,  trials,  sicknesses,  losses,  disappointments,  will  come,  and  for  oar 
good,  to  the  bringing  forth  of  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  What  does  the 
Christian  say  to  such  prospects  ?  He  trusts  in  the  name  of  Jesus  and  fears  no 
evil.  He  knows  in  whom  he  has  believed.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  his  comfort  and 
Btay  and  peace.  It  teaches  him  resignation  and  unshaken  trust.  IV.  In  the  hodb 
or  DEATH.  This  may  come  during  the  present  year.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  the 
password  to  heaven.  It  teaches,  in  the  moment  when  this  world  passes  away, 
simple  faith  in  His  merits  and  mediation,  by  whom  alone  we  can  be  saved.  Other 
experiences  may  or  may  not  be  ours ;  death  must  be.  How  shall  we  meet  it  ? 
Leaning  on  what  rod  or  staff  ?  The  name  of  Jesus,  and  faith  in  His  name,  is  the 
only  sure  refuge,  and  the  only  secure  hope.     {Thos.  H.  Bamett.) 

Ver.  32.  He  shall  be  great,  and  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest. — The 
ffreatness  ofJesut: — The  title  of  "  Great "  is  one  which  the  wisdom  of  this  world  recog- 
nizes, though  I  am  not  sure  that  it  always  gives  the  title  fairly.  We  have  Alexander 
the  Great,  Charles  the  Great,  Frederick  the  Great,  and  so  on.  The  epithet  has 
usually  been  applied  to  those  whose  great  powers  have  been  manifested  chiefly  in 
the  subjugation  of  their  fellows  to  their  own  will.  This  kind  of  manifestation  ia 
the  most  conspicuous,  it  involves  the  most  open  exercise  of  power,  and  is  most 
mixed  up  with  the  gratification  of  human  ambition,  and  pride,  and  vanity  ;  but, 
xindoubtedly,  those  who  have  most  permanently  and  extensively  influenced  their 
fellows,  have  been  those  whose  conquests  have  been  in  the  regions  of  thought,  in 
things  spiritual — the  founders  of  religions,  the  authors  of  philosophies,  the  great 
discoverers,  the  great  teachers.  A  man  like  Alexander  has  ceased  for  centuries  to 
be  a  living  power  in  the  world  ;  but  the  great  founder  of  Buddhism,  e.g.,  is  still 
affecting  the  daily  lives  and  habits  of  something  like  a  quarter  of  the  whole  popula- 
tion of  the  world.  A  great  captain  is  like  a  brilliant  meteor,  but  the  author  of  a 
new  thought,  or  a  new  system  of  thought,  is  like  a  fixed  star.  I.  Think  of  Christ's 
OBBATNESS  AS  A  MAN.  Estimate  in  any  just  way  the  influence  produced  upon  the 
world's  history  by  His  life  and  deeds  ;  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  He  is  the 
greatest  man  who  ever  lived  ?  Whose  life  has  been  the  most  like  a  seed  in  this 
world,  rising  up  with  the  irresistible  power  of  growth,  and  bringing  forth  fruit  after 
its  kind  ?  Whose  religious  teaching  has  been  practically  most  potent  in  subduing 
to  itself  the  highest  intellects  the  human  race  has  produced  ?  In  the  most  tattered 
rags  of  humanity,  Jesus  Christ  stands  forth  so  conspicuously  as  the  King  of  men, 
that  there  are  few,  who  do  not,  in  some  form  or  another,  bow  the  knee  before  Him. 
II.  Chkist's  greatness  as  God.  It  is  the  light  of  Divine  majesty  and  condescension 
shining  through  the  rags  of  humanity,  that  makes  the  whole  history  intelligible. 
"  He  shall  be  great  I  "  nay.  He  is  great  in  the  midst  of  the  humiliation  of  the  Cross 
itself.  That  humiliation  was  self-sought,  and  only  adds  emphasis  to  the  declara- 
tion and  promise  of  the  text.  III.  Christ's  greatness  is  to  increase.  He  is  great 
now.  But  He  is  to  be  greater  still — not  absolutely,  but  relatively — in  the  magnitude 
of  His  Kingdom  and  the  universality  of  His  sway.  IV.  All  mav  promote  the 
OBBATNESS  OF  Christ.  This  is  the  noblest  aim  of  man.  Men  are  willing  enough  to 
make  themselves  great,  to  get  themselves  on  in  the  world,  to  promote  their  own 
interests,  wealth,  glory,  and  within  reasonable  limits  it  is  right  that  this  should  be 
80 ;  but  the  privilege  of  the  believer  is  to  transfer  his  zeal  for  promoting 
his  own  greatness  to  the  promotion  of  the  greatness  of  Christ.  {Bishop  Harvey 
Goodwin.)  The  grandeur  of  Christ  : — This  subject  far  transcends  all  utter- 
ance. Jesus  is  such  a  One  that  no  oratory  can  ever  reach  the  height 
of  BUs  glory,  and  the  simplest  words  are  best  suited  to  a  subject  so  sub- 
lime. Fine  words  would  be  but  tawdry  things  to  hang  beside  the  unspeakably 
glorious  Lord.  I  can  say  no  more  than  that  He  is  great.  If  I  could  tell  forth  His 
greatness  with  choral  symphonies  of  cherubin,  yet  should  I  fail  to  reach  the  height 
of  this  great  argument.  I  wiU  be  content  if  I  can  touch  the  hem  of  the  garment  of 
His  greatness.  I.  He  is  great  from  many  points  of  view.  I  might  have  said,  from 
every  point  of  view  ;  but  that  is  too  large  a  truth  to  be  surveyed  at  one  sitting. 
Mind  would  fail  us,  life  would  fail  us,  time  would  fail  us  ;  eternity  and  perfection 
will  alone  suflice  for  that  boundless  meditation.  But  from  the  points  of  view  to 
which  I  would  conduct  you  for  a  moment,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  emphatically 
great.  1.  In  the  perfection  of  His  nature.  Peerless  and  incomparable  ;  Divine,  and 
therefore  unique.  He  is  all  that  God  is  ;  and  He  is  all  that  man  is  as  God  created 
him.    As  truly  God  as  if  He  were  not  man  ;  and  as  truly  man  as  if  He  were  not 


«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  I.: 

God.  2.  In  the  grandeur  of  His  offices.  He  comes  to  rebuild  the  old  wastes,  and 
"to  restore  the  fallen  temple  of  humanity.  To  accomplish  this  He  came  to  be  our 
Priest,  our  Prophet,  and  our  King ;  in  each  office  glorious  beyond  compare.  He 
came  to  be  our  Saviour,  our  Sacrifice,  our  Substitute,  our  Surety,  our  Head,  our 
Friend,  our  Lord,  our  Life,  our  All.  He  is  the  Standard-bearer  among  ten  thousand. 
Who  is  like  unto  Him  in  all  eternity  ?  3.  In  the  splendour  of  His  achievements. 
He  is  no  holder  of  a  sinecure  ;  He  claims  to  have  finished  the  work  which  Hia 
Father  gave  Him  to  do.  Is  it  not  proven  that  He  is  great  ?  Conquerors  are  great, 
and  He  is  the  greatest  of  them.  Deliverers  are  great  ;  and  He  is  the  greatest  of 
them.  Liberators  are  great,  and  He  is  the  greatest  of  tbem.  Saviours  are  great, 
and  He  is  the  greatest  of  them.  They  that  multiply  the  joys  are  men  truly  great, 
and  what  shall  I  say  of  Him  who  has  bestowed  everlasting  joy  upon  His  people, 
and  entailed  it  upon  them  by  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  and  ever  ?  4.  In  the  pre- 
valence of  his  merits.  He  has  such  merit  with  God  that  He  deserves  of  the  Most 
High  whatsoever  He  wills  to  ask  ;  and  He  asks  for  His  people  that  they  shall  have 
every  blessing  needful  for  eternal  life  and  perfection.  5.  In  the  number  of  His 
saved  ones.  6.  In  the  estimation  of  His  people.  7.  In  the  glory  of  heaven.  8.  On 
the  throne  of  the  Father.  II.  "  He  shall  be  great,"  and  He  is  so,  for  Hb  deal3 
WITH  GREAT  THINGS.  1.  It  was  a  great  ruin  He  came  to  restore,  great  sin  that  He 
came  to  do  away,  great  pardon  that  He  came  to  bestow.  2.  He  has  great  supplies 
to  meet  our  great  wants.  3.  He  is  a  Christ  of  great  preparations.  He  is  engaged 
before  the  throne,  to-day,  in  preparing  a  great  heaven  for  His  people  ;  it  will  be 
made  up  of  great  dehverance,  great  peace,  great  rest,  great  joy,  great  victory,  great 
discovery,  great  fellowship,  great  rapture,  great  glory.  III.  His  greatness  will 
SOON  APPEAB.  It  now  lies  under  a  cloud  to  men's  blear  eyes.  They  still  be- 
little Him  with  their  vague  and  vain  thoughts  ;  but  it  shall  not  always  be  so.  (G. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  greatness  of  Christ : — The  Saviour  of  men,  and  the  example 
for  all,  must  be  the  isolated  one,  the  unparalleled  Man  in  human  history.  He  must 
be  both  like  us  and  unlike  us — like  us  in  so  far  as  His  human  nature  is  concerned  : 
He  must  be  born.  He  must  increase  in  stature,  be  in  subjection  to  His  parents,  and 
be  subject  to  all  the  ordinary  conditions  of  human  nature  as  it  develops  itself  from 
infancy  to  manhood.  In  all  this  He  is  like  us — for  otherwise  He  could  not  be  our 
pattern  and  our  Saviour.  Then,  again,  He  must  be  unlike  us,  or  how  could  He  be 
that  One  whom  we  are  to  imitate,  and  of  whose  fulness  we  must  all  partake  ?  Christ 
as  a  Man  was  unlike  all  other  men.  He  alone  of  all  great  men  is  the  unparalleled 
One  of  all  history  ;  and  the  conviction  of  this  truth  suggests  that  more  than  man  is 
here — more  than  a  great  and  unparalleled  man  :  it  is  none  other  than  the  "  Son  of 
the  Highest."  (Bishop  Martensen.)  The  Incarnation  : — The  plan  of  salvation  is 
likened  unto  a  vine  which  has  fallen  down  from  the  boughs  of  an  oak.  It  lies  prone 
upon  the  ground ;  it  crawls  in  the  dust,  and  all  its  tendrils  and  claspers,  which  were 
formed  to  hold  it  in  the  lofty  place  from  which  it  had  fallen,  are  twined  around  the 
weed  and  the  bramble,  and,  having  no  strength  to  raise  itself,  it  lies  fruitless  and 
corrupting,  tied  down  to  the  base  things  of  the  earth.  Now,  how  shall  the  vine 
arise  from  its  fallen  condition  ?  But  one  way  is  possible  for  the  vine  to  rise  again 
to  the  place  from  whence  it  had  fallen.  The  bough  of  the  lofty  oak  must  be  let 
down,  or  some  communication  must  be  formed  connected  with  the  top  of  the  oak 
and  at  the  same  time  with  the  earth.  Then,  when  the  bough  of  the  oak  was  let 
down  to  the  place  where  the  vine  lay,  its  tender  claspers  might  fasten  upon  it,  and, 
vthus  supported,  it  might  raise  itself  up,  and  bloom,  and  bear  fruit  again  in  the  lofty 
place  fiom  whence  it  fell.  So  with  man  :  his  affections  had  fallen  from  God,  and 
were  fastened  to  the  base  things  of  earth.  Jesus  Christ  came  down,  and  by  Hia 
humanity  stood  upon  the  earth,  and  by  His  divinity  raised  His  hands  and  united 
Himself  with  the  Deity  of  the  Everlasting  Father  :  thus  the  fallen  affections  of  man 
may  fasten  upon  Him,  and  twine  around  Him,  until  they  again  ascend  to  the  bosom 
of  the  Godhead,  from  whence  they  fell.  (Watts.)  The  higher  life: — In  one  of 
his  essays  upon  the  phenomena  of  nature.  Bacon  tells  of  a  mountain  so  high  that 
BO  storm  ever  disturbs  its  air.  Its  climate  knows  little  vicissitude.  The  clouds  can- 
not float  so  high.  The  sunshine  is  constant  by  day,  and  the  night  comes  late  and 
the  morning  comes  soon.  So  peaceful  is  that  summit  that  a  traveller  having 
written  some  words  in  the  white  ashes  of  his  camp  tire,  found  the  words  still  there 
after  a  score  of  years  had  passed.  What  an  Elysian  field  is  that !  far  above  tornado 
and  lightning  shafts,  and  the  miasma  of  the  marsh  and  the  battlefields  of  men.  A 
fable  in  part,  but  au  emblem  of  those  heights  where  dwell  those  mortals  who  have 
xeaohed  the  widest  and  deepest  education  and  affections  and  the  purest  ethiea.    Aa 


OHAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  43 

in  classifying  physical  beauty  we  feel  constrained  to  make  distinctions  between  a 
"Violet  and  an  oak,  or  between  a  cascade  with  its  raurmur  and  mist,  and  a  cathedral 
with  its  spiro  and  arches,  and  between  a  trailing  vine  and  a  range  of  mountains, 
and  must  change  our  words  with  the  change  of  feeling  in  the  soul,  and  to  the  rose 
«ay  •*  beautiful,"  to  the  oak  "  grand,"  "  pretty  "  to  the  violet,  and  "  sublime  "  to  the 
mountain,  so  we  must  divide  into  many  parts  the  attractiveness  of  humanity,  and 
must  confess  some  to  be  witty,  some  pretty,  some  beautiful,  some  learned,  and  then 
when  already  the  heart  is  full  of  admiration  it  perceives  one  more  class  rising  above 
all  other  grades  of  mortality — those  morally  and  mentally  great.  In  this  grouping 
all  ages  may  meet.  The  infinite  love  of  the  Creator  is  in  nothing  more  manifested 
than  in  this,  that  He  has  made  this  moral  height  accessible  to  all.  Not  all  can  be 
rich,  beautiful,  witty,  young  ;  but  all  can  climb  upward  to  the  higher  life.  It  is  not 
the  mere  privilege  of  all,  but  the  pressing  duty  of  all.  The  heights  are  large,  and 
voices  full  of  mercy  and  of  alarm  are  bidding  those  in  the  valley  to  "  go  up  higher." 
God  is  represented  as  being  in  the  holy  mountains,  and  thither  He  expects  His 
children  to  come.  The  heights  are  everywhere.  They  are  seen  in  each  profession 
and  pursuit.  There  are  merchants  who  grovel  in  the  mire  and  whose  gains  stand 
for  fraud,  and  there  are  merchants  whose  wealth  tells  of  the  industry,  and  growth, 
and  welfare  of  the  people.  There  are  lawyers  low  and  high — lawyers  who  are 
always  upon  the  side  of  criminals,  and  concerning  whose  health  and  presence 
criminals  are  said  to  make  inquiry  before  they  plan  a  new  crime  ;  other  lawyers, 
to  whom  men  repair  for  help  when  they  feel  that  their  cause  is  just,  and  the  points 
of  law  and  equity  must  be  placed  clearly  before  jury  or  bench.  There  are  writers 
low,  and  writers  who  are  lofty.  The  former  are  witty  and  verbose  in  the  defama- 
tion of  character  and  in  detailing  the  sins  of  society — these  are  the  remains  of 
human  coarseness  that  are  being  slowly  but  steadily  eliminated  from  all  written 
thought,  and  therefore  in  greater  multitude  appear  the  writers  of  the  pure  school 
whose  editorials,  or  essays,  or  books,  or  poems  come  into  all  homes  as  welcome  as 
the  beams  of  the  morning  sun.  .  .  Said  one  of  the  greatest  poets  :  "  On  every 
height  there  lies  repose."  This  peace  is  not  found  elsewhere.  It  is  not  a  sleep, 
not  an  easy  existence  of  inaction,  but  a  repose  that  comes  from  the  sublimity  of  the 
landscape,  and  from  the  matchless  purity  of  the  air.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that 
the  human  mind,  while  sitting  in  the  long  past  ages  at  the  loom  of  thought,  wove 
for  the  Deity  such  an  attribute  as  "  The  Highest."  And  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
that  when  Christ  came  with  His  faultless  words  and  deeds,  with  His  boundless 
friendship  and  upper  forms  of  thought,  the  admiring  world  felt  that  He  was  a  Son 
of  the  Highest — figures  of  speech  which  should  be  taken  up  afresh  by  our  far-off 
age.  We  have  read  in  the  ocean  and  in  the  storm  and  in  the  stupendous  size  of  the 
universe,  that  the  Creator  has  power.  We  have  seen  in  the  marvellous  laws  of  mind 
and  material  that  He  has  wisdom.  We  read  the  Divine  love  in  the  entire  pageant 
of  life,  animal  and  rational,  and  we  read  the  Divine  eternity  in  the  awful  age  of 
the  universe,  which  drinks  up  millions  of  years  as  the  sun  dries  up  dewdrops  ;  but 
we  have  omitted  to  learn  from  the  high  in  thought,  and  industry,  and  art,  from 
their  eternal  beauty  and  repose,  tbat  God  is  also  "  The  Highest."  Far  above  the 
son,  far  above  the  suns  to  us  unseen,  is  enthroned  the  world's  God — the  God  of  all 
worlds — on  a  height  undreamed  of  by  mortals.  His  mansions  are  there.  Compared 
with  this  svunmit,  the  mount  in  the  poetic  philosophy  of  Lord  Bacon  sinks  down  and 
becomes  a  part  of  time's  vale  of  tears.  God  is  on  the  heights,  and  all  those  minds  in 
this  lower  world  which  love  the  higher  life  are  steadily  walking  up  the  slope  of  this 
range,  hidden  now  perhaps  by  mist,  but  covered  with  light  beyond  the  clouds. 
(David  Swing.)  Forgotten  great  ones  : — What  a  roll  of  greatness  should  we  have 
were  there  tables  of  marble,  or  brass,  or  gold  in  which  were  engraven  the  names  of 
those  who  in  all  times  and  places  have  attempted  to  attain  mental  and  spiritual 
excellence.  It  is  a  sad  thought  that  what  is  called  history  is  only  a  page  from  a 
vast,  grand,  but  lost,  volume.  Violence  and  reckless  ambition  impiessed  into  ser- 
vice all  the  chroniclers  of  the  past,  and  that  kind  of  greatness  we  see  in  Christ  was 
not  often  asked  to  sit  for  its  picture.  It  was  too  high  for  the  surrounding  kings 
and  their  hosts  of  sycophants  It  would  require  a  whole  London  of  Westminster 
Abbeys  to  hold  the  urns  of  the  noble  ones  whose  very  names  are  forgotten.  The  loss 
18  great  to  the  present,  for  many  minds  see  a  preponderance  of  evil  in  our  age,  and 
are  not  lare  that  our  world  was  planned  by  benevolence,  to  which  desponding 
minds  an  adequate  conception  of  the  continuous  glory  of  man  would  be  a  welcome 
inspiration.  There  has  been  a  succession  of  minds  on  the  heights,  and  these  have 
■ignalled  to  each  other  in  all  the  years  of  man  upon  oar  globe.    What  ones  an 


<4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

visible,  are  only  a  few  wanderers  from  the  mighty  herd.  Solon  and  Mose» 
studied  at  the  Egyptian  Heliopolis  indeed,  but  of  the  many  thousands  of  men 
always  studying  there,  it  cannot  be  possible  that  the  honours  were  all  borne  away 
by  a  Hebrew  and  a  Greek.  At  that  educational  centre,  thousands  and  tens  ot 
thousands  came  and  tarried  and  went  while  centuries  passed  along.  It  must  be 
that  the  few  names  that  havs  come  to  us  are  only  types  of  a  great  army  which  was 
scattered  over  the  prolific  East.  Aspasia  was  r^ot  the  only  intellectual  powerful 
woman  of  the  age  of  Pericles.  She  was  the  one  brought  into  the  foreground  by  her 
alliance  with  a  powerful  king  ;  others  having  her  education  and  her  beauty  and 
power  lived  and  died  in  a  fame  that  could  not  cross  the  gulf  of  many  centuries. 
Nor  was  Cleopatra  the  only  Greco-Egyptian  woman  who  could  speak  and  write  in 
all  the  tongues  of  the  Mediterranean  coast,  but  she  was  one  made  historic  by  the 
accidents  of  crowns  and  vices,  leaving  us  to  assume  that  there  were  other  women, 
many  who  equalled  her  in  learning,  and  passed  far  above  her  in  all  higher  worth. 
Thus  history  is  only  a  page  out  of  a  lost  volume.  As  those  who  dig  in  the  sands  of 
the  Swiss  lakes,  or  in  the  deserted  cave-homes  of  man  and  beast,  or  who  explore 
the  ruins  of  Mycenae,  toss  out  a  few  implements  or  a  few  carved  bones  or  a  few  jewels 
worn  once  by  beauty,  so  history  casts  up  out  of  the  vast  sepulchre  where  the  age* 
sleep  traces  only  of  an  absent  world.  (Ibid.)  Jesus  not  a  fabrication : — "W» 
can  learn,"  says  Theodore  Parker,  "  but  few  facts  about  Jesus.  But  measure  Him 
by  the  shadow  He  has  cast  into  the  world,  and  by  the  light  He  has  shed  upon  it, 
and  shall  we  be  told,  that  such  a  man  never  lived — that  the  whole  story  is  a  lie  ? 
Suppose  that  Plato  and  Newton  never  lived,  that  their  story  is  a  lie  ;  but  who  did 
their  works,  and  thought  their  thoughts  ?  It  takes  a  Newton  to  forge  a  Newton. 
What  man  could  have  fabricated  a  Jesus  ?  None  but  a  Jesus."  Christ  the  ideal 
representative  of  humanity  : — It  is  no  use  to  say  that  Christ,  as  exhibited  in  the 
Gospels,  is  not  historical,  and  that  we  know  not  how  much  of  what  is  admirable  is 
superadded  by  the  tradition  of  the  followers.  Who  among  His  disciples,  or  among 
their  proselytes,  was  capable  of  inventing  the  sayings  ascribed  to  Jesus,  or  of 
imagining  the  life  and  character  revealed  in  the  Gospels  ?  Certainly  not  the  fisher- 
men of  Galilee  ;  as  certainly  not  St.  Paul,  whose  character  and  idiosyncrasies  were 
of  a  totally  different  sort  ;  still  less  the  early  Christian  writers,  in  whom  nothing  is 
more  evident  than  that  the  good  which  was  in  them  was  all  derived  from  the  higher 
source.  About  the  life  and  sayings  of  Jesus  there  is  a  stamp  of  personal  originality 
combined  with  profundity  of  insight,  which,  if  we  abandon  the  idle  expectation  of 
finding  scientific  precision  where  something  very  different  was  aimed  at,  must  place 
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  even  in  the  estimation  of  those  who  have  no  belief  in  His 
inspiration,  in  the  very  first  rank  of  the  men  of  sublime  genius  of  whom  our  species 
can  boast.  When  this  pre-eminent  genius  is  combined  with  the  qualities  of  pro- 
bably the  greatest  moral  reformer  and  martyr  to  that  mission  who  ever  existed 
upon  earth,  religion  cannot  be  said  to  have  made  a  bad  choice  in  pitching  on  this 
man  as  the  ideal  representative  and  guide  of  humanity  ;  nor  even  now  would  it  be 
easy,  even  for  an  unbeliever,  to  find  a  better  translation  of  the  rule  of  virtue  from 
the  abstract  in  the  concrete  than  to  endeavour  so  to  live  that  Christ  would  approve 
our  life.  (John  Stuart  Mill.)  Divine  humanity  realized  in  Christ : — Dr.  Philip 
Schaff  mentions  the  testimony  of  Dr.  De  Wette,  one  of  the  ablest  and  most  learned 
sceptical  critics  of  Germany,  After  all  his  brilliant  scepticism  Dr.  De  Wette  wrote, 
a  few  months  before  his  death  :  "  I  know  that  in  no  other  name  can  salvation  be 
found  than  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Crucified  ;  and  there  is  nothing  loftier 
for  mankind  than  the  Divine  humanity  realized  in  Him,  and  the  kingdom  of  God 
planted  by  Him. 

Ver.  33.  And  He  shall  reign, — Christ's  everlasting  kingdom : —  The  everlasting 

kingdom.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  right  and  true  and  the  holy  shall 
have  the  victory.  All  dominions  hostile  to  Christ  must  give  way.  All  kingdoms 
incompatible  with  His  must  be  dissolved.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  their 
symbols  in  the  lion,  the  bear,  the  leopard,  and  the  fourth  dreadful  and  terrible 
beast :  and  by  a  law  universally  proved,  their  passions  and  discord  shall  precipitate 
their  own  destruction.  But  Christ's  kingdom  has  nothing  anarchical,  because  it 
has  nothing  sinful  in  it ;  it  has  not  one  element  of  decay,  because  into  it  nothing 
that  deiileth  can  enter.  Suns  shall  grow  pale,  stars  shall  become  dim;  the  crescent 
shall  wane,  the  crucifix  shall  fall  from  the  hands  of  him  that  holds  it;  and  Christ's 
kingdom  shall  extend  over  all  the  earth,  and  all  shall  bless  Him,  and  be  blessed  in 
Him.    We  see  already  tokens  of  that  day.    I  take  a  bright  view  of  the  coming 


OHAJ.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  45 

days.  What  progress  do  knowledge,  science,  education,  Christianity,  the  Bible, 
make  everywhere  throughout  the  world  at  this  moment?  Do  we  not  see  the 
whole  human  family  drawing  nearer  to  each  other?  Do  we  not  see  the  two 
great  nations,  America  and  England,  speaking  a  tongae  that  promises  more 
and  more  every  day  to  become  the  tongae  of  the  whole  world  ?  Do  we  not  see 
all  languages,  however  diversified,  becoming  reducible  to  two,  three,  or  four  at  the 
very  most, — Christians  becoming  less  earthly,  and  Christianity  less  alloyed  ?  What 
are  these  but  the  tokens  of  the  approaching  glory  ;  voices  in  the  wilderness,  pre- 
paring the  way  of  the  Lord ;  messengers  sent  before  to  announce  that  the  bride- 
groom Cometh  ?  I  see  flowers  of  paradise  begin  to  bloom  in  many  a  desert.  I  see 
upon  all  sides  the  sea  of  barbarism  and  superstition  begin  to  ebb,  and  many  a  dove 
take  wing,  and  fly  over  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  world's  chaotic  flood,  giving 
tokens  that  the  Prince  of  Peace  is  on  His  way,  warning  us  that  the  sound  of  His 
approach  already  breaks  upon  the  ear.  Let  us  hail  the  twilight ;  let  us  urge  on,  as 
far  as  we  can,  the  coming  day.  {Cummings.)  Christ  the  key  to  the  world's  history  : — 
The  great  Swiss  historian,  John  Von  Miiller,  gives  the  result  of  his  life-long  labours, 
extracted,  he  says,  from  seventeen  hundred  and  thirty-three  authors,  in  seventeen 
thousand  folio  pages,  in  this  striking  confession :  "  Christ  is  the  key  to  the  history 
of  the  world.  Not  only  does  all  harmonize  with  the  mission  of  Christ ;  all  is  sub- 
ordinated to  it.  When  I  saw  this,"  he  adds,  "it  was  to  me  as  wonderful  and 
surprising  as  the  light  which  St.  Paul  saw  on  his  way  to  Damascus,  the  fulfilment 
of  all  hopes,  the  completion  of  philosophy,  the  key  to  all  the  apparent  contradic- 
tions in  the  physical  and  the  moral  ;  here  is  life  and  immortality.  I  marvel  not  at 
miracles ;  a  far  greater  miracle  has  been  reserved  for  our  times,  the  spectacle  of  the 
connection  of  all  human  events  in  the  establishment  and  preservation  of  the 
doctrine  of  Christ."     {Prof.  Henry  B.  Smith.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee. — Of  Christ's  Incarnation  : — 
These  words  are  the  angel's  answer  to  Mary,  who,  understanding  the  angel  as 
speaking  of  a  thing  presently  to  be  done  before  Joseph  and  she  should  come 
together,  desires  to  know  how  she,  being  a  virgin,  should  conceive.  Here — 1.  The 
angel  tells  her  how  she  should  "  conceive  and  bring  forth  a  Son,"  namely,  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  the  power  of  the  Highest,  the  Spirit  of  God 
being  the  true  God,  and  so  the  Highest.  The  way  of  the  Spirit's  powerful  working 
to  this  miraculous  conception,  is  denoted  by  two  words.  One  is,  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  should  come  upon  her,  not  in  an  ordinary  way,  as  in  the  conception  of  all 
men  (Job  x.  8,  "  Thine  hands  have  made  me,  and  fashioned  me  together  round 
about) "  ;  but  in  an  extraordinary  way,  as  on  the  prophets,  and  those  that  were 
raised  to  some  extraordinary  work.  The  other  is,  that  the  power  of  the  Highest, 
which  is  infinite  power,  should  overshadow  her,  to  wit,  make  her,  though  a  virgin, 
to  conceive  by  virtue  of  the  efficacy  of  infinite  power,  by  which  the  world  was 
created,  when  the  same  Spirit  moved  on  the  waters,  cherished  them,  and  framed 
the  world.  2.  He  shows  what  should  follow  on  this  miraculous  conception,  namely, 
that  the  fruit  of  her  womb,  the  child  she  should  bear,  should  be  called  "the  Son  of 
God."  Where  the  angel  teaches  two  things.  (1)  The  immaculate,  sinless  concep- 
tion of  the  child  Jesus,  that  holy  thing,  a  holy  thing  though  proceeding  from  a 
sinful  creature,  not  tainted  with  sin,  as  all  other  children  are.  The  powerful  opera- 
tion of  the  Divine  Spirit  sanctified  that  part  of  the  virgin's  body  of  which  the 
human  nature  of  Christ  was  formed,  so  that  by  that  influence  it  was  separated 
from  all  impurity  and  defilement.  So  that,  though  it  proceeded  from  a  creature 
infected  with  original  sin,  there  was  no  sin  or  taint  of  impurity  in  it.  This  was  a 
glorious  instance  of  the  power  of  the  Highest.  (2)  He  tells  the  virgin,  that  there- 
fore,  seeing  that  child  to  be  thus  conceived,  he  should  be  called,  that  is,  owned  to 
be,  "the  Son  of  God."  He  says  not.  Therefore  that  holy  thing  shall  be  the  Son  of 
God,  for  he  was  the  Son  of  God  before,  by  virtue  of  His  eternal  generation  ;  but, 
therefore  he  shall  be  called,  i.e.,  owned  to  be  really  so,  and  more  than  a  man,     I, 

I  AM  TO    SHOW    WHO    SHE    WAS  THAT    WAS   THE    MOTHER    OF    ChRIST   AS    MAN,        Christ   aS 

God  had  no  mother,  and  as  man  no  father.  But  His  mother  as  man  was  Mary. 
She  was  the  seed  of  Abraham  ;  and  so  Christ  was  that  seed  of  Abraham,  in  whom 
all  nations  were  to  be  blessed  (Gal.  iii.  16).  She  was  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Luke 
iii.  33),  and  of  that  tribe  Christ  by  her  did  spring  (Heb.  vii,  14).  She  was  also  of  the 
family  of  David,  as  appears  by  her  genealogy  (Luke  iii.),  and  therefore  Christ  ia 
called  the  Son  of  David,  as  the  Messiah  behoved  to  be.  She  was,  however,  but  a 
mean  woman,  the  family  of  David  being  then  reduced  to  a  low  outward  condition 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBiP.  i. 

in  the  world,  having  long  before  lost  its  flourishing  state ;  so  that  our  Lord  '*  sprang 
up  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground  "  (Isa.  xi.  1,  and  liii.  2).  II.  I  come  to  show  what 
w«  ABE  TO  UNDERSTAND  BY  Christ's  BECOMING  MAN.  It  implies — 1.  That  He  had  a 
real  being  and  existence  before  His  incarnation.  He  truly  was  before  He  was  con> 
ceived  in  the  womb  of  the  virgin,  and  distinct  from  that  being  which  was  conceived 
in  her.  "  What  and  if  ye  shaU  see  the  Son  of  Man  ascend  up  where  He  was 
before  ?  "  (John  vi=  62).  Yea,  He  was  with  His  Father  from  all  eternity,  before  any 
of  the  creatures  came  out  of  the  womb  of  nothing,  2.  That  He  actually  took  upon 
Him  our  nature.  He  assumed  the  entire  nature  of  man  into  the  unity  of  Hia 
Divine  person,  with  all  its  integral  parts  and  essential  properties  ;  and  so  was  made 
or  became  a  real  and  true  man  by  that  assumption  Hence  it  is  said  (John  i.  14), 
"  The  Word  was  made  flesh."  But  though  Jesus  Christ  had  two  natures,  yet  not 
two  persons,  which  was  the  error  of  Nestorius,  who  lived  m  the  fourth  century. 
Again,  though  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,"  yet  it  was  without  any  confusion  of 
the  natures,  or  change  of  the  one  into  the  other  :  which  was  the  heresy  of  thf 
Eutychians  of  old,  who  so  confounded  the  two  natures  in  the  person  of  Christ,  that 
they  denied  all  distinction  between  them.  Eutyches  thought  that  the  union  was  so 
made  in  the  natures  of  Christ,  that  the  humanity  was  absorbed  and  wholly  turned 
into  the  Divine  nature ;  so  that,  by  that  transubstantiation,  the  human  nature  had 
no  longer  being.  But  by  this  union  the  human  nature  is  so  united  with  the  Divinity, 
that  each  retains  its  own  essential  properties  distinct.  The  properties  of  either 
nature  are  preserved  entire.  It  is  impossible  that  the  Majesty  of  the  Divinity  can 
receive  any  alteration ;  and  it  is  as  impossible  that  the  meanness  of  the  humanity 
can  receive  the  impression  of  the  Deity,  so  as  to  be  changed  into  it,  and  a  creature 
be  metamorphosed  into  the  Creator,  and  temporary  flesh  become  eternal,  and  finite 
mount  up  into  inflnite.  As  the  soul  and  the  body  are  united,  and  make  one 
person,  yet  the  soul  is  not  changed  into  the  perfections  of  the  body,  nor  the  body 
into  the  perfections  of  the  soul.  There  is  a  change  indeed  made  in  the  humanity, 
by  its  being  advanced  to  a  more  excellent  union,  but  not  in  the  Deity ;  as  a  change 
is  made  in  the  air  when  it  is  enlightened  by  the  sun,  not  in  the  sun  which  com> 
municates  that  brightness  to  the  air.  Athanasius  makes  the  burning  bush  to  be  a 
type  of  Christ's  incarnation  ;  the  fire  signifying  the  Divine  nature,  and  the  bush 
the  human.  The  bush  is  a  branch  springing  from  the  earth,  and  the  fire  descends 
from  heaven.  As  the  bush  was  united  to  the  flre,  yet  was  not  hurt  by  the  flame, 
nor  converted  into  the  fire,  there  remained  a  differeuce  between  the  bush  and  the 
fixe,  yet  the  properties  of  fire  shined  in  the  bush,  so  that  the  whole  bush  seemed 
to  be  on  fire.  So  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  the  human  nature  is  not  swallowed 
up  by  the  Divine,  nor  changed  into  it,  nor  confounded  with  it :  but  they  are  so 
united,  that  the  properties  of  both  remain  firm :  two  are  so  become  one,  that  they 
remain  two  still ;  one  person  in  two  natures,  containing  the  glorious  perfections  of 
the  Divinity,  and  the  weakness  of  the  humanity.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
dwells  bodily  in  Christ.  3.  Christ's  becoming  man  implies  the  voluntariness  of 
this  act  of  His  in  assuming  the  human  nature.  III.  I  proceed  to  show  that 
Christ  was  trde  man.  Being  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  He  became  man,  by  taking 
to  Himself  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul.  He  had  the  same  human  nature 
which  is  common  to  all  men,  sin  only  excepted.  He  is  called  in  Scripture 
"  man,"  and  "  the  Son  of  man,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  the 
Son  of  David,"  &o.;  which  designations  could  not  have  been  given  onto  Him, 
if  He  had  not  been  true  man.  The  actions  and  passions  of  Hia  life  show 
that  He  had  true  flesh.  He  was  hungry,  thirsty,  weary,  faint,  &c.  For  certainlj 
if  the  Son  of  God  would  stoop  so  low  as  to  take  upon  Him  our  frail  flesh.  He  woold 
not  omit  the  nobler  part,  the  soul,  without  which  He  could  not  be  man.  We  are 
•old  that  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  the  one  in  respect  of  His  body,  the 
other  in  respect  of  His  soul.  The  sufferings  of  His  body  were  indeed  very  great ; 
it  was  filled  with  exquisite  torture  and  pain  ;  but  His  soul  sufferings  were  much 
greater,  as  I  observed  in  a  former  discourse.    IV.  I  come  now  to  show  what  vm 

ABE  TO  DNDERSTAND  BT  ChBIST'S  BEINO  CONCEIVED  BY  THE  POWER  OF  THE  HoLT  GhOST 

m  THE  WOMB  OF  THE  ViBOiM  Maby.  To  opcu  this  a  little  three  things  are  to  be 
considered  here.  1.  The  framing  of  Christ's  human  nature  in  the  womb  of  the 
Virgin.  The  matter  of  His  body  was  of  the  very  flesh  and  blood  of  the  Virgin, 
otherwise  He  could  not  have  been  the  Son  of  David,  of  Abraham,  and  Adam,  accord* 
ing  to  the  flesh.  Indeed  God  might  have  created  His  body  out  of  nothing,  or  have 
formed  it  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  as  He  did  the  body  of  Adam,  cor  original  pro- 
genitor :  but  had  He  been  thus  extraordinarily  formed,  and  not  propagated  Irom 


OBAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  47 

Adam,  thongh  He  had  been  a  man  like  one  of  ns,  yet  He  would  not  have  been 
of  kin  to  us ;  because  it  would  not  have  been  a  nature  derived  from  Adam,  the 
eommon  parent  of  us  all.  It  was  therefore  requisite  to  an  affinity  with  us,  not  only 
that  He  should  have  the  same  human  nature,  but  that  it  should  flow  from  the  same 
principle,  and  be  propagated  to  Him.  And  thus  He  is  of  the  same  nature  that 
ginned,  and  so  what  He  did  and  suffered  may  be  imputed  to  us.  Whereas,  if  He 
had  been  created  as  Adam  was,  it  could  not  have  been  claimed  in  a  legal  and 
judicial  way.  The  Holy  Ghost  did  not  minister  any  matter  unto  Christ  from  His 
own  substance.  Hence  Basil  says,  Christ  was  conceived,  not  of  the  substance,  but 
by  the  power,  not  by  any  generation,  but  by  appointment  and  benediction  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  2.  Let  us  consider  the  sanctifying  of  Christ's  human  nature.  I  have 
already  said  that  that  part  of  the  flesh  of  the  Virgin,  whereof  the  human  nature  o^ 
Christ  was  made,  was  purifled  and  reflned  from  all  corruption  by  the  overshadow 
ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  a  skilful  workman  separates  the  dross  from  the  gold. 
Our  Saviour  was  therefore  called  '♦  that  holy  thing  "  (Luke  i.  35).  Now  this  sanctifi- 
cation  of  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was  necessary-  (1)  To  fit  it  for  personal  union 
with  the  Word,  who,  out  of  His  infinite  love,  hiunbled  Himself  to  become  flesh,  and 
at  the  same  time  out  of  His  infinite  purity,  could  not  defile  Himself  by  becoming 
sinful  fiesb.  (2)  With  respect  to  the  end  of  His  incarnation,  even  the  redemption 
and  salvation  of  lost  sinners ;  that  as  the  first  Adam  was  the  fountain  of  our  im 
purity,  so  the  second  Adam  should  also  be  the  pure  fountain  of  our  righteousness 
He  that  needed  redemption  himself  could  never  have  purchased  redemption  for  us. 
S.  We  are  to  consider  the  personal  union  of  the  manhood  with  the  Godhead.  To 
clear  this  a  little,  you  would  know — (1)  That  when  Christ  assumed  our  nature,  it 
was  not  united  consubstantially,  so  as  the  three  persons  in  the  Godhead  are  united 
among  themselves ;  they  all  have  but  one  and  the  same  nature  and  will :  but  in 
Christ  there  are  two  distinct  natures  and  wills,  though  but  one  person.  (2)  They 
are  not  united  physically,  as  the  soul  and  body  are  united  in  a  man  :  for  death 
actually  dissolves  that  union ;  but  this  is  indissoluble.  So  that  when  His  soul  was 
expired,  and  His  body  interred,  both  soul  and  body  were  still  united  to  the  second 
person  as  much  as  ever.  (3)  Nor  yet  is  this  such  a  mystical  union  as  is  beiween 
Christ  and  believers.  Indeed  this  is  a  glorious  union.  But  though  believers  are 
said  to  be  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  them,  yet  they  are  not  one  person  with  Him. 
But  more  positively,  this  assumption  of  which  I  speak  is  that  whereby  the  second 
person  in  the  glorious  Godhead  did  take  the  human  nature  into  a  personal  union 
with  Himself,  by  virtue  whereof  the  manhood  subsists  in  the  second  person,  yet 
without  confusion,  as  I  showed  already,  both  making  but  one  person  Immanuel, 
God  with  US.  So  that  though  there  be  a  twofold  nature  in  Christ,  yet  not  a  double 
person.  Again,  as  it  was  produced  miraculously,  so  it  was  assumed  integrally ; 
that  is  to  say,  Christ  took  a  complete  and  perfect  soul  and  body,  with  all  and  every 
faculty  and  member  pertaining  to  it.  And  this  was  necessary,  that  thereby  He  might 
heal  the  whoTe  nature  of  the  disease  and  leprosy  of  sin,  which  had  ceased  upon  and 
wofuUy  infected  every  member  and  faculty  of  man.  Christ  assumed  all,  to  sanctify 
all.  Again,  He  assumed  our  nature  with  all  its  sinless  infirmities :  therefore  it  is 
said  of  Him  (Heb.  ii.  17),  "In  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His 
brethren."  But  here  we  are  to  distinguish  between  personal  and  natural  infirmi- 
ties. Personal  infirmities  are  such  as  befall  particular  persons,  from  particular 
causes,  as  dumbness,  deafness,  blindness,  lameness,  leprosies,  &c.  Now,  it  was 
no  way  necessary  that  Christ  should  assume  these ;  but  the  natural  ones,  such 
as  hunger,  thirst,  weariness,  sweating,  bleeding,  mortality,  &o.  (Rom.  viii.  3). 
Again,  the  human  nature  is  so  united  with  the  Divine,  that  each  nature  still 
retains  its  own  essential  properties  distinct.  The  glory  of  His  Divinity  was  not 
extinguished  or  diminished,  though  it  was  eclipsed  and  obscured  under  the  veil  of 
oar  humanity ;  but  there  was  no  more  change  in  the  hiding  of  it,  than  there  is  in 
the  body  of  the  sun,  when  he  is  shadowed  by  the  interposition  of  a  cloud.  And 
this  union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ  is  an  inseparable  union  ;  so  that  from  the  first 
moment  thereof,  there  never  was,  nor  to  all  eternity  shall  there  ever  be,  any  separa- 
tion  of  them.  V.  I  now  proceed  to  show  wht  Christ  was  bobn  of  a  virgin.  That 
Christ  was  to  be  bom  of  a  virgin,  was  prophesied  and  foretold  many  ages  before 
His  incarnation,  as  Isa.  vii.  14.  The  Redeemer  of  the  world  behoved  to  be  so  bom, 
as  not  to  derive  the  stain  of  man's  nature  by  His  generation.  It  was  most  conform- 
able to  the  infinite  dignity  of  ^is  person,  that  a  supernatural  and  a  Divine  person 
be  concerned  as  an  active  principle  in  it.  By  His  being  bom  of  a  virgin  the  holi- 
oess  of  His  nature  is  efiectuallj  eecored.    Christ  was  an  extraordinary  person,  and 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [OHAt.  I. 

another  Adam  ;  and  therefore  it  was  necessary  He  should  be  produced  a  new  way. 
Thus  we  may  be  thoroughly  satisfied — 1.  That  Christ  had  a  true  human  body  ;  and 
that  though  He  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  He  had  not  merely  the 
likeness  of  flesh,  but  true  flesh  (Luke  zxiv.  39  ;  Heb.  ii.  14).  2.  That  He  had  a 
reasonable  soul,  which  was  a  created  spirit,  and  that  the  Divine  nature  was  not 
instead  of  a  soul  to  Him.  3.  That  Christ's  body  was  not  made  of  any  substanoa 
sent  down  from  heaven,  but  of  the  substance  of  the  Virgin  (Gal.  iv.  4).  He  was  "  the 
seed  of  the  woman  "  (Gen.  iii.  15),  and  the  fruit  <sd  Mary's  womb  (Luke  i.  42),  other* 
wise  He  had  not  been  our  brother.  4.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  cannot  be  called  the 
Father  of  Christ,  since  His  human  nature  was  formed,  not  of  His  substance,  but  of 
that  of  the  Virgin,  by  His  power.  6.  That  though  as  to  the  nativity  of  Christ  there 
was  nothing  as  to  the  way  of  it  extraordinary,  but  He  was  at  the  ordinary  time 
brought  forth  as  others  (Luke  ii.  22,  23),  and  that  as  a  general  truth,  "A  woman, 
when  she  is  in  travail,  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come  "  (John  xvi.  21),  yet 
He  was  born  without  sin,  being  "  that  holy  thing."  He  could  not  have  been  oar 
Bedeemer,  had  He  not  been  so  (Heb.  vii.  26).  6.  That  the  reason  why  Christ  waa 
born  without  sin,  and  the  sin  of  Adam  did  not  reach  Him,  was  because  He  came 
not  of  Adam  by  ordinary  generation,  not  by  the  blessing  of  marriage,  but  by  a 
special  promise  after  the  fall.  I  shall  conclude  all  with  some  infebences.  1.  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  true  Messiah  promised  to  Adam  as  the  seed  of  the  woman,  to  Abraham 
as  his  seed,  the  Shiloh  mentioned  by  Jacob  on  his  deathbed,  the  Prophet  spoken  of 
by  Moses  to  be  raised  from  among  the  children  of  Israel,  the  Son  of  David,  and  the 
Son  to  be  born  of  a  virgin.  2.  Behold  the  wonderful  love  of  God  the  Father,  who 
was  content  to  degrade  and  abase  His  dear  Son,  in  order  to  bring  about  the  salva- 
tion of  sinners.  3.  See  here  the  wonderful  love  and  astonishing  condescendency  of 
the  Son,  to  be  born  of  a  woman,  in  order  that  He  might  die  in  the  room  of  sinners. 
What  great  love  to  sinners,  and  what  unparalleled  condescension  was  here  I  4.  See 
here  the  cure  of  our  being  conceived  in  sin,  and  brought  forth  in  iniquity.  6.  Christ 
is  sensibly  touched  with  all  the  infirmities  that  attend  our  frail  nature,  and  has 
pity  and  compassion  upon  His  people  under  all  their  pressures  and  burdens  (Heb. 
ii.  17,  18).     (r.  Boston.)  The  life  of  separation: — The  question  that  is  uttered 

by  Mary  is  not  for  a  moment  an  utterance  of  incredulity.  It  is  really  the  utterance 
of  a  believer  who  accepts  the  message  that  God  has  sent  her,  but  who  is  conscious 
of  difficulties  in  the  way  of  its  fulfilment.  "  How  can  I  ever  be  a  mother,  how  can 
I  ever  be  a  mother  of  the  Messiah  Christ  ?  The  conditions — the  fixed,  the  unalter< 
able  conditions — of  my  life  make  that  to  be  for  me  an  impossibility.  *  How  can 
this  be,  seeing  I  know  not  man  ?  '  "  The  words,  of  course,  teach  us  this  truth,  that 
Mary  was  conscious  that  there  was  to  the  Divine  promise  and  its  fulfilment  in  her 
what  seemed  like  a  mighty  barrier.  We  cannot  say  for  certain  whether  the  old 
legend  is  true  ;  but  it  has  always  seemed  to  me  that  these  words  of  our  Lady  bear 
out  its  truth  in  a  most  remarkable  way.  I  refer  to  the  old  story  that  when  St. 
Mary  was  quite  a  child  she  was  taken  up  by  her  parents  to  the  Temple,  and  that  she 
there  dedicated  herself  to  serve  God  by  a  life  of  separation,  and  in  the  state  of  life- 
long virginity,  under  the  direct  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Love.  And 
certainly  that  there  was  the  existence  of  some  such  special  barrier  as  this  seems  to 
be  recognized  and  confessed  in  the  question  we  are  now  considering.  For  just  con- 
sider what  her  position  was.  She  had  been  already  espoused  unto  an  old  man 
called  Joseph  ;  and  if  their  union  was  to  have  been  the  marriage  union  under  its 
ordinary  conditions,  the  message  of  Gabriel  to  Mary  would  simply  have  been  under- 
stood by  her  in  this  way,  that  she  should  be,  in  the  course  of  nature,  the  mother 
of  David's  Greater  Son.  We  know  quite  well  that  one  of  the  great  longings  of  every 
Jewish  maiden  down  through  the  ages  had  been  to  become  the  mother  of  the 
Messiah  ;  and  it  was  this  longing  that  made  the  thought  of  virginity  utterly  abhor- 
rent to  the  whole  spirit  of  Judaism.  If,  then,  Gabriel  had  come  to  Mary  when  she 
was  about  to  enter  the  married  life  under  ordinary  conditions  she  would  never  have 
been  staggered  by  the  Divine  promise,  and  would  never  have  seen  any  difficulty  in 
the  way  of  its  fulfilment.  In  her  humility  she  might  have  felt  unworthy  of  it,  bat 
she  would  have  bowed  her  head  in  pure  and  simple  submission,  and  would  have 
said — not  the  first — but  her  second  word :  "  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ; 
be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy  word."  But  what  she  says  is  this  :  "  How  can  this 
be,  seeing  I  know  not  man."  What  does  this  lead  me  to  recognized  This  fact, 
that  already  the  love  of  God  had  done  this  for  Mary — it  had  led  her  to  a  life  of 
separation,  it  had  led  her  to  deliberately  turn  away  from  the  state  of  life  which 
was  the  common  longing  of  the  daughters  of  Israel ;  that  she  had  already  separated 


OHAT.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  4$ 

herself  from  man  as  a  necessary  preliminary  condition  of  consecrating  herself  to 
God ;  and  that  the  motive  of  this  had  been  the  love  of  Ood.  Mary  is  emphatically 
revealed  to  as  in  the  Bible  not  simply  as  a  woman  of  devotion,  but  a  woman  whose 
devotion  takes  especially  the  contemplative  form.  "  She  kept  all  His  sayings  and 
treasured  them  in  her  heart ; "  she  was  one  who  was  continually  looking  up  at  God 
with  the  fixed  eye  of  wrapt  contemplation  ;  she  was  the  pure  in  heart,  and  she  saw 
God.  And  as  she  gazed  on  the  vision  of  God's  beauty  and  lived  in  the  recognition 
of  God's  love,  the  love  of  God  took  possession  of  her  heart  in  wondrous  fulness  and 
power ;  and  as  she  gave  herself  up  to  be  moulded  by  that  love  her  first  response  to 
its  working  was  the  response  of  separation.  Now  Christian  life  is  always  a  life  of 
separation.  That  is  its  first  aspect.  We  are  taught  this  by  the  lessons  of  olden  times. 
If  you  go  back  to  the  history  of  Israel,  the  Chosen  People  could  only  consecrate  them- 
selves to  God  in  the  Church  in  the  wilderness  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan  when  they  had 
come  out  of  Egypt  and  had  been  separated  from  it  by  the  separating  waters  of  the  Red 
Sea.  Why,  the  very  term  whereby  the  Christian  society  is  known  shows  this, — I  mean 
the  Greek  equivalent  to  our  word  "  Church."  Now  what  is  the  Ecclesia.  The  Eccleita 
is  a  people  called  out.  Out  from  what  ?  Out  from  the  world.  As  long  as  the  present 
condition  of  things  continues,  the  Church  and  the  world  can  never  be  coextensive 
terms.  The  Church  will  always  be  found  to  be  an  Ecclesia,  an  election ;  in  other 
words  a  people  of  separation,  separate  by  privilege  of  course,  but  separate  by  respon- 
sibility also.  And  separation  is  the  first  essential  feature  of  every  true  Christian  life. 
In  this  separation  there  are  two  things  to  be  remembered.  In  the  first  place,  the 
separation  is  the  act  of  God.  It  is  God  who  separates,  as  He  teaches  us,  when 
speaking  to  His  people  of  old  He  says  to  them,  "  Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy,  who 
have  separated  you  tc  be  My  people."  God  separated  His  people  to  Himself,  first, 
by  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  when  Moses 
came  down  from  Mount  Sinai.  And  so  it  is  with  us.  We  are  separated  by  God's 
act.  The  great  act  of  separation  with  us  is  the  act  of  Holy  Baptism.  We  have 
been  separated  by  God's  act,  and  we  are  to  respond  to  it  now  by  coming  out  and 
by  being  separate.  Separate  from  what  ?  Now  here  we  must  be  very  careful  as  we 
work  our  way,  for  we  have  to  avoid  two  distinct  difficulties.  We  have  to  avoid 
practically  making  the  Church  and  the  world  the  same,  and  saying  that  the  Church 
has,  so  to  say,  to  put  a  gloss  over  the  world ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  to 
avoid  an  unpractical,  uncommon  sense  trancendentalism,  which  is  contrary  to  the 
example  of  Christ  and  the  spirit  of  His  gospel.  That  marvellous  Eucharistio 
prayer  of  our  Lord  seems  to  teach  the  plain  truth  about  this  matter :  "  I  pray 
not  that  Thou  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  Thou  shouldest  keep 
them  from  the  evil."  What  He  prays  for  is  this — not  that  He  may  have  a  people 
living  in  absolute  isolation  from  society,  but  that  He  may  have  a  people  going  out 
into  the  society  of  their  day,  living  lives  of  loyalty  to  Christ  where  Christ's  name 
is  denied,  living  lives  of  bold  obedience  to  principle  while  passion  sways  the  con- 
duct of  the  many.  Well,  then,  what  we  understand  by  the  world  is  society  as  far  as 
it  is  swayed  by  passion  and  desire,  and  not  by  principle  and  loyalty  to  Christ.  In 
other  words,  the  world  is  godless  and  corrupt  society ;  and  from  that  we  must  come 
ont  and  be  separate.  Woe  l»e  to  us  if  we  fail  in  loyalty  to  Christ  here.  We  shall 
bear,  to  our  own  shame  before  men,  angels,  and  God,  the  brand  of  moral  cowardice, 
and  a  more  degrading  brand  than  that  cannot  be  stamped  on  any  man  or  woman's 
brow.  Again,  what  are  we  to  understand  by  separation?  Well,  we  know  in  the 
Jewish  da.ys  there  were  different  degrees  of  separation.  There  was,  for  instance, 
the  separation  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  for  the  diaconate,  the  separation  of  the  family 
of  Aaron  for  the  priesthood,  the  separation  of  the  Nazarites  for  a  life  of  special 
strictness.  Then,  above  all,  there  was  the  life  of  separation  which  marked  off  every 
Jew  from  the  Gentiles  as  he  obeyed  the  requirements  of  the  Jewish  law.  So,  again. 
in  the  Church  there  are  different  forms  of  separation.  I.  To  mention  the  highest 
of  all,  THERE  IS  THE  sEPAEATioN  TO  WHAT  WE  CALL  BELiGioN.  There  are  those  to 
whom  the  voice  comes  which  has  found  its  expression  in  the  45th  Psalm,  verses  10 
and  11.  There  is  a  state  of  life  created  by  Christ  in  His  Church,  to  which  men 
and  women  are  attracted  to  follow  Him  in  poverty,  in  chastity,  and  in  obedience ; 
and  of  all  forms  of  separation,  that  of  the  religious  life  is  the  most  intense  in  its 
expression.  II.  Then,  again,  thebe  is  the  sepakation  of  providential  circum- 
stances. I  want  to  mention  three  especially.  1.  First  of  all,  come  family  ties. 
Always  think  highly  of  the  family.  There  is  no  sphere  in  life  in  which  woman 
ean  minister  better,  in  which  she  can  do  greater  work  for  God,  for  the  Church,  and 
lor  those  tot  whom  Christ  lived  and  died,  than  within  the  limits  of  the  home* 

4. 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  X. 

2.  Then  there  are  those  who  are  called  aside  by  sickness,  those  whom  God  in  Hi* 
wonderful  way  leads  by  constrainings  that  must  be  submitted  to,  to  a  separalion 
not  only  from  the  world  outside,  but  sometimes  even  from  the  family  within.  Aa 
the  world  would  say,  they  are  apparently  useless  for  life.  Bat  no  ;  they  are  led  by 
God  within  the  veil.  Like  the  priest  of  Israel  who  twice  daily  entered  into  the 
Holy  Place,  and  stood  by  the  altar  of  incense  alone  and  offered  its  sweet  savour  to 
God ;  so  these  are  led  by  God  by  a  wonderful  separation  to  do  a  higher  work  than 
that  of  ministering,  and  that  is  the  work  of  intercession.  3.  Then,  again,  I  cannot 
help  thinking  that  there  is  a  third  way  in  which  God  separates  some  in  His  pro- 
vidential leadings,  and  that  is  by  a  retiring  disposition.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say 
that  you  ought  to  give  way  to  that  self-consciousness  which  to  many  makes  inter- 
course with  the  world  one  long  agony.  But  there  are  many  of  you  who  go  throngh 
life  sorely  weighted  by  that  shyness,  that  self-consciousness,  which  makes  you 
always  think  that  nobody  cares  for  you.  It  may  be  that  even  this  temperament 
is  a  revelation  of  the  will  of  God  for  you,  and  that  by  it  he  has  separated  yon 
from  much  social  joy  and  from  many  opportunities  of  exercising  visibly  holy 
influence,  in  order  that  you  may  be  numbered  with  that  hidden  band  whose 
ministry  is  the  secret  ministry  of  intercession  rather  than  the  ministry  of  open 
work.  And,  believe  me,  all  these  family  ties,  all  these  providential  visitations  of 
sickress  and  of  temperament,  are  separations  created  by  God,  to  which  it  is  our 
wisdom,  as  it  is  our  duty,  to  be  submissive  and  obedient.    III.  Then,  again,  thbbb 

IS  THE  SEPARATION  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE  INNEB    LEADINGS    OF    THE  SpIEIT.       "  We   are 

not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  Many,  we  know,  would  like  to  have  a  definite 
law  telling  them  what  they  may  do  and  what  they  may  not.  You  may  go  to  a 
concert,  but  not  to  a  theatre,  you  may  ,go  to  a  dinner  party,  but  not  to  a  ball— 
everything  put  down  as  clear  as  it  can  be.  And  we  know  that  in  former  daya 
Puritanism  did  attempt  something  of  the  kind ;  but  it  ended  in  failure,  as  it  was 
bound  to  do.  For  we  have  not  simply  to  deal  with  abstract  laws,  but  we  have  to 
deal  with  individual  characters.  Cannot  you  see  how  it  may  be  harmful  for  one  to 
go  where  to  another  it  would  not  only  be  not  harmful,  but  positively  helpful.  So,i 
outside  the  great  Moral  Law,  God  does  not  lay  down  any  hard  and  fast  rule,  He 
does  not  legislate  for  our  amusements.  He  put  us  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit. 
Some  people  go  with  a  clear  conscience  where  others  cannot  go  but  with  a  guilty 
conscience.  The  great  law  of  Christian  life  here  is  this  —  always  be  true  to  con- 
science ;  never  allow  yourself  to  do  what  you  believe  to  be  contrary  to  God's  Will 
for  you,  but  do  not  limit  another  Christian's  liberty  by  your  own  rule  of  conduct  or 
your  own  conviction  as  to  what  is  lawful  or  expedient.  Ah !  be  sure  of  it,  separa- 
tion will  always  mark  off  those  whose  lives  are  ruled  by  principle  where  lives  are 
generally  ruled  by  passion.  What  is  the  great  principle  that  rules  conduct  in  the 
world  ?  Is  it  not  undisciplined  desire  ?  That  is  the  one  great  thing  men  live  for — 
to  gratify  desire.  But  when  Christ  really  comes  into  the  heart  the  pain  of  pains  ia 
to  grieve  Him,  and  the  joy  of  joys  is  to  please  Him,  because  we  love  Him.  In  no 
mere  metaphorical  language,  we  really  love  Him,  and  to  give  Him  joy  is  our  joy. 
How  can  we  henceforth  go  out  into  the  world  and  deny  Him,  and  not  rather  there 
own  Him  gladly,  by  proved  obedience  to  His  manifested  will  ?  Last  of  all,  love 
separates  in  yet  another  way.  Love  melts.  It  first  renews,  and  then  inspires,  and 
then  it  melts.  It  has  often  happened  even  in  the  love  of  this  world,  that  inter- 
course has  begun  with  revulsion,  but  then  love  came  in  after  a  time,  and  the  one 
who  has  been  misunderstood  is  seen  as  she  really  is ;  and  then  comes  grief  for  all 
the  past,  and  with  that  grief  comes  of  necessity  the  desire  for  reparation,  the 
ready  confession  of  wrong-doing  and  full  purpose  of  amendment  of  Ufe.  And  so 
it  is  with  us.  We  loved  not  God,  we  knew  not  what  He  was ;  and  then  came  a 
revelation  of  Him  in  Christ,  and  then  the  free  gift  of  His  Spirit  in  our  hearts 
brings  upon  us  a  deep  grief.  I  grieve  that  I  should  have  sinned  against  a  love  so 
great,  so  long  enduring— this  recognized  love  of  God  melts  me  down  into  contrition, 
it  makes  me  hate  all  my  past  life,  until  continuance  in  it  is  an  impossibility,  it 
brings  me  to  his  feet  in  confession,  it  raises  me  to  go  forth  and  show  my  sorrow  ifor 
a  life  conformed  to  the  world  in  the  dead  past  by  separation  from  the  world  in  the 
living  present.  Such  is  the  first  thought  that  we  have  to  notice.  The  life  of  a 
Christian  is  a  life  of  separation  becau£e  it  is  a  Hfe  lived  in  the  power  of  the  love 
of  God.     {Canon  Body.)  The  miracitlovs  conception  : — I.  The  impobtance  of 

THE  DOCTRINE  AS  AN  ARTICLE  OF  THE  FAITH.  It  is  evidently  the  foundatiou  of  the 
whole  distinction  between  the  character  of  Christ  in  the  condition  of  a  man  and 
that  of  any  other  prophet.     Had  the  conception  of  Jesus  been  in  the  natural  way^ 


oup.  I.]  ST.  LUKE,  51 

His  intercoarse  with  the  Deity  could  have  been  of  no  other  kind  than  tbe  nature  of 
any  other  man  might  have  equally  admitted;  than  the  prophets  enjoyed,  when  their 
minds  were  enhghtened  by  the  extraordinary  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Holy  Scriptures  speak  a  very  ditTerent  language  :  they  tell  us,  that  "  the  same  God 
who  sp^ke  in  times  past  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets,  hath  in  these  latter  days 
spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son;  "  evidently  establishing  a  distinction  of  Christianity 
from  preceding  revelations,  upon  a  distinction  between  the  two  characters  of  a 
prophet  of  God,  and  of  God's  Son.  Moses  bore  to  Jesus,  as  we  are  told,  the 
humble  relation  of  a  servant  to  a  son.  And  lest  the  superiority  on  the  side  of  the 
Son  should  be  deemed  a  mere  superiority  of  the  oifice  to  which  He  was  appointed, 
we  are  told  that  the  Son  is  "  higher  than  the  angels ;  being  the  effulgence  of  God's 
glory,  the  express  image  of  His  person ;  "  the  God  "  whose  throne  is  for  ever  and 
ever,  the  sceptre  of  whose  kingdom  is  a  sceptre  of  righteousness."  And  this  high 
dignity  of  the  Son  is  alleged  as  a  motive  for  religious  obedience  to  His  commands, 
and  for  reliance  on  His  promises.  It  is  this,  indeed,  which  gives  such  autliority  to 
His  precepts,  and  such  certainty  to  His  whole  doctrine,  as  render  faith  in  Him  the 
first  duty  of  religion.  But  we  need  not  go  so  high  as  to  the  Divine  nature  of  our 
Lord  to  evince  the  necessity  of  His  miraculous  conception.  It  was  necessary  to  the 
scheme  of  redemption,  by  the  Eedeemer's  oiJering  of  Himself  as  an  expiatory 
sacrifice,  that  the  manner  of  His  conception  should  be  such  that  He  should  in  no 
degree  partake  of  the  natural  pollution  of  the  fallen  race  whose  guilt  He  came  to 
atone,  nor  be  included  in  the  general  condemnation  of  Adam's  progeny.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  were  not  difficult  to  show  that  the  miraculous  conception,  once 
admitted,  naturally  brings  up  after  it  the  great  doctrines  of  the  atonement  and  the 
incarnation.  The  miraculous  conception  of  our  Lord  evidently  implies  some 
higher  purpose  of  His  coming  than  the  mere  business  of  a  teacher.  The  business 
of  a  teacher  might  have  been  performed  by  a  mere  man  enlightened  by  the  pro- 
phetic spirit.  II.  Having  seen  the  importance  of  the  doctrine  of  the  miraculous 
conception  as  an  article  of  our  faith,  let  us,  in  the  next  place,  consider  the  suffi- 
ciency OF   THE    EVIDENCE   BY   WHICH    THR    FACT    IS   SUPPOHTED.      We   have  for    it    the 

express  testimony  of  two  out  of  the  four  evangelists,  —  of  St.  Matthew,  whose 
Gospel  was  published  in  Judea  within  a  few  years  after  our  Lord's  Ascension ;  and 
of  St.  Luke,  whose  narrative  was  composed  (as  may  be  collecte'l  from  the  author's 
short  preface)  to  prevent  the  mischief  that  was  to  be  apprehended  from  some  pre- 
tended histories  of  our  Saviour's  life,  in  which  the  truth  was  probably  blended  with 
many  legendary  tales.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  the  fact  of  the  miraculous  con- 
ception should  be  found  in  the  first  of  the  four  Gospels, — written  at  a  time  when 
many  of  the  near  relations  of  the  holy  family  must  have  been  living,  by  whom  the 
story,  had  it  been  false,  had  been  easily  confuted  ;  that  it  should  be  found  again  in 
St.  Luke's  Gospel,  written  for  the  peculiar  use  of  the  converted  Gentiles,  and  for 
the  express  purpose  of  furnishing  a  summary  of  authentic  facts,  and  of  suppressing 
spurious  narrations.  Was  it  not  ordered  by  some  peculiar  providence  of  God,  that 
the  two  great  branches  of  the  primitive  Church,  the  Hebrew  congregations  for  which 
St.  Matthew  wrote,  and  the  Greek  congregations  for  which  St.  Luke  wrute,  should 
find  an  express  record  of  the  miraculous  conception  each  in  its  proper  Gospel  ?  Or 
if  we  consider  the  testimony  of  the  writers  simply  as  historians  of  the  times  in 
which  they  lived,  without  regard  to  their  inspiration,  which  is  not  admitted  by  the 
adversary, — were  not  Matthew  and  Luke — Matthew,  one  of  the  twelve  apostles  of 
our  Lord,  and  Luke,  the  companion  of  St.  Paul — competent  to  examine  the  evi- 
dence of  the  facts  which  they  have  recorded  ?  Is  it  likely  that  they  have  recorded 
facts  upon  the  credit  of  a  vague  report,  without  examination  ?  {Bishop  Horsley.) 
The  difficulty  of  Mary's  situation: — It  is  not,  commonly,  sufficiently  seen  what 
an  advance  these  words  are  upon  the  angel's  previous  announcement,  and  how 
simply  appalling  they  must  have  sounded  to  the  trembling  listener.  There  had 
been  nothing  as  yet  which  suggested  a  single  step  beyond  the  ordinary  course 
of  nature,  and  mothers  are  proverbially  capable  of  believing  in  any  the  most 
exalted  future  for  their  children  ;  but  now  words  had  been  spoken  which  proposed 
to  change  the  whole  tenor  of  her  life  and  being,  and  demanded  little  short  of  an 
agony  of  faith.  Nay  1  may  she  acquiesce  without  sin  ?  Her  betrothal— what  can 
it  mean  ? — is  to  be  ignored,  and  her  child  is  to  recognize  no  earthly  father.  What 
will  the  world  say,  that  little  world — all  the  more  terrible  because  it  is  so  little — of 
society  in  Nazareth  ?  And  how  shall  she  break  it  to  Joseph  *  And,  then,  she  may 
remember  some  dreadful  story  she  has  overheard  her  elders  teli  in  low,  stern  tones ; 
liow  some  betrothed  maiden  had   been  suspected  of  what  she   herself  was   aow 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  i. 

called  upon  to  brave,  and  how  there  had  been  a  trial,  and  she  had  been  pronoanoed 
guilty  ;  and  then  they  had  brought  her  out  to  the  door  of  her  father's  house,  and 
the  men  of  her  city  had  stoned  her  to  death  :  the  only  way,  they  said,  of  patting 
away  evil  from  among  them.     And   she  was   conscious  that  she  must  brave  all 
this,  practically,  alone;   there   was   no   prophet,   in   her  case,  who  would  make 
himself  responsible  for  her  integrity,  and  explain  it  all  to  the  people,  and  give 
them  a  sign,  and  convince  them  that  it  was  all  from  God.     The  angel  there  before 
her  might  be  very  real  to  her,  but  when  he  has  disappeared  and  lett  her — people  do 
not  very  readily  believe  in  angels*  visits  to  their  neighbours ;  will  she  ever  be  quite 
sure  herself?     {E.  T.  Marshall,  M.A.)        Rome — her  new  dogma,  and  our  duties : — 
First,  then,  what  is  the  doctrine?    It  is,  that   the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  was 
herself,  by  a  miraculous  interposition  of  God's  providence,  conceived  without  the 
stain  of  original  sin.     That  the  nature,  therefore,  with  which  she  was  born  into 
this  world  was,  from  the  first  moment  in  which  she  began  to  exist,  not  that  nature 
which  all  inherit  who  "  naturally  are  engendered  of  the  offspring  of  Adam,"  but 
another  nature ;  free  from  that  fault  and  corruption  which,  as  an  hereditary  taint, 
infects  every  member  of  the  fallen  race  who  is  naturally  born  into  this  world. 
II.  And  now  let  us  see,  secondly,  the  penalties  under  which  this  doctrine  is 
PROMDLGATED.     They  are  those  of  the  Church's  anathema  and  the  condemnation  of 
God.     Whosoever  henceforth  shall  deny  it  is  condemned  as  an  heretic.     "  Let  no 
man,"  says  the  decree,  *'  interfere  with  this  our  declaration,  pronunciation,  and 
definition,  or  oppose  or  contradict  it  with  presumptuous  rashness.     If  any  should 
presume  to  assail  it,   let  him  know  that  he  will  incur  the  indignation  of  the 
Omnipotent  God,  and  of  His  blessed  apostles  Peter  and  Paul."    III.  Thirdly,  let 
us  consider  ouk  reasons  for  objecting  to  this  promulgation.    .First,  then,  we 
object  to  it  as  the  unlawful  addition  of  a  new  article  to  the  Creed.     And  here,  first, 
we  must  establish  that  it  is  such  an  addition.     There  can  be  no  mistake  as  to  this 
matter.     Before  the  promulgating  of  this  decree,   any   one   within  the  Boman 
communion  might,  as  she  teaches,  deny,  with  St.  Bernard  and  St.  Augustine,  the 
doctrine  of  the  immaculate  conception  of  the  virgin  and  be  saved ;  since  that  8th 
of  December,  whosoever  denies  it  must  be  lost.    It  is,  therefore,  on  tlaeir  showing, 
a  new  and  necessary  article  of  a  Christian  man's  faith.  Every  lawful  addition  then  to 
the  Creed  mu.<t  be  made  in  accordance  with  these  conditions.    And  now,  if  we  try 
this  newly-propounded  article  by  these  conditions,  we  shall  be  able  to  prove  its 
unlawfulness.     For,  first,  it  lacks  the  condition  of  the  assent  of  the  whole  body  of 
the  faithful.    It  is  assented  to  neither  by  the  Eastern,  nor  by  our  own  branch,  of 
t-he  universal  Church.     It  is  true  that  this  argument  will  not  weigh  with  Bome, 
because,  after  the  exact  pattern  of  the  old  Donatist  schismatics,  she  claims  to  be 
exclusively  the  catholic  body,  and  makes,  as  they  did,  communion  with  herself  the 
one  condition  of  communion  with  her  Lord.    But  to  all  beyond  these  comparatively 
narrow  limits,  this  argument  against  her  intrusive  article  is  of  itself  unanswer- 
able.   But  next  it  falls  under  the  same  condemnation,  because  it  is  not  the  old 
truth  held  from  the  beginning,  but  a  new  proposition,  which  was  not  received  by 
the  primitive  Church.     To  prove  this,  we  need  but  to  compare  a  few  of  the 
plainest  facts  of  history  with  the  very  words  of  the  decree  by  which  this  dogma 
has  been  now  promulgated.     "  The  Church,"  it  declares,  "has  never  ceased  to  lay 
down  this  doctrine,  and  to  cherish  and  to  illustrate  it  continually  by  numerous 
proofs,  and  more  and  more  daily  by  splendid  facts.     For  the  Church  has  most 
clearly  pointed  out  this  doctrine,  when  she  did  not  hesitate  to  propose  the  concep- 
tion of  the  Virgin  for  the  public  devotion  and  veneration  of  the  faithful.    By  which 
illustrious  act  she  pointed  out  the  conception  of  the  Virgin  as  singular,  wonderful, 
and  very  far  removed  from  the  origins  of  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  to  be  venerated 
as  entirely  holy;  since  the  Church  celebrates  festival-days  only  of  the  saints." 
Here,  then,  we  have  (1)  an  admission  that,  for  the  validity  of  the  decree,  it  must 
be  possible  to  assert  that  it  is  the  ancient  truth  which  it  enacts  ;  and  next  (2)  the 
best  pretended  proof  which  can  be  given  that  the  doctrine  was  thus  held  of  old. 
From  what  remote  antiquity  then  is  this  proof  drawn  ?     The  answer  is  well  worthy 
of  notice.     The  earliest  date  which  the  Pope  can  give  for  any  declaration  of  the 
dogma,  is  that  of  the  "illustrious  act  by  which  the  Eoman  Church  proposed  the 
conception  of  the  virgin  for  the  public  devotion  of  the  faithful."     And  when  that 
"  act "  was  wrought  we  may  learn  from  a  decree  of  Alexander  Vllth,  the  earliest 
of  his  predecessors  whom  the  Pope  dares  to  quote  by  name,  as  having  "  protected 
and   defended  the  conception  as  the  true  object  of  devotion."     For  this  decree 
informs  us,  that  "  this  pious,  devout,  and  laudable  institution  emanated  from  oui 


tmit.  I,]  ST.  LUKE.  » 

predecessor  Sixtns  the  IVth."  Now  Sixtns  IVth  sncceeded  to  the  papacy  almoat 
at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century ;  so  that  this  is  the  earliest  act  which  the  Pope 
can  allege  to  prove  his  proposition,  that  "  the  Church  has  never  ceased  to  lay  dowa 
this  doctrine."  But  even  this  is  not  all ;  since  we  cannot  fully  estimate  the  false- 
hood of  this  reference  until  we  compare  it  with  the  decree  itself.  For  this,  so  far 
from  implying,  even  at  that  late  period,  the  implicit  holding  of  the  doctrine  which 
is  here  insinuated,  actually  provides  a  special  prohibition  to  guard  against  any 
being  led  by  the  fact  of  the  festival  to  condemn  those  who  deny  the  immaculate 
conception,  "  because  the  matter  has  not  been  decided  by  the  Apostolic  See."  Oi 
80  late  a  growth  is  this  doctrine  in  the  Koman  communion  itself,  and  so  signally 
does  this  its  novelty  condemn  its  promulgation  as  an  article  of  faith.  We  are  able 
to  disprove  by  positive  evidence  the  only  other  conceivable  suggestion  by  which  it 
could  be  justified,  namely,  that  though  not  enunciated  sooner,  yet  that  within  the 
bosom  of  the  Church  the  doctrine  was  held  implicitly  from  early  times.  For  in 
answer  to  this,  we  assert  not  only  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  it,  but  that  the  voice 
of  catholic  antiquity  distinctly  contradicts  such  a  supposition.  •'  Of  thee,"  for 
instance,  says  one,  speaking  of  our  Lord's  nativity,  "  He  took  that  which  even  for 
thee  He  paid.  The  mother  of  the  Redeemer  herself,  otherwise  than  by  redemption, 
is  not  loosed  from  the  bond  of  that  ancient  sin."  "He,  therefore,"  says  the  great 
Augustine,  "alone  who  was  at  once  made  Man  and  remained  God,  had  never  any 
sin,  nor  took  a  flesh  of  sin,  although  He  came  from  a  maternal  flesh  of  sin.  For 
that  of  flesh  which  He  took  He  either  purified  to  take  it,  or  in  the  taking  purified 
it ; "  and  so  say  all  their  own  greatest  authorities.  Hear  the  judgment  on  this 
point  of  one  of  their  bishops,  by  no  means  the  least  learned  of  their  canonists  : — 
"  That  the  Blessed  Virgin,"  says  Melchior  Canus,  "  was  entirely  free  from  original 
sin,  is  nowhere  held  in  Holy  Scripture,  taken  in  its  literal  sense ;  but  on  the  other 
hand,  in  them  is  delivered  the  general  law  which  includes  all  the  sons  of  Adam, 
without  any  exception.  Nor  can  it  be  said  that  this  teaching  descended  to  the 
Church  through  the  tradition  of  the  apostles,  since  such  traditions  have  come 
down  to  us  only  through  those  ancient  and  holy  writers  who  succeeded  the  apostles. 
But  it  is  evident  that  those  ancient  writers  had  not  received  it  from  those  before 
them.  .  .  .  All  the  saints  who  have  mentioned  this  matter  have  with  one  mouth 
asserted  that  the  Virgin  Mary  was  conceived  in  original  sin.  This  St.  Ambrose 
lays  down,  this  St.  Augustine  repeatedly ;  this  St.  Chrysostom,  this  Eusebius 
Emissenus,  this  Eemigius  and  Maximus,  this  Bede  and  Anselm  affirm ;  this  St. 
Bernard  and  Erhardus,  bishop  and  martyr,  with  a  multitude  besides  :  this  doctrine 
none  of  the  saints  have  contravened."  Neither  implicitly,  then,  nor  in  open  decla- 
ration, has  this  dogma  been  a  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  old.  IV.  But  once  more, 
and  above  all ;  since  the  canon  of  Holy  Scripture  was  complete,  no  declaeation  of 

DOCTBINE    COULD   EVER   BE    INSERTED     IN     THE     CREEDS,    WHICH    COULD    NOT   BE    SHOWN 

TO  ACCORD  WITH  THAT  WRITTEN  WoRD  OF  GoD.  And  whcu  tcstcd  by  this  rule,  the 
unlawfulness  of  this  attempt  will  be  most  clearly  proved.  For  not  only  is  there  no 
passage  which  can  be  alleged  as  even  tending  to  prove  it,  but  against  it  stand 
arrayed  the  clearest  sentences  of  Holy  Writ.  "  For,"  says  St.  Paul,  after  examining 
the  case  alike  of  those  without  the  law,  as  the  heathen,  or  under  the  law,  as  the 
mother  of  Christ ;  "  For  there  is  no  difference,  for  all  have  sinned  " — and  therefore 
Mary — "and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God;  being  justified,"  not  by  immaculate 
conception,  but  "freely  by  His  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus."  And  again,  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  But  next  (V.)  we 
object,  not  only  to  any  introduction  of  a  new  dogma,  but  we  object  also  in  par- 
ticular to  this  as,  to  say  the  least,  i&ving  direct  tendencies  to  heresy.  For  it  is 
no  mere  speculation ;  it  is  full  of  deadly  consequences.  For,  first,  if  in  the  course 
of  the  Divine  nrocess  for  working  out  our  salvation,  our  fallen  nature  was  pure 
from  spot  of  sin  in  any  one  before  that  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  it 
was  through  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  sanctified  wholly  by  the  union  of 
His  Godhead  with  it,  then  is  that  one,  and  not  He,  the  first  fountain  of  new  life  to 
our  corrupted  race.  This  teaching,  therefore,  points  us  not  to  Christ,  but  to  Mary, 
as  the  well-head  of  our  restored  humanity ;  and  thus  does  it  directly  shake  the  great 
doctrine  of  the  incarnation.  And  then,  further,  if  that  nature  which  He  thus  took 
in  the  womb  of  His  virgin  mother  was  not  that  which  she,  like  others,  inherited 
from  Adam,  but  one  made  by  God's  creative  power  to  exist  under  new  conditions  of 
original  purity,  how  can  we  say  that  He  indeed  took  from  her  our  very  nature  ? 
Then  was  that  quarry  whence  was  dug  that  flesh  which  He  united  to  His  Godhead, 
aot  ol  oar  iallen,  bat  of  a  new  and  different,  nature ;  and  then  is  His  perfect 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  v 

brotherhood. with  ns  destroyed.  And  yet  once  more  :  this  last  conclusion  leads  tut 
to  another  reason  why,  in  God's  name,  we  protest  against  this  dogma.  For  it  is 
not  merely  accidentally  that  it  thus  endangers  our  faith  in  the  true  incarnation  ot 
our  Lord,  and  points  our  eyes  from  Him  to  His  mother  as  the  medium  between 
God  and  us ;  but  this  dangerous  delusion  is  a  part,  and  the  crowning  part,  of  • 
whole  system  which  really  places  on  the  Mediator's  throne  the  virgin  mother 
instead  of  the  incarnate  Son.  For  this  is  the  grand  characteristic  of  the  whola- 
Boman  system  of  Mariolatrous  imposture.  It  does  confer  upon  the  Virgin  Mary^ 
the  Mediator's  office.  The  whole  system  of  Eome  does  make  the  Virgin  Mother 
the  special  mediator  between  God  and  man.  It  teaches  sinners  to  look  to  her  ar 
more  tender,  more  merciful,  more  full  of  pity,  more  able  to  sympathize  with  their 
infirmities,  than  is  that  true  High-priest,  who  is  such  as  "  became  us,"  because  He- 
is  fitted  by  the  perfect  holiness,  and  yet  true  brotherhood  with  us,  of  the  nature  He 
assumed,  "  to  have  compassion  upon  the  ignorant,  and  upon  them  that  are  out  of 
the  way."  Amongst  all  its  defacement  of  the  truth  of  Christ,  this  is  perhaps  the 
plainest  and  one  of  the  most  hideous  features  of  Eoman  superstition.  VI.  Lastly, 
brethren,  suffer  me  to  lay  before  you  some  of  the  duties  which,  as  it  seems  to 

MB,  ARE    enforced    UPON    US    BY   THIS     BAD    SPECTACLE     OF     DEEP     CORRUPTION     WITHIN 

THE  Roman  Church.  1.  The  first  is  that  which,  however  inadequately,  I  have  felt 
bound  to  attempt  this  day  to  discharge.  It  is  to  protest  anew  against  thiS' 
monstrous  effort  to  corrupt,  by  man's  additions,  the  revealed  truth  of  God.  2. 
Next,  surely  it  is  our  duty,  with  all  sadness  of  soul,  to  make  on  behalf  of  those  wha 
have  so  deeply  fallen,  our  humble  intercessions  with  our  long-suffering  Lord.  8. 
Again,  the  sight  of  this  evil  surely  enforces  upon  us  another  duty.  For  the  sake  of' 
truth  and  for  the  love  of  souls,  we,  whose  rule  of  faith  is  God's  Word,  and  whose 
interpreter  of  Scripture  is  true  catholic  consent,  are  bound  to  hold  faster  than  ever 
to  these  our  real  principles.  4.  But  we  have  yet  another  duty,  as  we  contemplate 
this  fearful  spectacle  ;  we  have  to  separate  ourselves  from  its  evil.  (Bishop  Satmuf 
iVilber/orce.) 

Ver.  37.  Nothing  shall  be  Impossible. — God's  omnipotence : — It  certainly  is  not 

possible  for  us  to  be  in  a  position  where  omnipotence  cannot  assist  us.  God  hath 
servants  everywhere ;  and,  where  we  think  He  has  none.  His  word  can  create  a 
multitude.  There  are  "  treasures  hid  in  the  sand,"  and  the  Lord's  chosen  shall 
eat  thereof.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  scorn  of  impossibility  : — It  is  not  a  lucky  word, 
this  same  impossible :  no  good  comes  of  those  who  have  it  so  often  in  their  mouth. 
Who  is  he  that  says  always,  There  is  a  hon  in  the  way  ?  Sluggard,  thou  must  slay 
the  lion,  then ;  the  way  has  to  be  travelled.  In  art,  in  practice,  innumerable 
critics  will  demonstrate  that  most  things  are  henceforth  impossible ;  that  we  are 
got,  once  for  all,  into  the  region  of  perennial  commonplace,  and  must  contentedly 
continue  there.  Let  such  critics  demonstrate ;  it  is  the  nature  of  them :  what 
harm  is  in  it  ?  Poetry  once  demonstrated  to  be  impossible,  arises  the  Burns,  arises 
tne  Goethe.  Unheroic  commonplace  being  now  clearly  all  we  have  to  look  for, 
comes  Napoleon,  comes  the  conquest  of  the  world.  It  was  proved  by  fluxionary 
calculus,  that  steamships  could  never  get  across  from  the  farthest  point  of  Ireland' 
to  the  nearest  of  Newfoundland  :  impelling  force,  resisting  force,  maximum  here, 
minimum  there,  by  law  of  Nature  and  geometric  demonstration.  What  could  be 
done  ?  The  Great  Eastern  could  weigh  anchor  from  Bristol  Port ;  that  could  be 
done.  The  Great  Eastern,  bounding  safe  through  the  gullets  of  the  Hudson,  threw 
her  cable  out  on  the  capstan  of  New  York,  and  left  our  still  moist-paper  demonstra- 
tion to  dry  itself  at  leisure.  "  Impossible  !  "  cried  Mirabeau,  •'  ne  me  dites  jamais  ee 
bete  de  mot  "  (Never  name  to  me  that  blockhead  of  a  word).     (Thomas  Carlyle.) 

Ver.  38.  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord. — Mary's  quiet  acceptance  of  great- 
ness : — Nothing  impresses  us  more  than  the  calmness  with  which,  after  the  first 
trouble  was  past,  the  virgin  received  the  message  of  the  angel.  She  was  not 
dazzled  nor  excited  by  her  glorious  future.  She  was  not  touched  by  any  vanity. 
"  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord."  In  nothing  more  than  in  this  is  the  simple 
greatness  of  her  character  displayed.  What  was  the  reason  of  this  ?  It  was  that 
the  thought  of  God's  presence  with  her  destroyed  all  thought  of  self.  She  could 
not  think  of  her  greatness  otherwise  than  as  bestowed  by  God.  "  He  that  is 
mighty  hath  magnified  me."  She  could  not  feel  the  flutter  of  vanity.  It  died  in 
the  thought  of  the  glorious  salvation  which  was  coming  to  her  country  and  the 
■world.   She  was  noth'ug  ;  God  was  all.   Do  you  want  a  cure  for  that  false  humility, 


CBA».  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  6S 

that  mock  modesty,  which  says,  "  I  am  not  worthy,"  and  trumpets  its  denial  till 
all  the  world  knows  that  an  honour  has  been  offered  ;  which,  while  it  says  with  tha 
lips,  "  It  is  too  great  for  me,"  feels  all  the  time  in  the  heart  that  self-consciousness 
of  merit  which  betrays  itself  in  the  affected  walk  and  the  showy  humility  t    Would 
yon  be  free  from  thia  folly?    Learn  Mary's  secret.    Feel  that  God  is  all;  that, 
whether  He  makes  you  great,  or  leaves  you  unknown,  it  is  the  best  for  you,  because 
it  is  His  work.     Do  you  want  a  cure  for  that  unhappy,  restless  vanity,  ever  afraid, 
yet  ever  seeking  to  push  itself  forward ;  ever  shy,  yet  ever  trembling  on  the  verge  of 
impertinence ;  which  shows  itself  to  inferiors  in  rank  in  a  bustling  assumption  of 
superiority  which  suspects  it  is  not  superior,  and  to  superiors  in  rank  by  an  in- 
quietude, an  ignorance  of  when  to  speak  and  when  to  be  silent,  sometimes  by  a 
fawning  submission,  sometimes  by   an   intrusive  self-assertion?     Learn  Mary'a 
secret.     Feel  that  you  are  the  child  of  God,  not  the  servant  or  the  master  of  any 
man,  but  the  servant  of  Christ,  who  was  the  servant  of  all.     Vain  1     What  have 
any  of  ua  to  be  vain  of?    Bank?  wealth?  beauty?  pomp  of  household?  dress? 
splendour  of  appearance  ?    A  few  years,  and  we  are  lying  in  the  chill  earth  of  tha 
churchyard ;  our  eye  dead  to  admiration,  our  ear  to  praise ;  and  the  world — whose 
smile  we  forfeited  eternal  life  to  court — regrets  us  for  an  hour,  and  then  forgets. 
And  that  is  human  life  !     No  ;  it  is  the  most  miserable  travesty  of  it.     We  stand 
in  the  presence  of  God.     What  are  all  the  adventitious  advantages  of  rank  or 
wealth  to  Him,  or  to  us  in  Him  ?     Only  the  tarnished  spangles,  the  tinsel  crowns, 
the  false  diamonds,  which  are  the  properties  of  this  petty  theatre  which  we  call 
the  world.     Once  be  able  to  say  in  your  heart,  "  behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord  ; 
be  it  unto  me  as  He  will,"  and  vanity  and  all  its  foolish  fluttering  tribe  of  small 
victories  over  others,  of  pushing  meannesses,  of  restless  desires,  of  little  ostenta- 
tions, will  abandon  your  heart  for  ever.     The  true  greatness,  wealth,  nobility,  is  to 
be  at  one  in  character  with  the  everlasting  goodness,  truth,  and  love  of  God ;  to  be 
great  with  the  magnanimity  of  Christ,  to  be  rich  in  all  the  eternal  virtues,  to  ba 
noble  among  the  aristocracy  of  the  best  men.     He  who  possesses  these  can  never 
be  vain,  and  the  way  to  possess  them  is  the  Virgin's  way — to  be  the  servant  of  God, 
to  do  His  will.     (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)       Ready  acquiescence  in  God's  will  :— 
How  fit  was  her  womb  to  conceive  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  God,  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  whose  breast  had  so  soon,  by  the  power  of  the  same  Spirit,  con- 
ceived an  assent  to  the  will  of  God  1  and  now,  of  a  handmaid  of  God,   she  is 
advanced  to  the  mother  of  God.    No  sooner  hath  she  said,  "  Be  it  done,"  than  it 
is  done ;  the  Holy  Ghost  overshadows  her,  and  forms  her  Saviour  in  her  own  body. 
{Bishop  Hall.)        Mary's  answer  exhibits : — 1.  Genuine  humility,  with  joyful  faith. 
2.  Quiet  resignation,  with  active  zeal.    3.  Faithful  love,  with  unwavering  heroism. 
{Van  Doren.)        Beasons  for  submission  to  the  will  of  God: — I,  The  sovEREiaNxr 
ov  God.    It  is  that  of  a  Father.     Whatever  we  have,  it  is  God's  more  than  ours. 
II.  Th«  bighteousness  and  justice  op  God.      III.  The  mercy  and  goodness  or 
God.      IV.  The  AiiL-snrFiciENCT  of  God.      V.  The  cnchangeableness  of  God. 
(D.  Beaumont.)        The  call  of  God : — It  was  the  answer  of  profound  and  humble 
obedience  to  the  greatest  call  ever  addressed  from  heaven  to  a  mortal  creature. 
Sudden,  undreamt  of,  overwhelming — interrupting  in  the  most  startling  manner 
the  daily  curse  of  an  obscure  human  life,  breaking  in  on  its  privacy,  and  laying  on 
it  the  most  awful  of  charges — it  was  a  call  to  prepare  for  being  the  instrument  of 
the  final  and  complete  accomplishment  of  God's  highest  words  and  most  amazing 
work.     It  was  a  call  to  be  the  last  link  in  a  chain  which,  beginning  from  God  Him- 
self, and  composed  of  that  august  hue  of  chosen  souls  who  in  all  ages  had  carried 
forward  His  purpose  and  His  promise,  was  to  end  in  man  brought  at  last  to  the 
utmost  and  most  inexpressible  closeness  unto  God — ihe  human  mother  of  the 
Eternal  Son.     It  was  a  call  to  such  a  pinnacle  of  unearthly  and  unapproachable 
greatness  that  the  consequences  involved  in  it,  and  the  price  which  it  might  exact, 
must  have  confounded  and  baffJed  all  anticipation  and  forethought.    What  might 
have  to  come  before  the  glory,  who  could  conjecture?    Wbat  might  she  not  have 
to  be,  to  endure,  to  surrender,  to  look  forward  to,  who  in  a  moment  learned,  in  the 
depth  of  her  obscurity,  that  she  had  been  chosen,  and  was  called  out  of  all  man- 
kind, to  be  the  mother  of  the  "  Son  of  the  Highest,"  the  "  Son  of  God,"  tha 
"Christ."     It  is  idle,  it  is  profane  to  attempt  to  imagine  the  mind  and  soul  of  a 
human  being  like  ourselves  at  such  a  moment.     In  its  sudden  translation  and 
lifting  cp  *ut  of  all  the  ordinary  conditions  of  human  life,  in  the  tides  of  honour 
and  rapture,    of  crushing  shame   and   consciousness  of    the  Divine   election,   of 
possible  sacrifice  and  certain  triumph,  it  could  be  like  nothing  that  man  has  evef 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  t 

gone  through.     But  whatever  passed  before  the  thought  of  that  blessed  one  whilt 
the  angel's  words  were  setting  before  her  the  lot  to  which  she  had  been  appointed, 
and  the  place  she  was  to  fill  in  the  eternal  history,  her  instant  expression  of 
character  was  that  of  absolute  self-surrender  to  all  that  she  was  called  to— o£ 
perfect  readiness  for  all  that  might  be  required  of  her.     "  Behold  the  handmaid  cl 
the  Lord,  &o."     {Dean  Church.)        When  Mary  uttered  these  words  of  sweet  and 
humble  sublimity,  she  at  once  received  the  rankling  sword-thrust  into  her  soul,  and 
steeped  her  soul  in  a  balm  that  healed,  and  more  than  healed  all  possible  sword- 
thrusts.     {Professor  Warjield.)        The  handmaid  of  the  Lord : — L  Let  your  atten- 
tion be  called  to  the  grand  event  here  described  and  made  known.    It  is  clear 
that  He  who  was  to  be  a  perfect  sacrifice  must  have  a  purer  origin  than  fallen 
man;  supernatural.     •' The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,"  &c.     II.  Mary's 
ANSWER  TO  THIS  GRACIOUS  COMMUNICATION.     "  Behold  the  handmaid, "  Ac.     I.  That 
this  obedient  saint  was  using  the  language  and  expressing  the  sentiments  of  God' a 
people  in  aU  ages.     The  title  of  Moses  was  "  the  servant  of  God"  (Daniel  vi.  20; 
Psa.  oivi.  16).     Beady  obedience.     2.  We  are  not  less  bound  to  the  service  of  God 
under  the  gospel ;  the  titles  of  servants  and  handmaids  do  as  much  befit  us,  as 
they  did  the  people  of  old.     St.  Paul  and  St.  James  style  themselves  "  servants  of 
God."    3.  A  word  to  those  who  can  say,  •'  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve."    This 
is  your  world  of  trial,  and  you  may  expect  difiBculties  to  draw  you  aside.     The 
Master's  rule  is  best  found  in  His  word,  "Be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy  word.' 
Let  as  receive  with  humility  and  gratitude  the  entire  Word  of  God.    With  what 
delight  must  the  angel  have  received  Mary's  pious  answer  to  his  communication : 
and  when  he  returned  and  told  it  in  the  court  of  heaven,  there  would  be  joy  in  the 
presence  of  the  rest  of  the  angels  of  God :  so  when  your  hearts  respond  to  the 
messengers  of  grace.     (J".  Slade,  M.A.)        Blessedness  of  resignation : — I  have  at 
times  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  comfort  which  it  yields  to  the  spirit  when  I  merge 
my  will  into  God's  will,  when  I  resolve  to  have  no  will  of  my  own  separate  from 
God.    I  feel  quite  assured  that  this  renunciation  of  self  and  entire  devotion  to 
God's  service  would  give  a  simplicity  and  grandeur  to  my  existence ;  would  throw 
an  unclouded  sunshine  over  all  my  ways ;  would  raise  me  above  the  cares  and 
provocations  of  this  life  ;  would  enhance  even  my  sensible  gratifications,  and  super- 
add those  gratifications  of  a  higher  order,  which  constitute  the  main  and  essential 
blessedness  of  heaven.     O,  my  God,  may  it  be  thus  with  mel     {Dr.  Chalmers.) 
The  life  of  consecration  : — As  Mary  uttered  this  word,  she  laid  herself  upon  God's 
altar  in  absolute  abandonment  to  God's  will,  that  He  might  do  in  her,  and  through 
her,  whatever  pleased  Him.     I.  If  we  consider  the  cibcumstances  that  precedkd 
AND  LED  tjp  TO  this  GREAT  UTTERANCE,  wc  shall  See,  in  Gabriel's  conversation  with 
her,  three  arresting  things.     1.  Gabriel  made  clear  to  her  what  her  vocation  was. 
This  is  the  first  condition  of  a  rightly  lived  life — it  must  be  lived  in  obedience  to 
the  recognition  of  the  vocation  of  God.    Each  of  us  has  been  created  for  a  definite 
end,  and  to  fill  a  special  sphere  in  life.     2.  Gabriel's  converse  with  Mary  revealed 
also  the  power  in  which  that  vocation  was  to  be  realized.     She  must  abandon  her- 
self to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.    8.  Gabriel  indicated  also  the  condition  under 
which  alone  the  Divine  vocation  could  be  realized,  and  that  was  by  the  consent  of 
her  own  will.    God  could  not  take  possession  of  Mary  without  her  free  response  to 
His  call.     n.  The  life  op  regeneration  is  of  necessity  not  simply  a  life  or 

NEGATIVE     SEPARATION    FROM    THB   WORtD,   BUT  A  LIFE   OF  POSITIVE   CONSECRATION  TO 

God.  1.  If  consecration  to  God  is  the  condition  of  a  rightly-lived  hfe,  since  it  is 
an  action,  it  is  an  action  which  must  take  place  at  some  time  in  our  lives.  It  must 
be  definitely  entered  into.  2.  If  this  hfe  of  consecration  is  one  which  we  definitely 
enter  into,  it  must  be  continuously  persevered  in.  You  cannot  consecrate  yourself 
in  a  moment,  so  as  to  secure  perseverance  in  a  consecrated  life.  We  can  only  live 
the  consecrated  life  when,  having  entered  into  it  by  an  act  of  self-surrender,  we  live 
in  obedience  to  consecrating  grace.  3.  The  life  of  consecration  must  be  lived  in  a 
God-assigned  sphere.  If  Mary  bad  turned  aside  from  the  vocation  of  God,  and 
with  aU  possible  zeal  had  sought  to  serve  Him  elsewhere,  and  in  other  spheres 
than  He  had  appointed,  her  life  would  have  been  a  life,  not  of  consecration  to  God, 
but  one  of  self-pleasing.  For  yon  must  remember  this,  that  it  is  quite  possible  for 
a  religious  life  to  be  a  self-pleasing  life-  We  may  be  apparently  leading  the  most 
heroic  lives  of  self-sacrifice,  and,  after  all,  our  hves  may  be  lives  of  self-pleasing 
all  the  time,  for  they  are  lived  in  a  self-chosen  sphere ;  and  the  question  which 
everyone  who  seeks  to  be  consecrated  to  God  must  ask  himself  is  this — Lord,  whera 
woaldest  Then  have  me  to  be  7    And  then^Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  to 


OHA».  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  57 

do  ?  And  then— Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  anSer  ?  We  must  be  where 
God  would  have  us  be,  we  must  do  what  God  would  have  as  do,  we  must  suffer 
what  God  would  have  us  suffer,  if  our  life  is  to  be  consecrated  to  God,  and  not 
dedicated  to  self.  It  is  so  important  that  we  should  remember  that  all  right 
spheres  in  life  are  God-as8igned.  God  calls  one  man  to  the  priesthood,  another  to 
serve  TTim  in  lay  life  ;  God  calls  one  to  religion,  another  to  secular  life  ;  God  calls 
one  to  serve  Him  in  married  life,  and  another  to  serve  Him  in  single  life ;  God 
calls  one  to  serve  Him  in  wealth,  and  another  in  poverty ;  but  the  essential  law  of 
living  a  life  of  consecration  to  God  is  a  hearty,  generous  embrace  of  the  God- 
assigned  sphere  of  hfe.  Hearty,  generous  embrace— no  mere  resignation.  What 
have  we  Christian  people  to  do  with  resignation  ?  We  have  to  rise  to  something 
much  higher  than  resignation ;  we  have  to  leap  forward  in  response  to  Divine 
vocation,  because  it  is  the  vocation  of  God.     IH.  The  condition  of  bespondin* 

TO   THE   DiVINB   VOCATION   IS   ABANDONMENT    TO   THE     HoLY   GhOST.        What    is    God'S 

great  purpose  in  putting  us  in  the  sphere  of  life  in  which  we  are?  I  do  not 
answer  this  question  with  dogmatic  confidence,  but  my  belief  is  that  the  primary 
purpose  of  God's  dealing  with  His  people  is — formation  of  character  ;  that  we  are 
placed  in  our  spheres  of  work,  wherever  they  may  be,  rather  for  what  God  means 
to  do  in  us  than  what  God  means  to  do  by  us.  I  know  quite  well  that  wherever 
God  places  us  He  means  to  do  a  work  by  us;  but — I  repeat  it — I  believe  that 
God's  primary  purposes  of  His  dealings  with  us  is  not  the  work  He  does  by  us, 
bat  the  work  He  wills  to  do  in  us.  IV.  Conseckation  implies  painful  bacrificb. 
Mary  would  naturally  shrink  back  from  response  to  this  vocation  for  two  reasons. 
1.  The  call  might  seem  too  high  for  her.  How  many  there  are  who  shrink  back 
from  Uving  generous.  Christian  lives  in  the  world  because  they  think  that,  if  they 
are  really  to  make  up  their  minds  to  Uve  lives  consecrated  to  Christ  and  of  loyalty 
to  God  "in  among  the  haunts  of  men,"  they  will  be  taking  up  a  position  which  is 
too  hard  and  difficult  for  them  to  maintain.  What  underlies  many  a  poor,  miser- 
able, dwarfed  Christian  life  is  this  cowardice  which  is  so  common  among  us.  It  is 
andeniably  the  fact  that  whole  surrender  to  God  does  of  necessity  involve  painful 
consequences ;  for  they  who  thus  give  themselves  up  to  God  are  called  to  know  the 
fellowship  of  Christ's  suffering.  It  is  quite  true  that  consecration  to  God  is  going 
to  Calvary.  Unless  we  are  prepared  to  know  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings, 
we  cannot  really  and  truly  say  this  second  word  of  Mary's.  2.  But  there  is  another 
thing  that  would  have  made  her  shrink  back  from  her  vocation,  and  that  was  the 
suspicion  and  calumny  that  would  follow  upon  her  consecration.  Ere  long  men 
were  pointing  at  her  with  the  finger  of  scorn,  and  even  Joseph  was  thinking  of 
putting  her  away.  And  one  thing  is  certain — is  it  not  ? — that  men  who  go  out  into 
the  world  to  try  to  lead  a  godly  life  often  find  themselves  exposed  to  its  calumny. 
Its  hatred  of  goodness  will  make  it  only  too  ready  to  believe  any  scandalous  story 
that  is  spread  abroad  about  any  one  who  lives  for  God.  It  is  a  fear  of  the  con- 
demnation of  the  world  which  holds  so  many  back  from  God.  Yet  Mary  faced  it 
all ;  though  her  response  meant  such  awful  nearness  to  God,  though  it  involved  such 
great  sacrifice  as  to  bring  upon  her  intense  shame,  boldly  she  ??aid,  "Behold  the 
handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy  word."  In  conclusion,  let 
me  point  out  how  that  this  life  of  consecration  is  the  fruit  of  love.  It  is  love  that 
•onsecrates.  Love  is  based  on  gratitude,  and  Mary  recognized  the  fact  gratefully  that 
God  had  the  right  to  claim  her  to  use  as  He  willed.  "  Behold  the  handmaid, — the 
slave  of  the  Lord — be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy  word."  "  0  God,  I  am  Thine 
handmaid,  Thy  slave  ;  Thy  right  over  me  is  absolute;  I  cani:otfor  a  moment  refuse 
to  obey  Thy  voice."  And  so  it  is.  God  has  upon  us  a  threefold  claim,  each 
springing  from  an  act  of  love.  1.  The  first  is  the  claim  of  creation.  Here  we  are  iv 
God's  world  not  of  our  own  will,  but  of  His  will.  2.  But  God  has  a  second  claia 
npon  us,  and  that  is  the  claim  of  redemption.  The  eternal  Christ,  the  Son  of  God, 
came  into  the  world,  became  the  Child  of  Mary,  and  passed  to  the  cross.  He  gave 
Himself — every  portion  of  Himself — upon  the  tree  for  us — His  mind.  His  heart. 
His  win,  each  member  of  His  sacred  body.  Behold  it  quivering  upon  the  cross  ! 
Why  ?  That  He  might  buy  us  for  His  own.  3.  But  there  is  one  other  reason,  and 
that  is  gratitude  for  regeneration.  O  mystery  of  mysteries  I  To  think  that  yoa 
and  I,  sin-stricken  as  we  are,  should  not  only  have  been  redeemed,  but  that  we 
should  have  been  "  married  to  the  Lord  I "  To  think  that  He  who  in  His  humanity 
is  the  fairest  of  Gd's  creation,  should  have  stooped  from  the  height  of  Hia 
Father's  throne  to  the  deep  depths  of  our  fallen  state,  and  not  simply  have  brought 
US  forgiveness,  but  tha*  He  should  have  embraced  us  in  Hia  arms,  aud  brouj^ht  ui 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

to  Hia  saored  heart,  and  made  us  with  Him  one — bone  of  His  bone  and  flesh  of 
His  flesh  !  To  think  of  this,  and  all  this  as  within  the  bounds  of  truth  I  Grasp 
the  mystery  of  regeneration,  and  what  follows?  Consecration  to  God,  abandon* 
ment  to  Christ,  As  the  wife  consecrates  herself  to  her  husband,  so  the  regenerate 
to  the  great  Bridegroom  of  the  Church.  Whole  surrender  is  my  duty  ;  whatever 
He  asks,  that  I  yield.  Creation,  redemption,  regeneration — revelation  after  revela- 
tion of  God's  love,  kindle  in  my  heart  gratitude,  and  then  lead  me  to  take  myself 
wholly  up  to  God's  altar  and  lay  myself  down  there  a  living  sacrifice  at  God's  feet, 
as  I  cry,  "  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thj 
word."    {Canon  Body.) 

Vers.  39-45.  And  Mary  arose  In  those  days  and  went  Into  the  hill  country. — 

The  home  of  Zacharias : — Juttah,  an  ancient  priestly  town,  is  held  by  the  Greek 
Church  to  be  the  birthplace  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  and  as  such  it  is  the  goal  of 
pilgrimage  to  thousands  of  Greek  Christians  each  year.  Support  to  this  view  ia 
believed  to  be  found  in  the  words  of  St.  Luke,  which,  in  our  version,  speak  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  as  journeying  "  into  the  hill  country  with  haste,  to  a  city  of  Judah." 
This,  it  is  held,  should  be  "  to  the  town  Judah  "  or  Juttah,  since  it  would  be  vague 
in  the  extreme  to  speak  merely  of  "  a  city  of  Judah."  On  this  ground,  so  great 
authorities  as  Eeland,  Bobinson,  and  Biehm  think  this  place  was  actually  the 
residence  of  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth,  and  the  birthplace  of  the  Baptist.  It  is  a 
large  stone  village,  standing  high  on  a  ridge ;  but  some  of  the  population  live  in 
tents.  Underground  cisterns  supply  water,  and  on  the  south  there  are  a  few  olive 
trees,  but  the  hill  and  its  neighbourhood  are  very  stony,  though  the  vine  must  in 
ancient  times  have  been  extensively  cultivated,  since  rock-cut  wine-presses  are 
found  all  round  the  village.  There  are,  besides,  some  rock-cut  tombs,  which  also 
date  from  antiquity.  But,  poor  though  the  country  looks  and  is,  the  population 
are  very  rich  in  flocks,  the  village  owning,  it  is  said,  no  fewer  than  seven  thousand 
sheep,  besides  goats,  cows,  camels,  horses,  and  donkeys.  The  hills  everywhere  are 
very  rugged  and  stony,  consisting  of  hard  crystalline  limestone ;  but  the  valleys, 
which  are  numerous,  have  good  soil  in  tbem,  some  of  them  being  especially  fertile. 
The  vineyards  and  olive  plantations  on  the  west,  north,  and  south  of  Hebron — for 
the  east  side  of  the  town  has  none — appeared  like  a  great  oasis  in  the  desert, 
though  the  Negeb  is  very  far  from  being  a  desert  as  things  are  judged  m  such  a  land 
as  Palestine.  {G,  Geikie,  D.D.)  Went  into  the  hill  country  :  Mary's  journey  : — 
It  will  prove  an  interesting  exercise  to  trace  on  tne  map  the  route  which  this  Jewish 
maiden  must  have  taken  in  going  down  across  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  from 
Nazareth  southward.  It  was  doubtless  the  same  general  path  to  which  she  had 
been  accustomed,  from  her  ordinary  journeys  to  the  Huly  City,  at  the  solemn 
annual  feasts.  But  just  now  her  mind  was  in  a  strange  new  frame  of  feeling. 
Each  familiar  locality,  so  crowded  with  history  and  devout  reminiscences  of  her 
nation's  annals,  would,  under  these  present  circumstances,  make  on  her  imagination 
a  far  deeper  impression  than  usual.  We  must  remember  this,  for  it  gives  help  in 
the  interpretation  of  her  song.  Out  from  under  the  shadows  of  western  hills,  she 
would  come  into  full  view  of  the  whole  country,  quite  across  to  Mount  Carmel,  on 
the  desidate  ridge  of  which  Elijah  defied  and  conquered  the  priests  of  Baal. 
Megiddo,  where  Josiah  lay  dying ;  Jezreel,  where  ALab  sinned  ;  the  brook  Kishon, 
beside  which  Deborah  sang,  after  Sisera  was  slain — these  were  close  at  her  feet. 
Before  long  she  would  arrive  at  Shechem,  and  seem  to  hear  the  old  burden  of 
cursing  and  blessing  echoing  from  Ebal  and  Gerizim.  Perhaps  she  paused  a 
moment  beside  Joseph's  grave ;  perhaps  she  sat  to  rest,  and  quenched  her  thirst  at 
Jacob's  well.  A  little  further  down  she  would  reach  Jerusalem,  "  beautiful  on  the 
sides  of  the  north,"  and  catch  glimpses  of  the  golden-roofed  temple  shining  in  the 
sun.  Diminutive  Bethlehem  next  would  have  to  be  passed,  and  her  tired  feet  would 
tread  the  lonely  path  that  goes  by  Bachel's  tomb.  Her  eyes  would  roam  over  the 
verdured  fields  where  David  tended  his  father's  flocks,  and  caught  the  starry  figures 
of  the  eighth  and  the  nineteenth  psalms.  And  while  she  lingered  on  such  a  spot, 
she  would  think  of  Euth  returning  with  Naomi  after  bidding  Orpah  farewell. 
Hard  hills  are  those  which  now  she  would  have  to  climb,  before  she  could  reach 
the  cave  of  Machpelah,  or  discover  the  small  houses  of  Hebron  in  the  distance. 
Of  this  we  have  no  detail.  But  it  aids  us  much  afterward  to  keep  it  in  mind ;  for 
it  shows  how  she  went  thinking  all  the  way  to  her  destination.  We  meet  her  first 
in  the  story  in  the  presence  of  Elisabeth,  dwelling,  perhaps,  almost  beneath  the 
ehade  of  Abraham's  oak  iu   Mamre.      (C.  *S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  The  power  of 


«HAr.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  B9 

tympathy  : — The  dialogne  is  brief ;  those  two  women  talked  together  as  only  two 
^omen  could  talk  who  perfectly  understood  each  other.  Mary  heard  Elisabeth 
«ay,  "  Whence  is  this  to  me,  that  the  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me  ?  " 
Her  troubles  had  been  so  hard,  her  joys  had  been  so  great,  and  her  silent  heart  had 
been  so  full  of  both  of  them,  that  her  relief  must  have  been  sudden  and  over- 
whelming. When  the  sweet  face  of  that  pure,  unmarried  maiden  saw  in  the 
joyous  countenance  of  that  incorruptible  Jewish  matron  the  sign  that  she  would  be 
welcomed  as  faultless  and  true,  oh,  in  that  supreme  moment,  she  could  answer 
only  with  a  song,  and  pour  forth  her  gratitude  in  nothing  less  than  the  inspired 
numbers  of  a  New  Testament  psalm  1  (C.  <S,  Robinson,  D.D.)  Religious  inter- 
course:— When  serious  persons  are  met  together,  the  example  of  Mary  and 
Elisabeth  teaches  them  how  they  ought  to  be  employed.  Let  not  the  time  be 
wasted  on  trifles :  but  needful  and  becoming  attention  being  paid  to  the  demands 
of  courtesy  and  common  life,  let  the  concerns  of  religion  occupy  a  prominent 
place  in  their  conversation.  Such  intercourse  is  most  acceptable  to  God,  and  will 
be  most  advantageous  to  yourselves.  1.  It  will  be  the  means  of  your  being  better 
informed,  for  "  the  lips  of  the  wise  increase  knowledge."  2.  It  will  operate  as  a 
check  on  all  that  is  evil,  and  as  a  stimulus  to  all  that  is  good.  3.  It  will  give  an 
opportunity  of  comparing  your  experience,  which  will  greatly  encourage  and  edify 
you  in  the  faith  and  obedience  of  the  gospel.  4.  It  will  elicit  many  a  latent  spark 
of  affection  and  zeal.  5.  It  will  support  your  mind  under  temptation,  and  steel 
your  heart  with  resolution  to  act  a  decided  part  in  life ;  for  it  will  convince  you  and 
keep  you  in  mind  that  there  are  some  of  the  same  sentiments  with  yourself, 
anxiously  watching  your  conduct,  and  deeply  concerned  for  your  stability.  Nor 
can  you  deem  it  a  Ught  matter  that  you  will  find  those  who  will  be  safeguards  to 
you  in  the  time  of  prosperity,  and  will  not  forsake  you  in  trouble.  The  hour  of 
Borrow,  sickness,  dissolution,  is  drawing  on  apace — an  hour  in  which  worldly 
associates  would  withdraw,  as  conscious  of  their  unfitness  for  such  a  scene  ;  or,  if 
they  remained,  would  prove  but  miserable  comforters  ;  but  an  hour  in  which  those 
who  know  and  love  the  truth  would  delight  to  stand  by  you,  to  suggest  comforting 
and  edifying  thoughts,  and  assist  in  cheering  the  last  moments  and  smoothing  the 
pillow  of  death.  Seek  the  society  of  the  pious,  and  you  form  a  friendship  which, 
although  interrupted  for  a  season  by  death,  will  be  renewed  with  increased  endear- 
ment, where  infirmity  no  longer  troubles,  nor  separation  divides.  (Jas.  Foote,  M.A.) 
Mary's  visit  to  Elisabeth: — The  next  step  taken  by  Mary  is  in  accordance  with  the 
«almest  practical  good  sense,  and  displays  an  energy  and  a  control  over  other  minds 
which  must  have  been  uncommon.  She  resolves  to  visit  her  cousin  Elisabeth  in 
the  mountain  country.  The  place  was  supposed  to  be  near  Hebron,  and  involved 
a  journey  of  some  twenty  miles  through  a  rugged  country.  For  a  young  maiden 
to  find  means  of  performing  this  journey,  which  involved  attendance  and  protec- 
tion, without  telling  the  reason  for  which  she  resolved  upon  it,  seems  to  show  that 
Mary  had  that  kind  of  character  which  inspires  confidence,  and  leads  those  around 
her  to  feel  that  a  thing  is  right  and  proper  because  she  has  determined  it. 
^Harriet  B.  Stowe.)  The   subordination  of  personal  joys: — Eemarkable  that 

Elisabeth  allowed  herself  to  be  swallowed  up  in  the  greater  joy  of  Mary.  Did  not 
felicitate  herself,  but  pronounced  the  mother  of  her  Lord  blessed  among  women. 
Her  ecstatic  reference  to  her  own  babe  is  in  marked  consistency  with  the  whole 
tone  of  her  spirit.  These  were  some  of  the  real  blessings  of  the  advent  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Before  He  was  yet  born  the  promise  of  His  coming  sent  gladness  into 
human  hearts.  The  mother  rejoiced,  and  her  coming  child  seemed  already  to 
share  His  mother's  ecstasy.  All  this  typical.  The  coming  of  Christ  should  always 
be  associated  with  the  creation  of  new  and  higher  joys.  The  exlcamation  of 
Elisabeth  shows  how  possible  it  is  for  all  our  tenderest  interests  and  proudest  hopes 
to  be  absorbed  in  noble  Christian  emotion.  If  ever  a  woman  could  be  tempted  to 
exalt  her  own  comforts  and  expectations,  so  as  to  shut  out  from  her  view  the  con- 
dition of  other  people,  Elisabeth  was  surely  exposed  to  such  a  temptation.  The 
case,  however,  was  not  one  of  each  woman  rejoicing  in  selfish  anticipations  of  her 
own  happiness ;  already  there  was  a  payment  of  homage  when  homage  was  the 
price  of  self- suppression — a  beautiful  proof  this,  that  the  work  that  was  done  in 
the  case  of  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth  was  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Probably 
there  is  no  finer  test  of  the  religiousness  of  our  spirit  than  the  subordination  of 
our  personal  joys  to  the  gladness  which  is  demanded  by  the  presence  and  claims  of 
Jesus  Christ.  (Dr.  Parker.)  Tlie  speech  of  Elisabeth  must  he  regarded  as  an 
inspired  spfiech : — St.  Luke  seems  to  assert  as  much  when  he  says  that  she  was 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ou*.  i. 

"filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  that  she  spake  ont  with  a  lond  voice  and 
described  the  blessed  virgin  as  the  mother  of  her  Lord.  And  observe  that  in  this 
inspired  speech  Elisabeth  addresses  Mary  in  the  very  phrase  which  the  angel  had 
already  used,  "Blessed,"  &o.  Observe  also  the  manner  in  which  Elisabeth  speaks 
of  the  blessed  virgin's  faith.  There  is  a  peculiar  emphasis  in  the  phrase,  "  Blessed 
is  she  that  believed."  It  was  her  faith,  in  the  one  great  instance  in  which  it  was 
tried,  which  made  her,  as  it  were,  a  fellow-worker  with  God,  and  gave  her  the  high 
honour  and  privilege  of  being  somethiug  more  than  a  mere  passive  instrument  in 
the  great  work  of  human  redemption.  {Bishop  Goodwin.)  Happiness  comtnuni- 
cated  doubles  itself : — The  blessed  maid,  whom  vigour  of  age  had  more  fitted  for 
the  way,  hastens  her  journey  into  the  hill-country  to  visit  that  gracious  matron 
whom  God  had  made  a  sign  of  her  miraculous  conception.  Only  the  meeting  of 
saints  in  heaven  can  parallel  the  meeting  of  these  two  cousins :  the  two  wonders 
of  the  world  are  met  under  one  roof,  aad  congratulate  their  mutual  happiness. 
When  we  have  Christ  spiritually  conceived  within  as,  wa  cannot  bt  quiet  till  ws 
have  imparted  our  joy.    (Bishop  Hall.) 

Blest  earth,  whereon  she  trod. 

Put  forth  your  fragrance  sweet  S 

Blest  hills  that  felt  her  feet. 
The  mother  with  her  God. 

More  blest  ye  friends,  whose  guest 

She  now  doth  silence  break. 

Of  heavenly  things  to  speak, 
And  where  her  footsteps  rest.        {Paritian  Brtviary.) 

Ver.  45.  And  blessed  Is  she  that  believeth. — Blessedness  of  firmly  believing: — 
Doubting  nothing  1  That  is  the  secret  of  liberty,  of  efficiency,  of  success  in  every 
"▼ork  which  is  undertaken  by  men :  a  confidence  in  the  practicability,  in  the  value 
of  the  work,  in  the  Divine  authority  which  imposes  it  upon  us  as  an  obligatory  work, 
and  in  the  Divine  providence  and  power  which  will  bring  it  to  a  successful  perform- 
ance. It  is  the  secret  of  success,  of  enthusiasm  in  any  secular  enterprise.  You 
see  it  in  the  inventor  who  is  perfectly  certain  of  the  combination  of  instruments  by 
which  he  is  to  accomplish  a  certain  result — a  result  which  is  of  value  and  importance 
to  mankind.  Nothing  can  hinder  his  endeavour,  nothing  can  obscure  or  damp  his 
enthusiasm,  because  he  is  certain  of  ultimate  success.  Tou  see  it  in  the  teacher 
who  knows  that  he  has  a  truth  to  communicate  to  men,  a  truth  which  it  is  of  im- 
portance to  them  to  apprehend  and  to  understand,  who  is  not  groping  among 
uncertainties  as  he  speaks  it,  who  is  not  vaguely  feeling  after  conjectures  while  he 
utters  it,  who  is  able  to  affirm  it  to  others,  because  he  has  it  affirmed  in  his  own 
intelligent  and  intuitive  spirit — the  principle  which  he  is  declaring  to  the  world. 
Kepler  said :  "  God  has  waited  so  many  centuries  for  an  observer  of  the  heavens,  I 
can  wait  for  years  for  an  interpreter  of  those  observations."  And  every  man  who  as 
certainly  knew  that  he  had  apprehended  truth  and  had  it  conveyed  to  others  has 
been  reinforced,  inspired  by  this  confidence,  and  gone  to  his  work  doubting  nothing. 
See  it  in  the  soldier  who  knows,  because  he  knows  the  commander,  that  the  order 
which  has  been  given  is  wise,  practicable,  needful ;  that  no  life  will  be  wasted  which 
can  be  saved,  and  no  endeavour  commanded  which  is  not  indispensable  to  the  great 
result.  See  it  in  the  sailor  who  trusts  his  clock  and  his  compass,  and  is  absolutely 
certain  that  the  sun,  of  which  he  takes  the  meridian  observation,  will  not  tell  him 
a  lie,  but  will  point  out  exactly  the  point  on  the  ocean  where  the  ship  at  that 
moment  is ;  and  he  goes  on  his  course,  after  his  observation,  doubting  nothing, 
knowing  where  he  is  as  exactly  as  if  the  commerce  of  nations  had  built  at  that 
very  spot  a  beacon  and  had  labelled  it  in  immense  letters  of  light  in  all  the 
languages  of  the  world :  "  This  is  at  such  a  point  on  such  a  meridian."  He  knows 
as  certainly  as  he  could  know  then,  when  he  has  caught  the  ray  of  the  sun  upon 
his  instrument,  where  he  is  on  the  ocean,  which  to  others  seems  pathless  and 
intricate.  Everywhere,  then,  this  confidence  is  the  condition  of  enthusiasm  and  of 
success,  and  in  Christian  enterprises,  precisely  as  in  secular  enterprises,  it  is  a 
confidence  not  merely  in  the  usefulness  of  the  work,  but  in  the  Divine  authority 
which  connects  itself  with  that  work,  and  the  Divine  care  and  the  Divine  affection, 
the  Divine  impulse  which  attend  us  in  our  endeavours  to  perform  it.  (R.  Stom.) 
Saving  faith : — I.  ha  the  simplicxiy  of  its  katcbb.    II.  In  thb  zmpobtanob  ov 


CHAP.  I.]  iSr.  LUKE.  61 

ITS  OBJBOTS.        III.     Ih  THB   BUFTICrENCT  OF   ITS   OEODNDS.       IV.    I»   THE   PBOPSEETY 

OP  ITS  ACTS.  V.  Ih  THB!  BENBnT8  OP  ITS  EXERCISE.  "  Blessed  is  she  that  believath ; 
for  there  shall  be  a  performance,"  and  only  a  performance  when  we  believe. 
(William  Bawton.)  Trtist  in  God  : — Mary's  faith,  astounding  in  itself,  the  most 
supreme  example  probably  of  perfect  trust  in  God  and  absolute  self-devotion  to 
Him  that  human  flesh  has  ever  given,  was  all  the  more  striking  to  Elisabeth  on 
account  of  its  contrast  vrith  the  unbelief  of  her  own  husband  under  a  far  less  severs 
trial.  No  wonder  that  when  Mary  appeared  before  her  spirit-illuminated  eyes,  she 
seemed  the  embodiment  of  Faith — that  modest  virgin,  with  clasped  hands,  whom 
Hermas  saw  in  vision,  though  whom  the  elect  of  God  are  saved,  and  from  whom 
spring  all  the  Christian  graces  as  fair  daughters  of  a  fair  mother.  Mary  is  thus,  in 
Elisabeth's  eyes,  the  most  blessed  of  women,  because  the  most  faithful ;  and  it 
suits  well  that  the  first  psalm  of  the  New  Testament  should  take  the  form  of 
a  praise  of  the  fundamental  evangelical  virtue.     {Professor  WarJUld.) 

Vers.  46-65.  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord. — Mary's  song : — Mary  was  on  a 
Tisit  when  she  expressed  her  joy  in  the  language  of  this  noble  song.  It  were  well 
if  all  our  social  intercourse  were  as  useful  to  our  hearts  as  this  visit  was  to  Mary. 
•♦  Iron  iharpeneth  iron ;  so  a  man  shajpeneth  the  countenance  of  his  friend." 
Mary,  full  of  faith,  goes  to  see  Elisabeth,  who  is  also  full  of  holy  confidence,  and 
the  two  are  not  long  together  before  their  faith  mounts  to  full  assurance,  and  their 
full  assurance  bursts  forth  in  a  torrent  of  sacred  praise.  This  praise  aroused 
their  slumbering  powers,  and  instead  of  two  ordinary  village  women,  we  see  before 
us  two  prophetesses  and  poetesses,  upon  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  abundantly 
rested.  When  we  meet  with  our  kinsfolk  and  acquaintance,  let  it  be  our  prayer  to 
God  that  our  communion  may  be  not  only  pleasant,  but  profitable  ;  that  we  may 
not  merely  pass  away  time  and  spend  a  pleasant  hour,  but  may  advance  a  day's 
march  nearer  to  heaven,  and  acquire  greater  fitness  for  our  eternal  rest.  I.  Mart 
SINGS.  1.  Her  subject  is  a  Saviour.  She  hails  the  incarnate  God.  2.  Her  peculiar 
delight  was  that  this  Saviour  was  to  be  born  of  her.  3.  The  choice  poem  before 
us  is  a  hymn  of  faith.  No  Saviour  was  yet  born  :  nor  had  the  Virgin  any  evidence 
as  yet,  such  as  carnal  sense  requires,  that  He  would  be.  But  faith  has  its  musio 
as  well  as  sense — music  of  a  diviner  sort.  If  the  viands  on  the  table  make  men 
sing  and  dance,  feelings  of  a  more  refined  and  ethereal  nature  can  fill  believers 
vfith  a  hallowed  plentitude  of  delight.  4,  Her  lowhness  does  not  make  her  stay 
her  song ;  nay,  it  imports  a  sweeter  note  into  it.  The  less  worthy  I  am  of  His 
favours,  the  more  sweetly  will  I  sing  of  His  grace.  5.  The  greatness  of  the 
promised  blessing  did  not  give  her  an  argument  for  suspending  her  thankful 
strain.  Although  she  appreciated  the  greatness  of  the  favour,  she  did  but  rejoice 
the  more  heartily  on  that  account.  6.  The  holiness  of  God  did  not  damp  the 
ardour  of  her  joy.  On  the  contrary,  she  exults  in  it.  She  weaves  even  that 
bright  attribute  into  her  song.  7.  Mark  how  her  strain  gathers  majesty  as  it 
proceeds.  8.  She  does  not  finish  her  song  till  she  has  reached  the  covenant — the 
softest  pillow  for  an  aching  head,  the  best  prop  for  a  trembling  spirit.  II.  She 
BIN08  BWKETLT.  1.  She  praiscs  her  God  right  heartily.  Evidently  her  soul  is  on 
fire.  2.  Her  praise  is  very  joyful.  3.  She  sings  confidently.  4.  She  sings  with 
great  familiarity.  It  is  the  song  of  one  who  draws  very  near  to  her  God  in  loving 
intimacy.  5.  While  her  song  was  all  this,  yet  how  very  humble  it  was,  and  how 
full  of  gratitude.  She  wants  a  Saviour ;  she  feels  it ;  her  soul  rejoices  because 
there  is  a  Saviour  for  her.  She  does  not  talk  as  though  she  should  commend  her- 
self to  Him,  but  she  hopes  to  stand  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Let  us  take  care 
that  our  familiarity  has  always  blended  with  it  the  lowliest  prostration  of  spirit, 
when  we  remember  that  He  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  and  we  are  nothing 
but  dust  and  ashes.  He  fills  all  things,  and  we  are  less  than  nothing  and  vanity. 
in.  Shall  she  sino  alone  ?  Yes,  she  must,  if  the  only  music  we  can  bring  is 
that  of  carnal  delights  and  worldly  pleasures.  The  joy  of  the  table  is  too  low  for 
Mary ;  the  joy  of  the  feast  and  the  family  grovels  when  compared  with  hers.  But 
shall  she  sing  alone  ?  Certainly  not,  if  this  day  any  of  us,  by  simple  trust  in 
Jesus,  can  take  Christ  to  be  our  own.  If  Christ  be  thine,  there  is  no  song  on 
earth  too  high,  too  holy,  for  thee  to  sing  ;  nay,  there  is  no  song  which  thrills  from 
angelio  lips,  no  note  which  thrills  archangel's  tongue,  in  which  thou  mayest  not 
join.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord: — The  keynote  of  a 
choice  sonnet.  When  your  own  heart  is  lifted  up,  then  lift  up  the  name  of  th« 
Lord.     Exalt  Him  when  He  exalts  you.      If  you  cannot  magnify  God,  it  is  pro* 


«  THE  BIBLICAL  TLLVSTRATOR,  CoHi».l» 

»         '  1 1  "  ■ '  '  I  ■ 

-liably  because  yoa  are  magnifying  jonrself.  May  the  Lord  oat  self  dotm,  and  maibt 
nothing  of  yen,  and  then  you  wUl  naake  everything  of  Him.  When  yoa  sink  in 
^onr  own  estimation,  God  will  rise  in  your  esteem.  I.  Hebb  is  am  oooiTPATtON 
;j-0B  ALL  oBACious  PEOPLE.  All  who  know  the  Lord,  and  have  been  bom  into  E^ 
'family,  may  "  magnify  "  Him.  1.  It  is  an  occupation  which  may  be  followed  by 
all  «oi-ts  of  people.  None  are  too  humble  or  lowly  to  do  this.  2.  This  ocoapa* 
tion  can  be  followed  in  all  places.  The  occupation  sanctifies  the  place.  3.  It  can 
'be  fitly  performed  in  solitude.  4.  It  requires  no  money.  '6.  It  does  not  require 
^great  talent.  The  soul  may  sing,  although  the  voice  cannot.  6.  It  is  the  grandest 
occupation  that  mortals  can  engage  in.  II.  A  bemedy  fob  SELF-coMaBATOLAXioiT. 
Mary  had  received  a  great  promise.  Nature  would  have  bid  her  magnify  herself ; 
grace  taught  her  to  "  magnify  the  Lord."  Following  the  prompting  of  grace,  she 
^ealt  a  death-blow  to  the  temptation  to  pride,  and  rendered  praise  where  daa 
III.  A  7BUITFUL  ciTEBAKcB  FOB  HOLY  TEELiNOS.  This  was  evidently  the  overflow 
of  a  full  soul.  1.  Wonder.  2.  Expectation.  3.  Awe.  4.  Humility.  6.  Calm 
thought.  Maiy*s  atterance  is  full,  many-sided,  and  iiatural,  and  yet  most 
spiritual.  It  breathes  the  purest  and  the  holiest  emotions.  ,.  IV.  A  beasom  roa 
HOPELFULKBSS.  It  would  be  well  to  be  wrapped  up  in  this  spbit  with  regard,  to 
everything.  1.  Our  own  providential  condition.  2.  Our  glances  into  futurity. 
8.  The  salvation  of  our  fellow-men.  V.  A  guide  in  oub  theology.  •  This  will 
keep  as  right.  (Ibid.)  Rejoicing  in  Ood : — When  Mary  speaks  here  of  her  soul  and 
her  spirit,"  she  means  to  describe  exhaustively  the  whole  inward  immaterial  being 
of  man — its  higher  and  its  lower  elements — the  ^eat  of  rfiason  and  personality,  as 
well  as  the  seat  of  affection;  that  which  we  have  in  common  with  the  lower 
animals,  as  well  as  that  which  distinguishes  us  from  them  as  immortal  beings. 
The  whole  inward  being,  she  says,  enters  on  this  work  of  joyful  praise — soul  and 
spirit  alike.  And  the  reason  is  that  the  human  soul  is  so  constructed  that  con- 
tact, real  contact,  with  God  affords  it  the  highest  pleasure,  of  which  such 
language  as  Mary's  is  the  natural,  the  unexaggerated,  expression.  Without  God, 
man,  viewed  on  the  highest  side  of  his  nature,  is  but  a  spent  force — incomplete, 
inexplicable.  With  God,  he  attains  the  complement,  the  explanation,  of  his 
mysterious  being.  These  words  express — I.  The  satisfacxion  which  uam's 
itEASON  EXPEBiENCEB  AT  CONTACT  wiTH,Goi>.  God  Satisfies  some  of  the  dee|>est 
jeaminga  of  our  intellectual  nature,'  e.g. — 1.  The  desire  to  find  some  cominon 
principle  and  comprehensive  law  explaining  seeming  irregularities.  2.  The  desire 
to  know  the  real  causes  of  things.  II.  The  satisfaction  which  God  yields  to 
THE  affections  OB  EMOTIONS^  1.  The  emotion  of  awe.  God  alone  is  great  in 
Himself,  distancing  aU  possible  competition.  2.  The  love  of  beauty.  3.  Filial 
Affection.  III.  Satisfaction  to  the  conscience.  Gpd  supports  aiid  justifies 
conscience.  He  gives  to  conscience  basis,  firmness,  consistency.  He  relieves  its 
anxieties.  He  reconciles  by  a  fuller  revelation  its  questionings  about  Himself. 
{Canon  Liddon.)         True  praise: — 1.  Clear  eye  to  estimate  God's  works.    2.  A 

gad  heart  to  rejoice  in  them.  3.  A  loosened  tongue.  {Van  Voren.)  L  Thank- 
1  joy.  n.  Humble  joy.  HI.  Hopeful  joy.  IV.  God-glorifying  Joy.  (IWd.J 
JReligious  joy : — Maiy's  praise  is  very  joyful — "My  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God 
iny  Saviour."  The  word  in  the  Greek  is  a  remarkable  one.  I  beHeve  it  is  the 
came  word  which  is  used  in  the  passage,  "Bejoice  ye  in  that  day  and  leap  for  joy.'* 
Vfe  used  to  have  an  old  word  in  English  which  described  a  certain  exulting  dance, 
J  *  a  galliard."  That  word  is  supposed  to  have  come  from  the  Greek  word  here 
tised.  It  was  a  sort  of  leaping  dance ;  the  old  commentators  call  it  a  levalto.  Mary, 
in  effect,  declares,  "  My  spirit  shall  dance  like  David  before  the  ark,  shall  leap, 
ehall  spring,  shall  bound,  shall  rejoice  in  God  my  Saviour."  When  we  praise 
God,  it  ought  not  to  be  with  dolorous  and  doleful  notes.  Some  of  my  brethren 
praise  God  always  on  the  minor  key,  or  in  the  deep,  deep  bass ;  they  cannot  feel 
toly  till  they  have  the  horrors.  Why  cannot  some  men  worship  God  except  vnth 
A  long  face  f  1  know  them  by  their  very  walk  as  they  come  to  worship :  what  a 
idreary  pace  it  isl  How  solemnly  proper  and  funereal  indeed  1  They  do  not 
nnderstand  David's  Psalm — 

**XJp  to  her  conrts  with  Joys  unknown. 
The  sacred  tribes  repair." 

1^0,  they  come  up  to  their  Father's  house  as  if  they  were  going  to  jail,  and  worship 
Ood  on  the  Sunday  as  if  it  were  the  most  doleful  day  in  the  week.    It  is  said  at 


«BAP.  I.)  ST.  LUKE.  63 

•  certain  Highlander,  when  the  Highlanders  were  very  pious,  that  he  once  went 
to  Edinburgh,  and  when  he  came  back  again  he  said  he  had  seen  a  dreadful  sight 
on  Sabbath,  he  had  seen  people  at  Edinburgh  going  to  kirk  with  happy  faces. 
He  thought  it  wicked  to  look  happy  on  Sunday  ;  and  that  same  notion  exists  in 
the  minds  of  certain  good  people  hereabouts  ;  they  fancy  that,  when  the  saints  get 
together,  they  should  sit  down  and  have  a  little  comfortable  misery,  and  but  little 
delight.  In  truth,  moaning  and  pining  is  not  the  appointed  way  for  worshipping 
God.  We  should  take  Mary  as  a  pattern.  All  the  year  round  I  recommend  her 
as  an  example  to  fainthearted  and  troubled  ones.  "  My  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God 
my  Saviour."  Cease  from  rejoicing  in  sensual  things,  and  with  sinful  pleasures 
have  no  fellowship,  for  all  such  rejoicing  is  evil.  But  you  cannot  rejoice  too 
much  in  the  Lord.  I  believe  that  the  fault  with  our  public  worship  is  that  we  are 
too  sober,  too  cold,  too  formal.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Magnificat — its  ttructure 
and  contents: — A  majesty  truly  regal  reigns  throughout  this  canticle.  Mary 
describes  first  her  actual  impressions  (vers,  46-48a)  :  then  she  rises  to  the  Divine 
fact  which  is  the  cause  of  them  (vers.  48b-50) ;  she  next  comtemplates  the 
development  of  the  historical  consequences  contained  in  it  (vers.  51-53) ;  lastly, 
she  celebrates  the  moral  necessity  of  this  fact  as  the  accomplishment  of  God's 
ancient  promises  to  His  people  (vers.  54,  55).  The  tone  of  the  first  strophe  has  a 
Bweet  and  calm  solemnity.  It  becomes  more  animated  in  the  second,  in  which 
Mary  contemplates  the  work  of  the  Most  High.  It  attains  its  full  height  and 
energy  in  the  third,  as  Mary  contemplates  the  immense  revolution  of  which  this 
work  is  the  beginning  and  cause.  Her  song  drops  down  and  returns  to  its  nest  in 
the  fourth,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  amen  of  the  canticle.  This  hymn  is  closely 
allied  to  that  of  the  mother  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ii),  and  contains  several  sentences 
taken  from  the  Book  of  Psalms.  Is  it,  as  some  have  maintained,  destitute  of  all 
onginaUty  on  this  account  ?  By  no  means.  There  is  a  very  marked  difference 
between  Hannah's  song  of  triumph  and  Mary's.  While  Mary  celebrates  her 
happiness  with  deep  humility  and  holy  restraint,  Hannah  surrenders  herself  com- 
pletely to  the  feeling  of  personal  triumph,  in  her  very  first  words  breaking  forth 
into  cries  of  indignation  against  her  enemies.  As  to  the  borrowed  Biblical 
phrases,  Mary  gives  to  these  consecrated  words  an  entirely  new  meaning  and  a 
higher  application.  The  prophets  frequently  deal  in  this  way  with  the  words  of 
their  predecessors.  By  this  means  these  organs  of  the  Spirit  exhibit  the  continuity 
and  progress  of  the  Divine  work.  Every  young  Israelite  knew  by  heart  the  songs  of 
Hannah,  Deborah,  and  David ;  they  sang  them  as  they  went  up  to  the  feasts  at  Jeru- 
salem ;  and  the  singing  of  psalms  was  the  daily  accompaniment  of  the  morning  and 
evening  sacrifice,  as  well  as  one  of  the  essential  observances  of  the  Passover  meal. 
{F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  Magnificat— external  characteristics: — It  is  worth  much 
just  in  itself  as  a  Christian  hymn.  1.  Begin  with  the  poetry  of  it.  It  strikes  us 
with  wonder  in  these  modern  days  that  a  peasant  woman  of  Galilee  should  be 
able  to  chant  in  so  exalted  a  strain.  But  we  know  "a  pure  heart  makes  the 
best  psalter."  And  she  was  speaking  out  of  the  abundance  of  hers.  Yet  never 
was  such  an  occasion,  never  was  such  an  angelic  preparation ;  never — surely  never 
before — was  such  a  theme  I  Israel's  Messiah  was  on  His  way,  God  was  about  to 
manifest  Himself  on  earth  in  the  flesh  I  2.  Observe  also  the  Israelitish  aspect  of 
che  song.  It  would  be  easy  to  parallel  almost  every  expression  in  Mary's  poetry  by 
an  utterance  very  similar  in  the  anthems  of  the  temple  service.  The  mechanical 
structure  is  not  very  difficult,  for  the  Hebrew  and  Syrian  languages  are  easily 
wrought  into  rhymeless  verses.  There  is  extant  now  a  Gospel  in  Hebrew  ;  those 
who  can  read  it  are  interested  in  noting  the  idioms  followed  here  in  the  Magnificat, 
The  mind  of  this  woman  was  filled  with  the  old  prophets'  imagery.  Her  whole 
thoughts  were  tinged  with  what  she  had  studied  and  committed  to  memory.  So 
this  song  has  been  exquisitely  compared  to  what  might  have  been  expected  from 
"some  ideal  Puritan  maiden,"  whose  mind  was  so  imbued  and  saturated  with 
the  Scriptural  forms  of  expression,  that  it  would  fall  unconsciously  into  inspired 
phrases  when  she  spoke.  3.  Then  observe  the  femininity  of  this  song.  No  one 
but  the  queen  of  her  sex  could  possibly  have  composed  it.  Mark  the  delicacy  of 
turn  in  the  sentences,  the  mingling  of  dignity  with  humility  ;  the  majesty,  as  sub- 
lime as  Ezekiel's,  and  the  tenderness,  more  gentle  than  John's.  For  this  shows 
the  mind  and  heart  of  just  the  one  woman  whom  Elisabeth  could  call  the  "  Mother 
of  her  Lord."  (C.  S.  Eobinson,  D.D.)  The  Magnificat — internal  characteristics: — 
1.  Mary's  instant  devotion.  She  does  not  pause  to  return  Elisabeth's  greeting;  she 
4oM  not  wait  to  pass  back  the  congratulation ;  she  seems  to  think  ouly  o£  God 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  \ 

above.  2.  Her  evangelic  faith.  She  felt  the  need  of  a  Savionr,  just  as  mach  h 
any  one  else.  A  great  word  this,  Saviour.  Here  first  it  appears  in  the  New 
Testament ;  the  word  which  the  heathen  orator  said  afterward  he  found  on  a  tomb 
that  he  passed  on  one  of  his  journeys,  "  Salvator,  a  new  word,  but  very  beautiful 
as  it  appears  to  me."  3.  Her  personal  humility.  How  sweetly  she  says,  "He 
hath  regarded  the  low  estate  of  His  handmaiden."  What  was  this  Galilean 
damsel,  poor  and  lonely  now,  that  she  should  have  been  singled  out  for  so  exalted 
a  lot  7  There  is  in  her  whole  demeanour,  during  this  pathetic  part  of  her  history* 
an  unusual  poise  and  sereuity.  She  was  not  even  frightened  or  abashed  by  th* 
angel ;  she  meekly  received  his  announcement,  neither  overcome  nor  unduly 
elated  in  her  prospects.  As  she  acquiesced  then,  she  sings  now.  4.  Her  lofty 
ambition.  Her  heart  rises  to  its  supreme  elevation.  "From  henceforth,"  &o. 
She  is  glad  with  her  whole  heart  that  the  chance  is  going  to  be  given  her  to 
become  a  blessing.  She  is  peerlessly  ambitious,  not  to  be  rich,  prospered, 
honoured,  famous,  but — to  do  good.  5,  Her  voluminous  praise.  Mary  makes  each 
Divine  attribute  in  succession  record  God's  glory  in  a  new  light.  Holiness,  grace, 
power,  justice,  beneficence.  6.  Her  magnificent  patriotism.  She  passes  almost 
unconsciously  from  God's  attributes  to  God's  people.  The  finest  thing  in  the 
Magnificat  is  this  adoring  ascription  of  praise  to  God  for  what  He  had  done  for 
her  country  and  her  race.  "  He  hath  holpen,"  &q.  (Ibid.)  The  Magnificat  ;— 
Mary's  song  of  praise  is — 1.  The  climax  of  all  the  hymns  of  the  old  covenant.  2. 
The  beginning  of  all  the  hynms  of  the  new.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  This  hymn 
exhibits  deep  conviction  of  the  reception  of  the  highest  favours  combined  with 
personal  humility.  (Ibid.)  All  the  perfections  of  God  glorified  in  the  gift  ol 
the  Saviour.  1.  Grace.  2.  Power.  3.  Holiness.  4.  Mercy.  5.  Justice.  6. 
Faithfulness.  (Ibid.)  Mary'a  canticle  : — This  is  the  first  canticle,  or  song  of 
praise,  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  composed  by  the  Blessed  Virgin  with  un- 
fcpeakable  joy,  for  designing  her  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  conception  and  birth 
of  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Observe — 1.  The  manner  of  her  praise.  Her  soul 
and  spirit  bear  their  part  in  the  work  of  thanksgiving.  As  the  sweetest  musio  ifl 
made  in  the  belly  of  the  instrument,  so  the  most  delightful  praise  arises  from  the 
bottom  of  the  heart.  2.  The  object  of  her  praise.  She  does  not  magnify  herself, 
but  the  Lord ;  yea,  she  does  not  rejoice  so  much  in  her  Son  as  in  her  Saviour.  (1) 
Thus  she  impUcitly  owns  and  coniesses  herself  a  sinner ;  for  none  need  a  Savioui 
but  siimers.  (2)  By  rejoicing  in  Christ  as  her  Saviour,  she  declares  how  she 
values  herself,  rather  by  her  spiritual  relation  to  Christ  as  His  member,  than  by 
her  natural  relation  to  Him  as  His  mother.  3.  Observe  how  she  admires  and 
magnifies  God's  peculiar  favour  towards  herself,  in  casting  an  eye  upon  her  poverty 
and  lowly  condition  ;  that  she,  a  poor,  obscure  maid,  unknown  to  the  world,  should 
be  looked  upon  with  an  eye  of  regard  by  Him  who  dwells  in  the  highest  heavens. 
As  God  magnified  her,  she  magnifies  Him.  4.  She  thankfully  takes  notice  that  it 
was  not  only  a  high  honour,  but  a  lasting  honour,  which  was  conferred  upon  her, 
"  All  generations,"  &o.  She  beholds  an  infinite,  lasting  honour  prepared  for  her, 
as  being  the  mother  of  a  universal  and  everlasting  Blessing,  which  all  former  ages 
had  desired,  and  all  succeeding  ages  should  rejoice  in,  and  proclaim  her  happy  for 
being  the  instrument  of.  5.  Observe  how  she  passes  from  the  consideration  of 
her  personal  privileges  to  the  universal  goodness  of  God.  She  declares  the  general 
providence  of  God  towards  all  persons  ;  His  mercy  to  the  pious.  His  justice  on  the 
proud,  His  bounty  to  the  poor.  Learn,  hence,  the  excellency  and  advantageoua 
usefulness  of  the  grace  of  humility ;  how  good  it  is  to  be  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart.  This  will  render  us  lovely  in  God's  eye ;  and  though  the  world  trample 
upon  us.  He  will  exalt  us  to  the  wonder  of  ourselves  and  the  envy  of  our  despisera. 
6.  Observe  how  she  magnifies  the  spiritual  grace  of  God  in  our  redemption — "He 
hath  holpen  His  servant  Israel,"  i.e.,  blessed  them  with  a  Saviour,  who  li^ed  in 
the  faith,  hope,  and  expectation  of  the  promised  Messiah ;  and  this  blessing  she 
declares  was — (1)  The  result  of  great  mercy ;  (2)  the  effect  of  His  truth  and 
faithfulness  in  His  promises.      (W.  Burkitt,    M.A.)  The  visit  of  Mary   to 

Elisabeth: — In  glancing  at  the  Magnificat,  observe,  first,  that  it  is  marked  by  that 
peculiar  characteristic  of  Hebrew  poetry  known  as  paralleMsm.  Our  rhythm  ia 
the  rhythm  of  metre,  our  rh:vme  is  the  rhyme  of  sound.  The  Hebrew  rhythm  waa 
the  rhythm  of  clause  or  statement,  the  Hebrew  rhyme  was  the  rhyme  of  thought 
and  sentiment ;  or,  as  Ewald  beautifully  expresses  it,  "  The  rapid  stroke  as  of 
alternate  wings,"  "  The  heaving  and  sinking  as  of  the  troubled  heart."  Hebrew 
poetry  ia  aa  much  nobler  than  the  classic  as  rhyme  of  thought  is  nobler  than 


«■!».!.]  ST.  LUKE.  9S 

rhyme  of  sonnd.  When  will  our  colleges  teach  Job,  and  David,  and  Isaiah,  and 
Habakkuk,  as  well  as  Homer,  and  Virgil,  and  Dante,  and  Shakespeare  ?  Again, 
observe  the  intensely  Jewish  character  of  the  Magnificat,  alike  in  its  phraseologr 
and  in  its  reminiscences.  Once  more,  observe  how,  in  the  holy  strains  of  the 
Magnificat,  the  Old  Testament  glides  into  the  New.  Mary's  cadences  are  the 
interlude  between  law  and  gospel — at  once  the  finale  to  the  old  covenant  and  the 
overture  to  the  new — and  so  linking  Sinai  and  Calvary,  temple  and  church, 
Moses  and  Jesus.  Very  beautiful  is  the  picture,  this  mutual  greeting  of  aged 
Elisabeth  and  youthful  Mary ;  it  is  the  emblem  of  the  mutual  greeting  of  type  and 
antitype,  of  law  and  grace.  Such  is  the  story  of  the  visitation.  All  deep  feehng 
is  essentially  poetical.  And  as  there  is  a  profound  relation  between  devotion  and 
poetry,  so  there  is  a  profound  relation  between  devotion  and  music.  Accordingly, 
music  is  an  essential,  vital  part  of  public  worship.  "  Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell 
in  you  richly ;  in  all  wisdom  teaching  and  admonishing  one  another  with  psalms, 
end  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  unto  God" 
(Col.  iii.  16).  But  devotion  is  even  more  than  a  song,  it  is  a  life.  And  here  even 
the  deaf  and  dumb  may  sing,  singing  and  making  melody  in  their  hearts  to  the 
Lord*    Ob,  how  many  spiritual  Beethovens  there  are  1 

There  are  in  this  loud,  stunning  tida 

Of  human  care  and  crime, 
With  whom  the  melodies  abide 

Of  th'  everlasting  chime ; 
Who  carry  music  in  their  heart 
Through  dusky  lane  and  wrangling  mart» 
Plying  their  daily  task  with  busier  feet, 
Because  their  secret  souls  a  holy  strain  repeat. 

What  God  is  like  our  God,  who  giveth  songs  in  the  night,  turning  the  raven's  croak 
into  the  nightingale's  warble  I  God  be  praised  1  there  is  such  a  thing  as  rhythm 
of  life,  an  inward  life-psalm,  and  so  an  outward — heaven  the  phone,  earth  the  anti- 

Ehone.  Our  heavenly  Father,  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven  so  on  earth  I  The  real 
turgy,  after  all,  is  the  service  of  daily  character.  {G.  D.  Boardman.)  The  MagnU 
fieat : — Bible  contains  accounts  of  three  remarkable  women  whose  lips  broke  forth 
into  a  song  of  pious  exultation  and  profound  gratitude.  Miriam  (Exod.  xv.  20), 
Hannah  (1  Sam.  ii,  1),  and  Mary,  mindful  of  the  honours  and  benedictions  with 
which  she  is  about  to  be  crowned  as  the  mother  of  the  Messiah.  It  is  a  threefold  ex- 
pression of  mercy.  I.  This  incompabable  bono  embodies  Maby's  sense  of  the  DnriNB 

aiEBOT  SHOWN  TO  HEB  PEESONALLT.  II.  ThE  SONG  EEHEAKSES  THE  DiVINE  MERCY  TO 
OTHEBS  IN  GENEBAIi.      Ill,    ThE  SONG  POINTS  OUT  God'S  BPECIAI.  MEECY  TO  HiS  PEOPLE. 

{Dr.  DooUttle.)  The  song  of  Mary: — I.  The  prophetic  element  in  it.  1.  That 
all  generations  would  call  her  blessed.  2.  That  her  Son  would  be  a  blessing  to 
Israel.  II.  Heb  beasons  fob  thankfulness.  1.  That  God  did  not  regard  the 
conventional  distinctions  among  men  (ver.  48).     2.  The  greatness  of  the  blessing 

Jver.  49).  3.  That  God  had  cast  dishonour  on  pride  and  vanity,  and  had  honoured 
inmility  (vers.  50-52).  4.  That  God  gives  favours  through  His  mercy  (ver.  54), 
not  through  His  justice,  &c.  Helplessness  is  the  strongest  argument  to  secure 
Divine  help.  6.  Because  of  the  blessing  which  was  to  come  to  Israel  through 
God's  remembrance  of  His  promises  (ver.  54-55).  Her  heart  had  yearned  that  Zion 
and  her  nation  might  be  blessed.  (Preacher^g  Monthly.)  A  new  song: — This 
song  is  in  its  substance  the  fit  utterance  of  aU  hearts  in  whom  Christ  is  bom  the 
hope  of  glory.  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  whenever  Christ  has  entered  into 
the  human  heart,  a  new  song  has  been  put  into  the  mouth  of  the  believer.  Chris- 
tianity in  the  heart  means  music  in  the  life.  A  religion  without  joy  is  a  landscape 
without  the  sun.  Christianity  without  elevation  is  as  an  eagle  with  broken  wings. 
Christianity  has  given  to  the  world  more  poems,  hymns,  anthems,  and  manifold 
utterances  of  triumph  and  joy  than  any  other  influence  which  has  touched  the 
nature  of  mankind.  Truly  it  has  made  the  dumb  man  eloquent  and  turned  silence 
Itself  into  singing;  and  as  for  those  of  low  degree  and  no  account,  it  has  in 
innumerable  instances  brought  them  to  the  front  and  invested  them  with  supreme 
attraction  and  commanding  influence.  (Dr.  Parker.)  The  Virgin's  character : — 
1.  We  have  here  a  type  of  that  character  in  which  Christ  is  for  ever  being  bom. 
To  the  pure,  the  humble,  and  the  unselfish,  the  Blessedness  of  blessedness  was 
glvsn.    When  the  angel  appeared  to  her  she  was  troubled  at  the  tidings  and  the 

6 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I» 

praise.  It  was  the  trouble  of  a  beautiful  nnconsoiousness.  A  rare  excellence  in  man 
or  woman  this  fair  unconsciousness  I  rarer  than  ever  now.  The  unconscious  life  fA 
Mary — what  a  charm  those  who  possessed  it  might  exercise  upon  the  world !  2. 
Look  next  at  the  Virgin's  quiet  acceptance  of  greatness.  8.  Her  idea  of  fame. 
4.  This  large  conception  of  womanly  duty — this  which  is  the  patriotism  of  the 
woman,  was  not  absent  from  the  Virgin's  character.  She  rejoiced  in  being  the 
means  of  her  country's  blessing  (vers.  64-55).  She  forgot  her  own  honour  in  God, 
she  forgot  herself  in  her  country.  And  this  is  that  which  we  want  in  England — 
women  who  will  understand  and  feel  what  love  of  country  means  and  act  upon  it. 
This  is  the  woman's  patriotism,  and  the  first  note  of  its  mighty  music — a  mnsio 
which  might  take  into  itself  and  harmonize  the  discord  of  English  society — was 
struck  more  than  1800  years  ago  in  the  song  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  (Stopford 
Brooke.)        "  My  Saviour "  ; — L  Thb  plea  of  the  penitbnt.     II.  Thb  bono  o» 

THE    SAVED.        III.   ThE    STAPy    OP    THB    PBOMOAL.        IV.    ThB    ANTHEM    OF    HEAVEN. 

{Stems  and  Twigs.)  The  beatitude  of  Mary,  the  mother  of  the  Lord: — These  words 
contain  at  once — (a)  A  prophecy ;  (h)  a  command,  because  spoken  in  the  fulness  of 
inspiration;  (c)  a  revelation.  Why  snould  all  generations  call  her  blessed?  I.  Thb 
FIRST  BROAD  AND  GENERAL  ANSWER  IB  THIS :  She  occupies  in  ouc — and  that  a  subject 
of  the  highest  importance — a  unique  position  as  the  example.  1.  There  was  a 
Btrong  and  vivid  faith.  2.  Humility.  3.  The  entire  simplicity  of  self-surrender. 
II.  The  fulfilment  of  this  beatitude  is  to  be  found,  above  all,  in  thb  dignity  of  heb 
OFFICE.  Mary  was  called  in  the  beginning  of  redemptive  love  to  co-operate,  by  the 
grace  that  was  given  to  her,  in  the  effecting  of  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation, 
which  is  the  foundation-truth  of  Christianity.  III.  She  was  the  mother  of  thb 
Son  of  God.  That  strikes  the  keynote  of  the  beatitude.  Beautiful  picture  always 
— the  mother  and  her  child  ;  and  the  great  prototype  is  that  heavenly  vision — nay, 
that  historical  reality — Jesus  and  Mary.  Nearness  and  devotion  to  Jesus  were  her 
beatitude,  and  may  be  ours.  {Caiion  Knox  Little.)  The  Magnificat,  as  it 
exemplifies  the  life  of  jny : — You  know  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was 
uttered.  Eecall  them  briefly  to  mind.  In  the  cottage  of  the  Annunciation  the  call 
of  God  had  come  to  her;  she  had  responded  to  it;  she  had  given  herself  by  a 
magnificent  act  of  abandonment  into  the  manipulation  of  the  Divine  Hand: 
•'  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord  ;  be  it  unto  me  according  to  Thy  word."  And 
even  as  she  spoke — for  there  is  no  delay  with  God — the  mystery  of  mysteries  was 
wrought  out,  and  the  Incarnate  had  taken  up  His  dwelling  within  her  very  person, 
and  she  was  the  shrine,  the  ark,  of  the  Eternal  Son  of  God.  It  cannot  have  been 
that  she  could  have  undergone  such  a  crisis  as  this  without  its  having  an  effect  upon 
her  inner  being.  Could  Christ  have  been  in  her  without  illuminating  her  intellect, 
without  communicating  fervour  to  her  heart,  without  acting  mightily  on  her  will  7 
Who  should  be  the  first  to  taste  the  reality  of  the  Incarnation  J  Who  but  the 
earthly  instrument  through  whom  it  is  wrought  out.  Who  should  first  sing  the 
hymn  that  tells  of  the  thrilling  experiences  of  those  who  know  the  touch  of  the  In- 
carnate ?  Who  but  the  dear  mother  in  whom  He  abode.  But  for  the  moment  her 
lip  is  sealed ;  she  cannot  speak  as  yet.  There  is  within  her  a  thought  too  big  for 
utterance,  and  she  cannot  speak  of  it  until  she  has  received  some  confirmation  from 
without.  She  has  got  a  secret ;  with  whom  shall  she  share  it  ?  With  whom  but 
her  oousin  Elisabeth.  She  rises  and  goes  from  Nazareth  into  the  hUl-country  with 
haste,  into  a  city  of  Judah  where  Elisabeth  is  dwelling  with  her  husband  Zacharias, 
and  as  she  enters  the  house  she  salutes  Elisabeth,  and  hereupon  Elisabeth  utters 
her  beatitude,  "  Blessed  art  thou  among  women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy 
womb.  And  whence  is  this  to  me  that  the  mother  of  my  Lord  should  come  to 
me  ? "  Thus  the  mystery  that  has  been  wrought  out  in  her  has  been  by  God 
revealed  to  another ;  it  is  no  longer  a  secret  that  she  must  keep  to  herself ;  she  may 
Bhare  it  with  another ;  she  may  know  the  joy  and  sympathy  of  communicating  it 
to  another.  As  thus  the  message  of  Gabriel  is  confirmed,  Mary  said,  "  My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour."  Cannot 
you  follow,  step  by  step,  the  whole  of  this  wondrous  experience  that  led  up  to  the 
utterance  of  this  hymn  of  hymns  ?  And  yet  how  was  it  that  Mary  was  thus  enabled 
to  utter  this  wondrous  hymn?  It  is  an  unique  hymn.  Amidst  all  the  poetic 
compositions  which  are  the  treasure  of  the  world  to-day,  is  there  one  hymn  which 
in  its  chaste  and  wondrous  beauty  surpasses  the  Magnificat  ?  Why,  its  loveli- 
ness  has  attracted  generation  after  generation,  and  its  beauty  ia  as  intensely  felt 
to-day  as  in  any  previous  age  of  the  Church.  And  who  was  it  who  composed  it  ? 
A  poor  simple,  peasant  maid,  probably  some  sixteen  years  of  age,  untrained  in  all 


CHAJ.  1.]  ST.  LUKE.  %7 

the  culture  which  generally  precedes  the  composition  of  a  hymn  so  exquisitely 
perfect  and  so  beautiful  as  this.  Whence  was  this  poor,  simple  maiden  of  Galilee 
enabled  to  give  utterance  to  a  hymn  which  through  eighteen  centuries  of  Christen- 
dom has  expressed  fully,  and  more  than  expressed,  all  the  adoring  worship  of 
mighty  spirits  in  their  vision  of  the  Incarnate  God  ?  Mary  was  taught  this  un- 
doubtedly by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Yes ;  but  how  ?  By  the  action 
of  the  Spirit  upon  her  whole  being,  upon  her  whole  nature,  her  soul,  her  Psyche, 
and  then  upon  her  spirit,  her  Pneuma — the  emotional  and  moral  part  of  her  nature ; 
and  then  upon  her  very  lips  Her  lips  were  touched  with  a  live  coal  from  God's 
altar,  and  in  perfect  language  they  gave  expression  to  the  perfect  music  of  her 
sanctified  inner  nature  as  it  thrilled  under  the  touch  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  My  soul 
doth  magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour."  What 
illumination  there  is  in  it,  how  deep  she  saw  into  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation, 
how,  above  all,  was  she  enabled  to  look  forward  and  prophetically  to  foretell  its 
magnificent  results  1  What  fervour  there  is  in  it,  chastened,  I  know,  but  how 
intense !  And  whence  came  this  rapt  fervour  that  finds  expression  in  this  hymn  1 
Surely  she  who  is  revealed  to  us  in  it  cannot  be  a  maiden  in  her  early  youth  I 
What  a  strength  there  is  in  it  1  Whence  comes  it  all  but  through  the  action  of  the 
Spirit,  giving  fervour,  giving  love.  Yes ;  it  was  the  Spirit  of  God  that  drew  forth 
from  Mary's  nature  all  the  wondrous  music  that  finds  expression  in  her  unequalled 
hymn.  And  again,  what  is  it  that  fills  Mary  with  this  joy  that  inspires  her  with 
tbis  hymn  f  What  inflames,  what  energizes  her  whole  being?  It  is  the  vision  of 
Jesus  Christ.  She  looks  within — not  around,  not  above,  but  she  looks  within,  and 
the  eyes  of  her  understanding,  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  fall  upon  the 
wondrous  vision  of  the  Babe  indwelling.  She  is  indeed  Christoplieros — the  Christ- 
bearer.  0  mystery  of  mysteries,  within  her  tabernacles  the  very  Eternal  Son  of 
God  Himself,  and  every  step  she  treads  from  Nazareth  she  bears  within  herself  the 
burden  of  her  Incarnate  God  1  And  as  she  looks  on  the  Presence  of  Jesus  Christ 
dwelling  within  her,  her  whole  being  thrills  with  a  joy  hitherto  untasted  by  the 
sons  and  daughters  of  men.  For  her  joy  is  not  primarily  joy  in  God  as  He  is  in 
Himself,  but  it  is  primarily  joy  in  God  Incarnate.  Why  ?  There  is  in  Mary,  first 
of  all,  as  she  gazes  on  Jesus,  joy  in  the  revelation  of  the  love  of  God.  She  knew 
what  God  had  wrought  for  man ;  she  knew  that  God  had  taken  in  her  very  person, 
lowly  as  she  was,  human  nature  into  union  with  the  personality  of  the  Divine  Son, 
and  she  knew  why.  Now,  if  you  look  at  the  Magnificat,  you  will  see  what  were 
the  three  elements  in  her  joy  in  her  vision  of  Christ.  1.  She  rejoiced  in  the  revela- 
tion of  God's  saving  love.  2.  She  rejoiced  in  Christ  as  revealing  God's  ennobling 
love.  •*  I  am  high  and  lifted  up,  I  have  been  magnified ;  but  my  magnificence  is 
an  act  of  God's  grace,  it  is  the  result  of  God's  condescension.  God  has  come  to 
me  not  simply  to  set  me  free  from  the  trammels  of  sin  by  His  saving  love,  but, 
having  set  me  free  from  sin  by  His  gift  of  salvation.  He  has  embraced  me,  He  has 
brought  me  near  to  Himself  in  close  and  mystic  union."  And  Mary's  second  joy 
in  the  vision  of  her  Child  was  the  joyful  recognition  of  her  elevation.  3.  But 
more  than  that,  there  was  in  her  vision  of  Jesus  a  third  joy,  the  joy  of  union  with 
God,  and  that  a  twofold  union.  First  the  joy  of  the  union  of  contemplation.  As 
Mary  looked  upon  Jesus  she  saw  mirrored  in  Him  the  beauty  of  God.  There  she 
sees  the  vision  of  His  might — God  is  powerful.  There  is  then  the  vision  of  His 
holiness — God's  power  is  blended  with  righteousness.  There  is  then  the  vision  of 
His  mercy — it  is  tempered  by  His  compassion.  There  is  then  the  revelation  of  His 
wisdom  underlying  His  mysterious  elections.  There  is  the  revelation  of  His  justice, 
showing  that  He  deals  with  men  according  to  their  moral  position.  Above  all, 
there  is  the  revelation  of  His  faithfulness,  for  ever  true  to  His  blessed  word.  And 
as  Mary  gazed  upon  her  Son  she  saw  God — God  in  all  the  beauty  of  His  perfection, 
»nd,  as  she  saw  God  in  Christ,  God  took  possession  cf  her  whole  being,  and  she 
rejoiced  in  the  union  of  contemplation.  But  more  than  that,  she  rejoiced  in  her 
co-operation  with  Him.  As  she  gazed  upon  Jesus,  she  knew  that  she  had 
responded  to  God's  call ;  and,  therefore,  her  life  was  a  life  of  joy ;  in  the  knowledge 
of  her  union  with  her  God  as  His  chosen  instrument  in  His  great  work.  And  so 
we  learn  this  great  truth,  that  the  life  of  Mary  was  a  life  of  joy.  Before  we  con- 
clude, we  may  pass  on  to  one  other  thought  in  connection  with  her  life  of  joy — it 
■was  not  a  selfish  joy.  It  is  remarkable  how,  in  the  Magnificat,  Mary  begins 
with  her  personal  experiences,  but  soon  passes  on  from  that  to  identify  herself  with 
the  human  race.  Mary  looks  ahead  and  sees  what  the  effect  of  the  birth  of  her 
Bon  is  to  be  on  the  world,  how  it  is  to  ameliorate  the  whole  condition  of  human  life. 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  » 

how  the  oppressed  are  to  be  set  free  from  their  oppression,  the  hungry  to  be  fed,  fh6 
helplesi  to  be  assisted.  And  as  she  looks  forward  and  sees  the  effect  of  the  Incar« 
nation  on  the  race,  Mary  rejoices  with  the  joy  of  a  perfect  charity,  with  the  joy  of 
the  second  Eve  of  our  race,  with  each  member  of  which  she  was  so  specially 
identified,  because  she  was  the  mother  of  Him  who  is  indeed  the  Son  of  Man. 
Ajid  so  it  ever  is.  Christian  life  is  truly  a  life  of  joy.  What  strikes  the  keynote 
of  life  in  the  Church  ?  Is  it  not  the  Holy  Eucharist  ?  What  does  the  term  mean  f 
Joy,  thanksgiving.  It  is  not  penance  that  strikes  the  keynote  of  Christian  life. 
True,  as  we  shall  see  next  week,  there  is  an  imder-current  of  the  note  of  penanc« 
for  ever  blending  with  the  thanksgiving  of  the  Church  on  earth ;  there  is  a  sorrow 
that  tempers  and  beautifies  its  joy ;  but  for  all  that,  it  is  not  at  the  tribunal  of 
penance  that  the  keynote  of  Christian  life  is  struck.  It  is  struck  at  the  altar  mom 
by  mom,  and  it  rings  out  there  clear  and  distinct  in  the  Holy  Eucharist.  We  are 
baptized  into  Christ  that  we  may  live  our  lives  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  altar ; 
we  are  baptized  into  Christ  that  we  may  live  lives  that  are  true  to  the  Eucharistio 
note  that  there  is  struck ;  we  are  baptized  into  Christ  in  order  that  the  experience 
of  Mary  may  be  our  abiding  experience,  and  the  song,  Magnificat,  be  our  con- 
tinuous song.  Is  it  not  so  ?  What  did  Mary  rejoice  in  as  she  sang  Magnificat  ? 
In  the  indwelling  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  in  strange  real  mystery  the  blessing  of 
Mary  becomes  the  blessing  of  her  children.  Did  not  our  Lord  once  say — "  WhoBO- 
ever  shall  do  the  will  of  God,  the  same  is  My  brother,  and  My  sister,  and  mother." 
What  do  you  understand  these  words  to  mean  ?  Are  they  not  words  which  cannot 
be  fully  understood  outside  the  limits  of  His  Church  and  divorced  from  the  mystery 
of  the  Eucharist  ?  But  in  His  Eucharist  their  meaning  is  clear  and  distinct.  For 
what  was  the  privilege  of  the  Incarnation?  That  Mary  was  the  Christ-bearer. 
What  is  the  joy  of  the  Eucharist  ?  That  we  each  become  a  Christ-bearer.  "  He 
that  eateth  My  flesh  and  drinketh  My  blood  dwelleth  in  Me  and  I  in  him.  So, 
then,  as  we  go  forth  on  our  way  into  the  world  from  the  altar  of  God  we  bear  about 
within  as  Christ.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  (Canon  Body.) 
The  reverence  due  to  the  Blessed  Virgin: — I.  Combidsb  in  what  respects  th» 
YiBoiM  Mabt  is  blessed.  1.  In  her  the  curse  pronounced  on  Eve  was  changed  into  a 
blessing.  Eve  was  doomed  to  bear  children  in  sorrow,  but  now  this  very  dispen- 
sation was  made  the  means  of  bringing  salvation  into  the  world.  All  our  corruption 
can  be  blessed  and  changed  by  Christ.  The  very  punishment  of  the  fall,  the  very 
taint  of  birth-sin,  admits  of  a  cure  by  His  advent.  2.  When  Christ  came  as  the 
seed  of  the  woman,  He  vindicated  the  rights  and  honour  of  His  mother.  From 
that  time,  marriage  has  not  only  been  restored  to  its  original  dignity,  but  even 
gifted  with  a  spiritual  privilege,  as  the  outward  symbol  of  the  heavenly  union  sub- 
sisting betwixt  Christ  and  EUs  Church.  3.  Mary  is  doubtless  to  be  accounted 
blessed  and  favoured  in  herself,  as  well  as  in  the  benefits  she  has  done  us.  Who 
can  estimate  the  holiness  and  perfection  of  her  who  was  chosen  to  be  the  mother  of 
Christ  ?  If  to  him  that  hath,  more  is  given,  and  holiness  and  Divine  favour  go 
together  (and  this  we  are  expressly  told),  what  must  have  been  the  transcendant 
purity  of  her,  whom  the  Creator  Spirit  condescended  to  overshadow  with  Hia 
miraculous  presence  ?  What,  think  you,  was  the  sanctified  state  of  that  human 
nature,  of  which  God  formed  BQs  sinless  Son — knowing,  as  we  do,  that  *'  what  is 
bom  of  the  flesh,  is  flesh,"  and  that  "  none  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  un- 
clean "  ?  II.  This  being  so,  why  abe  wb  not  told  mobb  about  the  blessed  viboin  ? 
1.  Scripture  was  written,  not  to  exalt  this  or  that  particular  saint,  but  to  give  glory 
to  Almighty  God.  Had  Mary  been  more  fully  disclosed  to  us  in  the  heavenly  beauty 
and  sweetness  of  the  spirit  within  her,  she  would  have  been  honoured,  her  gifts 
would  have  been  clearly  seen ;  but  the  Divine  Giver  would  have  been  somewhat  less 
contemplated,  because  no  design  or  work  of  His  would  have  been  disclosed  in  her 
history.  He  would  have  been  seemingly  introduced  for  her  own  sake,  not  for  Hii, 
and  we  should  have  been  in  danger  of  resting  in  the  thought  of  her,  the  creature, 
more  than  God  the  Creator.  Thus  it  is  a  dangerous  thing,  it  is  too  high  a  privilege, 
for  sinners  like  ourselves,  to  know  the  best  and  innermost  thoughts  of  God's  servants. 
It  is  in  mercy  to  us  that  so  little  is  revealed  about  the  blessed  virgin,  in  mercy  to 
our  weakness,  though  of  her  there  are  "  many  things  to  say,"  yet  they  are  "hard 
to  be  uttered,  seeing  we  are  dull  of  hearing,"  2.  The  more  we  consider  who  Mary 
was,  the  more  dangerous  will  such  knowledge  of  her  appear  to  be.  Other  saints 
are  but  influenced  or  inspired  by  Christ,  and  made  partakers  of  Him  mystically. 
But,  as  to  Mary,  Christ  derived  His  manhood  from  her,  and  so  had  an  especial 
unity  of  nature  with  her ;  and  this  wondrous  relationship  between  God  and  man,  it 


OTAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  69 

is  perhaps  impossible  for  us  to  dwell  upon  without  some  perversion  of  feeling.  For, 
truly,  she  is  raised  above  the  condition  of  sinful  beings,  though  by  nature  a  sinner ; 
she  is  brought  near  to  God,  yet  is  but  a  creature ;  and  seems  to  lack  her  fitting  place 
in  our  limited  understandings,  neither  too  high  nor  too  low.  We  cannot  oombino 
in  our  thought  of  her  all  we  should  ascribe  with  all  we  should  withhold.  Hence, 
we  had  better  only  think  of  her  with  and  for  her  Son,  never  separating  her  from 
Him,  but  using  her  name  as  a  memorial  of  His  great  condescension  in  stooping  from 
heaven,  and  not  abhoring  the  virgin's  womb.  Nothing  is  so  calculated  to  impress 
on  our  minds  that  Christ  is  really  partaker  of  our  nature,  and  in  all  respects  man, 
as  to  associate  Him  with  the  thought  of  her,  by  whose  ministration  He  became  our 
brother.      (J.    H.  Newman,   D.D.)  True   womanly  fame : — A   true    woman's 

thought !  For  so  far  as  a  woman  is  sincere  to  the  nature  God  has  given  her, 
her  aspiration  is  not  so  much  that  the  world  should  ring  with  heir  fame,  or 
society  quote  her  as  a  leader  of  fashion,  but  that  she  should  bless,  and  be 
blessed  in  blessing.  It  is  not  that  she  should  not  wish  for  power,  but  that  she 
should  wish  for  a  noble,  not  an  ignoble  power.  It  is  not  that  she  should  not 
wish  to  queen  it  in  this  world,  but  that  she  should  wish  to  queen  it,  not 
by  ostentation  of  dress  or  life,  nor  by  eclipsing  others,  but  by  manifestation  of 
love,  by  nobility  of  gentle  service,  by  unconscious  revelation  in  her  life  and  con- 
scious maintenance  in  others  by  her  influence,  of  all  things  true  and  pure,  of  stain- 
less honour  in  life,  of  chivalrous  aspiration  in  the  soul.  At  home  or  in  the  wider 
sphere  of  social  action  her  truest  fame  is  this,  that  the  world  should  call  her  blessed. 
The  music  of  that  thought  sounds  through  every  line  of  the  virgin's  psalm.  And 
there  is  no  sadder  or  uglier  sight  in  this  world  than  to  see  the  women  of  a  land 
grasping  at  the  ignoble  honour,  and  rejecting  the  noble ;  leading  the  men,  whom 
they  should  guide  into  high  thought  and  active  sacrifice,  into  petty  slander  of  gossip 
in  conversation,  and  into  discussion  of  dangerous  and  unhealthy  feeling ;  becoming, 
in  this  degradation  of  their  directing  power,  the  curse  and  not  the  blessing  of  social 
intercourse — becoming  what  men  in  frivolous  moments  wish  them  to  be,  instead  ol 
making  men  what  men  should  be ;  abdicating  their  true  throne  over  the  heart  tc 
grasp  at  the  kingdom  over  fashion ;  ceasing  to  protest  against  impurity  and  unbe- 
lief, and  giving  them  an  underhand  encouragement ;  turning  away  from  their 
mission  to  bless,  to  ezalt,  and  to  console,  that  they  may  struggle  through  a  thousand 
meannesses  into  a  higher  position,  and  waste  their  Divine  energy  to  win  precedence 
over  their  rival ;  expending  all  the  force  which  their  more  excitable  nature  gives 
them,  in  false  and  sometimes  base  excitements  day  after  day,  with  an  awful  blind- 
ness and  a  pitiable  degradation ;  exhausting  life  in  amusements  which  fritter  away, 
or  in  amusements  which  debase,  their  character ;  possessing  great  wealth,  and  ex- 
pending it  only  on  self,  and  show,  and  shadows  ;  content  to  be  lapped  in  the  folds 
of  a  silken  and  easy  life,  and  not  thinking,  or  thinking  only  to  the  amount  of  half 
a  dozen  charitable  subscriptions — a  drop  in  the  waters  of  their  expenditure — not 
thinking  that  without  "  their  closed  sanctuary  of  luxurious  peace,"  thousands  of 
their  sisters  are  weeping  in  the  night  for  hunger  and  for  misery  of  heart,  and  men 
and  children  are  being  trampled  down  into  the  bloody  dust  of  this  city,  the  cry  of 
whose  agony  and  neglected  lives  goes  up  in  wrath  to  the  ears  of  God.  This  is  not 
our  work,  you  say,  this  is  the  work  of  men.  Be  it  so  if  you  like.  Let  them  be  the 
hands  to  do  it ;  but  who,  if  not  women,  are  to  be  the  hearts  of  the  redemption  of  the 
poor  from  social  wrong  T  As  long  as  the  women  of  England  refuse  to  guide  and  to 
inspire,  as  long  as  they  forget  their  nature,  and  think  of  pleasure  instead  of  blessing, 
as  long  as  they  shut  their  ears  to  the  agony  of  the  cities  of  this  land,  that  they  may 
not  be  disturbed  in  their  luxury,  and  literature,  and  arts,  so  long  men  will,  as  they 
have  ever  done,  take  the  impulse  of  their  lives  from  them  and  do  nothing  chivalrous, 
nothing  really  self-sacrificing,  nothing  very  noble  and  persistent  for  the  blessing  of 
the  world.  The  regeneration  of  society  is  in  the  power  of  the  woman,  and  she  turns 
away  from  it.  All  future  English  generations  might  call  her  blessed,  and  she  pre- 
fers that  they  should  caU  her  fashionable  1  (Stnpford  A.  Brooke,  M. A.)  The 
Virgin  Mary ;  or,  true  blessedness  : — The  Virgin  Mary  is  the  woman  of  all  others 
whom  truly  to  contemplate  is  to  revere.  She  stands  alone  among  the  women  of 
the  earth.  She  occupies  a  position  that  is  unique  m  the  history  of  the  world — the 
most  illustrious  of  all  her  sex,  "  whom  all  generations  shall   call  blessed.     I.  In 

DWELLING   UPON     THE    CHARACTER  OF    THE   BLESSED     VLBOIN,    THERE    ABE   TWO   EBB0E3 

TO  BE  AVOIDED.  1.  The  error  of  the  Roman  Church — "  Mariolatry,"  i.e.,  the  exal- 
tation of  Mary  to  a  position  that  no  created  being  can  occupy,  a  position  scarcely 
inferior  to  that  of  Christ  Himself,  the  appealing  to  her  to  bring  her  infiuence  ta 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  b 

bear  on  her  Son,  as  though  He  needed  thus  influencing,  as  though  any  one  ooold 
be  more  tender,  more  compassionate,  more  truly  sympathetic  than  that  all-merciful 
High  Priest,  who  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  having  beet 
"  tempted  in  all  things  as  we  are,"  "  bone  of  our  bone,  flesh  of  our  flesh."  2.  Oi» 
the  other  hand,  there  is  the  opposite  error,  which  is  doubtless  a  reaction,  a  reooil 
from  this  undue  exaltation  of  the  Blessed  Virgin — I  mean  the  error  of  the  puritanical 
school  of  thought,  which,  by  a  kind  of  rebound,  throws  itself  into  the  opposite 
extreme,  and,  almost  dreading  the  very  mention  of  her  name,  seems  to  deny  to  her 
the  respect  which  is  surely  due  to  her,  and  which  is  claimed  for  her  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture.      II.   GONSIBEB   WHAT   THOSE  SPECIAL  VIRTUES  WBBE   THAT   8H0NB   FORTH   IN  THB 

YiBoiN  Maby,  those  graces  and  characteristics  that  give  such  beauty  to  our  con- 
ception of  her  saintlinesB.  1.  Humility.  The  burden  of  the  Magnificat  ia  the 
greatness  of  God  and  her  own  littleness,  the  marvellous  condescension  of  "  the  high 
and  lofty  One  who  inhabiteth  eternity,"  in  stooping  so  low  to  visit  one  so  poor  and 
80  humble  as  she  was.  Humility,  what  a  beautiful  virtue  it  is  !  and  yet  how  diffi- 
cult to  acquire!  How  easy  it  is  to  mistake  it.  There  are  so  many  spuriout 
imitations  of  it ;  there  is  so  much  dissimulation  in  the  world  that  it  is  Bometimer 
difficult  to  distinguish  between  a  mock  humility  and  the  genuine  virtue.  It  is  BO 
necessary  that  the  motive  be  the  right  one.  True  humility  consists  not  merely  ur 
appearing  lowly  to  others,  it  is  the  being  lowly,  lowly  in  one's  own  estimation, 
lowly  in  heart.  It  is  to  recognize  what  God  is,  and  what  we  are.  It  is  the  onlj 
garb  that  befits  weak  and  erring  mortals  such  as  we  are.  2.  Simplicity  of  character. 
How  much  this  grace  is  needed  among  us — in  words,  in  dress,  in  demeanour. 
3.  Faith.  "Blessed  is  she  that  believed."  Faith,  what  is  it?  It  is  to  take  God 
at  His  word,  it  is  to  rest  the  soul  on  Him,  to  trust  Him,  to  surrender  the  whole 
being,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  to  His  keeping.  A  person  strong  in  faith  is  one 
who  can  rise  above  the  poor  paltry  objects  of  this  earth,  and  "  endure  as  seeing 
Him  who  is  invisible."  Conclusion  :  li  we  would  do  the  will  of  God,  if  we  would: 
be  blessed  as  Mary,  there  must  be  in  us  the  qualifications  that  Mary  possessed — 
humility,  simplicity,  faith.  Humility,  that  God  may  dwell  in  ns;  simplicity, 
that  we  may  be  true  children  of  God ;  faith,  that  God's  voice  may  be  heard  and 
obeyed.  Oh,  how  beautiful  must  such  a  life  as  this  be  1  the  life  of  Ck>d  in  the 
soul — "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  {Rowland  Ellis,  M.A.) 
The  Magnificat : — Every  burst  of  true  religious  life  is  accompanied  by  its  burst  of 
religious  poetry.  This  is  marked  in  our  own  most  popular  hymn-books  by  the 
names  of  Luther,  Wesley  and  Whitfield,  Keble  and  Newman.  St.  Luke's  Gospel 
shows  as  that  it  was  so  just  before  our  Lord's  appearance.  All  through  that 
Gospel,  indeed,  an  attentive  ear  can  catch  choral  vibrations.  Its  close  is  anthem- 
like. But  more  especially  is  this  the  case  with  its  opening  chapter.  The  air  is 
full  of  song.  The  whole  field  is  in  flower.  I.  Lex  cs  look  at  the  historical 
VBAUEWOBK  IN  WHICH  THE  Maokificat  IS  SET.  Mary  was  misconstrued  by  the 
world.  She  was  called  upon  to  bear  the  cross  which  is  heaviest  for  the  purest  sonla 
— a  cross  of  shame.  In  Nazareth  she  could  not  remain.  She  turned  to  the  spot 
towards  which  she  seemed  to  be  invited  by  an  angel's  lips,  and  pointed  by  an 
angel's  finger.  A  light  twinkled  for  her  among  the  hills.  If,  as  seems  most 
probable,  Elisabeth  lived  at  Hebron,  the  journey  would  be,  for  a  traveller  supplied 
with  the  best  horses  of  the  country,  one  of  seven  or  eight  hours ;  for  one  unable  to 
procure  such  help,  about  twice  that  length  of  time.  The  journey  lies  through  one- 
of  the  sternest  and  wildest  routes  in  Palestine.  The  solitude  is  the  most  desperate- 
which  travellers  of  experience  have  ever  traversed.  The  scenery  is  so  stern  that 
the  very  mountains  of  Moab,  touched  as  they  are  with  a  beautiful  rosy  tint,  present 
a  contrast  which  is  almost  a  relief.  At  the  end  of  her  second  or  third  day's  journey 
— probably  late  on  the  third — lines  of  blue  smoke,  piercing  a  sky  touched  by  the 
twilight  shadows,  told  the  Virgin  that  she  was  drawing  near  to  Hebron.  The  softer 
and  more  humanised  character  of  the  landscape  might  insensibly  communicate  a 
measure  of  relief  to  that  aching  heart.  Yet  Hebron  was  a  spot  which  could  scarcely 
be  entered  without  solemn  associations,  by  one  whose  spirit  habitually  breathed 
and  moved  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  It  not  only 
included  the  grotto  of  Machpelah,  the  last  resting-place  of  Sarah,  of  Abraham,  of 
Isaac,  Eebekah,  Leah,  Jacob.  Its  foundation  ascended  to  an  antiquity  which  jost 
exceeded  that  of  Tanis,  in  Egypt.  Long  before  the  Canaanites  came,  the  gigantic 
shapes  of  Anakim  and  Bephaim  moved  through  the  primaeval  forests  by  which  it 
was  surrounded.  The  Canaanites  gave  it  the  name  of  Arba,  a  great  warrior  of  the 
Anaks  (Kirjath-arba).  These  distant  and  marvellous  recollections  mast  impress  th» 


CHiJP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  71 

least  susceptible  imagination.    However  this  may  have  been,  there  must  have  been 
a  pathos  in  the    quiet  word    of   the  gentle  maiden  as   she  saluted    Elisabeth. 
Elisabeth,  for  her  part,  knew  her  cousin's  voice,  even  before  she  saw  her  pale  and 
suffering  face.    And  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  babe  within  her  quicken- 
ing, and  seeming  to  leap  into  joyous  life,  she  spoke  with  a  thrilling  and  exultant 
voice,  that  swelled  and  rang  out  in  ecstatic  welcome  to  the  mysterious  Incarnation 
into  whose  presence  she  was  brought.     Two  thoughts  here  naturally  occur.     1.  Ii 
was  nothing  but  a  brief,  unrecorded  salutation,  probably  of  one  or  two  words,  which 
drew  out  the  amazing  and   magnificent   acknowledgment,   that  came  home  to 
Elisabeth  with  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and,  for  a  while,  stirred  her  very 
frame,  elevated  her  spirit,  ennobled  and  transformed  the  tones  of  her  voice  into  a 
rich  and  stately  music.     Here,  as  is  so  often  the  case,  God's  work  is  done  by  an 
unconscious  infiuence  going  forth  from  His  servants.    Even  handkerchiefs  and 
aprons  lead  to  high  manifestations  of  the  powers  that  are  lodged  in  the  gospel. 
When  souls  are  steeped,  day  by  day,  in  prayer  and  prolonged  realization  of  the 
presence  of  God,  more  especially  when  they  are  in  sorrow,  or  bearing  the  cross,  a 
sweet  contagion  goes  forth  from  them.     A  mere  act  of  common  courtesy  and  affec- 
tion perhaps,  as  in  the  case  of  Mary's  salutation,  touches  the  deepest  spiritual 
chords  in  other  hearts.      2.  It  certainly  should  not  be  overlooked  that,  in  the 
presence  of  the  incarnate  Lord,  Elisabeth's  child  leaped  and  quickened  beneath  her 
leaping  heart.    It  is  strange,  then,  that  believing  people  should  assume  that  very 
young  children  are  necessarily  insusceptible  of  grace.    Such  an  assumption  is  not 
reasonable.     "  The  first  springs  of  thought,"  said  a  great  philosopher,  "  like  those 
of  the  Nile,  are  veiled  in  obscurity."    What  influences  may  be  made  to  stir  those 
unknown  springs,  what  elements  may  be  mingled  with  those  obscure  waters,  we 
cannot  tell,  and  therefore  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  deny,  in  the  presence  of  a 
counter-affirmation  of  the  Word  of  God.    II.  Wb  now  proceed  to  the  Magnificat 
ITSELF.    After  the  prominence  given  to  the  loud  ecstatic  utterance  of  Elisabeth 
(ver.  42),  it  seems  certain  that  the  deUcate  pencil  of  St.  Luke  presents  us  with  a 
real  contrast  in  a  single  word.     "And  Mary  said."    Elisabeth's  utterance  and 
supernatural  possession  by  the  Holy  Ghost  was  instantaneous ;  it  was  a  single  and 
exceptional  burst,  a  momentary  elevation.    But,  during  those  months,  when  her 
very  frame  was  the  shrine  of  the  Christ  of  God,  Mary  was  habitually  steeped  in  the 
Spirit,  habitually  absorbed  in  the  great   Presence  by  which  she  was  inhabited. 
There  is  a  noble  quiet  in  the  one  word  eaid.    But  that  quiet  does  not  exclude  a 
great  and  special  joy,  which  gushed  up  within  her  soul  and  spirit  at  the  words  of 
Elisabeth.    For  those  words  are  pervaded  not  only  by  enthusiastic  acknowledge 
ment  of  Mary's  purity,  but  by  enthusiastic  recognition  of  the  secret  in  her  soul,  of 
the  truth  of  which  she  was  the  favoured  depositary.    Every  one  who  is  possessed 
by  a  great  unpopular  truth,  finds  that  unpopularity  one  of  the  severest  of  trials.    He 
may,  indeed,  and  he  must  bring  it  forth  to  others ;   but  he  will  be  plied  with 
sarcasms  in  the  world,  with  texts  and  anathemas  even  in  the  Church.    There  is 
a  joy  of  the  purest  and  rarest  kind,  when  some  one  at  last  says,  "  The  truth 
which  possesses  you  has  taken  possession   of    me  also.      I    understand   you." 
Such  was  Mary's  joy  when  she  said,  in  the  rhyme-thought  of  Hebrew  poetry, 
the  second  rhythm  at  once  repeating  and  passing  beyond  the  first — "My  soul  doth 
magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  did  exalt  upon  that  God  who  is  my  Saviour." 
Let  us  examine  the  personal  traits,  and  the  general  religious  principles,  by  which 
the  Magnificat  is  pervaded.     1.  Of  these  personal  traits,  humility  is,  no  doubt,  the 
chief.    Ma^,  in   the    Magnificat,  does  not  profess   humility ;   she  practises  it. 
Favoured,  indeed,  she  is.    Yet  (as  the  word  so  translated  implies)  she  has  no 
thought  of  that  which  she  is — only  of  that  which,  in  God's  free  grace,  she  has 
received.     In  the  second  line  she  counts  herself  among  the  lost  whom  He  has 
brought  into  a  state  of  salvation.    Her  joy  and  exultation  repose  upon  that  God 
who  is  her  Saviour.    Her  woman's  heart  does,  indeed,  throb  as  it  thinks  of  the  cry 
which  arises  from  the  heart  of  redeemed  human  tv,  as  it  turns  to  the  grace  which 
she  has  received — "For  lol   from  hence  on,   all  the  generations  shall  call  me 
blessed."    But  why?    "  For  He  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  me  great  things,  and 
holy  is  His  name."  •♦  He  who  hath  a  gift,"  wriies  an  excellent  old  divine,  "and 
is  puffed  up  by  it,  is  doubly  a  thief ;  for  he  steals    the  gift,  and  the  glory  of  it 
also;  and  both  are  God's."    2.  The  religious  principles  by  which  the  Magnificat  is 
pervaded  are  these.    Mary's  soul  is  full  of  faith  in  the  tenderness  and  power  of 
God— in  the  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    And  she  believes  intensely  in 
the  victory  of  that  Incarnation ;  in  the  sure  triumph  of  God.    With  the  instinct 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  u 

of  a  prophetess,  she  sees  an  outline  of  all  history,  and  compresses  and  cmshei 
the  vast  drama  into  four  strong  rugged  words — still  as  the  rocks,  obscure  as  the 
mists  or  troubled  sunlights  that  veil  them,  the  secrets  of  God,  whose  meaning 
men  see  when  a  great  revolution  is  over,  and  which  then  goes  back  into  silence 
for  centuries  again.  "  He  hath  put  down  the  lords  of  dynasties  from  thrones." 
That  dethronement  includes  not  Herod  only,  though  it  may  have  begun  from  the 
Idumsean  usurper.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  men  of  action  and  science;  pontiffs, 
powerful  with  a  power  not  of  God;  men  of  action  which  is  not  heavenly,  and 
science  which  is  not  true;  Mary  sees  them  sink,  or  their  thrones  stand  un- 
tenanted, if  they  stand  at  all.  Not  always  by  the  earthquake  of  war  and  revo- 
lution. In  an  old  Greek  city,  a  modern  engineer  once  remarked  a  mass  of 
stone,  many  tons  in  weight,  lifted  up  for  several  feet  from  the  ground,  and 
hanging,  as  if  suspended  in  the  air.  On  looking  more  closely,  he  saw  that  the 
root  of  a  huge  fig-tree  had  performed  this  achievement.  By  exercising  an  even, 
continued  pressure,  every  moment  of  the  twenty-four  hours,  for  about  three 
centuries,  it  had  fairly  lifted  off  this  stupendous  weight.  Something  of  this 
strong,  yet  gentle  and  gradual  work  is  done  by  the  influence  of  Christianity. 
A  miracle  of  lifting  is  performed.  The  tyrant  is  hurled  from  his  throne,  "  not 
by  might,  not  by  power."  III.  We  mat  pkooeed  to  dbaw  some  lessons,  eccle- 
BiASTicAii  AND  PEBSONAi,  FEOM  THE  MAGNIFICAT.  1.  It  will  not,  WO  think,  offend 
those  earnest  Christians  who  object  upon  principle  to  parts  of  the  English 
Liturgy,  or  even  to  liturgies  in  general,  if  we  venture — surely  in  no  spirit  of 
offence  or  controversy — to  give  expression  to  the  reasons  which  probably  induced 
our  Keformers  to  retain  this  poem  in  the  Reformed  Prayer-book.  A  manual  of 
public  prayer,  they  doubtless  thought,  would  scarcely  be  complete  without  the 
Magnificat,  and  other  poems  of  the  New  Testament.  A  Scriptural  service  should 
reproduce  the  Bible  essentially.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  should  incorporate  the 
Psalms.  In  the  New  Testament  there  are  but  few  Divine  songs.  But  there  are 
some,  and  surely  they  are  there  for  good  reasons.  We  can  scarcely  fail  to  remark 
that  there  is  much  caprice  in  the  taste  for  hymns.  It  is,  in  the  midst  of  fluctua- 
tion and  mutabihty,  a  great  thing  to  have  some  hymns  in  public  service  whose 
permanence  is  insured  by  their  being  strictly  scriptural.  2.  Not  without  propriety 
is  the  Magnificat  placed  in  the  public  service.  It  comes  after  the  Old  Testament 
lesson.  Now  the  Magnificat  was  breathed  by  Mary  with  the  Old  Testament  promise 
fully  before  the  gaze  of  her  soul.  "  In  remembrance  of  His  mercy,"  she  exclaimB, 
"  as  He  spake  to  our  fathers,  to  Abraham,  and  to  his  seed  for  ever."  She  stood,  as 
her  song  stands  with  us,  between  the  two  Testaments.  3.  By  using  the  Magnificat 
we  fulfil  her  own  prophecy,  "  All  generations  shall  call  me  blessed."  Some,  in  a 
superstitious  horror  of  superstition,  forget  this.  She  is  blessed.  Blessed  because 
chosen  out  from  all  the  mothers  of  Israel,  and  of  the  earth,  to  an  inconceivable 
privilege.  Blessed,  because  consecrated  as  a  temple  for  the  Eternal  Word ;  by 
ineffable  conjunction,  uniting  to  Himself  that  human  nature  which  was  conceived 
and  bom  from  her.  4.  Personal  lessons.  We  may  well  apply  Mary's  words  to 
ourselves  for  a  mercy  common  to  all.  Jesus  Himself  teaches  us  that  her  blessed- 
ness is  ours;  that  so  there  is  a  strange  family  likeness  between  as  and  her 
(Matt.  xii.  48-50).  In  a  family  which  possesses  some  one  specially  gifted  member, 
we  often  see  looks  of  him  in  others.  So  the  likeness  of  Christ  is  reproduced,  gene- 
ration after  generation,  in  all  the  children  of  God.  Again,  praise  should  be  oar 
work.  The  brute  rolling  in  the  dust  of  our  roads  is  said  to  have  inherited  associa- 
tions of  the  free  desert  sands.  The  dog,  scraping  and  turning  before  he  lies  down 
to  rest,  similarly  acts  from  a  blind  reminiscence  of  progenitors  in  the  prairie  grass. 
Much  more  do  men  inherit  the  instinct  of  that  praise,  of  which  the  Magnificat  ia 
the  purest  expression.  Once  more,  joy  and  peace  are  part  of  our  purchased 
inheritance.  When  we  read  or  join  in  the  Magnificat,  let  us  see  to  it,  that  that  peace 
is  ours  which  will  make  its  words  true  for  us.  (Bishop  Wm.  Alexander.)  The 
Virgin  Mary's  joy : — The  events  in  Mary's  life  which  lead  to  this  burst  of  joy. 
1.  The  first  event  to  be  noticed  in  her  life,  la  the  high  honoub  God  unex- 
pectedly PUTS  ON  HKB.  We  find  her,  in  an  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,  living  at 
Nazareth,  a  city  or  town  of  Galilee.  Little,  however,  is  said  of  her  rank  or  condi- 
tion there.  But  suddenly  comes  down  an  angel  from  heaven  to  her,  salutes  her  aa 
the  highly  favoured  of  Jehovah,  and  announces  to  her  that  she  is  the  destined 
mother  of  the  world's  Saviour.  We  often  tell  you,  brethren,  that  there  may  be 
many  an  unexpected  affliction  and  sorrow  awaiting  yoa  in  the  future ;  we  may  tell 
jon  now  that  tiiere  may  be  too  in  that  future  many  ualooked  for  joys  and  honoors 


OTrf.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  78 

awaiting  you.  These  things,  like  all  others,  are  in  the  hands  of  a  sovereign  God, 
and  in  His  wise  and  holy  sovereignty  He  often  pours  them  out  abundantly  where 
they  are  the  least  expected,  "  He  hath  regarded  the  lowliness  of  His  handmaiden," 
Bays  Mary,  as  though  recognizing  the  pleasure  He  takes  in  exalting  the  humble, 
and  surprising  them  with  manifestations  of  His  love.     2.  We  see  next  in  Mary's 

life   THK   PAINFUL    TRIAL   WITH    WHICH     THIS     HIGH     HONOUB   WAS   ACCOMPANIED.        One 

moment's  thought,  brethren,  will  bring  this  to  your  minds.  The  angel  appeared 
to  her  privately.  None  saw  or  heard  him  but  herself.  When  she  tells  of  his  visit 
and  message,  who  will  believe  her  ?  and  if  she  is  not  believed,  what  in  a  short  time 
wiU  be  her  situation  7  Her  character  ruined,  the  world  scorning  her,  her  friends 
mourning  over  her,  and  worse — her  betrothed  husband,  the  object  perhaps  of  her 
warmest  youthful  affections,  lost  to  her,  loving  her  still  but  casting  her  off ;  nay, 
her  very  life  endangered,  for  she  will  be  charged  with  an  offence  which,  by  a  Jewish 
law,  is  death.  Dearly,  some  would  say,  will  she  pay  for  the  honour  intended  her. 
But  when  does  God  bestow  honour  on  any  one  without  calling  on  him  to  pay  some- 
thing for  it  ?  We  could  not  bear  the  Divine  mercies,  were  it  not  for  the  afflictions, 
the  sorrows  and  mortifications,  which  generally  accompany  them.  3.  Observe  next 
in  Mary  heb  submissive  acquiescence  both  in  the  honoub  and  in  the  trial 
ALLOTED  HEB.  Moses,  when  God  Himself  appears  to  him  at  Horeb,  and  makes 
known  to  him  that  He  has  chosen  him  to  be  the  deliverer  of  His  people,  begins  to 
debate  the  matter  with  God,  telling  Him  He  has  made  a  mistake,  and  chosen  a 
wrong  instrument  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  purpose.  "  Who  am  I,"  he  asks, 
"  that  I  should  go  unto  Pharaoh,  and  that  I  should  bring  forth  the  children  of 
Israel  out  of  Egypt  ?  "  Mary  rises  above  it  all.  The  angel  delivers  his  message  to 
her.  There  is  no  bidding  him  pass  her  by  and  go  elsewhere,  no  telling  him  of  her 
unworthmess,  no  obtruding  of  herself  or  her  own  feelings  in  any  way.  "  Behold 
the  handmaid  of  the  Lord,"  she  says  :  "  be  it  unto  me  aocordiiig  to  thy  word." 
And  that  is  real  humility,  which  leads  ns  to  regard  ourselves  as  God's  servants. 
But  Mary  was  a  thoughtful  as  well  as  an  humble  woman.  It  is  more  than  probable, 
therefore,  that  all  the  consequences  which  must  naturally  follow  the  honour 
designed  for  her,  rushed  at  this  moment  into  her  mind.  The  tone  of  her  answer 
seems  to  intimate  this.  And  a  word  from  her,  we  are  ready  to  say,  would  have 
averted  these  consequences.  "  Go,"  she  might  have  said  to  the  angel,  "  to  my 
parents,  or  go  to  some  of  my  neighbours  and  friends,  or  go  to  Joseph  and  tell  him 
what  is  to  happen  to  me.  Save  those  kind  hearts  from  sorrow,  and  me  from 
shame."  But  not  a  word  of  the  kind  comes  from  her.  She  looks  on  honour  and 
dishonour,  evil  report  and  good  report,  with  the  same  calmness.  "  Come  what 
will,"  she  seems  to  say,  "  be  it  unto  me  according  to  thy  word."  We  must  now 
look  at  her  joy.  1.  It  is  clear  that  it  was  a  joy  accompanied  with  both  affliction 
AND  SUBMISSION.  At  Nazareth,  Mary's  home,  all  was  still  dark  as  before.  Yet 
Mary  is  happy ;  she  magnifies  the  Lord  and  her  spirit  rejoices.  But  what  is  the 
promised  joy  of  the  gospel  ?  It  is  abounding  joy  in  abounding  tribulation.  You 
must  wait,  therefore,  for  your  tribulation  to  abound,  before  you  are  warranted  to 
complain  or  wonder  that  your  spiritual  joy  does  not  overflow.  But  are  your  trials 
severe  ?  Then  you  have  to  learn  that  there  is  no  abounding  joy  for  you,  till  you 
are  perfectly  content  to  have  them  severe  ;  till  your  minds  are  completely  reconciled 
to  them  ;  till  all  murmuring,  and  rebellion,  and  impatient  struggling  to  get  rid  of 
them,  are  come  to  an  end.  The  soul  often  keeps  up  a  long  effort  in  afHiction  to- 
make  terms  with  its  God.  Tribulation  must  work  patience  before  it  can  work  joy,  or- 
hope,  or  anything  pleasant.  2.  And  this  joy  before  us  is  a  deeply  seated  joy.  "  My 
soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord;  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced."  It  was  no  superficial,, 
transient  pleasure,  excited  in  her  by  Elisabeth's  words  or  kindness ;  it  was  a  joy 
lodged  deeply  within  her,  filling  her  heart  and  soul ;  quickened  and  called  into- 
outward  expression  indeed  by  the  sympathy  she  had  experienced,  but  existing  in 
perfect  independence  of  that  sympathy  and  of  all  outward  things.  It  is  evident 
that,  young  as  she  was,  she  had  a  mind  and  feelings  of  unusual  strength.  Her 
joy  partook,  therefore,  of  the  character  of  her  mind  and  feelings.  It  was  a  power- 
ful joy.  Light  minds  will  have  light  joys.  They  are  not  spacious  enough  for  the 
joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  largely  in  them.  A  child  must  not  wonder  that  it 
can  take  little  or  no  share  in  the  pleasures  of  a  man.  3.  This  joy  again  is  a  sinner's 
JOY  IN  A  sinner's  God.  It  is  joy  in  a  Saviour.  Holy  as  she  was,  she  felt  herself  a 
sinner ;  and  her  highest  joy  was  not  in  Elisabeth's  kindness,  though  that  must 
have  been  at  this  time  a  balm  indeed  to  her ;  nor  in  the  honour  the  Lord  had  put 
»a  her,  though  in  that  she  exults ;  it  was  in  this — that  she  had  found  for  her  gailtj 


»4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  t. 

Bonl  a  mighty,  a  Divine  Saviour.  And  was  there  anything  -wonderful  or  peculiar  in 
this  ?  Nothing  peculiar,  for  the  saints  of  God  in  all  ages  have  felt  the  same.  "  My 
heart  shall  be  joyful  in  the  Lord ;  it  shall  rejoice  in  His  salvation  ;  "  had  said  her 
father  David  long  before.  The  reason  is,  the  Lord  in  all  His  dispensations  with  as 
deals  with  us  as  sinners.  There  is  a  peculiarity  in  His  dispensations  towards  us. 
He  will  have  a  corresponding  peculiarity  therefore  in  our  conduct  and  in  out 
feelings  towards  Him.  The  worship  that  He  requires  of  us,  is  a  sinner's  worship ; 
the  praise  we  offer  Him,  must  be  a  sinner's  praise ;  and  the  joy  too  we  feel  in  Him, 
will  be  a  sinner's  joy.  Nor  is  this  wonderful.  Consider  what  salvation  is.  It  is 
the  restoration  of  a  ruined  soul.  It  is  the  taking  of  us  from  the  very  gates  of  hell 
to  heaven.  "I  would  not  forget  God  as  my  Preserver,  my  Benefactor,  my  Comforter, 
the  sole  Author  and  Giver  of  all  my  blessings  ;  but  if  I  magnify  Him,  my  soul  must 
magnify  Him  the  most,  and  if  I  rejoice  in  Him,  my  spirit  must  rejoice  in  Him  the 
most,  as  God  my  Saviour."  4.  And  this  also  we  must  notice  in  this  joy — it  was 
i.  JOT  THAT  WAS  THE  FRUIT  AND  EFFECT  OF  FAITH.  It  is  as  a  Saviour  that  ws  must 
chiefly  rejoice  in  Him,  and  His  salvation  is  a  future  thing,  not  one  of  as  has 
received  more  than  an  earnest  and  foretaste  of  it.  Faith  therefore  becomes  a 
necessary  pre-requisite  to  joy.  It  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  which  enables  it  to  discern 
the  beauty,  and  excellency,  and  glory,  of  its  unseen  God ;  and  the  reality,  greatness, 
and  certainty,  of  the  salvation  and  blessings  He  has  promised  us.  We  turn  to 
Mary,  and  in  her  we  see  this  faith  exemplified.  As  we  repeat  her  words  in  our 
service,  we  are  ready  to  imagine  that  they  must  have  oome  from  her  with  the 
infant  Jesus  in  her  arms,  that  they  were  a  young  mother's  first  words  of  joy  over 
her  new-bom  babe.  But  that  Jesus  is  as  yet  unborn.  She  is  singing  here  a  song 
of  almost  pure  faith.  She  is  placing  God's  promises  before  her  mind,  and  in  them 
she  is  exulting.  And  here,  brethren,  lies  the  great  secret  of  almost  all  a  Christian's 
joy — he  is  living,  not  a  life  of  sense,  but  a  life  of  faith.  Many  of  you  look  to  what 
you  have  for  cornfort  and  happiness ;  he  looks  to  what  he  is  to  have,  to  what  God 
has  promised  him,  to  what  the  rolling  years  are  to  bring  him  ages  and  ages  hence. 
This  is  no  delusion,  brethren.  It  is  not,  as  you  may  suppose,  an  ideal  thing.  It  is 
a  real  thing.  There  are  those  now  around  you,  who  could  tell  you  that  it  is  a  real 
thing.  The  joy  of  Mary's  soul  in  God  her  Saviour,  is  a  joy  they  can  understand  ai 
well  as  you  can  understand  a  parent's  joy  in  his  children,  or  a  friend's  joy 
in  his  friend,  or  a  thirsty  man's  joy  in  a  fountain,  or  a  weary  traveller's 
joy  in  his  home.  It  is  a  joy  they  have  known  and  felt.  {C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
Magnifying  the  Lord : — "  My  soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord."  Here  is  an  occupation 
for  all  of  us  who  know  the  Lord,  and  have  been  born  into  His  family.  It  is  an 
occupation  which  may  be  followed  by  all  sorts  of  people.  This  humble  woman 
speaks  of  her  low  estate,  and  yet  she  could  magnify  the  Lord.  All  believers,  of 
every  rank  and  condition,  can  attend  to  this  work.  This  is  an  occupation  which 
can  be  followed  in  all  places.  Ton  need  not  go  up  to  the  meeting-house  to  magnify 
the  Lord,  you  can  do  it  at  home.  You  may  be  tossed  about  upon  the  sea  in  a 
storm,  but  you  may  trust  His  name,  and  be  calm,  and  so  magnify  Him.  Or,  you 
may  be  no  traveller,  and  never  go  a  hundred  yards  out  of  the  village  in  which  you 
were  born,  but  you  may  magnify  the  Lord  just  as  well  for  all  that.  This  is  not  an 
occupation  which  requires  a  crowded  congregation,  it  can  be  fitly  performed  in 
solitude.  I  suppose  this  sonnet  of  the  Virgin  was  sung  with  only  one  to  hear  it, 
her  cousin  Elisabeth.  There  is  quorum  for  God's  praise  even  where  there  is  only 
one ;  but,  where  there  are  two  that  agree  to  praise  God,  then  is  the  praise  exceeding 
sweet.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Living  in  God  a  source  of  joy  : — What  a  blessing  is  a 
cheerful  spirit  I  When  the  soul  throws  its  windows  wide  open,  letting  in  the  sun- 
shine, and  presenting  to  all  who  see  it  the  evidence  of  its  gladness,  it  is  not  only 
happy,  but  it  has  an  unspeakable  power  of  doing  good.  To  all  other  beatitudes 
may  be  added,  "  Blessed  are  the  joy-makers."  I  have  power  in  my  soul  which 
enables  me  to  perceive  God.  I  am  as  certain  as  that  I  live  that  nothing  is  so  near 
to  me  as  God.  He  is  nearer  to  me  than  I  am  to  myself.  It  is  part  of  His  very 
essence  that  He  should  be  nigh  and  present  to  me.  .  .  .  And  a  man  is  more 
blessed  or  less  blessed  in  the  same  measure  as  he  is  aware  of  the  presence  of  God« 
(John  Tauler.)  Joy  under  unfavourable  circumstances  : — When  some  of  its  tribe 
have  migrated  to  lands  where  the  frost  never  sets,  and  the  snow  never  falls,  the 
sweet  httle  Robin  with  its  red  breast,  and  its  warm  brown  plumage,  its  cheerful 
chirp,  and  nimble  movements,  never  seems  to  lack  any  good  thing,  but  in  frost  and 
snow  is  daily  fed,  and  is  seldom  found  dead  from  cold  or  hunger,  or  even  wearing 
the  appearance  of  a  famished  state.    The  peasants  wonder  how  the  robin  lives,  and 


«RAP.  I.]  8T.  LUKE.  7S 

in  some  districts  they  call  it  "  God  Almighty's  bird,"  because  they  suppose  that  by 
some  special  providence  it  is  sustained  and  fed.  There  are  many  like  this  feathered 
«reature ;  their  outward  circumstances  always  wear  a  wintry  aspect,  and  yet  they 
mre  always  cheerful,  they  never  complain,  they  never  seem  to  want  any  good  thing. 
^Samuel  Martin.)  Joyous  workers  do  nwst  for  God : — Joy.  God  delights  in  joy  ; 
and  His  desire  for  His  people  is  that  they  should  be  trustful  and  joyful — and  this 
Irath  for  their  own  sakes  and  for  His  glory.  God  needs  vigorous  workers,  and  He 
can  only  have  these  by  bestowing  on  them  a  joy  adequate  to  the  greatness  of  the 
work.  In  joy  the  apostles  went  forth  to  work  for  God,  and  they  found  that  the  joy 
of  the  Lord  was  their  strength.  It  is  joy  then,  not  sorrow,  that  is  our  strength ;  and 
they  that  have  done  most  for  God,  have  been  those  who  have  had  most  joy  in  God. 
{H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  Rejoicing  always : — Billy's  whole  life  was  spent  in  praising  the 
Lord,  and  for  the  most  part  aloud.  He  couldn't  help  himself ;  with  a  heart  always 
in  tune,  every  influence,  every  breath  shook  from  its  tremulous  chords  some  note 
of  thanksgiving.  "As  I  go  along  the  street,"  he  said,  "I  lift  up  one  foot,  and  it 
■eems  to  say  '  Glory  1 '  and  I  lift  up  the  other,  and  it  seems  to  say  '  Amen  I '  and 
they  keep  on  like  that  all  the  time  I  walk."  Probably  you  would  have  come  upon 
him  singing.  "Bless  the  Lord,  I  can  sing,"  he  would  say ;  "  my  Heavenly  Father 
likes  to  hear  me  sing.  I  can't  sing  so  sweetly  as  some,  but  my  Father  likes  to  hear 
me  sing  as  well  as  those  who  can  sing  better  than  I  can.  My  Father  likes  to  hear 
tiie  crow  as  well  as  the  nightingale,  for  He  made  them  both."  {Life  of  Billy  Bray.) 
Happiness  of  confiding  in  God: — There  once  lived  in  an  old  brown  cottage  a 
solitary  woman.  She  tended  her  little  garden,  and  knit  and  spun  for  her  living. 
She  was  known  every  where,  from  village  to  village,  by  the  name  of  "  Happy  Nancy," 
She  had  no  money,  no  family,  no  relatives,  and  was  half-blind,  quite  lame,  and 
Tery  crooked.  There  was  no  comeliness  in  her,  and  yet  there,  in  that  homely, 
deformed  body,  the  great  God,  who  loves  to  bring  strength  out  of  weakness,  had  set 
His  royal  seal.  "  Well,  Nancy,  singing  again  ?  "  would  the  chance  visitor  say,  as 
fae  stopped  at  her  door.  "  0  yes,  I'm  for  ever  at  it."  "  I  wish  you'd  tell  me  your 
secret,  Nancy.  You  are  all  alone,  yon  work  hard,  you  have  nothing  very  pleasant 
surrounding  you  ;  what  is  the  reason  you're  so  happy?"  ♦'  Perhaps  it's  because  I 
haven't  got  anybody  but  God,"  replied  the  good  creature,  looking  upward.  "  You 
see,  rich  folks  like  you  depend  upon  their  families  and  their  houses ;  they've  got  to 
b*  thinking  about  their  business,  of  their  wives  and  children ;  and  then  they're 
always  mighty  afraid  of  troubles  a-head.  I  ain't  got  anything  to  trouble  myself 
about,  you  see,  'cause  I  leave  all  to  the  Lord.  I  think,  well,  if  He  can  keep  this 
great  world  in  such  good  order,  the  sun  rolling  day  after  day,  and  the  stars  shining 
night  after  night,  and  make  my  garden  things  come  up  the  same,  season  after 
season.  He  can  certainly  take  care  of  such  a  poor  thing  as  I  am  ;  and  so  you  see  I 
leave  it  all  to  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  takes  care  of  me."  "  Well,  but,  Nancy,  sup- 
pose a  frost  comes  after  your  fruit-trees  are  all  in  blossom  and  your  plants  out ; 
suppose "  "  But  I  don't  suppose — I  never  can  suppose — I  don't  want  to  sup- 
pose, except  that  the  Lord  will  do  everything  right.  That's  what  makes  you 
people  unhappy — you're  all  the  time  supposing.  Now,  why  can't  you  wait  till  the 
suppose  comes,  and  then  make  the  best  of  it  ?  "  "  Ah,  Nancy,  it's  pretty  certain 
you'll  get  to  heaven,  while  many  of  us,  with  all  our  worldly  wisdom,  will  have  to 
stay  out."  "  There  you  are — at  it  again,"  said  Nancy,  shaking  her  head  ;  "  always 
looking  out  for  some  black  cloud.  Why,  if  I  were  you,  I'd  keep  the  devil  at  arm's 
length,  instead  of  taking  him  right  into  my  heart.  He'll  do  you  a  desperate  sight 
of  mischief."  She  was  right.  We  do  take  the  demon  of  care,  of  distrust,  of 
melancholy  foreboding,  of  ingratitude,  right  into  our  heart.  We  canker  every 
pleasure  with  gloomy  fear  of  coming  ill.  We  seldom  trust  that  blessings  will  enter, 
or  hail  them  when  they  come.  We  should  be  more  childlike  to  our  Heavenly 
Father,  believe  in  His  love,  learn  to  confide  in  His  wisdom,  and  not  in  our  own  ; 
and,  above  all,  wait  till  the  "  suppose  "  comes,  and  make  the  best  of  it.  Depend 
upon  it,  earth  would  seem  an  Eden  if  you  would  follow  Happy  Nancy's  rule,  and 
never  give  place  in  your  bosom  to  imaginary  evils.  {StuderWs  Handbook  to  Scripture 
Doctrines.)  The  greatest  blessedness  is  to  be  a  follower  of  Christ : — "  All  genera- 
tions shall  call  me  blessed."  So  sang  Mary,  when  the  greatness  of  her  mother-joy 
was  made  known  to  her.  Yet  her  highest  blessedness,  after  all,  was  not  so  much 
because  she  was  the  mother,  as  because  she  was  the  disciple,  of  Jesus  Christ.  It 
was  a  great  favour  to  be  Hk  nurse,  but  a  far  greater  to  be  His  follower.  (J. 
Stringer  Rowe.)  Mary's  unselfishness : — In  these  words  we  see,  as  in  the  song  of 
Hannah,  the  exaltation  of  a  purely  unselfish  spirit,  whose  personal  experiencoa 


T6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

merge  themselves  in  those  of  nniversal  humanity.  One  line  alone  expresses  her 
intense  sense  of  the  honour  done  her,  and  all  the  rest  is  exultation  in  her  God  a» 
the  helper  of  the  poor,  the  neglected,  the  despised  and  forgotten,  and  the  Saviour 
of  her  oppressed  country.  No  legend  of  angel  ministrations  or  myths  of  miracle- 
can  so  glorify  Mary  in  our  eyes  as  this  simple  picture  of  her  pure  and  lofty  unsel- 
fishness of  spirit.  {H.  B.  Stowe.)  Christianity  and  women  ; — The  position  ol 
women  in  Christian  society  is  directly  traceable  not  only  or  chiefly  to  our  Lord's 
teaching,  but  to  the  circumstances  of  His  birth.  Before  He  came  woman,  even  in 
Israel,  was  little  better  than  the  slave  of  man.  In  the  heathen  world,  as  in  Eastern 
countries  now,  she  was  a  slave  to  all  intents  and  purposes.  Here  and  there  a 
woman  of  great  force  of  character  joined  to  hereditary  advantages  might  emerge 
from  this  chronic  oppression — might  become  a  Deborah  or  a  Semiramis,  or  a  Boa- 
dicea,  or  a  Cleopatra,  or  a  Zenobia — might  control  the  world  by  controlling  its 
rulers.  But  the  lot  of  the  great  majority  was  a  suffering  and  a  degraded  one.  But 
when  Christ  took  upon  Him  to  deliver  man.  He  did  not  abhor  the  virgin's  womb. 
In  the  greatest  event  in  the  whole  course  of  human  history,  the  stronger  sex  had  no 
part  whatever.  The  Incarnate  Son  was  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  was  born 
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  therefore  in,  and  with  Mary,  woman  rose  to  a  position  ot 
consideration  unknown  before,  in  which  nothing  is  forfeited  that  belongs  to  the  true 
modesty  and  grace  of  her  nature — by  which  a  larger  share  of  influence  in  shaping- 
the  destinies  of  the  Christian  races  was  secured  to  her  in  perpetuity.  It  was  the 
Incarnation  which  created  chivalry  and  those  better  features  which  sweeten  our 
modem  life,  and  which  are  due  to  chivalry.  (Canon Liddon.)  Greatness  of  God: — 
When  Massillon  pronounced  one  of  those  discourses  which  have  placed  him  in 
the  first  class  of  orators,  he  found  himself  surrounded  by  the  trappings  and  pageants 
of  a  royal  funeral.  The  temple  was  not  only  hung  with  sable,  but  shadowed  with 
darkness,  save  the  few  twinkling  lights  on  the  altar.  The  beauty  and  the  chivalry 
of  the  land  were  spread  out  before  him.  The  censers  threw  forth  their  fumes  of 
incense,  mounting  in  wreaths  to  the  gilded  dome.  There  sat  Majesty,  clothed  in 
Back-cloth  and  sunk  in  grief.  All  felt  in  common,  and  as  one.  It  was  a  breathless 
suspense.  Not  a  sound  stole  upon  the  awful  stillness.  The  master  of  mighty 
eloquence  arose.  His  hands  were  folded  on  his  breast.  His  eyes  were  Ufted  to 
heaven.  Utterance  seemed  denied  to  him.  He  stood  abstracted  and  lost.  At 
length,  his  fixed  look  unbent ;  it  hurried  over  the  scene,  where  every  pomp  was 
mingled  and  every  trophy  strewn.  It  found  no  resting-place  for  itself  amidst  all 
that  idle  parade  and  all  that  mocking  vanity.  Again  it  settled ;  it  had  fastened  upon 
the  bier,  glittering  with  escutcheons  and  veiled  with  plumes.  A  sense  of  the  inde- 
scribable nothingness  of  man  "  at  his  best  estate,"  of  the  mearmess  of  the  highest 
human  grandeur,  now  made  plain  in  the  spectacle  of  that  hearsed  mortal,  overcame 
him.  His  eye  once  more  closed ;  his  action  was  suspended ;  and,  in  a  scarcely 
audible  whisper,  he  broke  the  long-drawn  pause — "  There  is  nothing  great  but  God." 
(Sermons  hy  Dr.  Hamilton.)  God's  continuing  mercy: — What  a  comfort  tore- 
member  that  the  Lord's  mercy  and  lovingkindness  are  to  be  continued.  Much  as  we 
have  experienced  in  the  long  years  of  our  pilgrimage,  we  have  by  no  means  outlived 
eternal  love.  Providential  goodness  is  an  endless  chain,  a  stream  which  follows 
the  pilgrim,  a  wheel  perpetually  revolving,  a  star  for  ever  shining,  and  leading  us 
to  the  place  where  He  is  who  was  once  a  babe  in  Bethlehem.  All  the  volumes  which 
record  the  doings  of  Divine  grace  are  but  part  of  a  series  "to  be  continued."  (C.H.S.) 
An  ignominious  fall : — How  proudly  in  history  sounded  the  name  of  William  the 
Conqueror  !  Intimidator  of  France  and  Anjou  and  Brittany,  victor  at  Hastings  sus- 
taining the  English  crown,  driving  people  from  their  homes  that  he  might  have  a 
game  forest,  making  a  Domesday  Book  by  which  all  the  land  was  put  under  despotic 
espionage  to  avenge  a  joke  at  his  obesity,  proclaiming  war,  trampling  harvest-fields 
and  vineyards  under  cavalry  hoof,  until  nations  were  horror-struck.  But  at  that 
apex  of  renown,  while  he  was  riding  one  day  his  horse  put  forefoot  on  a  hot  cinder 
and  plunged,  wounding  the  rider  against  the  pommel  of  the  saddle  so  that  he  died, 
his  son  hastening  to  England  to  get  the  crown  before  his  father's  breath  ceased. 
The  imperial  corpse,  coffinless,  carried  in  a  cart,  most  of  the  attendants  leaving  it 
in  the  street  at  a  fire  alarm,  that  they  might  go  and  see  the  conflagration.  The 
burial  in  the  church,  built  by  the  Conqueror,  interrupted  by  some  one  who  cried : 
"  Bishop,  the  man  whom  thou  hast  praised  was  a  robber ;  the  very  ground  on 
which  we  are  standing  is  mine,  and  is  the  site  where  my  father's  house  stood.  H& 
took  it  from  me  by  violence  to  build  this  church  upon  it.  I  reclaim  it  as  my  rights 
and  in  the  name  of  God  I  forbid  you  to  baty  him  here  or  cover  him  with  mj  glebe.** 


CHA*.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  71 

"Go  up,"  said  the  ambition  of  William  the  Conqueror.  "Go  up  by  way  of  a 
throne  ;  go  up  by  way  of  criminality ;  go  up  by  way  of  revenge."  "  Come  down," 
Bays  God.  ••  Come  down  by  the  way  of  a  miserable  death ;  come  down  by  the  way 
of  ignominious  obsequies ;  come  down  in  the  sight  of  all  nations ;  come  clear  dowu  • 
come  for  ever  down  !  "  (Dr.  Talmage.)  Pride  the  master  sin: — "Pride  is  the 
great  master  sin  of  the  human  heart."  Buskin  says,  '*  In  general,  pride  is  at  the 
bottom  of  all  great  mistakes."  Napoleon  declared,  "Pride  never  listens  to  the 
voice  of  reason,  nature,  or  religion."  "  God  resisteth  the  proud."  "  Those  that 
walk  in  pride  He  is  able  to  abase."  David,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Belshazzar,  and 
Herod  experienced  this.  (See  Dan.  iv.  5 ;  Acts  xii.  23.)  Charles  V.  was  so  sure 
of  victory  when  he  invaded  France,  that  he  ordered  his  historians  to  prepare  plenty 
of  paper  to  record  his  exploits.  But  he  lost  his  army  by  famine  and  disease,  and 
returned  crest-fallen.  A  South-American  farmer  had  such  large  herds  of  horses, 
that  he  boasted,  "I'll  never  want  horses,  not  even  if  God  wished  it."  Soon  after, 
an  epidemic  destroyed  them  every  one.  "  He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased." 
{H.  R.  Burton.)  Pride  before  destruction: — As  weeds  naturally  grow  in  rich 
Boil,  so  pride  is  commonly  engendered  by  prosperity.  The  devil  and  his  angels 
when  they  were  in  heaven,  and  desired  to  usurp  the  place  of  God  ;  our  first  parents 
when  they  were  in  Eden,  and  aspired  to  be  as  gods ;  Haman  when  he  was  the 
favourite  of  Ahasuerus,  and  wished  everybody  to  honour  him;  David  when  he 
became  great,  and  commanded  Joab  to  number  Israel  that  he  might  know  how 
mighty  a  king  he  was ; — are  Scripture  illustrations  of  pride  and  its  results.  Bajazet, 
Sultan  of  the  Turks  about  five  hundred  years  ago,  was  a  great  conqueror,  till  at 
length  he  was  completely  defeated  by  Timur,  the  Emir  and  general  of  the  Tartars. 
In  reply  to  Timur's  question,  "  Had  you  conquered  what  would  you  have  done  with 
me  ?  "  Bajazet  haughtily  answered,  •'  Put  you  in  an  iron  cage,  and  exhibited  you 
wherever  I  went."  "  Proud  man,"  angrily  replied  Timur,  "  it  shall  be  done  so  to 
thee;  "  and  for  about  three  years  Bajazet  was  exhibited  like  a  wild  beast,  till,  in 
his  misery,  he  killed  himself  by  beating  his  head  against  the  bars  of  his  cage. 
When  the  first  Napoleon  was  preparing  to  invade  Russia,  a  lady,  trying  to  dissuade 
him,  said,  "  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes ; "  "  Madame,"  he  proudly  answered, 
"  I  dispose,  as  well  as  propose."  It  was  remarked  that  from  that  time  he  never 
prospered.  "  Great  gifts  are  beautiful  as  Eachel,  but  pride  makes  them  barren  as 
she  was."  "  A  proud  heart  and  a  lofty  mountain  are  never  fruitful."  (Ibid.) 
Help  offered  : — With  marked  effect  Mr.  Moody  narrated  the  following  incident,  com- 
municated to  him  by  Pastor  Monod :  A  friend  of  mine  in  Paris  said  that  when 
Prussia  was  at  war  with  France,  they  went  out  one  night  after  darkness  had  come 
to  bring  in  the  wounded  men.  They  were  afraid  to  take  out  lights  for  fear  of  getting 
a  bullet  from  the  enemy.  When  they  thought  they  had  gotten  all  the  wounded,  and 
were  ready  to  retire  into  the  city,  a  man  got  on  the  top  of  a  high  spot  of  ground 
and  cried  in  a  loud  voice,  asking  if  there  were  any  who  wished  to  be  taken  into 
Paris,  and  telling  them  the  ambulance  was  ready  to  go.  Before  he  spoke  it  was 
silent ;  not  a  voice  was  heard.  But  the  moment  he  had  ceased  speaking,  and  the 
men  knew  that  there  was  help,  there  was  a  cry  all  over  the  field.  I  come  to-day  to 
tell  you  that  there  is  One  willing  to  save,  that  there  is  help.  Let  a  cry  go  up : 
"  Shepherd,  save  me  from  death  and  hell."  This  is  the  gospel.  Copiousness  of 
God's  mercy  : — God's  pity  is  not  as  some  sweet  cordial,  poured  in  dainty  drops  from 
a  golden  phial.  It  is  not  like  the  musical  water-drops  of  some  slender  rill,  murmur- 
ing down  the  dark  sides  of  Mount  Sinai.  It  is  wide  as  the  whole  scope  of  heaven. 
It  is  abundant  as  all  the  air.  If  one  had  art  to  gather  up  all  the  golden  sunlight 
that  to-day  falls  wide  over  all  this  continent,  falling  through  every  silent  hour ;  and 
all  that  is  dispersed  over  the  whole  ocean,  flashing  from  every  wave  ;  and  all  that 
is  poured  refulgent  over  the  northern  wastes  of  ice,  and  along  the  whole  continent 
of  Europe,  and  the  vast  outlying  Asia  and  torrid  Africa — if  one  could  in  anywise 
gather  up  this  immense  and  incalculable  outflow  and  treasure  that  falls  down 
through  the  bright  hours,  and  runs  in  liquid  ether  about  the  mountains,  and  fills 
all  the  plains,  and  sends  innumerable  rays  through  every  secret  place,  pouring  over 
and  filling  every  flower,  shining  down  the  sides  of  every  blade  of  grass,  resting  in 
glorious  humility  upon  the  humblest  things — on  sticks,  and  stones,  and  pebbles — on 
the  spider's  web,  the  sparrow's  nest,  the  threshold  of  the  young  foxes'  hole,  where 
they  play  and  warm  themselves — that  rests  on  the  prisoner's  window,  that  strikes 
radiant  beams  through  the  slave's  tear,  that  puts  gold  upon  the  widow's  weeds,  that 
plates  and  roofs  the  city  with  burnished  gold,  and  goes  on  in  its  wild  abundance  up 
and   down  the  earth,  shining  everywhere  and  always,  since  the  day  of   primal 


7f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t; 

creation,  without  faltering,  without  stint,  without  waste  or  diminution ;  as  full,  as 
fresh,  as  overflowing  to-day  as  if  it  were  the  very  first  day  of  its  outlay — if  one 
might  gather  up  this  boundless,  endless,  infinite  treasure,  to  measure  it,  then  might 
he  tell  the  height,  the  depth,  and  unending  glory  of  the  pity  of  God  !  The  light, 
and  the  sun,  its  source,  are  God's  own  figures  of  the  immensity  and  copiousness  of 
His  mercy  and  compassion.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Power  of  a  tnie  Christian 
ivoman: — We  are  told  that  this  sacred  visit  lasted  three  months.  A  mythical  legend 
speaks  of  a  large  garden,  pertaining  to  the  priests'  house,  where  Mary  was  wont  to 
walk  for  meditation  and  prayer,  and  that  bending  one  day  over  a  flower,  beautiful, 
but  devoid  of  fragrance,  she  touched  it,  and  thenceforth  it  became  endowed  with  a 
sweet  perfume.  The  myth  is  a  lovely  allegory  of  the  best  power  of  a  true  and 
noble  Christian  woman,  (fl.  B.  Stowe.)  Take  heed  of  abusing  the  mercy  of 
God  : — Suck  not  poison  out  of  the  sweet  flower  of  God's  mercy :  do  not  think  that 
because  God  is  merciful  you  may  go  on  in  sin  ;  this  is  to  make  mercy  become  your 
enemy.  None  might  touch  the  ark  but  the  priests,  who  by  their  office  were  more 
holy ;  none  may  touch  this  ark  of  God's  mercy  but  such  as  are  resolved  to  be  holy. 
To  sin  because  mercy  abounds  is  the  devil's  logic.  He  that  sins  because  of  mercy, 
is  like  one  that  wounds  his  head  because  he  hath  a  plaister ;  he  that  sins  because 
of  God's  mercy,  shall  have  judgment  without  mercy.  Mercy  abused  turns  to  fury. 
Nothing  sweeter  than  mercy,  when  it  is  improved;  nothing  fiercer  when  it  is 
abused  ;  nothing  colder  than  lead,  when  it  is  taken  out  of  the  mine,  notliing  more 
scalding  than  lead,  when  it  is  heated ;  nothing  blunter  than  iron,  nothing  sharper 
when  it  is  whetted.  Mercy  is  not  for  them  that  sin  and  fear  not,  but  for  them  that  fear 
and  sin  not.  God's  mercy  is  a  holy  mercy;  where  it  pardons,  it  heals.  (T.  Watson.) 
The  Christian's  exaltation : — I  have  read  of  Ingo,  an  ancient  king  of  the  Draves,  who, 
making  a  stately  feast,  appointed  his  nobles,  at  that  time  pagans,  to  sit  in  the  hall 
below,  and  commanded  certain  poor  Christians  to  be  brought  up  into  his  presence^ 
chamber,  to  sit  with  him  at  his  table,  to  eat  and  drink  of  his  kingly  cheer ;  at  which 
many  wondering,  he  said,  "  that  he  accounted  Christians,  though  never  so  poor,  a 
greater  ornament  to  his  table,  and  more  worthy  of  his  company,  than  the  greatest 
peers  unconverted  to  the  Christian  faith ;  for  when  these  might  be  thrust  down  to 
hell,  those  might  be  his  consorts  and  fellow-princes  in  heaven."  Although  yoa 
see  the  stars  sometimes  by  their  reflections  in  a  puddle,  or  in  the  bottom  of  a  well, 
aye,  in  a  stinking  ditch,  yet  the  stars  have  their  situations  in  heaven.  So,  though 
yon  see  a  godly  man  in  a  poor,  miserable,  low,  despised  condition  for  the  things  of 
this  world,  yet  he  is  fixed  in  heaven.  (T.  Brooks.)  The  coming  of  Jesus  is — 1. 
The  exaltation  of  the  lowly.  2.  The  putting  down  of  the  mighty.  3.  The  satisfy- 
ing of  the  hungry.  4.  The  leaving  empty  of  those  who  regard  themselves  as 
spiritually  rich.  (Van  Oosterzee.)  It  is  the  nature  of  God  to  make  something 
out  of  nothing ;  therefore,  when  any  one  is  nothing,  God  may  yet  make  something 
of  him.  (Luther.)  Mary's  patriotism  ; — It  might  be  imagined  that  thoughts  like 
these  would  be  too  universal  for  a  simple  Jewish  maiden.  But  remember  she 
was  espoused  to  one  in  whose  veins  ran  the  blood  of  Abraham,  whose  fathers 
had  been  kings  in  Jerusalem.  Joseph  was  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  and  in 
him  she  was  hnked  to  all  the  glorious  past  of  her  nation.  From  the  hill- top, 
too,  of  Nazareth  she  saw  daily  the  peaks  of  Hermon,  Tabor,  and  Carmel,  and  the 
mist  above  the  distant  sea.  So  wide  a  prospect  is  scarcely  sef;n  in  Palestine  ;  and 
as  the  woman  walked  at  eventide,  the  beauty  and  glory  of  her  land  must  have 
grown  deeply  into  her  heart,  till  love  of  country  was  mingled  with  the  life-blood  in 
her  veins.  And  now,  inspired  with  the  thought  of  the  blessedness  coming  on  her 
nation,  the  whole  past  and  future  of  her  race,  from  the  tents  of  the  wandering 
patriarch  to  the  church  of  the  Messiah  to  come,  lay  before  her  patriotic  eyes,  so 
blessed  at  last  through  Him  who  should  be  born  of  her.  The  heart  of  the  Virgin 
broke  into  a  song  of  joy.  She  forgot  her  own  honour  in  God  who  gave,  she  forgot  her- 
self in  her  country.  And  this  is  what  we  want  in  England — women  who  will  under- 
stand and  feel  what  love  of  country  means  and  act  upon  it ;  who  will  lose  thought 
of  themselves  and  their  finery  and  their  pleasure  in  a  passionate  effort  to  heal  the 
sorrow  and  to  destroy  the  dishonour,  dishonesty,  and  vice  of  England ;  to  realize 
that  as  mothers,  maidens,  wives,  and  sisters,  they  have  but  to  bid  the  men  of  this 
country  to  be  true,  brave,  loving,  just,  honourable,  and  wise;  and  they  will  become 
so,  as  they  will  become  frivolous,  base,  unloving,  ashamed  of  truth  and  righteous- 
ness, if  women  are  so ;  to  be  not  content  to  live  only  for  their  own  circles,  and  to 
be  self-sacrificing  and  tender  there,  but  to  take  upon  their  hearts  the  burden  of  the 
poor,  the  neglected,  and  the  sinful,  for  whom  many  of  the  most  influential  now 


«BiP.  I.  ST.  LUKE.  7f 

exercise  a  dainty  distant  pity  and  no  more.  This  is  the  woman's  patriotism  ;  and 
the  first  note  of  its  mighty  music — a  music  which  might  take  into  itself  and  har- 
monize the  discord  of  English  society — was  struck  more  than  1800  years  ago  in  tha 
song  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  prophecy  of  the  Mag- 
nificat:— The  Magnificat  is  recognized,  by  the  judgment  and  the  heart  of  Chris- 
tendom, as  the  noblest  of  Christian  hymns.  1.  It  is  in  the  third  strophe  of  the 
hymn  that  Mary's  feeling  seems  to  attain  its  highest  point  of  elevation.  She  has 
already  referred  in  tender,  solemn,  and  reserved  language  to  the  great  things  which 
God  has  done  for  her.  And  now  she  is,  as  it  were,  looking  out  across  the  centuries 
at  the  mighty  religious  revolution  which  would  date  from  the  appearance  of  her 
Divine  Son  on  the  scene  of  human  history.  She  uses  past  tenses,  because  she  reada 
off  what  she  sees  intuitively,  as  if  it  were  already  history.  Gibbon  felt  the  power 
of  Mary's  words,  when,  as  he  tells  us  in  his  antobiography,  he  sat  musing  amid  the 
rains  of  the  Capitol,  while  they  were  chanting  the  vesper  service  in  what  had  once 
been  the  Temple  of  Jupiter ;  and  the  idea  of  writing  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  city 
first  presented  itself  to  his  mind.  That  which  met  his  eye  was  a  comment  on  the 
language  of  the  Magnificat,  as  it  fell  upon  his  ear :  "  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty 
from  their  thrones."  Pagan  Bome  was  succeeded  by  Christian  Europe ;  and  since  that 
astonishing  revolution,  the  last  clause  of  this  strophe  of  Mary's  song  has  been  con- 
tinually fulfilling  itself.  The  old  civilizations  receive  nothing,  century  after  century, 
from  the  Master  of  the  feast ;  while  simple  and  comparatively  rude  peoples,  such  as 
the  New  Zealanders  and  the  Melanesians,  are  brought  into  the  fold  of  Christ,  and 
filled  with  the  good  things  of  the  everlasting  gospel.  2  But  while  we  may  thus 
with  fair  probability  connect  these  clauses  of  the  Magnificat  with  successive  stages 
in  the  history  of  the  Church,  it  is  unquestionable  that  they  are  or  may  be  in  course 
of  fulfilment,  at  any  one  period  and  simultaneously  ;  that  each  and  all  of  them  is  or 
maybe  realized  perfectly  in  every  age.  The  "proud,"  the  "  mighty,"  the  "  rich  "  of  the 
Incarnation  hymn  are  always  here  ;  to  be  scattered  by  the  arm  of  God ;  to  be  put 
down  from  their  thrones  ;  to  be  sent  empty  away.  This  is  true  in  the  private  and 
spiritual,  as  well  as  in  the  political  and  public  sphere.  And  the  question  arises, 
why  is  it  true  ?  Why  is  there  this  intrinsic  antagonism  between  the  revelation  of 
God  on  the  one  hand,  and  so  much  that  is  characteristic  of  human  nature  and 
energy  on  the  other  ?  The  answer  is,  that  Christianity  presupposes  in  man  the  exist- 
ence of  an  immense  want,  which  it  undertakes  to  satisfy ;  and  further,  that  this 
want  is  so  serious  and  imperative,  that  all  honest  natures  must  crave  for  its  satis- 
faction. Happy  they  who  in  this  world  experience  the  sentence  of  the  Magni- 
ficat ;  in  whom  pride  and  self-reliance  is  put  down  from  its  seat,  and  spiritual 
hunger  is  rewarded ;  who  discover  ere  it  is  too  late  that  they  are  poor  and  blind 
and  naked,  and  who  take  the  Divine  counsel  to  buy  raiment  and  fine  gold  and  eye- 
salve  from  the  Son  of  Man.  3.  It  would  be  easy  to  show  how  intimately  our  pros- 
pects of  improvement  in  all  departments  of  human  activity  and  life  must  depend 
upon  our  faith  in  the  continuous  fulfilment  of  the  words  of  the  Magnificat.  The 
temper  which  is  there  fore-doomed  is  in  reality  the  great  obstacle  to  the  attain- 
ment of  our  best  hopes  for  the  future.  {Canon  Liddon,)  The  hungry  and  the 
rich : — Mary  has,  as  she  sings,  two  classes  of  persons  before  her — the  hungry  and 
the  rich.  She  employs  these  words  in  their  spiritual  meaning.  By  the  hungry  Mary 
means  those  who  have  a  sense  of  spiritual  need,  those  who  are  dissatisfied  with 
their  present  attainments.  By  the  rich  she  means  those  who  are  conscious  of  no 
want,  the  self-satisfied.  I.  Thb  bewabd  o»  spibitual  hxjngeb.  "  He  hath  filled," 
Ac.  Mary  touches  upon  a  principle  of  very  wide  range,  applicable  to  the  needs  of 
mental,  of  moral,  and  of  physical  life.  If  a  living  being  is  to  benefit  by  nourish- 
ment in  body,  mind,  or  spirit,  there  must  be  the  appetite,  the  desire  for  it.  The 
soul  must  desire  God  as  its  true  life,  if  God  is  to  enlighten  and  strengthen  it.  With- 
out this  desire  He  will  do  nothing  for  it.  It  will  be  sent  empty  away.  The  one 
condition  of  true  spiritual  enrichment  is  a  humble,  earnest,  persistent  desire  for 
the  graces  which  God  has  to  give.  11.  Thb  punishment  or  sfibitual  SEiir-SATis- 
FAOTioN — "  Sent  empty  away."  The  "  rich  "  were  the  most  numerous  class  in  the 
days  of  the  Incarnation.  The  people  did  not — the  mass  of  them — feel  any  sense 
of  religious  want,  but  were  very  well  content  with  themselves.  There  was  but  a 
small  minority  who  waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  The  rich  still  abound  in 
the  race  of  Israel.  III.  A  man,  to  have  the  presence  of  God  in  his  soul,  must  fbbl 
BI8  NEED  OF  GoD — he  must  be  hungry.  God  gives  to  every  creature  a  sort  of  pre- 
liminary endowment  which  creates  in  the  soul  a  longing  for  Himself.  The  vast 
differences  between  man  and  man  in  later  life  depend  upon  almost  ucobserved  acts 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  v 

which  encourage  or  repress  spiritual  hunger  in  early  years.  Like  other  tastes,  ft 
hunger  for  spiritual  things  is  strengthened  by  exercise — weakened  by  neglect.  We 
cannot  afford  the  eternal  loss  of  God.  Let  us  ask  Him  to  give  as  a  strong  desire  to 
enjoy  Him  for  ever.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  56-80.  Now  Elisabeth's  fall  time  came  that  she  should  he  delivered.— 

TJie  nativity  of  John  the  Baptist : — That  which  was  miraculons  at  the  beginning 
became  natural  towards  the  close.  This  is  seen  in  the  case  of  Elisabeth,  as 
recorded  in  the  fifty-seventh  verse.  True  also  of  spiritual  generation.  Begins  in 
mystery  and  proceeds  to  prove  itself  by  all  that  is  practical  in  behaviour.  The  work 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  heart  of  man  can  never  be  explained ;  it  will  ever  be  as 
miraculous  as  the  overshadowing  of  Mary,  or  the  overruling  of  nature  in  the  case 
of  Elisabeth ;  but,  as  the  motherhood  of  Mary  and  Elisabeth  was  never  doubted, 
so  Christian  life  in  all  its  tempers  and  charities  will  establish  itself  in  the  con- 
fidence of  men  notwithstanding  the  miracle  in  which  the  new  life  began.  The 
neighbours  and  cousins  of  Elisabeth  were  proceeding  upon  the  nsual  plan  of 
naming  the  child.  They  would  have  dragged  down  the  miraculous  to  the  ordinary, 
and  surrounded  this  speciality  of  Divine  favour  with  aU  that  was  ancient  and  tra- 
ditional in  the  family.  They  knew  not  that  another  and  better  kindred  was  about 
to  be  inaugurated,  and  in  fact  that  the  whole  law  of  kinship  was  about  to  undergo 
revolution  and  sanctification.  Think  of  the  particularity  of  Divine  providence 
in  giving  this  child's  name.  Did  not  God  say  unto  Moses,  "  I  know  thee  by 
name  "  ?  Did  not  Jesus  call  Zacchasus  by  name  ?  Could  not  God  give  every  child 
his  name,  as  well  as  number  the  hairs  of  his  head,  and  take  charge  of  all  his  going 
in  the  world  ?  Zacharias  confirmed  the  decision  of  Elisabeth,  and  so  determined 
the  name  of  the  child,  notwithstanding  the  wonder  and  apparent  opposition  of  the 
neighours  and  cousins.  When  the  mouth  of  Zacharias  was  opened,  the  language  of 
praise  and  exultation  seemed  to  pour  from  his  grateful  and  thankful  lips  like  a  river 
which  for  a  season  had  been  impeded.  This  speech  gives  us  insight  into  the  mean- 
ing of  inspiration,  for  it  is  distinctly  said  that  Zacharias  was  filled  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  prophesied.  What  then  is  the  meaning  of  Divine  inspiration  ?  Mark 
the  pare  and  sublime  religiousness  of  the  speech.  From  beginning  to  end  it  lives 
and  glows  with  the  name  of  God.  Any  professed  inspiration  that  leads  men  down 
to  superficiality  and  contracted  views  of  life,  and  to  the  praise  of  secondary  causes, 
is  presumptively  false.  Any  inspiration  that  leads  men  to  profounder  reverence,  to 
higher  aspiration,  to  nobler  charity,  is  presumptively  true.  The  inspiration  of 
Zacharias  recognized  most  emphatically  the  preceding  inspiration  with  which  God 
had  favoured  His  Church.  Zacharias  seems  to  be  standing  in  the  midst  of  that 
summer  of  which  Old  Testament  times  were  but  the  spring.  And  as,  on  the  one 
hand,  his  inspiration  seemed  to  contract  the  past  until  Abraham  lived  but  yester- 
day ;  so,  on  the  other,  it  contracts  the  future,  and  makes  John  already  the  full- 
grown  messenger  and  herald  of  the  Messiah.  This  is  what  inspiration  does  for 
a  man ;  when  it  does  less  it  may  be  suspected  or  denied.  The  child  grew  1  The 
child  waxed  strong  in  spirit  I  The  child  lingered  in  the  deeper  parts  of  the  wilder- 
ness until  the  time  of  his  showing  forth  unto  Israel  had  ripened  1  "  He  that 
believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  The  days  we  spend  in  silence  and  obscurity  are 
not  wasted,  for  what  man  ought  to  hasten  into  the  Lord's  work  as  if  the  Lord  had 
been  waiting  for  him  in  the  weakness  of  impatience  ?  We  shall  be  better  prophets 
as  we  become  better  students.  In  the  silent  time  we  are  gathering  elements,  con- 
solidating character,  and  undergoing  discipline,  all  of  which  will  be  wanted  when 
the  trumpet  calls  us  to  the  battle.  (Dr.  Parker.)  The  birth  and  training  of 
John  the  Baptist : — Such  is  the  story  of  the  birth  and  training  of  the  Harbinger. 
The  story  suggests  many  lessons.  I  will  mention  but  two.  I.  It  is  a  fine 
illustration  of  the  proverb,  "  Coming  events  cast  theib  shadows  before."  It  was 
meet  that  the  King  of  kings,  in  making  advent,  should  have  His  avant-eourier. 
Yes,  it  was  meet  that  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  should  have  His  morning  star. 
II.  The  place  op  asceticism  ik  the  Chkistian  life.  For  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  Christ's  religion  demands  as  one  of  its  essential  conditions  self-denial.  Pre- 
supposing a  fallen,  inverted  nature,  where  the  outward  has  usurped  the  inward — the 
flesh,  the  spirit — Christianity  undertakes  a  restoration  of  the  primal  order,  proposing 
victory  in  the  very  sphere  of  defeat.  Thus,  St.  Paul  himself  buffeted  his  own 
body,  and  brought  it  into  bondage.  It  was  true  of  Moses,  of  David,  of  Daniel.  Our 
blessed  Lord  Himself  went  into  the  wilderness,  and  fasted  forty  days  and  forty 
nights.    So,  also,  many  of  the  noblest  characters  in  Christian  history  have  been 


mxt.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  81 

ascetics :  witness  a  Basil,  Gregory  Naziauzen,  Chrysostom,  Jerome,  Columba, 
Augustine  of  Canterbury.  Their  power  lay,  in  part  at  least,  in  their  asceticism.  It 
certainly  was  so  in  the  case  of  John  of  the  Desert.  His  hermit-life  gave  him  sim- 
plicity of  manners,  freedom  from  the  entanglements  of  society  and  the  elaborate 
artifices  of  a  complicated  civilization.  It  also  gave  him  self-reliance,  fortitude, 
courage.  An  ascetic  life  is  ever  apt  to  make  what  in  some  respects  is  a  grand 
charaoter.  Yet  an  ascetic  life  is  fraught  with  perils.  It  tempts  to  self -righteousness, 
morbid  gloom,  and  fanaticism.  We  only  need  recall  the  abominable  vices  of  the 
medisBvaJ  monks — their  indolence,  avarice,  hypocrisy,  and  sensuality — to  be  certified 
that  monasticism  has  no  just  place  in  the  Christian  economy.  Happy  the  day  for 
those  European  countries  when  the  monasteries  were  suppressed!  No,  man  was  made 
for  man.  He  may  escape  society,  but  in  escaping  society,  he  disowns  duty.  The 
leaven  of  the  kingdom  must  be  put  into  the  meal  of  the  world.  The  asceticism  which 
Jesus  Christ,  alike  by  word  and  by  example,  demands  is  self-denial,  not  for  self- 
denial's  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  others.     (G.  D.  Boardman.)        To  children: — 

I.  The  naming  of  John.  "  His  name  is  John,"  not  may  be,  or  ought  to  be,  but  i$. 
And  why  was  it  so  clearly,  fully,  and  inevitably  settled  ?  Simply  because  God  had 
decided  the  matter,  and  good  old  Zacharias  never  dreamt  for  a  moment  of  question- 
ing that  decision.     The  Word  of  God  settles  matters,  and  allows  of  no  appeal. 

II.  The  godfather  of  John.  "  John  "  signifies  the  grace,  or  gift  of  God.  And 
who  but  the  eternal  God  Himself  could  give  him  such  a  name  as  this  ?  III.  Thb 
chabacteb  OF  John.  He  was  the  "gift  of  God"  in  a  peculiar  sense.  He  was  a 
man  "  sent  from  God,"  too,  for  a  special  purpose.  But  his  character  was  undoubtedly 
•'  the  gift  of  God,"  and  an  instance  of  His  grace  and  mercy.  How  entirely  he 
seems  to  have  lost  himself  in  his  office  I  Are  you  showing,  by  a  holy  and  consistent 
and  unblameable  walk,  that  your  name  of  "Christian"  has  been  given  from  above? 
(Study  and  Homiletie  Monthly.)  These  opening  chapters  of  Luke  very 
jubilant : — Heaven  and  earth  sing,  angels  and  men.  The  high  occasion  justifies 
it.  Song  even  from  the  dumb  1  Yes.  He  had  doubted  the  word  of  the  angel, 
and  so  was  stricken  dumb.  Unbelief  cannot  sing.  But  Zacharias  is  rebuked  ; 
no  longer  of  doubtful  mind.  Now  he  sings,  rises  into  rapture.  His  song  rather 
of  Christ  than  of  John.  No  wonder.  Who  ever  stops  thought  with  the  herald, 
the  ambassador  7  There  is  a  psalm  of  life  as  well  as  song  of  the  hour ;  and  all 
hour-songs  are  to  deepen  that  life-psalm.  (G.  B.  Johnson.)  Naming  a  child : — 
It  was  likewise  not  customary  among  the  Arabs  to  give  the  children  names  which 
laad  never  been  borne  by  any  person  in  the  family.  When,  therefore,  on  the  seventh 
day  after  Mahomet  was  born,  his  grandfather  invited  the  members  of  the  tribe  of 
the  Koreischites  to  a  feast,  the  guests  asked,  after  the  conclusion  of  it,  what  name 
he  would  give  his  grandson,  on  whose  account  he  had  treated  them  so  magnificently; 
when  he  said,  Mahomet.  They  replied,  "  Then  you  mean  to  give  him  a  name  alien 
to  his  family."  The  same  custom  prevails  among  some  North  American  tribes. 
Lafitua  says,  "  Among  the  Hurons  and  Iroquois  they  always  retain  in  every  family 
a  certain  number  of  names  of  the  ancestors  of  the  family,  both  of  men  and 
women.  These  names  are  quite  peculiar  to  them,  and  it  is  presumed  to  be  generally 
known  that  they  belong  to  such  or  such  a  family.  Now  in  every  family  it  is  the 
custom,  as  it  were,  to  revive,  to  call  back  to  life,  those  members  of  it  who  have 
made  themselves  famous.  They  therefore  look  out  at  the  same  time  the  names  of 
those  whom  they  revere,  and  give  them  to  such  of  their  descendants  as  are  to 
represent  them.  The  latter  acquire  more  or  less  consideration  in  proportion  as 
those  who  formerly  bore  these  names  were  distinguished  for  their  qualities,  virtues, 
or  deeds.  The  Jews  had,  in  the  same  manner,  certain  names  in  every  family  which 
they  took  care  to  preserve  ;  and  these  were  taken  only  from  the  father's  family,  as 
appears  from  what  passed,  according  to  the  Scripture,  at  naming  John  the  Baptist. 
But  among  the  Hurons  and  Iroquois  the  names  of  the  boys  are  at  present  taken,  as 
formerly  among  the  Lycians,  from  the  family  of  the  mother  only."  (Biblical 
Treasury.)  Birth  and  naviing  of  tlie  Baptist: — Three-fourths  of  a  year  before 
portentous  events  had  intimated  the  return  of  prophecy  and  miracles  to  Israel — 
Zacharias  in  the  temple.  One-fourth  of  a  year  since,  another  manifestation  from 
heaven — Mary  and  Gabriel.  Expectation  high  1  Gleam  of  sunshine  in  darkness  ! 
Music  in  storm.  HUls  of  Zion  shining  with  early  rays  of  twilight.  And  now  '*  the 
morning  star  "  shining  bright  in  the  cold,  chilly  dawn,  heralds  the  speedy  rising  of 
the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  with  health  and  healing  in  His  wings  1  For  it  was  now 
to  be  seen  that  what  God  promised  should  be  performed.  I.  The  birth  of  John. 
1.  Remember  circumstances  of  his  being  promised,  and  the  astonishing  testimony 

6 


81  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA*.  I. 

to  the  divinity  of  future  Jesus,  when  the  two  mothers  met.  2.  Now  the  promises 
begin  to  be  accomplished.  John  born.  Neighbours  and  kinsfolk  rejoice  with  her. 
A  subject  of  attention,  for  it  was  (1)  miraculous  ;  (2)  promised.  II.  Naming  of 
ciBCUMCisioN.  1.  Circumcision,  eighth  day.  A  duty.  Analogy  in  baptism  (Col. 
ii.  11,  12).  Baptism  also  should  be  in  infancy.  2.  Naming  took  place  then.  So 
Christian  name  is  given  at  baptism,  not  by  registration.  III.  The  mieacle  (ver.  64). 
Reward  to  faith.  IV.  Zachakias'  song  op  peaise.  Christ  came,  not  to  make  men 
sullen,  low,  morose,  desponding  ;  but  to  pour  out  blessings  in  rich  abundance,  and 
to  turn  the  captivity  of  His  people  "  as  the  rivers  in  the  south."  Has  this  song 
been  realized  in  you  ?  Is  God  visiting  you  ?  Has  darkness  vanished,  and  the  true 
light  shone  in  you  ?  Make  sure  1  Don't  grasp  the  shadows  of  time,  and  lose  the 
substance  of  eternity.      (G.   Venables,  S.C.L.)  The  dumb  learning  to  praise 

God : — A  beautiful  incident  occurred  only  a  short  time  since  in  the  school  to  teach 
mutes  articulation  and  lip-reading,  at  Mystic  Eiver,  Connecticut.  Miss  P.,  an 
interesting  graduate  of  one  of  the  oldest  institutions  for  the  education  of  deaf 
mutes,  having  a  desire  to  learn  to  speak  and  read  the  lips  of  her  speaking 
friends,  was  recommended  by  her  old  principal  to  try  Mr.  Whipple's  school, 
and  she  entered  it  last  term.  She  made  rapid  progress,  and  was  much  aided 
by  the  natural  alphabet,  the  invention  of  her  teacher.  This  alphabet 
curiously  suggests  sound,  or  the  right  position  of  the  organs  to  utter  sound,  as 
well  as  form ;  and  whenever  a  mute  pupil  can  read  and  write  it,  he  or  she  can 
generally  give  any  of  the  forty  sounds  of  our  difiBcult  language  with  great  precision 
and  discrimination,  and  often  with  remarkable  correctness.  This  young  lady, 
filled  with  enthusiasm  at  every  step,  mastered  the  alphabet  with  little  diflSculty,  and 
one  day  came  to  her  teacher  with  something  written  on  her  slate,  which  she  asked 
him  to  correct,  her  mind  being  agitated  with  emotion.  It  proved  to  be  the  Lord's 
Prayer,  put  into  the  language  of  articulation.  Perceiving  her  agitation,  the  teacher 
could  scarce  restrain  his  own  tears  as  he  corrected  a  few  unimportant  errors  of  pro- 
nunciation, and  delicately  returned  it.  The  next  morning  the  young  lady  came 
exultingly  to  her  teacher,  exclaiming  :  "  I  prayed  last  night  for  the  first  time  in  my 
life  with  my  voice ; "  and  neither  of  them  could  restrain  their  emotions.  Ha 
ventured  to  ask  her  if  she  had  ever  prayed  before.  *'  Oh,  yes ;  I  have  thought  my 
prayers,  but  I  never  spoke  before."  "  My  lips  shall  praise  Thee,  0  God."  "Attend 
to  tbe  voice  of  my  supplications,  0  Lord."  Praising  God: — "Praise  is  the 
rent-charge  we  owe  to  God  "  for  His  blessings.  David  said,  "  As  long  as  I  live  I 
will  praise  the  Lord."  In  ancient  places  of  Christian  worship  it  was  arranged  that 
one  set  of  worshippers  should  keep  on  praising  God,  till  another  set  came,  so  that 
praise  might  always  be  going  up  to  heaven,  night  and  day.  Commodore  Good- 
enough,  when  dying,  2:;id,  "  I  have  not  breath  left  to  praise  God  for  all  Hia 
mercies."  Mr.  Wesley's  last  words  were,  "  I'll  praise  I  I'll  praise  1 "  Swiss  herds- 
men  al  sunset  call  forth,  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord  1 "  This  shout  is  repeated  from  one 
to  another  till  every  valley,  peak,  and  hill  reverberates  with  the  ascriptions  of 
gratitude  to  the  Giver  of  all  good.  In  the  last  four  Psalms,  how  many  exhortations 
we  have  to  praise  God !  In  tbe  last  verse  of  the  last  Psalm  we  read,  "  Let  every- 
thing that  hath  breath  praise  the  Lord."     (if.  R.  Burton.) 

Ver.  66.  What  manner  of  child  shall  this  be  T — Great  expectations : — When  a 
child  is  born  (as  we  say)  "  to  the  purple ;  "  when  an  heir  to  the  throne  is  an- 
nounced ;  or  when  we  stand  beside  the  cradle  of  some  unconscious  little  successor 
to  a  great  historic  title,  to  a  vast  estate,  or  to  accumulated  wealth  of  other  kinds — 
how  do  we  busy  ourselves  with  speculations  as  to  what  may  be  in  store  for  such  a 
child  ?  Descending  to  lower  strata  in  social  life,  how  common  it  is  to  forecast  a 
great  future,  if  the  child  should  early  display  great  ability,  high  intellectual  gifts, 
special  aptitudes  for  a  particular  branch  of  study  1  Yet  very  often,  in  such  cases, 
the  thoughts  we  harbour  are  but  the  most  foolish  "  castles  in  tbe  air."  We  direct 
our  hopes  to  external  things ;  we  dazzle  our  imagination  with  splendid  prospects 
of  a  great  career  ;  and  by  "  greatness  "  mean  publicity,  honours,  wealth,  rank,  and 
a  frequent  mention  in  the  newspapers.  Ah,  how  mistaken,  how  ill-judged,  how  far 
below  (not  above)  the  true  mark  are  our  fond  anticipations  for  our  children.  Let 
us  try  to  learn  this  lesson  from  the  text.  What  was  it,  probably,  that  the  friends 
and  neij-'hhours  of  this  distinguished  priestly  family  expected  for  the  new-bom 
child  ?  We  can  hardly  doubt  what  it  would  be,  when  we  reflect  on  the  circumstances 
of  tbe  time.  So  pious  a  circle,  and  one  so  conversant  with  the  Temple  and  its 
seivices,  as  these  iamihar  friends  of  the  priest  Zacharias,  would  be  sure  to  tinge 


ou?.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  89 

all  their  thDUghts  with  religion.  And,  therefore,  in  their  answers  among  them- 
selves to  this  qaestion,  we  may  confidently  assume  that  a  high  spiritual  destination 
would  be  assigned  to  him  as  a  champion  of  Israel  against  the  world.  "  Surely  this 
child,"  they  may  have  said,  "will  become — as  Joab  was  to  David — a  mighty  and 
unconquered  captain  in  the  armies  of  the  coming  Messiah  ;  his  sword  will  be  red 
with  the  blood  of  Jehovah's  enemies  ;  and,  like  the  heathen  before  Judas  Macca- 
bffius,  so  the  hated  Roman  legions  will  go  down  before  his  avenging  onset."  Or, 
should  their  thoughts  take  a  more  peaceful  turn,  "  The  child,"  they  might  say, 
*'  will  be  (like  his  father)  a  faithful  priest  of  God  ;  and  will  fulfil,  in  the  future 
history  of  our  nation,  as  prominent  a  part  as  Zadok  and  Jehoiada  in  the  days  of 
old.  At  the  very  least,  he  will  be  a  writer  of  books — such  as  '  Daniel,'  or  '  The 
Book  of  Enoch  ' — books  that  will  touch  the  heart  of  Israel  to  the  very  quick  ;  or,  it 
may  be,  a  preacher,  a  prophet,  an  EUjah — a  prominent,  a  powerful,  a  striking,  an 
impressive  personage,  ever  to  the  front  when  some  conflict  shall  be  imminent  with 
the  false  priests  of  Baal,  or  when  the  modern  Jezebels  and  Ahabs  are  to  be  pubUcly 
smitten  with  the  curse  of  an  avenging  God."  But  if  such  dreams  were  among  theii 
sanguine  anticipations  for  this  wonderful  child,  we  know  how  utterly  they  were 
mistaken.  The  event  has  taught  us  how  much  more  spiritual,  how  much  mora 
worthy  of  all  these  wonderful  antecedents,  was  the  result  than  these  pious  Jews 
had  been  able  to  imagine.  The  result  was  this :  first,  for  many  long  years  no 
publicity  at  all,  but  a  quiet  and  meditative  life  in  the  wilderness ;  and  after  that 
preparation  was  complete,  even  then  no  protracted  public  ministry  amid  obedient 
and  awe-stricken  crowds,  but  a  brief  mission  to  prepare  the  way  for  Him  who  was 
to  come,  abruptly  closed  by  imprisonment ;  and  after  that,  no  dramatic  execution, 
while  tearful  multitudes  pressed  around  the  scaffold  to  dip  their  handkerchiefs  in  the 
martyr's  blood,  but  only  a  swift  stroke  amid  the  dungeon's  gloom,  a  ghastly  comedy 
of  horror  when  a  dancing-girl  brought  in  upon  a  charger  the  prophet's  head,  and  a 
secret  burial  by  a  handful  of  terrified  disciples.  Such  is  the  irony  of  history.  Such 
is  the  answer  to  the  question  of  the  text.  {Canon  G.  H,  Curteis.)  Internal 
history  of  the  Baptist : — There  are,  for  every  man  that  lives  upon  this  earth,  two 
histories  unfolding  simultaneously.  There  is  the  external  history  of  his  career ; 
and  there  is  the  internal  history  of  his  character,  of  his  soul.  In  the  case  of  the 
Baptist,  as  in  every  other  case,  we  can  only  read  the  mysterious  secrets  of  the 
**  hidden  man,"  by  the  few  visible  tokens  that  are  given  us.  Now,  in  the  Gospels 
we  have  five  tokens  given,  by  the  help  of  which  we  can  reconstruct  the  whole 
character  of  the  man.     I.  We  havk  the  fact  of  his  faithful,  unselfish  sub- 

BEMDKB  OF    PBIVAOT  AND    OF  SWEET,    8EBBNB     MEDITATION     ALONE   WITH   NATURE   AND 

WITH  God,  at  the  oleab  call  to  ibksoue  public  duty.  It  is  no  easy  task  to 
preach  repentance  to  swaying  and  restless  crowds.  It  is  not  pleasant  to  stand  as  a 
pablic  target  for  questioners  of  every  kind,  and  casuists  of  every  degree,  to  shoot 
their  arrows  at.  Yet  thus  stood  John  the  Baptist.  His  answers  in  public  show 
that  he  had  not  misused  his  opportunities  in  retirement.     II.  Another  token  of 

HIS  PEBSONAIi    CHABACTEB,   WHICH     IS    FDBNISHED     IN  THE    GOSFELS,    IS   HIS   LOTALTT. 

"Look  not  to  me,  but  to  another  who  is  greater  than  I."  A  sign  of  the  noblest 
self-devotion.  This  worship  of  a  higher  Being  guards  the  heart  against  all  approaches 
of  vanity  and  self-worship,  and  repels  every  base  thought  of  self-interest.  III.  There 

IB  TET  ANOTHEB  OHABACTEBISTIO  IN  THE  BaP TIST,  WHICH  BRINGS  HIM  INTO  VERY  CLOSE 
CONTACT  WITH   MANY   LOYAL   YET    TROUBLED    SOULS   AT    THE    PRESENT   DAY.      It    SecmS 

that,  at  one  time,  he  was  even  afflicted  with  doubt  (Matt.  xi.  2,  3).  Most  kindly, 
gently,  and  patiently  was  that  question  answered  by  our  Lord.  And  we  may, 
therefore,  gather  encouragement  for  ourselves  under  any  similar  difficulties.  We 
may  be  sure  that  if  we,  in  like  manner,  take  an  honest  and  straightforward  course, 
not  letting  our  doubts  withdraw  as  from  our  Saviour,  but  rather  bring  us  nearer 
and  closer  to  Him,  we  shall  receive  the  same  gentle  and  sufficient  reply,  an  appeal 
to  personal  experience,  to  what  we  have  ourselves  "  heard  and  seen."  IV.  Another 

CHABACTERISTIC  OF  THIS  SAINTLY  MAN  IS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  HIS  COURAOEOUS  REBUKB 
OF  8IN,  EVEN  WHEN  IT  WAS  DRAPED  AMD  GILDED  AND  DISGUISED  UNDEB  WELI/> 
SXEKINO  NAMES,  IM  THE  PALACES  OF  EINOS.  V.  BUT  THE  MOST  STRIKING  FEATURB 
OF  ALL   IN   HIS  OHABAOTEB  WAS  HIS   SELF-EFFACEMENT.      We  knOW  tOO  Well   that  eveU 

self-denial  is  a  virtue  of  high  and  difficult  attainment.  Much  more  difficult  is  a 
genuine  and  unaffected  self-humiliation.  But  most  difficult  of  all  is  self-effacement 
in  Christ — that  spiritual  depth,  attained  also  by  St.  Paul,  which  says  (feeling  what 
it  says)  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  The  Baptist  is  a  type  of 
Ihose  who  resolve,  at  all  risks,  to  discharge  their  duty  and  to  deUver  the  message 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  U 

entmsted  to  them  by  God,  withont  one  single  thought  of  self,  or  one  transient  viiah 
to  appear  themselves  in  the  matter.    No  indolence ;  no  cowardice ;  bat  they  ate 
content  to  be  only  "  a  voice ' — to  preach  God's  Word,  not  their  own,  to  porsae  some 
truth  which  is  not  to  enhance  their  own  repntation;    to  advocate  some  causfl 
which  is  not  to  redound  to  their  own  advantage.      {Ibid.)        The  future  of  a 
child : — Stars  have  been  interrogated  and  thought  to  prophesy  and  proclaim  the 
future  of  a  child,  so  that  to  this  day  "bom  under  an  unlucky  star"  is  passed  into 
a  proverb.     I,  Thb  development  of  childhood.     "  What,  then,  shall  this  child 
be  P  "    1.  What  God  designs  it.    God  had  a  plan  of  life  for  this  child  of  Zacharias 
and  Elisabeth.    2.  What  training  makes  it.    The  fashioning  power  of  parents  and 
teachers  is  very  great.     God's  plan  may  be  marred  Jn  our  hands.     The  life  of  John 
Stuart  Mill  proclaims  the  wonderful  power  that  a  parent  can  wield  over  the  plastio 
nature  of  the  child,  and  how  instruction  and  training  may  shape  a  Life.    Great  men 
owe  much  to  pious  parents  like  Zacharias  and  Elisabeth.    II.  The  pbovidence  ojt 
God  with  childhood.     "  For  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him."    Thio  stimu- 
lated the  question.  Curiosity  as  to  the  future  of  a  child  becomes  greater  when  there 
are — 1.  Marks  of  the  supernatural.    This  was  the  case  vrtth  John.    2.  Tokens  of 
the  Divine  protection.     The  myth  of  Eomulus  and  Eemus,  suckled  in  their  infancy 
by  a  she-wolf,  enshrines  a  truth — those  destined  for  greatness  are  under  the  special 
protection  of  the  Almighty.    The  apostolic  John  Wesley  was  miraculously  saved 
in  childhood  from  a  burning  house.    3.  Early  evidences  of  greatness.     Providence 
is  shown  in  such  evidences,  leading,  as  they  often  do,  to  special  care  in  education. 
This  is  what  all  should  desire  for  their  children,  that  the  hand  of  the  Lord  may  be 
with  them.     (Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)        A  question  and  answer  at  the  birth 
of  a  child : — 1.  The  natural  question — "  What  manner  of  child  shall  this  be  ?  "    2. 
The  satisfactory  answer  —  "The  hand  of  the  Lord  vrill  be  with  him."     (Van 
Oosterzee.)        "What  manner  of  child  shall  this  bet*'': — 1.  How  far  above  our 
asking  is  the  Divine  gift  very  often !     2.  How  wonderful  are  the  possibilities  for 
weal  or  woe  in  a  child !     Shall  our  children  prove  John  Baptists,  voices  for  Christ  ? 
or  shall  tliey  falsify  our  own  allegiance  to  Him  ?    3.  How  blessed  it  is  to  have  a 
child  associated  with  Christ  from  the  outset  1     I  covet  for  our  children  this  associ- 
ation with  the  Lord.     I  would  have  His  name,  His  story.  His  words.  His  gospel, 
their  earliest  memories  and  their  dearest  child-experiences.     4.  What  of  kindred 
dedication  of  children  to-day  ?    Where  are  the  Abrams,  Hannahs,  and  Zachariasea 
of  this  age  ?    How  few  Christian  parents  yield  their  children  up  to  the  service  of 
God ?    5.  How  many  of  those  -who  "  feared "  and  asked  •'  What  manner  of  child?" 
&c.,  received  him  and  received  the  Lord?      One   asks  wistfully,  whether,  when 
the  thirty  years  were  passed,  and  John  the  Baptist,  and  then  the  Lord  came  forth, 
mnny  or  any  watched  for  their  coming  and  welcomed  their  manifestation.     I  gladly 
believe  that  some  would,  some  must.    {A.  B.  Grosart,  DD.)       A  sermon  to  parents: — 
"  What  manner  of  child  shall  this  be  ?  "    Will  it  grow  up  to  manhood  or  woman- 
hood,  or  will  the  flower  be  nipped  in  the  bud  ?    And  if  it  grow  to  man's  estate, 
what  kind  of  a  man  wiU  it  make?    Wise,  virtuous,  useful;  or  fooUsh,  vicious, 
profligate  ?  Such  questions  as  these  associated  with  the  birth  of  childhood.  The  true 
parent  will  not  be  content  simply  with  asking  "  What  manner,"  &c.,  but  realizing 
that  the  answer  to  that  question  depends  very  largely  upon  home-training  and 
influence,  will  set  to  work  to  make  that  training  and  influence  of  such  a  character 
as  will,  under  God,  produce  the  best  results.     To  assist  you  in  this  work  will  now 
be  my  aim.    I  begin  by  reminding  you  that  your  child  is  fearfully  and  wonderfully 
made.     It  is  a  "  Trinity  in  Unity."    It  is  made  up  of  three  parts.    And  each  of 
these  parts  must  be  cultivated  and  developed  in  order  to  a  complete  and  noble 
manhood.     I.  Youb   child   has   a  body   that   bequikes   to   be    built    dp    an© 

PEEFECTED.      II.     YoUE    CHILD    HAS    A     SOUL     THAT     NEIDS     TO    BE     DEVEL0PJ<:D     AND 

CULTURED.  By  the  soul  I  mean  that  moral  and  intellectual  part  of  your  child's 
nature  which  distinguishes  it  from,  and  raises  it  above,  the  brutes  that  perish.    IIL 

YoUB  CHILD  HAS  A  SPIEITUAL  NATUKE  VTHICH  NEEDS  TO  BE  ENCOURAGED  AlfD 
FOSTEEED   AND     CAREFULLY     AND     PRAYERFULLY    WATCHED    OVER.  ObsCrve 1.    Thl* 

threefold  development  should  be  simultaneous.  2.  We  should  begin  early,  should 
look  for  signs  of  early  piety,  and  should  interpret  these  as  indications  that  God 
Himself  is  at  work  in  their  young  hearts.  Our  children  have  visions  of  God  much 
earlier  than  we  are  accustomed  to  think.  Let  us  encourage  them  to  foster  these 
visions,  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God  within,  to  respond  to  the  wooings  of  His  love. 
This  done,  we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  with  the  question,  "  What  manner,"  &o., 
but  may  safely  and  joyfully  leave  our  children  in  God's  hands,  feeling  assured  that 


«EAP.  u]  ST.  LUKE.  85 

His  grace  will  prove  more  than  snfficient  for  ail  their  needs,  that  His  love  will 
never  see  them  want  any  good  thing,  and  that  His  spirit,  which  has  begun  the  gocd 
work  in  their  souls,  will  carry  it  on  to  perfection.  (W.  Fox.)  A  sermon  ta 
children : — Every  boy  and  girl  might  well  ask  about  himself  or  herself,  "  What 
manner,"  &c.  I  want  you  to  think  about  what  you  are  going  to  be.  It  is  not 
chance  that  decides.  The  fruit  comes  out  of  the  blossom ;  the  flower  out  of  the 
bud ;  the  man  out  of  the  child.  You  are  beginning  now  to  be  the  men  and  women 
that  you  will  be.  Here  are  some  things  that  you  can  do,  or  get  done  for  you.  For 
we  can  go  for  help  to  One  who  is  able  to  do  very  much  more  than  we  ask  or  think. 
I.  Mend  the  little  faults  now.  II.  Be  now  what  yod  would  like  to  be  when 
100  ABB  GKOWN  UP.     1.  Be  truthful.     2.  Be  kind  and  pleasant.     III.  Take  with 

TOU   TWO   THINGS  MORE    WONDEBTUL  THAN   ANY  OTHER  GIFTS   THAT   YOU   EVER  BEAD   OB 

EEABD  OF.  1.  A  golden  key — prayer.  2.  A  charm  which  I  would  have  you  wear 
not  next  to  your  heart,  but  in  the  heart  itself.  The  charm  is  this — try  always  to 
please  Jesus.  IV.  And  yet  the  most  wonderful  part  remains,  that  if  we  come  to 
Jesus,  and  seek  Him  as  our  Saviour  and  Helper,  the  child  will  become  an  angel  of 
God.  (Mark  Ouy  Pearse.)  Indications  in  childhood: — "Childhood  shows  the 
man  as  morning  shows  the  day."  Moses,  Joseph,  Samuel,  David,  Obadiah,  Josiah, 
Daniel,  Shadrach,  Meshach,  Abednego,  Jotm  the  Baptist,  John  the  Apostle, 
Timothy,  Washington,  John  Wesley,  and  mulitudes  of  other  goodly  children  have 
lived  to  be  men  famous  for  their  godliness  and  usefulness.  The  Arabians  put  an 
ant  into  the  hand  of  a  new-bom  infant  and  say,  "  May  the  boy  turn  out  clever  and 
BkilfuL"  We  pray  that  from  the  childhood  blossoms  we  have  in  our  homes  and 
Bcbools  there  may  develop  flowers  which  will  fill  every  circle  where  they  move  with 
fragrance,  spiritual  beauty,  and  joy ;  or  that,  in  other  cases,  the  buds  now  attach- 
ing themselves  to  some  branch  which  is  joined  to  the  True  Vine,  may  be  twigs  or 
branches  themselves  in  years  to  come,  bearing  fruit  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
benefit  of  mankind.  {H.  B.  Burton.)  A  child  misjudged : — A  poor  doctor,  who 
had  met  with  great  misfortunes,  lay  on  his  deathbed,  saddened  by  the  thought  that 
he  was  leaving  a  large  family  behind  him,  without  any  provision  for  its  mainten- 
ance. Not  long  before  his  death,  his  youngest  child  was  born,  a  scrawny,  puny 
babe,  weighing  five  or  six  pounds.  The  mother  was  worn  out,  and  was  apparently 
to  be  left  poor,  friendless,  and  alone,  with  her  great  family  of  little  ones.  But— 
that  baby  I  Every  one  said :  "  What  a  mercy  if  that  child  should  die  1  What 
can  she  do  with  it  ?  "^Tiat  a  blessing  if  it  should  die  1 "  The  poor  mother  almost 
thought  so  too.  But  the  unwelcome  babe  would  not  die.  He  made  a  struggle  for 
life,  and  won  the  battle.  To-day  his  memory  is  revered  as  that  of  Dr.  John  Todd, 
the  author  of  "  The  Student's  Manual, "  and  of  other  works  of  eminent  usefulness, 
by  means  of  which,  "  being  dead,  he  yet  speaketh."  No  mother  knows  what  she 
has  in  her  cradle.  (BaxendaWs  Anecdotes.)  The  mystery  of  moral  development : — 
The  beginning  of  Nero's  reign  was  marked  by  acts  of  the  greatest  kindness  and 
condescension ;  by  affability,  complaisance,  and  popularity.  The  object  of  his 
administration  seemed  to  be  the  good  of  his  people ;  and  when  he  was  desired  to 
sign  his  name  to  a  list  of  malefactors  that  were  to  be  executed,  he  exclaimed,  "  I 
wish  to  heaven  I  could  not  write  1 "  He  was  an  enemy  to  flattery,  and  when  the 
Senate  liberally  commended  the  wisdom  of  his  government,  Nero  desired  them  to 
keep  their  praises  until  he  deserved  them.  Yet  this  was  the  wretch  who  assassin- 
ated his  mother,  who  set  fire  to  Rome,  and  destroyed  multitudes  of  men,  women, 
and  children,  and  threw  the  odium  of  that  dreadful  action  upon  the  Christians. 
The  cruelties  he  exercised  towards  them  were  beyond  description,  while  he  seemed 
to  be  the  only  one  who  enjoyed  the  tragical  spectacle.  Oh,  human  depravity, 
what  a  monster  1  Divine  grace  alone  can  change  it  and  make  it  holy.  (Handbook 
to  Scripture  Doctrines.) 

Vers.  67-79.  And  Ms  fitther  Zacharias  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.— TA* 
tong  of  Zacharias : — 1.  Preliminary  questions.  In  the  opening  portion  of  St.  Luke's 
Gospel,  there  is  a  definiteness  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance,  which  makes  us  feel 
that  we  are  not  breathing  in  the  air  or  looking  through  the  deceptive  light  of  legend. 
We  are  not  travelling  in  dreamland,  for  we  can  measure  distances.  The  objections 
which  have  been  made  in  modern  times  to  this  statement  are  derived  from  two  ele- 
ments in  the  narrative — (1)  from  the  account  of  various  angelic  appearances  ;  (2) 
from  the  recorded  bursts  of  ecstatic  or  prophetic  song.  1.  As  to  the  angelic  appear- 
ance in  these  opening  chapters.  Unquestionably  here,  as  elsewhere,  throughout, 
and  to  its  very  close,  St.  Luke's  is  the  Gospel  of  the  holy  angels.    The  existence  o£ 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  b. 

angels  rests  upon  the  same  witness  as  the  whole  supernatural  life.  There  must  be 
something  of  fitness  in  the  times  of  their  manifestation,  and  in  the  persons  to  whom 
they  make  themselves  known.  In  a  material  age  they  cease  to  appear.  There  must 
be  a  certain  saintly  second-sight — a  something  angelic  in  the  angel  seen.  All 
depends  upon  the  initial  point  of  view.  From  ours  it  is  not  incredible,  but  rather 
probable,  that  Gabriel  should  have  come  to  Zacharias  and  Mary ;  that  songs  of 
acclamation  should  have  rung  out  over  Bethlehem .  We  are  come  to  an  innumer- 
able company  of  angels.  Well,  too,  may  we  be  impressed  by  the  gravity  and 
reserve  of  the  scriptural  account  of  angelic  appearances.  Man  receives  no  random 
invitation  to  a  heedless  intimacy  on  the  one  hand  ;  to  a  Socinian  heresy  of  angel 
cultus  on  the  other.  Of  all  the  countless  hosts  of  heaven.  Scripture  condescends  to 
make  but  two  known  to  us  by  name — Gabriel  and  Michael.  2.  But,  in  reference  ta 
these  opening  scenes  of  St.  Luke's  Gospel,  it  has  further  been  objected  that  these 
sacred  songs,  these  bursts  of  Hebraic  poetry,  are  unmistakably  like  art,  or  legend ; 
that  the  critic  is  irresistibly  impelled  to  see  them  in  a  piece  of  fancy  work,  like  the 
songs  in  Tennyson's  "  Queen  Mary."  There  are  a  few  considerations  which  remove 
this  obstinate  prejudice  of  modem  criticism.  If  labour  and  genius  are  the  only 
possible  creators  of  any  form  of  literature,  these  songs,  of  course,  can  scarcely  be 
genuine.  But  if,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  prophecy  exists ;  if  Jesus  Christ  be  its  chief 
and  central  subject,  it  is  only  natural  that,  after  an  interval  of  400  years,  it  should 
awaken  again,  just  as  He  was  about  to  visit  the  earth ;  that  the  father  of  God'a 
chosen  servant,  who  was  to  go  as  a  messenger  before  Messiah's  face,  should  be 
filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  prophesy.  (1)  The  Benedictus  was,  no  doubt, 
formed  in  the  heart  of  Zacharias  during  the  long  months  of  enforced  muteness, 
when  he  was  dumb,  and  not  able  to  speak.  After  nine  months  of  silence  it  came 
streaming  out  like  the  molten  metal  when  issue  is  given  to  it.  (2)  The  pioua 
Hebrew  would  have  no  such  material  difiiculties  as  those  which  have  been  suggested 
above.  For  Hebrew  poetry  was  not  fettered  by  the  laws  of  an  inexorable  prosody. 
It  did  not  exact  the  exquisite  and  severe  modulation  of  classical  scansion.  Psalm- 
like strains  rushed  spontaneously  to  the  lips  of  those  who  lived  in  the  circle  of  the 
Old  Testament  writings,  and  spake  its  language.  Moreover — and  this  is  most 
improtant  of  all — the  whole  substance  and  tenor  of  the  Benedictus  shows  that 
it  was  not  moulded  by  art ;  that  it  does  not  bear  the  same  relation  to  the  gospel 
history  as  the  speeches  of  Pericles  or  Hannibal  to  the  narratives  of  Thucydidea 
and  Livy.  From  what  point  of  view  mnst  Zacharias  have  spoken  7  The  sight  of 
Christ  which  he  enjoyed  was  far  beyond  that  of  any  of  the  psalmists  in  clearness. 
Yet  the  picture  which  he  drew  must  have  been  painted  in  Hebrew  colours,  and  set 
in  a  Jewish  framework.  A  later  writer,  in  an  age  pre-eminently  without  critical 
tact  and  subtlety,  would  never  have  contented  himself  with  putting  these  oracular 
utterances  into  the  lips  of  Zacharias.  No  doubt  the  Christian  Church  has,  almost 
from  the  beginning,  used  these  songs  in  daily  worship.  By  doing  so  she  interpreta 
them  of  Jesus.  But  the  question  is  not,  in  the  slightest  degree,  how  the  Christian 
Church  understands  this  and  the  other  songs,  when  they  have  been  permanently 
committed  to  writing.  The  question  is  whether,  after  the  cross  and  resurrection, 
after  all  things  were  fulfilled,  she  could,  by  any  conceivable  self-restraint,  have 
managed  to  write  them  in  such  a  strain  f  These  songs  would  rather  have  been  like 
the  Apocalyptic  strains,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain."  The  mind  which 
wrote  the  Benedictus,  under  the  condition  of  a  full  historical  knowledge  of  the 
gospel,  must  either  have  been  an  earnest  or  a  deceptive  mind.  For  an  earnest 
mind,  such  reserve  upon  the  subjects  which  were  in  the  front  rank  of  its  affections, 
would  have  been  unnatural ;  for  a  deceptive  mind  it  would  have  been,  ex  hypothesi, 
impossible.  Thus,  the  Benedictus  is  impossible  at  a  date  either  earlier  or  later 
than  that  to  which  it  is  assigned  by  the  third  evangelist.  Such  visions  of  the  light 
just  dawning,  such  a  conception  of  the  general  character  of  the  approaching  re- 
demption, with  such  reserve — rather  such  silence — as  to  the  mode  in  which  it  was 
to  be  carried  out  in  detail ;  such  silver  brightness  on  the  edge  of  the  mist,  such 
dimness  in  its  heart ;  such  strange  eloquence  and  reserve — could  only  have  come 
from  one  who  stood  on  the  thin  border-line  between  the  two  dispensations — on  the 
infinitesimal  space  between  the  two  vast  ranges  before  and  behind.  A  little  more, 
and  the  song  would  have  been  purely  Christian ;  a  little  less,  and  it  would  have 
been  purely  Jewish.  II.  We  proceed  to  draw  some  lessons  from  the  song  itself. 
1.  It  is  well  to  remember  who  and  what  Zacharias  was.  Zacharias  was  a  holy  and 
religious  priest.  The  employment  of  Zacharias  was  that  of  a  minister  of  a  Divinely- 
ordained  ritual.  Now  true  revelation  doea  not  deal  with  the  apirit  of  man  mechaoi- 


CHA».  I.]  ST.  LUKE,  87 

oallj.  The  thought  and  utterance  take  the  mould  and  colour  of  the  mind,  which 
the  spirit  freely  uses.  The  form  of  the  revelation  is  adapted  to  the  natural  tenden- 
cies and  whole  condition  of  him  who  is  the  Holy  Ghost's  voice  or  pen.  The  prophet- 
priest  Ezekiel  views  the  Church  under  the  image  which  would  naturally  occur  t© 
one  who  had  been  trained  in  such  an  element — the  image  of  a  temple.  The  priest- 
prophet  Zacharias  views  the  life  of  all  the  emancipated  children  of  God  as  one  con- 
tinuous worship,  one  endless  priestly  service — "That  we,  fearlessly,  having  been 
once  for  all  delivered  from  hand  of  enemies,  should  continually  do  Him  worship. 
In  holiness  and  righteousness  before  Him  all  the  days  that  we  have."  This  is  the 
essence  and  use  of  all  the  true  ritualism  of  God,  One  word  summed  up  the  whole 
meaning  and  purpose  of  the  priestly  life  of  Zacharias — to  do  God  service,  to  be 
worshipping  BUra.  This  word,  this  Ich  Dien  of  the  faithful  priesthood,  he  makes 
the  Ich  Dien  of  every  child  of  God.  The  one  true  priest,  whose  coming  is  so  near, 
shall  enable  all  the  redeemed  people  to  perform  the  true  service  of  priests,  to  cele- 
brate God's  worship  in  the  long  festivity  of  a  perpetual  freedom.  The  motto  of 
Christ's  kingdom  of  priests  comes  fitly  from  the  lips  of  an  inspired  priest.  The 
meaning  of  the  Old  Testament  ritual  is  given,  as  best  became  the  fitness  of  things, 
by  one  who  was  "  of  the  order  of  Abia."  These  words  are  sung  in  hundreds  of 
churches.  It  is  well  that  singers  should  be  taught  to  sing  "  gracef  ally,"  as  well  as 
heartily,  to  the  Lord,  But  both  choirs  and  congregations  should  keep  the  words 
of  Zacharias  ever  before  them,  "Without  fear  to  do  Him  the  worship  and  service 
of  a  life."  2.  The  place  which  is  occupied  by  the  Benedictus  in  the  reformed 
Prayer  Book  is  significant  and  interesting.  It  is  placed  immediately  after  the 
second  lesson  at  morning  service,  which  is  always  from  one  of  the  Gospels,  Epistles, 
or  the  Apocalypse,  Zacharias  was  the  first  New  Testament  prophet ;  and  this  is 
almost  the  first  gospel  hymn.  The  voice  and  song  of  such  a  one  may  fitly  be  heard 
immediately  after  our  first  reading  from  the  New  Testament,  It  does  not,  perhaps, 
seem  a  mere  fancy  to  see  in  the  contents  of  the  Benedictus  a  reference  to  the 
work  of  the  Christian  ministry,  Zacharias  was  a  father  as  well  as  a  priest.  He 
turns,  with  a  burst  of  joy,  which  was  not  merely  natural,  to  his  babe,  and  places 
him  among  the  goodly  company  of  the  prophets — "And  thou  too,  child,  shalt  be 
called  prophet  of  the  Highest.  For  onward  thou  shalt  go,  on,  in  front  of  the  Lord, 
to  prepare  His  ways ;  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation  to  His  people."  But  what 
was  to  be  done  by  the  child  of  Zacharias  is  to  be  done  by  Christ's  ministers,  who 
••  prepare  and  make  ready  a  people  for  His  second  coming."  And  the  simple  reading 
of  the  simple  gospel  in  the  second  lesson  is  a  specimen,  as  it  were,  and  epitome  of 
all  this  work.  III.  This  utterance  of  Zacharias  is  something  more  than  a  song  or 
poem.  It  is  a  treatise  on  salvation.  1.  Its  Author — "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel,  For  He  hath  raised  up  a  strong  salvation  for  us."  2.  Its  cause — "On 
account  of  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  3,  Its  essence — "Salvation,  consisting 
in  remisssion  of  sins."  4.  Its  blessedness  and  privileges — "  Being  delivered  out  of 
the  hand  of  our  enemies,  to  serve  Him  without  fear."  5.  Its  consequence — "In 
holiness  and  righteousness  before  Him  all  our  days,"  All  who  have  ever  understood 
the  Psalmist's  deeply  pathetic  cry,  "  Make  the  reproach  which  I  am  afraid  of  to  pass 
over,"will  also  understand  the  preciousness  of  the  privilege.  We  conclude  by  citing 
the  image  with  which  the  song  concludes.  It  is  derived  from  a  caravan  which  has 
lost  its  way,  when  the  wayfarers  "sit  down"  in  the  darkness,  which  is  like  the 
shadow  of  death,  to  perish  in  their  helplessness.  Then,  in  the  high  heavens,  a 
glorious  star  makes  its  Epiphany.  So  often  as  we  sing  this  hymn  with  true  spiritual 
worship,  with  hearts  full  of  the  sense  of  that  salvation  which  consists  in  remission 
of  sins,  the  old  song  may  be  as  full  of  life  and  joy  as  any  new  hymn.  The  Hymn 
of  Zacharias  is  the  strain  of  the  "Pilgrims  of  the  Night,"  {Bishop  WilUiam 
Alexander.)  Zachariah's  canticle  : — 1.  Observe  that  no  sooner  was  Zachary  re- 
covered and  restored  to  his  speech,  but  he  sings  the  praises  of  his  Eedeemer,  and 
offers  up  a  thanksgiving  to  God.  The  best  return  we  can  make  to  God  for  the  use 
of  our  tongue,  for  the  giving  or  restoring  of  our  speech,  is  to  publish  our  Creator's- 
praise,  to  plead  His  cause,  and  vindncate  His  honour.  2.  The  subject  matter  of 
Zachary's  song.  What  is  the  particular  and  special  mercy  which  He  praises  and 
blesses  God  for  ?  It  is  not  for  his  own  particular  and  private  mercy,  namely,  the 
recovery  of  his  speech,  though  undoubtedly  he  was  very  thankful  to  God  for  that 
mercy ;  but  he  blesses  and  praises  God  for  catholic  and  universal  mercies  bestowed 
upon  His  Church  and  people.  3,  In  this  evangelical  hymn  there  is  a  prophetic 
prediction,  both  concerning  Christ  and  concerning  John.  (1)  Concerning  Christ, 
he  declares  that  God  the  Father  had  sent  Him  of  His  free  mercy  and  rich  grace^ 


1M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [cbmt.  t. 

yet  in  performance  of  His  truth  and  faithfulness,  and  according  to  His  promise  and 
oath  which  He  had  made  to  Abraham  and  the  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament.  Where 
note — (a)  He  blesses  God  for  tbe  comprehensive  blessing  of  the  Messiah — "visited," 
i.e.,  in  th«  incarnation  of  Jesus,  (b)  The  special  fruit  and  benefit  of  this  gracioaa 
and  merciful  visitation — the  redemption  of  a  lost  world,  (c)  The  character  given 
of  this  Saviour  and  Redeemer — "  horn  of  salvation,"  i.e.,  a  royal  and  glorious,  strong 
and  powerful,  Saviour  to  His  Church  and  people.  The  horn  in  Scripture  signifies 
glory  and  dignity,  strength  and  power ;  as  the  beauty,  so  the  strength  of  the  beast 
lies  in  his  horn ;  now  Christ  being  styled  a  horn  of  salvation  intimates  that  He 
himself  is  a  royal  and  princely  Saviour,  and  that  the  salvation  which  He  brings  is 
.great  and  plentiful,  glorious  and  powerful,  (d)  The  nature  and  quality  of  that  sal- 
vation and  deliverance  which  the  Son  of  God  came  to  accomplish  for  us.  Not  a 
temporal  deliverance,  as  the  Jews  expected,  from  the  power  of  the  Bomans  ;  but 
■  spiritual,  from  the  hands  of  sin  and  Satan,  death  and  hell;  His  design  was  tc 
purchase  a  spiritual  freedom  and  liberty  for  us,  that  we  might  be  enabled  to  serve 
Him  without  fear,  i.e.,  without  the  servile  and  offending  fear  of  a  slave,  but  with 
the  dutiful  and  ingenuous  fear  of  a  child.  Learn  hence,  that  believers,  who  were 
slaves  of  Satan,  are  by  Christ  made  God's  freemen  ;  and,  as  such,  they  owe  God  a 
willing,  cheerful,  and  delightful  service  without  fear,  and  a  constant,  persevering 
flervice  all  the  days  of  their  life,  (c)  The  source  and  foimtain  from  which  this 
.glorious  Saviour  and  gracious  salvation  arose  and  sprang,  viz.,  from  the  mercy  and 
faithfulness  of  God.  (2)  Concerning  John,  he  prophesies — (a)  The  nature  of  His 
office.  (5)  The  quality  of  his  work.  He  was  to  be  a  herald  and  harbinger  to  the 
Most  High ;  as  the  morning  star,  foretelling  the  glorious  arising  of  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness.  4.  Zachary,  having  spoken  a  few  words  concerning  his  son,  returns 
instantly  to  celebrate  the  praises  of  the  Saviour,  comparing  Him  to  the  rising  sun, 
which  shone  forth  in  the  brightness  of  the  gospel  to  enlighten  the  dark  comers  of 
the  world.  (W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Deliverance  at  hand: — When  an  English  garri- 
son, during  the  Indian  Mutiny,  was  besieged  at  Lucknow,  and  was  almost  momen- 
tarily expecting  the  fall  of  the  city,  a  sick  woman  started  up  from  her  slumber, 
crying,  "We're  saved  1  Don't  you  hear  the  music?  They're  coming  I  They're 
coming  I  "  No  one  else  could  hear  that  music ;  yet,  in  a  few  hours,  a  relieving  force 
arrived,  and  the  garrison  was  saved.  This  prophecy  of  Zacharias  is  like  the  far-off 
music  of  the  coming  salvation.  Compare  in  Motley's  "Dutch  Republic"  the  account 
of  tbe  relief  of  Leyden.  The  state  of  the  world  before  the  coming  of  Christ  may 
be  compared  to  that  of  shipwrecked  men  cUnging  to  a  rock  in  the  midst  of  the  sea. 
There  is  no  safety  for  them  where  they  are,  and  no  safety  in  themselves.  With 
what  joyous  eyes  is  it  that  they  behold  a  boat  coming  to  their  rescue  from  the 
distant  land  1  So  in  the  case  of  lost  humanity,  salvation  had  to  be  brought.  A  man 
crossing  a  heath  one  dark  night  fell  into  a  pit.  He  tried  in  vain  to  get  out,  calling 
loudly  for  assistance  all  the  while.  Soon  people  gathered  to  his  assistance,  and  a 
rope  was  lowered  to  him.  He  grasped  it,  and  was  drawn  up  into  the  light.  So 
mankind  cannot  be  uphfted  from  the  pit  of  sin,  except  by  salvation  brought  from 
above.  {Sunday  School  Times.)  God's  faithfulness  : — Like  the  song  of  Mary, 
this  prophecy  of  Zacharias  tells  of  God's  faithfulness  in  His  promises.  In  ancient 
'times  there  was  a  beautiful  rite  of  hospitality.  Friends  residing  indifferent  countries 
gave  each  other  emblems,  on  the  presentation  of  which  each  could  claim  the  hospi- 
tality of  the  other.  And  when  they  both  were  dead,  the  son  of  one  could  call  upon 
the  son  of  the  other  for  the  same  hospitality  by  presenting  his  emblem.  The  pro- 
jnises  made  to  the  father  were  fulfilled  to  the  son.  So  down  through  the  ages  the 
Jews  waited  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  made  to  Abraham.  But  to  us  it  is 
given  to  see  in  clearer  light  their  complete  fulfilment,  and  how  that  came  neither 
too  late  nor  too  soon.  {Ibid.)  The  song  of  Zacharias  : — I.  Let  us  join  Zacharias 
in  his  song  of  praise  for  that  great  deliverance  of  which  John  was  the  harbinger. 
The  blessings  here  celebrated  were  not  confined  to  Jews,  but  are  common  to  all  God's 
people.  Salvation  is  ever  the  same  in  substance,  and  much  the  same  in  its  form 
and  means.  II.  It  becomes  us  to  be  thankful  that  the  light  of  the  gospel  hasvisited 
>our  own  land  in  particular.  Through  God's  mercy  we  have  been  lifted  out  of 
idolatry,  impurity,  and  misery,  into  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Let  us  see  that  the 
*'  hght "  is  shining  into  our  hearts,  and  that  we  are  walking  in  it.  IH.  Deliverance 
from  enemies  through  the  gospel.  Saved  from  sin ;  taken  out  of  the  power  of  our 
spiritual  foes.  IV.  Serving  God  without  fear.  1.  External  peace  and  security.  S. 
Internal  state  of  mind  produced  by  religion.  At  peace  with  God  ;  delighting  in 
Pim  as  a  Father  and  Friend.     (James  Foote,  M.A.)       The  parental  relationship  .*— 


<mut.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  89 

There  are  men  and  women  known  in  history  chiefly  by  their  relation  to  their 
children.  They  were  godly  men  and  women  ;  men  and  women  of  ability  and  use- 
fulness in  their  day  ;  but  their  pre-eminent  place  in  the  world  is  as  parents.  Thia 
fact  should  be  a  stimulus  and  a  source  of  hope  to  every  parent.  Whatever  a  father 
or  a  mother  may  have  done  or  have  failed  to  do  up  to  the  present  hour,  there  ia 
that  child  to  be  looked  after,  to  be  loved  and  cared  for,  to  be  trained  and  prayed 
over,  to  have  faith  in  behalf  of.  In  that  child  there  may  lie  the  hope  and  the  joy  of 
multitudes,  and  the  hope  and  the  joy  of  the  parents  as  well.  How  this  ought  to 
nerve  us  and  give  us  cheer  as  we  toil  and  pray  for  the  child  of  our  hearts.  That 
child  may  rise  up  to  call  ua  blessed,  and,  for  his  sake,  all  generations  may  call  us 
blessed.  It  is  for  us  to  do  our  duty  by  our  children.  It  may  be  for  us  to  have  a 
reward  in  them  beyond  all  other  rewards  we  have  in  and  for  our  earthly  course. 
You  are  the  father,  or  the  mother,  of  that  child.  How  much  of  good  does  that 
portend  to  him  ?  How  much  of  good  it  may  portend  to  you  1  (H.  C,  Trumbull.) 
The  iource  of  true  power : — *'  Filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost " — that  was  fitness  for 
praising  God  acceptably,  and  for  proclaiming  His  truth  acceptably,  in  the  days  of 
Zacharias.  It  was  not  that  Zacharias  was  filled  with  enthusiasm,  filled  with 
earnestness,  filled  with  knowledge,  filled  with  poetic  fervour ;  but  that  he  was  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  That  gave  his  words  power,  and,  because  of  that  fact,  his 
words  are  in  our  ears  and  on  our  lips  to-day.  There  is  no  other  source  of  true 
power  in  God's  service  in  this  age,  or  in  any  age.  To  be  a  good  parent,  a  good 
teacher,  a  good  preacher,  a  good  Bible  student,  a  good  man,  or  a  good  woman,  one 
needs  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost ;  there  is  no  substitute  for  this.  (Ibid.) 
Songs  composed  under  stress  of  deep  feeling  : — On  the  night  before  her  execution, 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots  composed  a  short  prayer,  and  sang  it  over  by  herself  because 
she  could  not  sleep.  The  words  are  very  musical  in  the  Latin  which  she  ased, 
expressing  the  passionate  wish  of  a  captive  to  escape : 

*•  0  Lord  God  Almighty  I  my  hope  is  in  Thee  1 

0  Jesus  beloved,  now  liberate  me ! 

In  durance  the  drearest,  in  bonds  the  severest— 
My  desire  ia  to  Thee  I 
In  sighing  and  crying,  on  bended  kneea  lying, 

1  adore — I  implore  Thou  would' st  liberate  me  I** 

When  Madame  Guyon  and  her  faithful  maid  were  imprisoned,  she  composed  songa' 
for  her  comfort.  "And  then,"  says  she,  "we  sang  them  together,  praises  unto 
Thee,  0  our  God !  It  sometimes  seemed  to  me  as  if  I  were  a  little  bird,  whom  the 
Lord  had  placed  in  a  cage,  and  that  I  had  nothing  to  do  now  but  sing !  "  Eeligiout 
value  of  song  : — Bishop  Jewel,  writing  to  Peter  Martyr,  March,  1560,  says  :  "Eehgion 
is  now  somewhat  more  established  than  it  was.  The  people  are  everywhere  ex- 
ceedingly inclined  to  the  better  part.  Ecclesiastical  and  popular  music  has  much 
conduced  to  thia  result.  For  as  soon  as  they  had  once  commenced  to  sing  publicly 
in  only  one  little  church  in  London,  immediately  not  only  the  other  neighbouring 
churches,  but  even  the  towns  far  distant,  began  to  vie  with  each  other  in  the  same 
practice.  At  times  you  may  see  at  Paul's  Cross,  after  sermon,  six  thousand  persons, 
old  and  young,  of  both  sexes,  singing  together  and  praising  God.  This  sadly 
annoys  the  priests  and  the  devil,  for  they  see  that  by  these  means  the  sacred  dis- 
courses sink  more  deeply  into  men's  minds,  and  that  their  kingdom  is  shaken  and 
shattered  at  almost  every  note."  The  song  of  Zacharias  : — It  is  emphatically  the 
song  of  a  man  whose  tongue  is  imloosed  ;  who  for  the  first  time  has  entered  into  the 
meaning  of  the  books  which  he  has  been  reading  since  his  childhood,  of  the  services 
in  which  he  has  been  engaged  ever  since  he  became  a  priest.  A  speech  may  be 
invented  with  tolerable  success  for  a  general  on  the  eve  of  a  battle,  though  such  as 
have  really  come  down  to  us  stir  the  blood  far  more ;  but  the  mimicry  of  this  kind 
of  feeling  must  have  been  odious  and  contemptible.  I  know  not  where  you  could 
find  the  stamp  of  fraud  more  clear  and  ineffaceable  than  on  a  document  which 
attempted  it.  If  the  words  of  Zacharias  have  lasted  to  our  day,  and  have  been 
accepted  by  men  of  different  races  as  vital  and  true  words — as  words  which  speak 
to  and  speak  forth  the  human  heart  within  them — I  cannot  persuade  myself  that 
they  bear  that  stamp  of  insincerity.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  Spontaneous  spiritual 
tong : — One  can't  help  thinking  that  the  mind  and  heart  of  Zacharias  during  all 
those  nine  months  had  been  filling  with  this  song.  And  now  it  bursts  forth  at 
«iice — as  a  flower  suddenly  bursts  out  where  there  was  but  a  green- sheathed  bad 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

yesterday.  This  song  is  as  spontaneous  as  that  of  a  lark,  and  as  lyrical.  As  David 
found  a  prayer  in  his  heart  (2  Sam.  vii.  27),  so  Zacharias  found  a  song  in  his.  {A.  B. 
Grosart,  D.D.)  It  is  a  wonderful  scene  in  the  house  of  the  old  priest  Zacharias  that 
we  are  permitted  to  witness.  The  priest's  lips  had  long  been  sealed.  In  silence  ha 
had  awaited  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise.  His  tongue  was  not  to  be  loosed 
till  the  word  of  the  Lord  had  been  fulfilled,  that  his  first  utterance  might  be  praise 
to  God  for  His  wonderful  works.  It  was  manifest  that  a  new  era  was  beginning — 
the  era  of  the  long-expected  redemption  of  Israel.  This  is  the  strain  of  Zacharias' 
hymn  of  praise.  Just  as  a  mountain  stream,  which,  after  being  long  hemmed  in, 
finds  at  last  an  outlet,  leaps  along  in  tumultuous  gladness,  so  does  the  long  pent-up 
emotion  of  Zacharias'  heart  flow  forth  in  a  rapture  of  praise,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord," 
&c.  We  feel  that  this  is  not  the  expression  simply  of  his  own  personal,  fatherly 
gladness.  It  is  the  rejoicing  song  of  all  who  looked  for  redemption  in  Israel,  thus 
finding  utterance  through  him.  We  observe  that  it  was — I.  A  time  of  fulfil- 
ment (vers.  67-70),  and — II.  A  time  of  salvation  (vers.  71-79).  (ProfessorLuthardt.) 
Emotion  breaking  out  into  speech : — A  vivid  emotion  of  love  and  gratitude  is  very 
apt  to  break  out  into  speech,  either  in  the  form  of  a  public  testimony  for  Christ,  or 
in  the  voice  of  song.  I  have  known  a  prayer  meeting,  at  a  time  of  awakening,  to 
become  like  an  aviary,  for  God  had  put  a  new  song  into  scores  of  mouths.  {T.  L. 
Cuyler.)  Changed  by  the  Spirit : — No  man  or  woman  amongst  you  knows  what 
he  might  be  if  he  were  filled  with  the  Spirit.  What  is  that  rough  Luther?  He  is 
only  fit  to  have  been  a  killer  of  bullocks,  or  a  feller  of  oaks  in  the  forest ;  but  fill 
Luther  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  what  is  he  ?  He  takes  the  bull  of  Rome  by  the 
horns,  slays  wild  beasts  of  error  in  the  great  arena  of  the  gospel,  and  is  more  than 
a  conqueror  through  the  might  which  dwelleth  in  him  I  Take  John  Calvin — fit 
naturally  to  be  a  cunning  lawyer,  cutting  and  dividing  nice  points,  judging  this 
precedent  and  that,  frittering  away  his  time  over  immaterial  niceties ;  but  fill  him 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  John  Calvin  becomes  the  mighty  master  of  grace,  the 
reflection  of  the  wisdom  of  all  past  ages,  and  a  great  light  to  shed  a  brilliant  ray 
even  till  the  Millennium  shall  dawn  1  Chief,  and  prince,  and  king  of  all  uninspired 
teachers,  the  mighty  seer  of  Geneva,  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God  is  no  more  John 
Calvin,  but  a  God-sent  angel  of  the  Churches  I     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  68.  Visited  and  redeemed  His  people. — Visited: — 1.  To  visit  is  the  work  of 
one  that  comes  to  do  a  charitable  ofiice  to  a  sick  person,  according  to  that  place 
(Matt.  XXV.),  "I  was  sick  and  ye  visited  Me."  So  Christ  came  into  this  world 
because  it  languished  of  a  sore  disease.  2.  To  give  a  visit  to  another  is  a  volun- 
tary courtesy,  an  act  of  kindness  that  hath  no  compulsion  or  unwillingness  in  it : 
for  he  that  visits  any  place  or  persons,  if  he  did  not  like  them  he  might  keep 
away ;  but  you  cannot  imagine  more  promptness  and  readiness  in  any  one  than 
there  was  in  our  Saviour,  to  be  humbled  to  that  baseness  to  take  our  nature  upon 
him.  3.  There  is  not  only  willingness,  but  friendliness  in  the  appellation :  no  man 
visits  another  but  in  the  profession  of  a  friend ;  therefore  St.  Paul  says  upon  the 
Incarnation  (Tit.  iii.  4),  "  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man 
appeared."  {Bishop  Racket.)  Redeemed: — 1.  Now  captivity  must  be  presup- 
posed on  our  part,  because  we  did  await  and  expect  redemption.  2.  As  his  good- 
ness is  amplified  from  our  captivity,  so  the  redemption  is  the  more  valuable, 
because  none  else  could  have  plucked  us  out  of  those  fetters  but  the  Holy  One,  our 
Lord  and  Master.  3,  And  let  it  make  a  third  animadversion,  that  the  manner  of 
our  redemption  doth  greatly  exaggerate  the  most  meritorious  compassion  of  the 
Redeemer ;  there  hath  been  redemption  wrought  by  force  and  victory,  so  Moses 
brought  the  Israelites  with  an  high  hand  out  of  the  slavery  of  Egypt :  there  la  a 
redemption  which  is  wrought  by  intercession  and  supplication ;  so  Nehemiah  pre- 
vailed with  King  Cyrus,  to  dismiss  the  Jews  out  of  the  Babylonish  captivity :  or 
thirdly,  either  gold,  or  silver,  or  somewhat  more  precious  is  laid  down  to  buy  oat 
the  freedom  of  that  which  is  in  thraldom ;  that's  the  most  costly  and  estimable 
way  when  value  for  value  is  paid ;  or  fourthly,  the  body  of  one  is  surrendered  up 
for  the  ransom  of  another,  life  for  life,  blood  for  blood ;  and  greater  charity  cannot 
be  shown  than  to  bring  redemption  to  pass  by  such  a  compensation.  So  St.  Peter 
extols  that  act  in  our  Saviour ;  says  he,  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible 
things,  but  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  as  a  lamb  undefiled."  So  out  of  His  own 
mouth  (Matt.  xx.  28).  4.  As  all  mankind  that  is  flesh  and  blood  in  every  man  and 
woman  is  honoured  by  His  visitation,  so  all  without  exceptions  are  beholden  to 
Bis  redemption      Zachary  the  priest  with  all  his  innocency,  who  is  said  to  have 


HHir.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  fl 

been  blameless  and  righteous  before  God,  yet  he  blesseth  God  that  he  was  redeemed. 
Having  thus  spoken  of  the  benefits  of  visitation  and  redemption,  I  should  leave 
my  treatise  very  imperfect  if  I  should  not  speak  of  the  receivers ;  very  briefly 
therefore  concerning  them  upon  whom  all  was  conferred,  "  He  hath  visited  and 
redeemed  His  people."  It  is  certain  that  the  generations  of  mankind  are  meant 
by  this  word,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Adam,  and  none  others.  {Ibid.)  Diffi- 
culty of  defining  redemption : — If  you  should  expect  from  me  a  discourse  in  which 
I  should  explain  redemption,  I  must  follow  the  example  of  that  philosopher  ol 
Ancient  times  who,  when  some  asked  a  definition  of  God,  said  I  must  first  ask  for 
a  week  to  prepare  my  reply ;  after  that  week  is  passed  I  must  ask  a  second,  and 
again  a  third,  and  so  on  till  I  bad  at  last  declared  that  I  never  could  end  my  de- 
mand for  time.  For  the  more  that  philosopher  meditated  on  God,  the  less  was  he 
able  to  give  a  definition ;  and  the  more  I  meditate  on  redemption,  the  less  can  I 
explain  it.  (Adolphe  Monod.)  Realizing  redemption: — Dean  Stanley  tells  ua 
that  Dr.  Arnold  used  to  make  his  boys  say,  "  Christ  died  for  me,"  instead  of  the 
more  general  phrase,  "  Christ  died  for  us."  "  He  appeared  to  me,"  says  one  whose 
intercourse  with  him  never  extended  beyond  these  lessons.  "  to  be  remarkable  for 
his  habit  of  realizing  everything  that  we  are  told  in  Scripture."  (Life  of  Dr 
Arnold.)  God's  great  redemption: — John  Frederick  Oberlin  put  off  all  earthly 
comfort  to  redeem  a  barren  district  of  France  from  poverty  and  ignorance,  with 
his  own  pickaxe  beginning  the  building  of  a  high  road  from  Ban  de  la  Roche  up  to 
the  city  of  Stra^buig.  But  here  was  a  highway  to  be  constructed  from  the  squalor 
of  earth  to  the  heights  of  heaven.  Clarkson  pleaded  before  the  English  Parliament, 
and  the  Eussian  Emperor,  against  the  slave  trade.  But  here  was  the  question  of 
deliverance  for  a  hundred  thousand  millions  of  bondmen.  Aye  !  it  was  the  pounding 
off  of  an  iron  chain  from  the  neck  of  a  captive  world.  I  think  it  was  the  greatest 
and  most  absorbing  thought  of  God's  lifetime.  I  do  not  think  that  there  was  any- 
thing in  all  the  ages  of  the  past,  or  that  there  will  be  in  all  the  ages  of  the  future, 
anything  to  equal  it.  The  masterpiece  of  eternity  !  There  were  so  many  difficul- 
ties to  be  overcome  1  There  were  such  infinite  consequences  to  be  considered  I 
There  were  such  gulfs  to  bridge,  and  such  heights  to  scale,  and  such  immensities 
to  compass  1  If  God  had  been  less  than  omnipotent.  He  would  not  have  been 
strong  enough ;  or  less  than  omniscient,  I  do  not  think  He  would  have  been  wise 
enough ;  or  less  loving,  would  have  been  sympathetic  enough.  There  might  have 
been  a  God  strong  enough  to  create  a  universe,  and  yet  too  weak  to  do  this.  To 
create  the  worlds,  only  a  word  was  necessary ;  but  to  do  this  work  required  more 
than  a  word.  It  required  more  than  ordinary  effort  of  a  God.  It  required  the 
dying  anguish  of  an  Only  Son.     {Dr.  Talmage.) 

Ver.  70.  As  lie  spake. — All  God's  promises  are  fulfilled: — Look  over  your  lives, 
O  Christians  I  and  you  cannot  find  one  hour  when  God's  promises  have  failed  you. 
Look  over  the  history  of  His  people,  and  it  is  full  of  promises  fulfilled ;  but  there 
is  not  a  fragment  of  a  broken  promise  to  be  found.  When  Elisha's  servant  was 
afraid  because  the  armies  of  Syria  were  besieging  them  in  Dothan,  Elisha  prayed 
that  his  eyes  might  be  opened ;  and  the  servant  saw  that  the  mountain  was  full  of 
horses  and  chariots  round  about  Elisha.  If  God  touches  our  eyes,  we  too  shall 
Bee  all  our  own  life  and  all  history  fuU  of  God's  fulfilled  promises  round  about  as. 
Ab  when  Milton's  archangel  spoke — 

••  To  confirm  His  words,  out  flew 
Millions  of  flaming  swords,  drawn  from  the  thigha 
Of  mighty  cherubim." 

So  God  speaks  a  promise,  and  out  fly  millions  of  facts  and  experiences  to  confirm 
His  words.  Faithfulness  of  God  : — Far,  far  above  all  comprehension  is  the  truth 
and  faithfulness  of  God.  He  never  fails,  nor  forgets,  nor  falters,  nor  forfeits  His 
word.  Afflictions  are  like  clouds,  but  the  Divine  truthfulness  is  all  around  them. 
While  we  are  under  the  cloud  we  are  in  the  region  of  God's  faithfulness ;  when  wa 
mount  above  it  we  shall  not  need  such  an  assurance.  To  every  word  of  threat,  or 
promise,  prophecy  or  covenant,  the  Lord  has  exactly  adhered,  for  He  is  not  a  man 
that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he  should  repent.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Mercy  of  God  boundless: — Like  the  ethereal  blue,  it  encompasses  the  whole  earth, 
smiling  npon  oniverBal  nature,  acting  as  a  canopy  for  all  the  creatures  of  earth. 


9»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  I. 

gnrmonnting  the  loftiest  peaks  of  human  provocations,  and  rising  high  above 
the  mists  of  mortal  trangression.  Clear  sky  is  evermore  above,  and  mercy 
calmly  smiles  above  the  din  and  smoke  of  this  poor  world.  Darkness  and  clouda 
are  but  of  earth's  lower  atmosphere :  the  heavens  are  evermore  serene,  and  bright 
with  innumerable  stars.  Divine  mercy  abides  in  its  vastness  of  expanse,  and 
matchless  patience,  all  unaltered  by  the  rebellions  of  man.  When  we  can  measure 
the  heavens,  then  shall  we  bound  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  Towards  his  own 
servants  especially,  in  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  He  has  displayed  grace 
higher  than  the  heaven  of  heavens,  and  wider  than  the  universe.  0  that  the 
atheist  could  but  see  this,  how  earnestly  would  he  long  to  become  a  servant  of 
Jehovah  1  (Ibid.)  Immovableness  of  the  Divine  promises : — A  swallow  having 
built  its  nest  upon  the  tent  of  Charles  V.,  the  Emperor  generously  commanded 
that  the  tent  should  not  be  taken  down  when  the  camp  removed,  but  should 
remain  until  the  young  birds  were  ready  to  fly.  Was  there  such  a  gentleness  in 
the  heart  of  a  soldier  toward  a  poor  bird  which  was  not  of  his  making,  and  shall 
the  Lord  deal  hardly  with  His  creatures  when  they  venture  to  put  their  trust  in 
Him?  Be  assured  He  hath  a  great  love  to  those  trembling  souls  that  fly  for 
shelter  to  His  royal  courts.  He  that  buildeth  his  nest  upon  a  Divine  promise  shall 
find  it  abide  and  remain  nntil  he  shall  fly  away  to  the  laud  where  promises  are 
lost  in  fulfilments.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  73.  The  oath  which  He  aware. — The  purpose  of  God^i  oath: — God  doth  not 
give  it  to  make  His  word  or  promise  sure  and  steadfast,  but  to  give  assurance  and 
security  to  us  of  their  accomplishment.  Every  word  of  God  is  sure  and  certain 
truth  itself,  because  it  is  His  ;  and  He  might  justly  require  of  us  the  belief  of  it, 
without  any  further  attestation.  But  yet,  knowing  what  great  objections  Satan 
and  our  own  unbelieving  hearts  will  raise  against  His  promises,  at  least  as  to  oar 
own  concerns  in  them,  to  confirm  our  minds,  and  to  take  away  all  pretences  of 
unbelief,  He  interposes  His  oath  in  this  matter.  (John  Owen.)  God^s  covenants  : 
— A  covenant  is  a  contract,  or  a  compact,  between  two  agreeing  parties,  that,  on 
certain  conditions  being  observed  by  one  party,  the  other  will  do  as  specified.  God 
made  a  covenant  of  works  with  our  first  parents,  that  if  they  obeyed  His  commands 
they  should  enjoy  His  favour  and  blessings.  Since  the  fall,  God  has  made  a 
covenant  of  grace  by  faith  with  mankind,  that,  trusting  in  Him,  through  atone- 
ment,  they  should  be  saved  and  blessed.  God  entered  into  covenant  with  Abraham 
and  his  descendants  (Gen.  xvii.  2-14).  God  covenants  with  us  that  He  wiU  answer 
our  believing  prayers ;  that  He  will  teach  and  guide  those  who  are  willing  and 
obedient ;  that  He  will  fulfil  to  us  all  His  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises, 
if  we  perform  the  simple,  easy,  reasonable  conditions  attached  to  them.  Then 
God  will  ever  be  faithful  to  His  engagements.  "  Suppose,"  said  one,  "  God  were 
not  to  fulfil  His  promises  to  you."  "  Then,"  was  the  reply  of  the  Christian  lady 
addressed,  "He  would  lose  more  than  I  should."  This  would  be  the  fact,  for  in 
such  a  case  God  would  lose  the  glory  of  His  Divine  faithfulness,  truth,  holiness, 
justice,  mercy,  love,  &c.  But  this  is  an  utter  impossibility.  God  "  cannot  lie," 
therefore  we  may  each  say,  with  David,  "  He  bath  made  with  me  an  everlasting 
covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."    (H.  E.  Burton.) 

Ver.  74.  Being  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies. — Delivered  from  tin 
hind  of  the  enemy  : — While  labouring  among  the  wild  tribes  of  the  Druses,  a  mes- 
Benger  from  one  of  their  chiefs,  whose  influence  it  was  important  to  secure,  sent  a 
message  entreating  Mr.  Gobat  to  visit  him.  The  latter,  however,  was  unable  to  do 
so  in  consequence  of  indisposition.  A  second  messenger  repeated  the  invitation, 
but  still,  contrary  to  Mr.  Gobat's  expectations,  he  was  prevented  from  complying 
with  the  chief's  wishes.  A  third  messenger  prevailed  on  him  to  set  out,  by  the 
assurance  that  if  he  went  at  once  he  might  spend  the  night  with  the  chief,  and  be 
ready  to  return  in  the  morning,  so  as  to  join  a  ship  about  to  sail  for  Malta,  in 
which  Mr.  Gobat  was  anxious  to  embark.  On  their  journey  the  guides  lost  them- 
selves in  the  mountain  paths.  Having  at  last,  with  some  difficulty,  regained  their 
route,  they  suddenly  saw  by  the  light  of  the  moon  that  a  hyena  had  laid  itself  down 
across  the  path  exactly  in  their  way.  They  threw  stones  to  frighten  it,  when  the 
animal  sprang  up  and  ran  along  the  path  which  the  party  were  to  travel.  A  super- 
stition is  prevalent  among  the  Druses,  that  "  the  way  a  hyena  goes  is  an  unlucky 
one."  The  natives  refused,  accordingly,  to  go  farther,  and  Mr.  Gobat  had  to 
retrace  his  steps,  greatly  perplexed  at  the  obstacles  which  had  hindered  a  journey 


OHA».  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  98 

apparently  of  bo  much  consequence  to  his  mission.  When  in  Malta  he  received  a 
letter  from  a  friend  in  Lebanon,  stating  that  he  had  been  visited  by  the  chief,  who, 
with  much  agitation,  had  spoken  to  him  as  follows : — "  Your  friend  is  truly  a 
servant  of  God,  and  God  has  preserved  him ;  for  I  wished  to  draw  him  to  my 
village  in  order  to  murder  him.  Therefore  I  sent  message  after  message  to  him  ; 
but  God  has  delivered  him  from  the  hand  of  his  enemies."  (Memoirs  of  the  late 
Bishop  Gobat.)  God's  interposition: — In  a  Western  cabin,  far  away  from  all 
other  residences,  there  sat  a  Christian  mother  rocking  her  babe  to  sleep.  The 
husband  and  the  father  had  been  called  suddenly  off  on  business,  and  there  had 
been  no  defence  provided  for  that  house  that  night  in  the  wilderness.  As  the 
mother  eat  there  in  the  cabin  rocking  her  babe  to  sleep,  miles  away  from  any  other 
tenement,  glancing  to  the  floor  she  saw  a  ruffian's  foot  projecting  from  under  the 
table.  Having  rocked  her  child  to  sleep  she  put  him  in  the  cradle,  and  then  knelt 
down  and  said  :  "  Oh  I  Lord,  keep  this  child ;  keep  me.  Oh  1  Thou  who  never  slum- 
bereth,  watch  over  our  cabin  to-night.  Let  no  harm  come  to  us.  If  there  be  those 
abroad  who  wish  us  ill,  bring  them  to  a  better  mind.  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon 
all  wanderers,  all  who  do  deeds  of  violence  and  death.  Bring  them  to  Thyself 
— bring  them  to  pardon  and  to  heaven."  As  she  arose  from  the  prayer  the 
ruffian  came  out  from  under  the  table  and  said :  "  There  will  be  no  harm 
to  you  to-night.  Pray  for  me,  I  am  the  wanderer  that  you  spoke  of.  Pray  for 
me."  Years  passed  on,  and  that  Christian  woman  satin  a  great  meeting  called 
in  the  interest  of  reform.  There  was  a  great  orator  that  day  to  be  present,  and  as 
he  preached  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come,  his  eye  fell  upon 
the  countenance  of  that  woman.  His  cheek  was  blanched  and  he  almost  failed  in 
his  speech.  At  the  close  of  the  meeting  they  joined  hands,  and  a  few  words  of 
conversation  passed,  and  some  one  said  :  "  Why,  where  did  you  form  the  acquaint- 
ance of  that  orator  ?"  "  Never  mind,"  she  said,  "  I  have  known  him  many  years." 
Who  was  it  watching  the  mother  that  night  ?  Who  was  it  watching  the  babe  ? 
Who  was  it  that  brought  the  ruffian  to  God  in  repentance  for  his  sin  ?  Who 
is  it  that  watches  all  our  cradles,  and  all  our  tables,  and  all  our  homes,  and 
all  our  way?  Blessed  be  His  glorious  name  for  ever.  He  is  a  shelter  to  which 
we  may  all  run.  He  is  a  fortress  in  which  we  may  all  be  safe.  (Dr.  Talinage.) 
Might  serve  Him  without  fear. — Serving  the  Lord  in  holiness : — I.  The  conveyance 
made  in  this  covenant — "  That  He  would  grant  unto  us,"  &c.  II.  The  benefits 
secured  to  us  in  this  conveyance.  Let  us  then  attend — I.  To  the  conveyance  made 
IN  THIS  COVENANT.  In  this  two  things  may  be  observed.  1.  The  parties  in  whose 
favour  this  conveyance  is  made.  Us,  the  seed  of  Abraham.  So  in  this  gospel,  the 
covenant  is  held  out  to  you  all,  as  heaven's  blank  bond  for  grace  and  glory,  that 
whosoever  will,  may  fill  his  own  name  in  it,  by  applying  the  same  to  himself  in  the 
way  of  believing.  2.  The  manner  of  the  conveyance.  It  is  by  way  of  grant  or  gift, 
for  so  the  word  is.  But  observe  the  gift  is  to  us,  and  so  it  is  to  be  understood  in 
respect  of  us,  to  be  a  free  gift.  In  respect  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  it  is  not  bo.  All  the 
benefits  of  the  covenant,  to  be  bestowed  on  His  spiritual  seed,  are  made  over  to  Him 
on  a  valuable  consideration.  God  gives  us  to  serve  our  Pvedeemer,  because  Christ 
served  Him  perfectly  in  our  room  and  stead.  II,  To  the  benefits  secuued  to  us 
IN  THIS  CONVEYANCE,  eveu  the  sum  of  the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  1.  The 
principal  benefit,  which  stands  here  under  the  notion  of  the  end,  namely,  serving 
the  Lord.  "  That  He  would  grant  unto  us,  that  we  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands 
of  our  enemies,  might  serve  Him."  O  that  men  would  learn  this  lesson,  that  any 
service  we  do  to  God,  if  right  service,  it  is  a  benefit  of  the  covenant,  bestowed  on 
UB,  for  Christ's  sake.  Then  would  they  learn  that  God  is  not  debtor  unto  them  for 
it,  but  they  are  debtors  to  free  grace  on  that  very  account.  And  the  more  they  do  for 
God,  and  the  better  that  they  do  it,  they  are  always  th*"  deeper  in  debt  to  free  grace, 
(Eph.  ii.  8,  9,  10).  This  benefit  of  the  covenant,  that  we  might  serve  Him,  imports 
three  things:  1.  The  privilege  of  God's  service.  God  is  a  master  of  infinite  glory 
and  power,  so  that  to  be  admitted  into  His  service  is  the  greatest  privilege.  How 
do  men  value  themselves,  in  that  they  are  of  an  earthly  king's  household,  servants 
to  one  who  wears  a  crown  ?  But  what  a  small  thing  is  that,  in  comparison  of  this, 
to  be  the  feUows  of  angels,  in  being  taken  into  the  service  of  Jehovah,  the  Lord  oi 
heaven  and  earth.  It  is  a  great  part  of  heaven's  happiness.  "  For  there  His  ser- 
vants  shall  serve  Him."  2.  Strength  and  ability  for  His  service.  •'  And  I  will 
strengthen  them  in  the  Lord,  and  they  shall  walk  up  and  down  in  His  name,  saith 
the  Lord."  "He  that  abideth  in  Me,  and  I  in  him,"  saith  Jesus,  "the  same 
bxingeth  forth  mach  fruit ;  for  without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."    "  For  His  grace  i$ 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  u 

sufficient  for  ns,  and  His  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  3.  Acceptance  of 
the  service.  For  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God.  Concerning  this 
covenant  service,  two  things  are  further  to  be  remarked.  1.  The  kind  of  service  to 
God,  in  which  sinners  are  instated  by  the  covenant  of  grace ;  for  there  is  a  great 
difference  of  services.  Now — (1)  This  is  not  bond  service,  the  service  of  slaves,  who 
work  their  work  for  fear  of  their  master's  whip.  '•  Wherefore  we  have  not  received 
the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  we  have  received  the  spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby  we  cry  Abba,  Father."  (2)  It  is  not  hired  service,  so  much  work  for  so 
much  wages.  But — (3)  It  is  an  honorary  service.  So  the  word  used  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  t^^xt,  signifies  to  minister,  which  is  an  honorary  kind  of  service,  such 
as  kings  and  priests  had  when  put  into  their  office.  Thus  Christ  hath  made  His 
people  kings  and  pi  .'ests  unto  God.  They  are  a  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spii"itual 
sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God,  by  Jesus  Christ.  Let  us  now  attend — 2.  To  the  quali- 
ties of  the  service.  They  are  these  :  (1)  It  is  universal,  which  the  service  of  these 
remaining  under  the  first  covenant  never  is.  "  Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when 
I  have  respect  unto  all  Thy  commandments."  We  are  to  serve  Him  in  holiness 
and  righteousness.  These  answer  to  the  whole  holy  law  as  a  rule  of  life.  That 
grace  is  held  forth  in  the  covenant,  which  you  are  to  embrace  for  sanctifleation,  aa 
well  as  justification.  And  it  is  a  full  covenant  for  that  purpose,  as  for  all  other 
purposes  of  salvation.  (2)  It  is  a  perpetual  and  lasting  service.  The  first  covenant 
required  a  lasting  service,  but  secured  not  man  from  breaking  the  service.  But  the 
second  covenant  secures  the  perpetuity  of  the  service,  that,  however  fickle  the 
believer  is,  yet  he  shall  serve  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  his  life.  It  imports  that  he 
shall  serve  the  Lord  for  ever  and  ever,  in  heaven,  after  death.  We  are  now  to  con- 
sider, secondly,  the  subordinate  benefit,  namely,  deliverance  from  our  enemies, 
which  stands  here  as  a  mean  in  order  to  the  end,  namely,  God's  service.  "  That 
we,  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies,  might  serve  Him."  It  is 
evident  from  the  structure  of  the  words,  both  in  our  version,  and  in  the  original 
especially,  that  the  service  is  the  end  of  the  deliverance,  and  the  deliverance  the 
means  of  the  service.  As  God  said  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  so  doth  He  say  of  all  His 
people ;  '*  Let  My  son  go,  tlaat  he  may  serve  Me."  They  cannot  serve  the  Lord  till 
once  they  be  delivered.  This  may  also  direct  you  in  your  management  of  this 
solemn  occasion  of  grace  and  salvation,  1.  If  ever  you  would  be  capable  to  serve 
the  Lord,  seek  that  you  may  be  delivered  from  your  spiritual  enemies,  taken  out  of 
their  hands  who  keep  you  in  bondage.  2.  If  ever  you  would  obtain  that  deUver- 
ance  from  your  spiritual  enemies,  seek  it  in  the  covenant,  in  a  way  of  believing. 
"  And  if  the  Son  make  you  free,  you  shall  be  free  indeed."  Lastly,  Seek  that 
deliverance,  that  you  may  serve  the  Lord.  Many  seek  deliverance  by  Christ,  that 
they  may  live  at  ease  in  the  embraces  of  their  lusts,  free  from  the  fear  of  hell. 
{T.  Boston.)  Serving  the  Lord  in  holiness  : — I.   The  covehant  DELrvEBANOi 

BESTOWED.  We,  being  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  our  enemies.  I  shall  reduce 
these  to  four.  1.  They  are  delivered  from  the  law.  Not  from  the  law  as  a  rule  of 
life  in  the  hand  of  a  Mediator,  standing  in  the  covenant  of  grace  ;  but  from  the  law 
as  a  covenant,  under  which  all  men  are  in  their  natural  state  (Bom.  vi.  14,  16). 
They  are  delivered  from  the  curse  of  it.  From  the  commanding  power  of  it.  For 
how  can  it  have  a  commanding  power  over  them  who  are  not  under  it?  But  they 
are  as  completely  freed  from  it,  as  death  can  make  a  wife  free  from  her  husband. 
2.  From  sin.  Though  they  are  not  free  from  the  indwelling  of  it  in  this  life,  and 
molestation  by  it,  yet  they  are  freed  from  its  guilt  of  eternal  wrath,  by  which  it 
binds  over  the  sinner  to  the  revenging  wrath  of  God.  "  There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  They  are  freed  also  from  the 
dominion  of  sin.  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  you  are  not  under 
the  law,  but  under  grace."  3.  From  death.  Our  Lord's  words  are,  "  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  unto  you,  if  a  man  keep  My  saying,  he  shall  never  see  death. "  Lastly,  from 
Satan,  though  not  from  molestation  by  him  in  this  life ;  yet  from  under  his  power 
and  dominion.  Let  us  now — II.  Take  notice  of  the  covenant  service,  which  ib  thb 
DBSiGN  OF  THIS  DELIVERANCE ;  and  not  Only  the  design  of  the  deliverance,  but  also 
of  the  deliverer :  which,  therefore,  shall  certainly  take  effect  in  the  delivered.  I 
take  it  up  in  three  things,  according  to  the  text.  They  shall  serve  the  Lord — 1.  As 
sons  serving  their  Father.  Love  to  their  Father  will  set  them  to  work.  2.  They 
shall  serve  Him  universally.  "  Then  shall  I  not  be  ashamed,  when  I  have  respect 
to  all  Thy  commandments."  They  will  serve  the  Lord  internally  and  externally. 
8.  They  will  serve  Him  constantly.  "  I  have  inclined  my  heart  to  perform  Thy 
Statutes  alway,  even  unto  the  end."    Let  us — HI.  Show  the  neckssaby  cosssanosi 


3HAP.  1.J  ST.  LUKE.  «E 

BETWIXT    THE   COVENANT    DELIVEBANCB    AKD    COVENANT    8ERVICB.      1.   None   Can   Senr« 

the  Lord  in  this  right  manner,  till  once  in  the  first  place,  they  are  delivered : 
no  more  than  a  dead  corpse  can  rise  and  serve  you  (Eph.  ii.  1-10),  2.  The  soul 
being  once  thus  delivered,  will  certainly  serve  the  Lord  "  in  holiness  and  righteous- 
ness before  Him."  Use  1.  The  sanctification  of  sinners  is  the  chief  subordinate 
end  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  or  of  the  gospel,  standing  next  to  the  glory  of  God. 
Use  2.  They  in  whom  the  spirit  of  legalism,  hypocrisy,  and  apostasy  reigns,  have 
no  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.  Lastly,  as  ever  you  would  evidence  yourselves  God's 
covenant  people,  partakers  of  this  deliverance,  serve  no  more  the  devil  and  your 
own  lusts.  (Ibid.)  The  practical  nature  of  Christianity  : — I.  The  iirst  blessing 
resulting  from  the  Incarnation  of  Christ  is  deliverance  from  our  enemy.  Man's 
worst  enemy  is  the  devil  and  sin.  In  one  sense  it  may  be  said  we  are  not  freed 
from  these,  for  temptation  besets  the  path  of  the  Christian  all  through  life;  and 
the  best  and  holiest  men  must  with  shame  confess  that  they  day  by  day  offend.  Yet 
is  it  true  that  since  the  coming  of  Christ  the  power  of  the  devil  on  earth  is  much 
diminifehed,  our  Lord  having  seen  him  like  lightning  fall  from  heaven,  and  having 
by  His  descent  into  hell  triumphed  over  the  dismal  powers  of  despair  and  hell. 
Strong  as  temptation  is,  we  know  that  no  one  is  tempted  beyond  what  he  is  able  to 
resist,  and  if  he  have  recourse  to  the  passion  of  Christ  he  will  obtain  not  only  a 
victory  but  a  crown.  II.  The  next  result  of  Christ  having  come  in  the  flesh  is, 
THAT  WE  MAT  SERVE  HiM  WITHOUT  FEAB.  To  Bvcry  SOU  of  Adam  Sufficient  grace  is 
given  to  save  him,  though,  alas  1  we  see  too  many  neglect  so  gracious  a  gift.  But 
if  the  work  of  Christ  be  thus  enabliug,  what  an  obligation  it  lays  on  all  to  occupy 
with  that  precious  talent.  God  has  done  all  this  to  enable  you  to  render  to  Him 
that  service,  which  is  not  only  perfect  freedom,  but  the  true  end  and  happiness  of 
the  creature,  the  very  purpose  for  which  all  things  were  called  into  being.  And 
this  service  is  without  fear.  The  relation  with  God  into  which  we  are  brought 
through  His  Divine  Son  is  a  filial  one.  We  have  received  the  adoption  of  sons,  and 
therefore  the  more  we  act  as  dutiful  children,  the  more  we  shall  love  our  kind 
parent ;  and  when  love  is  perfect,  then,  we  are  told,  it  casts  out  fear.  The  feor 
thus  cast  out  is  distrust  of  God's  goodness  and  mercy,  or  the  dread  of  ever  being 
separated  from  His  holy  care.  But  we  are  not  for  a  moment  to  believe  that 
any  supposed  advance  in  the  spiritual  life  entitles  us  to  take  liberties  with  the 
honour  of  Him,  at  whose  sight  the  whole  earth  trembles.  III.  This  service  la  in 
holiness  and  righteousness.  Holiness  has  been  defined  to  be  purity  and  strength, 
the  clean  heart  and  the  strong  will  dedicated  as  an  offering  to  God  ;  and  righteous- 
ness is  the  same  as  justice,  and  may  be  taken  either  for  that  one  great  quality, 
whereby  we  render  both  to  God  and  to  man  what  is  due,  or  else  for  that  habitual 
charity,  which  contains  the  whole  cycle  of  the  Christian  duties.  IV.  Thib  service 
IS  PROGRESSIVE  AND  CONTINUOUS — "  All  the  days  of  our  life."  1.  No  man  is  really 
safe  till  his  trial  is  over.  A  blight  may  come  over  the  soul ;  temptation,  hitherto 
successfully  resisted,  may  at  length  be  succumbed  to  ;  conscience  drugged,  the  soul 
may  finally  be  lost,  (1)  This  thought  should  make  us  all  humble.  (2)  Watchful. 
(3)  Prayerful.  (4)  Thankful  for  the  merciful  warning,  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but 
fear."  2.  We  must  be  ever  advancing.  It  takes  a  long  and  a  weary  time  to  destroy 
the  traces  of  old  sin,  and  form  ourselves  upon  the  model  of  the  new  man.  Even  at 
the  end  we  shall  be  far  short  of  the  ensample  proposed  to  us,  but  there  is  comfort 
in  the  thought  that  even  if  we  are  not  now  what  we  ought  to  be,  there  is  no 
necessity  for  staying  as  we  are.  God  is  ever  calling  us,  and  aiding  us  in  our 
faintest  efforts  to  obey  that  call.  He  mercifully  deals  with  us  both  by  prosperity  and 
by  adversity,  if  we  only  will  submit  to  His  loving  discipline.  (Bishop  A.  P.  Forbes,) 
Delivered  from  fear : — How  safe  Noah,  his  family,  and  all  the  creatures  in  the  ark 
were  when  God  shut  them  in,  and  took  them  under  His  protection  1  A  man  dreamed 
that  he  was  enclosed  in  a  steel  house,  and  though  enemies  came  with  guns,  bayonets, 
and  swords  to  kill  him,  he  was  perfectly  safe.  How  much  more  secure  are  those 
who  have  God  for  their  Refuge,  Shield,  and  Protector.  During  a  terrible  storm  at 
sea,  a  Christian  officer  was  perfectly  calm  and  fearless.  His  wife  expressed  sur- 
prise at  this,  when  he  drew  his  sword,  and  placing  the  point  close  to  her  breast, 
said,  "  I  could  kill  you."  "  But,"  she  replied,  "  I  am  not  afraid,  because  I  know 
you  love  me,  and  you  won't  hurt  me."  "  So  I  fear  not,"  responded  he,  "  because 
God  loves  me,  and  He  won't  hurt  me."  Knox  was  said  never  to  have  feared  the 
face  of  any  man.  Chrysostom  said  once,  "  Go,  tell  her,"  (Queen  Eudoxia)  "  that 
I  fear  nothing  but  sin."     {H,  R.  Burton.)  Serving  God  and  the  fear  of  man  : — 

**  When  in  my  deep  distress  I  determined  to  call  on  God  I  wanted  to  be  sure  that 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I^ 

no  one  should  hear  me.  I  went  to  the  woods,  where,  at  the  foot  of  a  large  tree,  I 
had  pled  alone  a  thousand  times  without  the  least  fear  of  intrusion.  But  now  I 
could  not  feel  alone.  Somo  one  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  tree.  I  walked  round 
it,  but  still  felt  that  some  listener,  eluding  me,  was  on  the  other  side.  In  this  way 
I  actually  walked  several  times  around  the  tree.  Stopping,  I  said  :  What  are  men 
or  devils  that  I  should  quail  before  them  when  seeking  Jehovah  ?  Then  I  prayed, 
and  if  the  assembled  universe  had  been  there  I  should  have  prayed."  {Dr.  Finney.) 
Tormenting  fear  of  God : — And  as  I  was  brought  up  under  the  influence  of  fear  of 
my  parents,  so  I  was  also  brought  up  under  the  influence  of  fear  of  God.  I  do  not 
believe  that  there  is  any  creature  in  India  that  goes  before  monstrous-mouthed 
idols  with  more  quaking  than  I  felt  when  I  thought  of  Jehovah.  I  used  to  read 
those  hymns  of  Watts,  where  he  threw  blood  on  the  blazing  throne,  and  quenched 
indignation,  and  brought  forth  love  and  mercy ;  and  if  I  have  not  been  through 
purgatory  under  the  experience  bred  by  the  view  presented  in  those  hymns,  nobody 
has  1  That  which  I  hungered  for  and  needed  from  the  beginning  was  not  terror.  I 
was  terrified  enough.  I  had  too  much  fear.  And  I  remember  perfectly — all  eternity 
wiU  not  burn  it  out — when  a  change  came  over  my  feelings.  I  was  walking  near 
Lane  Seminary  (where  I  studied  theology  without  a  hope),  and  was  working  over  a 
lesson  that  I  was  to  hear  recited ;  and  the  idea  dawned  on  me,  not  that  there  had 
been  a  covenant  formed  between  God  and  His  Son,  but  that  Christ  revealed  the 
nature  of  God,  whose  very  soul  was  curative,  and  who  brought  Himself  and  His 
living  holiness  to  me,  because  I  needed  so  much,  and  not  because  I  was  so  deserv- 
ing ;  and  that  instant  the  clouds  rose,  and  the  whole  heaven  was  radiant,  and  I 
exclaimed,  "  I  have  found  God  1  "  and  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  found  Him. 
Good  His  name  was  ;  and  I  went  like  one  crazed  up  and  down  through  the  fields, 
half  crying,  half  laughing,  singing  and  praying  and  shouting  like  a  good  Methodist. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  75.  All  the  days  of  our  life. — TJie  holy  and  their  heavenly  prospects  : — True, 
aU  our  lives  long  we  shall  be  bound  to  refrain  our  soul  and  keep  it  low  ;  but  what 
then  ?  For  the  books  we  now  forbear  to  read,  we  shall  one  day  be  endued  with 
wisdom  and  knowledge.  For  the  music  we  will  not  listen  to,  we  shall  join  in  the 
song  of  the  redeemed.  For  the  pictures  from  which  we  turn,  we  shall  gaze  un- 
abashed on  the  beatific  vision.  For  the  companionship  we  shun,  we  shall  be 
welcomed  into  angelic  society  and  the  communion  of  triumphant  saints.  For  the 
pleasures  we  miss,  we  shall  abide,  and  evermore  abide,  in  the  rapture  of  heaven. 
It  cannot  be  much  of  a  hardship  to  dress  modestly,  and  at  small  cost,  rather  than 
richly  and  fashionably,  if,  with  a  vivid  conviction,  we  are  awaiting  the  '*  white 
robes  of  the  redeemed."  And,  indeed,  this  anticipation  of  pure  and  simple  white 
robes  for  eternal  wear  may  fairly  shake  belief  in  the  genuine  beauty  of  elaborate 
showiness,  even  for  such  clothes  as  befitted  in  the  present  distress.  {ChrittiTia 
G.  Rossetti.)  Holiness : — What  is  the  base  line  of  the  Bible  ?  It  is  sin.  And  it 
is  not  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why  the  Bible  is  made  so  little  of  that  men  do  not 
realize  what  sin  is — how  dreadful  and  how  fatal  it  is  ?  What  is  the  horizontal 
line  of  the  Bible  ?  It  is  holiness.  That  is  where  earth  and  heaven  meet.  But  on 
that  horizon  line  there  is  only  one  point  of  sight,  it  is  where  God  and  man  meet  in 
Christ,  in  whom  alone  holiness  can  be  found.  {John  Munro  Gibson.)  Ambition 
to  excel  in  holiness : — "  There  is  nothing,"  it  might  have  seemed  when  the  firut 
settlers  of  Massachusetts  established  the  English  race  on  the  cheerless  shores,  the 
barren  rocks,  the  trackless  forests  of  this  continent.  Yet  there  was  everything ; 
there  was  the  hope  of  a  new  world ;  there  were  the  elements  of  a  mighty  nation,  it 
only  those  who  followed  after  sustained  the  high  spirit  and  great  resolves  of  those 
who  had  gone  before.  It  was  but  two  days  ago  that  I  read  in  the  close  of  a  volume 
written  by  the  founder  of  the  venerable  village  of  Concord,  a  sentence  which  ought 
to  bring  at  once  the  noblest  encouragement  and  the  sternest  rebuke  to  every  citizen 
of  this  Commonwealth.  "  There  is  no  people,"  says  Peter  Bulkley,  in  his  Gospel 
Covenant,  in  the  year  1646,  to  his  little  flock  of  exiles,  "  There  is  no  people  but 
will  strive  to  excel  in  something.  What  can  we  excel  in  if  not  in  holiness  t  If  we 
look  to  numbers,  we  are  the  fewest ;  if  to  strength,  we  are  the  weakest ;  if  to  wealth 
and  riches,  we  are  the  poorest  of  all  the  people  of  God  throughout  the  whole  world. 
We  cannot  excel,  nor  so  much  as  equal,  other  people  in  these  things ;  and,  if  we 
come  short  in  grace  and  holiness,  we  are  also  the  most  despicable  people  under 
heaven.  Strive  we  therefore  to  excel,  and  suflcr  not  this  crown  to  be  taken  awaj 
from  us.     {Dean  St^inley.) 


tiHAP.  l]  ST.  LUKE.  97 

Ver.  77.  To  give  knowledge  of  salvation. — Source  of  salvation : — All  great  rivers, 
unlike  some  great  men  who  have  begun  life  in  lowly  circumatances,  boast  a  lofty 
descent.  It  is  after  the  Alpine  traveller  has  left  smiling  valleys  beoeath  him,  and 
toiling  along  rugged  glens  and  through  deep  mountain  gorges,  reaches  at  length  the 
fihores  of  an  icy  sea,  that  he  stands  at  the  source  of  the  river,  which,  cold  as  the 
snows  that  feed  it,  and  a  full-grown  torrent  at  its  birth,  rushes  out  from  the  cavern  of 
the  hollowed  glacier.  Yet  such  a  river,  in  the  loftiness  of  its  birth-place,  is  but  an 
humble  image  of  salvation.  How  high  its  source!  "He  showed  me  a  pure  river  of 
water  of  life,  clear  as  crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb." 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  God  a  great  for  giver : — Mr.  Fleming,  in  his  "Fulfilling  of 
the  Scriptures,"  relates  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  a  very  great  sinner,  and  for  his 
horrible  wickedness  was  put  to  death  in  the  town  of  Ayr.  This  man  had  been  so 
stupid  and  brutish  a  fellow,  that  all  who  knew  him  thought  him  beyond  the  reach 
of  all  ordinary  means  of  grace  ;  but  while  the  man  was  in  prison  the  Lord  wonder- 
fully wrought  on  his  heart,  and  in  such  a  measure  discovered  to  him  his  sinfulness, 
that,  after  much  serious  exercise  and  sore  wrestling,  a  most  kindly  work  of  repenx- 
ance  followed,  with  great  assurance  of  mercy,  insomuch  that  when  he  came  to  the 
place  of  execution  he  could  not  cease  crying  out  to  the  people,  under  the  sense  of 
pardon  and  the  comforts  of  the  presence  and  favour  of  God,  "  Oh,  He  is  a  great 
forgiver  1  He  is  a  great  forgiver  !  "  And  he  added  the  following  words :  "  Now 
hath  perfect  love  cast  out  fear.  I  know  God  hath  nothing  to  lay  against  me,  for 
Jesus  Christ  hath  paid  all ;  and  those  are  free  whom  the  Son  makes  free."  (Arvine.) 
Nature  silent  concerning  salvation; — On  one  occasion  the  late  Dr.  Newton  was 
travelling  in  a  railway  carriage,  when  he  found  himself  in  the  presence  of  an  infidel, 
who  soon  began  to  obtrude  his  opinions  upon  his  fellow  passengers,  declaring  his 
contempt  for  the  Bible,  adding  that  he  did  not  need  it ;  the  book  of  nature  affording 
him  all  the  information  that  he  required  on  religious  and  moral  subjects.  Dr.  Newton, 
observing  a  young  man  in  the  company  who  might  receive  some  injury  from  these 
remarks,  deemed  it  his  duty  to  interfere.  Looking  at  the  infidel,  he  said,  "  The 
book  of  nature,  sir,  that  you  have  mentioned,  is  a  large  volume,  and  he  is  a  very 
learned  man  that  is  acquainted  with  all  its  contents.  Yet  there  is  one  subject  on 
which  I  think  it  gives  no  information."  "  Indeed,"  said  the  infidel,  "  what  is 
that  ?  "  "  What  is  that,"  rejoined  Dr.  Newton,  ♦'  it  is  salvation."  "  Salvation  !  " 
exclaimed  the  infidel.  "Aye,  salvation,"  rejoined  the  Doctor.  "Every  man  is 
sensible  from  what  passes  in  his  own  conscience  that  he  has  done  wrong,  and  that 
that  which  all  people  confess  to  be  morally  wrong,  everywhere  meets  our  sight.  To 
do  wrong  renders  us  liable  to  punishment,  and  therefore  we  need  salvation.  But 
where  do  you  find  anything  about  salvation  in  the  book  of  nature  ?  Do  you  find 
it  in  the  grass  of  the  fields,  either  when  it  grows  or  when  it  fades  away  ?  Do  you 
find  it  in  the  ever- varying  surface  of  the  sea  ?  or  in  the  clouds  as  they  pass  over 
your  head  7  The  book  which  you  too  exclusively  admire  was  written  too  soon  for 
the  purpose  of  instructing  men  with  respect  to  the  nature  and  method  of  salvation. 
It  was  written  before  there  was  sin  in  the  world,  and  therefore  before  salvation  was 
needed."    The  infidel  stood  aghast,  and  said  not  a  word. 

Ver.  78.  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  Goi..— Christ's  advent : — I,  A  very 

ABTECTINO   VIEW   OF   THB    STATE    OF   MANKIND    BEFORE    ChRIST  CAME.       "  DarkueSS  and 

the  shadow  of  death."  1.  Ignorant  of  the  moral  character  of  God  2.  Ignorant  of 
the  purity  of  God's  law.  3,  Ignorant  as  to  the  evil  nature  and  dreadful  consequences 
of  sin.  4.  Ignorant  as  to  the  true  source  of  happiness.  5.  Ignorant  regarding  the 
future  state.  II.  A  vert  interesting  description  of  the  Saviour.  "  The  Dayspring." 

1.  The  great  source  of  light ;  (1)  Natural;  (2)  intellectual;  (3)  rational;  (4)  spiritual. 

2.  The  dayspring  is  gradual  and  progressive,  (1)  Eevelation  has  waxed  fuller 
and  fuUer  throughout  the  ages.  (2)  The  increasing  enlightenment  of  individuals. 
8.  The  dayspring  is  certain  and  irresistible.  The  darkest  moral  clouds  must  even- 
taally  succumb  to  the  bright  beams  shed  by  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  4.  The  day- 
spring  is  free,  and  common  to  all.  III.  A  very  encoubaginq  representation  of 
THE  DESIGN  OF  Christ's  MISSION.     1.  To  givo  light.     He  has   shown  Himself — 

11)  in  the  dignity  of  His  person  ;  (2)  in  the  perfection  of  His  atonement ;  (3)  in  the 
ulness  of  Has  grace  ;  (4)  in  the  willingness  to  save  which  He  has  manifested ;  (5) 
in  the  discovery  He  has  made  of  the  means  of  cleansing  from  moral  guilt.  2.  To 
give  peace.  (1)  Peace  with  God ;  (2)  peace  with  our  fellow-men ;  (3)  peace  with 
oorselves.  Notice  in  conclusion  :  1.  The  infinite  condescension  of  Jehovah  in  inter- 
IKSsing  on  our  behalf.    2.  The  Christian's  duty  and  privilege.    (1)  His  duty  is  to 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  i. 

trast  in  the  Lord  in  time  of  darkness.  (2)  His  privilege  sometimes  is  to  walk  in 
the  light  of  Ood's  countenance.  3.  The  miserable  state  of  those  who  hear  the 
good  news,  and  jet  hold  aloof.  4.  If  the  pleasures  of  religion  be  so  great  upon 
earth,  what  must  be  the  enjoyment  of  believers  in  the  upper  world?  {Dr.  Scott.) 
The  tender  mercy  of  our  God : — The  original  is,  "  The  mercy  of  the  heart  of  out 
God."  This  seems  to  mean  not  only  tenderness,  but  much  more.  The  mercy  ol 
the  heart  of  God  is,  of  course,  the  mercy  of  His  great  tenderness,  the  mercy  of  Hia 
infinite  gentleness  and  consideration ;  but  other  thoughts  also  come  forth  from  the 
expression,  like  bees  from  a  hive.  It  means  the  mercy  of  God's  very  soul.  The 
heart  is  the  seat  and  centre  of  life,  and  mercy  is  to  God  as  His  own  life.  Mercy  is 
of  the  Divine  essence  ;  there  is  no  God  apart  from  His  heart,  and  mercy  lies  in  the 
heart  of  God.  Nor  is  this  all ;  the  mercy  of  God's  heart  means  His  hearty  mercy. 
His  cordial  delight  in  mercy.  Kemission  of  sins  is  a  business  into  which  the  Lord 
throws  His  heart.  He  forgives  with  an  intensity  of  wiU  and  readiness  of  soul. 
God  made  heaven  and  earth  with  His  fingers,  but  He  gave  His  Son  with  His  heart 
in  order  that  He  might  save  sinners.  The  eternal  God  has  thrown  His  whole  soul 
into  the  business  of  redeeming  men.  I.  God  shows  His  tender  mercy  in  that  Hb 
DEIGNS  TO  VISIT  US.  He  has  not  merely  pitied  us  from  a  distance,  and  sent  us  relief 
by  way  of  the  ladder  which  Jacob  saw,  but  He  has  Himself  visited  as.  1.  God's 
great  visit  to  us  is  the  incarnation  of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  The  proclamation  of  the  gospel  in  a  nation,  or  to  any  individual,  is  a  visit  of 
God's  mercy.  3.  He  has  visited  some  of  us  in  a  more  remarkable  manner  still,  for 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  He  has  entered  into  our  hearts,  and  changed  the  current  of 
our  lives.  He  has  turned  our  affections  towards  that  which  is  right  by  enlightening 
our  judgments.  He  has  led  us  to  the  confession  of  sin.  He  has  brought  us  to  the 
acceptance  of  His  mercy  through  the  atoning  blood ;  and  so  He  has  truly  saved  ns. 

II.  God  shows  His  tender  mercy  in  that  Hb  visits  us  as  thb  datsprino  from  cm 
HiOH.  He  does  not  come  to  ns  in  Christ,  or  by  His  Spirit,  as  a  tempest,  as  when 
He  came  from  Paran,  with  ten  thousand  of  His  holy  ones,  in  all  the  pomp  of  Hia 
fiery  law  ;  but  He  has  visited  us  as  smiling  mom,  which  in  gentle  glory  floods  the 
world  with  joy.  He  has  come,  moreover,  not  as  a  blazo  which  will  soon  die  down, 
but  as  a  light  which  will  last  our  day,  yea,  last  for  ever.  After  the  long  dark  and 
cold  night  of  our  misery,  the  Lord  cometh  in  the  fittest  and  most  effectual  manner ; 
neither  as  lightning,  nor  candle,  nor  flaming  meteor,  but  as  the  sun  which  begins 
the  day.  1.  The  visitation  of  the  Lord  to  us  is  as  the  dayspring,  because  it  suits 
our  eye.  Day,  when  it  first  breaks  in  the  east,  has  not  the  blaze  of  burning  noon 
about  it ;  but  peeps  forth  as  a  grey  light,  which  gradually  increases.  So  did  Christ 
come  ;  dimly,  as  it  were,  at  first,  at  Bethlehem,  but  by  and  by  He  will  appear  in  all 
the  glory  of  the  Father.  So  does  the  Spirit  of  God  come  to  us  in  gradual  progress. 
The  revelation  of  God  to  each  individual  is  made  in  form  and  manner  tenderly 
agreeable  to  the  condition  and  capacity  of  the  favoured  one.  He  shows  us  just 
so  much  of  Himself  as  to  delight  us  without  utterly  overwhelming  us  with  the 
excess  of  brightness.  2.  The  visits  of  God  are  hke  the  dayspring,  because  they 
end  our  darkness.  Our  night  is  ended  once  for  all  when  we  behold  God  visiting  ua 
in  Christ  Jesus.  Our  day  may  cloud  over,  but  night  will  not  return.  3.  Christ's 
coming  into  the  world  is  as  the  morning  light,  because  He  comes  with  such  a 
largeness  of  present  blessing.  He  is  the  Light  which  lighteneth  every  man.  There 
is  other  light.  4.  Christ's  coming  is  as  the  dayspring,  because  He  brings  as  hope 
of  greater  glory  yet  to  come.  The  dayspring  is  not  the  noon,  but  it  is  the  sure 
guarantee  of  it ;  and  so  the  First  Advent  is  the  pledge  of  the  glory  to  be  revealed. 

III.  There  is  another  instance  of  great  tenderness  in  this,  that  thb  Lord  visits  us 
IN  OUR  VERY  lowest  ESTATE.  God  comcs  to  US  as  the  morning,  which  does  net 
wait  for  man,  nor  tarry  for  the  sons  of  men.  He  gives  with  gladness  to  those  who 
have  no  deservings  of  any  kind  (Eom.  v.  6,  8).  He  comes  to  us  when  we  are — 1.  In 
our  sins.  2.  In  darkness.  3.  In  ruin.  IV.  Our  God  shows  His  tender  mercy,  in 
that  Hb  visits  us  with  such  wonderful  and  joyful  results.  Imagine  a  caravan 
in  the  desert,  \vhich  has  long  lost  its  way,  and  is  famishing.  The  stm  has  long 
gone  down,  and  the  darkness  has  caused  every  one's  heart  to  droop.  All  around 
them  is  a  waste  of  sand,  and  an  Egyptian  darkness.  There  they  must  remain  and 
die  unless  they  can  find  the  track.  They  feel  themselves  to  be  in  a  fearful  case,  for 
hungry  and  thirsty,  their  soul  fainteth  in  them.  They  cannot  even  sleep  for  fear. 
Heavier  and  heavier  the  night  comes  down,  and  the  damps  are  on  the  tents,  chilling 
the  souls  of  the  travellers.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  How  they  watch  1  Alas,  no  star 
eomforte  them  1    At  last  the  watchmen  cry,  "  The  morning  cometh  1 "    It  breaks 


CHAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  93 

over  the  sea  of  sand,  and,  what  is  better,  it  reveals  a  heap  which  had  been  set  up 
as  a  waymark,  and  the  travellers  have  found  the  track.  The  dayspring  has  saved 
them  from  swift  destruction  by  discovering  the  way  of  peace.  Conclusion  :  If  the 
tender  mercy  of  God  has  visited  us ;  let  us  exhibit  tender  mercy  in  our  dealings 
with  our  fellow-men.  (G.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The  gradual  development  of  redemp- 
tion : — Our  subject  matter  is  the  gradual  development  of  redemption,  like  the  sun, 
*•  shining  more  and  more  unto  perfect  day."  I.  Thbee  is  a  gradualness  in  all 
THE  woBES  OF  GOD.  In  the  physical  sphere,  gradual  development  is  a  universal  law. 
At  first,  all  was  a  chaos  of  lifeless  matter,  then  vegetable  life  appeared,  then  low 
forms  of  brute  life,  then  the  mammal,  and  then  the  man.  The  world  did  not  reach 
its  present  state  in  a  few  seconds — the  chaos  did  not  become  a  cosmos  in  an  hour. 
In  the  first  day's  work  we  only  see  power ;  but  in  the  second  day's  work  we  see 
wisdom ;  and  in  the  third  day's  work  we  see  goodness  ;  and  thus  from  step  to 
step  we  advance,  until  the  sixth  day  brings  forth  the  crowning  glory,  man,  the 
lord  of  creation,  filled  with  the  harmonies  of  the  skies.  Creation  is  not  a  fungus- 
growth,  but  a  gradual  oak-growth.  In  the  intellectual  and  moral  spheres  there  is 
gradualness.  Even  our  consciousness  develops.  Natural  consciousness  develops 
gradually,  and  the  reflective  consciousness  of  the  profound  thinker  is  only  a  further 
development  of  the  natural.  We  grow  step  by  step.  Our  education  proceeds 
gradually.  The  prince  and  the  pauper  must  begin  with  the  alphabet  and  the  mul- 
tiplication table,  and  then  onward,  "  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept." 
Our  great  discoveries  have  been  gradual.  How  slowly  did  the  astrology  of  the 
ancients  develop  into  our  nineteenth-century  astronomy  1  How  gradually  did  the 
alchemy  of  the  fathers  grow  into  the  modern  chemistry  of  a  Faraday  1  And,  again, 
in  the  moral  sphere  there  is  gradual  development.  The  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus 
is  not  made  of  full  stature  all  at  once.  For  a  time,  he  is  "  a  little  one  in  Christ," 
then  he  "  grows  in  grace,"  and,  finally,  he  reaches  unto  "  the  measure  of  the  stature 
of  the  fulness  of  Christ."    II.  We  reason  from  analooi  that  the  gradualness 

WB  FIND  IN  NATURE  AND  MAN  MAY  ALSO   BE    EXPECTED  IN  THE    PROGRESS  OF   REDEMPTION, 

»OR  God  is  the  author  of  both.  The  God  of  the  rock  and  star  is  also  the  God  of 
the  Bible,  and  we  are  not  surprised  to  find  this  gradual  development  in  Eevela- 
tion — four  thousand  years  intervening  between  the  fall  of  the  first  Adam  and  the 
advent  of  the  second  Adam.  Eedemption  grew  as  the  world  grew — it  grew  as  the 
human  grace  grew — slowly.  As  far  as  we  know,  God  was  powerful  enough  to  bring 
about  redemption  sooner ;  but  for  some  wise  purpose.  He  left  the  world  in  the 
dim  starlight  for  forty  centuries.  Why  this  slowness  ?  He  is  never  in  a  hurry,  for 
He  "  seeth  the  end  from  the  beginning."  The  march  of  the  Hebrews  from  Egypt 
to  Canaan,  if  they  had  taken  a  direct  route,  would  have  only  occupied  them  a  few 
months ;  but  the  Lord  kept  them  in  the  lone  desert  for  forty  years.  The  Divine  is 
never  in  a  hurry.  Jesus  Christ  spent  thirty  years  on  earth  before  He  performed 
one  miracle — no  hurry  I  And,  indeed,  we  rejoice  in  this  gradualness.  We  cordially 
thank  God  for  it.  And  why  ?  Simply  because  a  full-orbed  revelation  all  at  once 
would  overwhelm  us.  If  the  natural  sun  were  to  reach  its  meridian  at  once,  the 
tender  green  of  earth  would  be  reduced  to  ashes.  "  0  God,  how  gracious  Thou  art 
to  reveal  Thyself  gradually  unto  us  in  a  manner  adapted  to  our  weak  capacities. 
It  is  no  punishment  to  withhold  these  mighty  mysteries  from  us,  but  a  mercy." 
And,  besides,  friends,  we  would  not  be  satisfied  with  a  little  Christ,  that  could  be 
fully  and  completely  revealed  in  a  century  or  two.  We  are  great  sinners,  and 
we  need  a  great  Christ  to  save  us  —  a  Christ  that  demands,  not  six  thousand 
years,  but  all  the  countless  years  of  eternity  to  reveal  Him  to  the  full.  And, 
blessed  be  God,  that  Christ  is  to  be  found  in  our  glorious  gospel.  And  let  us 
not  think  that  the  development  of  relation  is  yet  at  an  end.  No,  far  from  it. 
III.  The  development  of  redemption  from  stage  to  stage.  (J,  0.  Davieg.) 
Waiting  for  the  dayspring : — Many  a  hoary  seer  longed  for  the  dayspring,  but  saw 
it  not.  A  Bweet  Welsh  evangelist  has  a  very  striking  illustration  on  this  point. 
About  Christmas  time,  John  the  elder  brother  is  expected  home  from  London  by 
the  midnight  train.  AH  the  younger  children  are  in  ecstasy,  and  they  all  wish  to 
Btay  up  until  his  arrival.  "  Pray,  father,  let  us  stay  up  to  wait  John  home,"  is  the 
universal  petition.  But  the  reply  is,  "  No,  my  dear  ones,  it  will  be  too  long  for  yon 
to  wait;  yoa  must  go  to  rest ;  you  shall  see  John  in  the  morning — not  sooner." 
Friends,  the  ancient  prophets  expected  a  Saviour — their  Elder  Brother  Jesus.  How 
delighted  they  would  be  to  see  Him  in  the  flesh ;  but  they  were  compelled  to  enter 
the  oold  bed  of  the  grave  before  His  arrival.  David  cried,  "  Father,  let  me  see  th« 
Horn  of  Salvation  of  which  I  sang  so  well."    "No,  My  child,  yoa  most  retire.' 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Job  implored,  "  Father,  let  me  see  my  living  Kedeemer."  "  No,  My  child,  you  must 
retire ;  but  yoa  sball  see  him  after  you  awake  on  the  resurrection  morning." 
Malachi  cried,  "  Father,  I  am  about  the  last  of  them  all ;  do  let  me  see  the 
Sun  of  Kighteousness  of  which  I  sang  so  sweetly."  "No,  My  child,  you  mast 
retire  to  rest ;  it  wiU  be  too  long  for  you  to  wait."  And  they  silently  retired  into 
their  cold  graves  to  rest.  But  at  last,  hoary-headed  Simeon  advanced,  and  earnestly 
implored,  "  Oh  I  my  Father,  the  train  is  nearly  in,  according  to  my  brother  Daniel's 
table  ;  do  let  me  stay  up  to  see  the  Consolation  of  Israel."  •'  Tes,  My  child,  thy 
request  is  granted,"  said  the  Father,  and  the  old  saint  was  allowed  to  see  the  day> 
break,  and  so  delighted  was  he  with  its  splendour  that  he  prayed  for  death — (what 
a  strong  saint !) — "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation,  which  Thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all 
people — a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel  1  " 
Thank  heaven,  the  Sun  has  risen,  and  the  world  is  now  enveloped  in  a  glorious  day  I 
(Ibid.)  The  mercy  of  God : — A  living  sense  of  the  tender  mercy  of  God  should 
actuate  us  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  on  the  way  to  heaven.  In  what  respects  the 
tender  mercy  of  God  is  displayed  towards  His  creatures.  I.  In  the  chabacteb 
WHICH  God  has  thought  tit  to  assdmb  towards  His  dependent  ceeatobes.  He 
feels  towards  us  as  a  parent  for  His  offspring.  Who  but  a  father  would  have 
devised  such  a  scheme  of  redemption  ?  II.  In  the  temporal  good  His  tenoek 
MERCY  IS  BiANiFEST.  The  merciful  arrangement  which  marks  the  course  of  human 
life.  For  instance,  an  infant  is  more  dependent  upon  the  aid  of  others  than  any 
other  creature ;  to  meet  this  necessity,  God  has  graciously  made  the  strongest 
of  all  human  instincts  that  of  a  mother's  affection  for  her  child.  Here  His  tender 
mercy  is  abundantly  shown.  Again,  as  we  advance  in  life,  God's  mercy  is  no  leas 
exhibited.  It  was  necessary  for  Him  to  mark  His  disapprobation  of  sin  by  what  is 
called  a  curse.  Instead  of  bodily  deformity  and  constant  pain,  the  curse  was  that 
we  should  labour,  which  is  at  once  a  great  source  of  health  and  happiness.  Even 
death  is  so  introduced  to  us  that  he  ceases  in  his  approach  to  wear  the  aspect  of 
the  king  of  terrors,  and  is  regarded  as  a  kind  friend  come  to  relieve  us  of  weariness 
and  pain.  The  mercy  of  God  is  evident  in  the  affections  incident  to  life ;  saints, 
apostles,  and  martyrs  have  experienced  the  blessedness  of  suffering.  Then  think 
of  the  positive  blessings  with  which  God  has,  in  His  mercy,  chosen  to  sweeten  the 
cup  of  mortal  existence.  We  are  born  in  a  Christian  land ;  health,  &c.  How  im- 
proving to  our  souls  must  be  a  right  consideration  of  the  Divine  mercies.  {A. 
Gatty,  M.A.)  God's  mercy  towards  a  dark  world: — I.  The  condition  ot  thb 
WORLD  PREVIOUSLY  TO  THE  ADVENT  OF  Christ.  1.  A  State  of  ignorauce.  2.  A  state 
of  danger.     II.    The    mercy    of    God    toward  the   world   in   that   condition. 

1.  Undeserved.  2.  Unsolicited.  8.  Seasonable.  III.  The  manner  in  which  thb 
MERCY  OF  God  was  manifested.    1.  He  sent  His  son  to  enlighten  it  in  its  ignorance. 

2.  He  sent  His  son  to  guide  it  in  its  danger.  {O.  Brookt.)  Darkness  and 
danger: — There  are  beneath  the  suburbs  of  the  ancient  city  of  Rome  many  dark 
and  narrow  passages,  excavated  in  the  soft  stone.  These  are  called  the  cata- 
combs, and  were  used  as  burial  places  by  the  early  Christians.  These  passages 
are  very  many,  crossing  and  re-crossing  each  other,  and  stretching  for  an  immense 
distance  underground  in  a  most  bewildering  manner.  So  complicated  and  puzzling 
is  this  labyrinth  of  subterranean  galleries  that  it  is  most  dangerous  to  explore  them 
without  a  guide.  A  young  artist  once  ventured  to  visit  them  alone,  taking  with 
him  a  few  candles,  and  ensuring  his  safe  return  by  a  ball  of  twine,  one  end  of  which 
he  fastened  securely  outside.  After  a  time,  he  sat  down  to  sketch  in  one  of 
the  gloomy  recesses,  having,  as  he  thought,  made  his  end  of  the  elue  safe 
under  a  stone.  But  rising  suddenly  to  alter  his  sketch,  he  overturned  and  ex- 
tinguished his  candle.  He  hastened  to  strike  a  match,  but  found  that  through 
some  forgetfulness  only  two  or  three  remained,  and  in  his  nervous  haste  he  faUed 
to  get  these  to  ignite.  He  now  hurriedly  sought  the  line  to  guide  him  back  to  the 
entrance,  but  he  could  nowhere  find  it.  It  had  slipped  from  its  place.  In  vain  he 
sought  for  it ;  casting  himself  on  the  ground,  he  felt  for  it  in  every  direction,  but 
could  nowhere  discover  it.  He  despaired  of  ever  again  reaching  the  daylight ;  he 
thought  he  must  die  of  hunger,  wandering  through  the  hopeless  maze  of  those 
dark  passages  ;  but  just  as  he  threw  himself  in  utter  despondency  once  more  on 
the  eai-th,  he  felt  something  beneath  his  hand.  It  was  the  twine — and  he  was 
safe  1  Thus  the  Gentiles  "  sat  in  darkness  " ;  thus  the  heathen  world  groped  after 
truth.  They  were  lost  in  the  gloomy  recesses  of  ignorance  and  doubt.  But  the 
good  news  of  a  Bedeemer  came  like  a  guiding  clue,  leading  them  into  the  warmth 


OTiP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  101 

-ftnd  light  and  sunshine  of  Christianity.  (W.  Hardman,  LL.D.)  The  necessity 
and  glory  of  Christ : — The  dayspring  signifies  the  sun.  The  worship  of  the  sun 
was  the  greatest  of  the  heathen  worships.  How  glorious  the  sun  isl  How 
necessary  T  An  apt  emblem  of  the  necessity  and  the  glory  of  Christ.  Without 
Him  we  could  have  no  check,  no  conscience,  and  therefore  no  peace,  and  no  con- 
fidence. But  then,  if  Christ  be  so  necessary,  how  is  it  that  men  can  live  in 
ignorance  of  Him  ?  Are  there  not  blind  men  in  the  world  ?  They  are  very  apt 
images  of  unbelievers  The  sun  brings  up  corn  and  fruit  for  them  as  for  us. 
They  feel  his  warmth,  and  seek  it  out,  not  to  see  him,  but  because  it  is  warmer. 
So  men  of  the  world  are  helped  and  comforted  by  the  virtues  of  Christians,  and 
what  goes  on  unseen  by  themselves.  And  so  they  are  honest,  and  so  forth,  because 
it  is  the  best  policy,  and  sheds  a  sunny  glow  over  their  lives.  And  all  the  while 
they  have  never  seen  or  known  Him,  and  have  only  heard  of  Him  with  the 
hearing  of  the  ear.  The  blind  do  not  see  the  sun  in  summer  rising  higher  in  the 
heavens ;  they  only  feel  that  it  is  warmer.  So  these  do  not  see  Christ's  kingdom 
enlarging  itself,  but  only  rejoice  that  there  is  more  honesty  and  kindliness  abroad. 
In  this  way  the  world  feels  and  knows  that  it  is  the  better  for  Christ's  coming. 
Very  different  is  it  with  those  whose  eyes  are  opened,  and  who  really  see.  They 
know  in  whom  they  have  believed.  They  are  guided  into  the  way  of  peace. 
{Bishop  E.  Steere.)  The  dayspring  from  on  high  : — We  may  notice  three  things 
in  the  text : — I.  A  decijlBation  of  a  most  blessed  fact — "  The  dayspring  from  on 
high  hath  visited  us."  II.  The  source  and  origin  of  that  blessed  fact — 
"  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  III.  Its  Divine  fruits  and  conse- 
quences— "  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death  ; 
to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace."  I.  In  looking  at  these  three  points  con- 
nected with,  and  springing  out  of  the  text,  I  shall  rather  invert  their  order ;  and 
consider,  first,  the  original  spring  and  source  of  the  blessings  mentioned  in  the 
text.  This  is  set  forth  in  the  words,  "  Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God." 
Mercy  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  our  spiritual  blessings.  But  what  is  mercy  ? 
It  embraces  several  particulars.  1.  It  embraces  a  feeling  of  pity  and  compassion. 
But  pity  and  compassion  do  not  fill  up  the  whole  idea  of  mercy ;  for  we  read,  that 
God's  "  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works  "  (Psa.  cxlv.  9).  Thus  the  Lord,  in 
sparing  Nineveh,  "remembered  even  the  cattle"  (Jonah  iv.  11).  And  when  He 
caused  the  waters  of  the  deluge  to  assuage  it  was  because  he  '•  remembered  Noah, 
and  every  living  thing,  and  all  the  cattle  that  was  with  him  in  the  ark  "  (Gen. 
viii.  1).  There  is  in  the  bosom  of  their  Creator  mercy  and  pity  even  for  the  brute 
creation.  As  full  of  mercy.  He  also  "relieveth  the  fatherless  and  widow" 
(Psa.  cxlvi.  9) ;  and  "  loveth  the  stranger,  in  giving  him  food  and  raiment "  (Deut. 
X.  18).  2.  We  must,  therefore,  add  to  the  idea  of  pity  and  compassion,  another 
mark,  that  of  pardon,  in  order  to  show  what  mercy  is  as  extended  to  the  family  of 
God.  For  the  Lord's  people  are  sinners ;  and  as  such,  being  transgressors  of  God's 
holy  law,  need  pardon  and  forgiveness.  3.  But  in  order  to  complete  the  full 
description  of  mercy,  we  must  ever  view  it  as  flowing  through  the  blood  and 
obedience  of  Immanuel.  Mercy,  was  not,  like  creation,  a  mere  display  of  an  attri- 
bute of  Jehovah.  If  I  may  use  the  expression,  it  cost  the  Godhead  a  price:  "Ye 
are  bought  with  a  price  "  (Cor.  vi.  20).  But  there  is  an  expression  in  the  text  that 
heightens,  and  casts  a  sweet  light  upon  this  mercy.  It  is  there  called  tender 
mercy  ;  literal^,  as  it  is  in  the  margin,  "  bowels  of  mercy."  Not  mere  mercy;  but 
"  tender  mercy."  Not  cold  and  naked  mercy  ;  but  mercy  flowing  forth  out  of  the 
bowels  of  Divine  compassion.  Now  nothing  but  "  tender  mercy  "  could  ever  look 
down  with  compassion  upon  the  sons  of  men,  or  pluck  out  of  the  depths  of  the 
fall  such  ruined  wretches.  But  to  view  mercy  in  its  real  character,  we  must  go  to 
Calvary.  II.  But  we  pass  on  to  consider  that  solemn  declaration,  that  blessed  fact 
contained  in  the  words — "Whereby  the  dayspring  from  on  high  hath  visited  us." 
There  is  a  connection,  you  will  observe,  betwixt  the  "  tender  mercy  of  God," 
and  the  visiting  of  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high."  The  "  tender  mercy  of 
God  "  is  the  fountain,  and  the  "visiting  of  the  dayspring  from  on  high"  is  the 
stream.  Let  us  then  endeavour,  if  God  enable  us,  to  unfold  the  mind  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  words.  First.  What  is  meant  by  the  expression  "  dayspring?  "  By  "  day- 
cpring "  is  meant  the  day-dawn,  the  herald  of  the  rising  sun,  the  change  from 
darkness  to  light,  the  first  approach  of  mom  ;  in  one  word,  the  spring  of  the  day. 
But  what  is  this  "dayspring"  spiritually?  It  is  the  intimation  of  the  rising 
of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  It  is  not  the  same  thing  as  the  Sun  of  Eighteons- 
ness ;  bat  it  is  the  herald  of  His  approach  ;  the  beams  which  the  rising  sun  casta 


lOa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi*.  i. 

npon  the  benighted  world,  announcing  the  coming  of  Jesus,  '•  the  King  in  Hit 
beauty."  This  expression  was  singularly  applicable  in  the  mouth  of  Zaoharias. 
The  Lord  of  life  and  glory  had  not  then  appeared ;  He  was  still  in  the  wumb  of 
the  Virgin  Mary.  But  His  forerunner,  John,  had  appeared  as  the  precursor,  the 
herald  of  His  approach,  and  was  sent  to  announce  that  the  Sun  of  Kighteousnesa 
was  about  to  arise.  But  there  is  another,  an  experimental  meaning,  connected 
with  the  words.  "  The  dayspring  from  on  high  "  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the 
approach  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  flesh ;  but  it  may  be  extended  to  signify  the 
appearance  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  heart.  Now,  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high  " 
visits  the  soul  with  the  very  first  Divine  intimation  dropped  into  the  conscience 
respecting  the  Person,  work,  love,  and  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  Until  this  day- 
dawn  beams  upon  the  soul,  it  is  for  the  most  part  ignorant  of  the  way  by  which  a 
sinner  is  to  be  saved.  But  the  first  *'  dayspring  from  on  high  "  which  usually 
visits  the  soul  is  from  a  view  by  precious  faith  of  the  glorious  person  of  Immanuel. 
Until  we  see  by  the  eye  of  faith  the  glorious  Person  of  "  Immanuel,  God  with  us," 
there  is  no  day-dawn  in  the  heart.  But,  in  looking  at  the  glorious  Person  of  the 
Son  of  God,  we  catch  a  faith's  view  of  His  atoning  blood,  and  see  it  to  be  of  infinite 
dignity.  So  also  with  respect  to  the  glorious  righteousness  of  Immanuel.  But 
what  a  sweetness  there  is  in  the  expression,  "visited  us  I"  What  is  conveyed  by  it  f 
One  idea  contained  in  it  is,  that  it  is  the  act  of  a  friend.  If  I  have  a  friend, 
and  I  visit  him,  my  visit  is  a  mark  of  my  friendship  and  affection.  But  anothear 
idea  connected  with  the  word  "  visit,"  is  that  of  unexpectedness.  Is  it  not  so 
sometimes  naturally  ?  We  have  an  unexpected  visit.  We  may  have  been  looking 
for  our  friend  to  call ;  but  the  time  passes  away,  and  no  well-known  rap  is  heard  at 
our  door.  We  wonder  why  our  friend  delays  his  coming  so  long.  But  perhaps, 
when  we  are  least  expecting  it,  the  form  of  our  friend  appears.  So  spiritually. 
We  may  be  longing  and  languishing,  hoping,  and  expecting  the  visit  of  the  day- 
spring  from  on  high ; "  but  it  does  not  appear ;  the  Lord  delayeth  His  coming ; 
there  is  no  intimation  of  His  appearing,  no  putting  in  of  His  hand  by  the  hole  of  the 
door,  no  looking  in  through  the  lattice,  no  glimpse  nor  glance  of  His  lovely  counte- 
nance. But  perhaps,  when  least  expected,  and  least  anticipated  ;  when  the  mind  is 
so  deeply  sunk  as  scarcely  to  dare  to  hope,  so  shut  up  in  unbelief  as  hardly  able  to 
vent  forth  a  sigh,  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high  "  will  visit  the  soul,  and  be  all  the 
more  precious  for  coming  so  suddenly  and  unexpectedly.  III.  But  this  *•  day- 
spring  from  on  high"  visits  the  soul  to  produce  certain  effects.  Two  of  them  are 
specified  in  the  text.  "  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the 
shadow  of  death;"  that  is  one:  "to  guide  our  feet  in  the  way  of  peace;"  that  is 
the  other.  1.  ••  To  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death."  Is  this  what  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high  "  visitmg  us  is  to  do  ?  Must 
we  not  then  know  something  of  the  experience  here  described  to  be  blest  with  the 
visit  ?  But  let  us  look  at  the  words  a  little  more  closely.  "  To  such  as  sit  in 
darkness,"  What  is  the  darkness  here  spoken  of?  Is  it  merely  what  I  may  caU 
moral  darkness  ?  Natural  darkness  1  No ;  it  is  not  the  darkness  of  unregeneracy ; 
it  is  not  the  darkness  of  sin  and  profanity ;  nor  is  it  the  darkness  of  a  mere 
empty  profession.  These  things  are  indeed  darkness,  gross  darkness ;  but  those 
who  are  thus  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world  never  sit  experimentally  in  darkness. 
They  are  like  the  Jews  of  old,  who  said,  "  We  see ;  therefore  their  sin 
remaineth."  "  We  dark  ?  we  ignorant  ?  we  scorn  the  idea."  Such  is  the 
language  of  empty  profession.  But  the  Lord's  own  quickened,  tender-hearted 
family  often  painfully  know  what  it  is  to  sit  in  darkness.  But  whence  does  this 
darkness  arise.  Strange  to  say,  it  arises  from  light.  Darkness  as  darkness  ii 
never  seen.  Darkness  as  darkness  is  never  felt.  Light  is  needed  to  see  dark- 
ness ;  Ufe  is  required  to  feel  darkness.  There  are  children  in  Hungary  bom  and 
bred  at  the  bottom  of  a  mine.  Do  these  children  ever  know  what  darkness  is, 
like  one  who  comes  down  there  out  of  the  broad  light  cf  day  ?  Were  they  not 
told  there  was  a  sun  above — did  not  some  tidings  of  the  'light  of  day  reach  their 
ears,  they  might  live  and  die  ignorant  that  there  was  a  sun  in  the  heavens.  So 
spiritually.  Man,  born  and  bred  in  the  depths  of  nature's  mine,  does  not  know 
that  he  is  dark  ;  but  when  Divine  light  enters  into  his  soul,  that  discovers  to  him 
his  darkness  ;  for  it  is  the  light  which  makes  manifest  all  things  ;  as  the  apostle 
says,  "  But  all  things  that  are  reproved  are  made  manifest  by  the  light ;  for  what- 
soever doth  make  manifest  is  light"  (Eph.  v.  13).  Thus,  it  is  the  light  oi 
God's  teaching  in  a  man's  conscience  that  makes  him  know  his  darkness;  and 
Divine  life  in  his  eoul  makes  it  felt.  But  what  does  darkness  imply?    The  absence 


CBAP.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  103 

of  everything  that  brings  light  and  peace  into  the  heart.  But  there  is  one  word 
in  the  text  which  conveys  to  my  mind  much,  that  is,  "  sitting  in  darkness."  They 
are  not  represented  as  standing  ;  that  might  imply  a  mere  momentary  transition 
from  light  to  darkness.  They  are  not  represented  as  running ;  that  might  imply 
they  would  soon  get  out  of  the  darkness.  They  are  not  represented  as  lying  down ; 
that  might  lead  to  suppose  they  were  satisfied  with  their  darkness.  But  they  are 
represented  as  sitting  in  darkness.  Then  surely  they  are  not  dead.  Nor  do  they 
sit  at  ease  and  at  rest ;  but  are  in  that  posture,  because  they  can  neither  move 
backward  or  forwarc!,  nor  turn  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  In  ancient 
medals  that  were  struck  when  Jerusalem  was  led  captive  by  the  Eomans,  she  is  re- 
presented as  sitting  on  the  ground.  The  same  thing  is  intimated  in  Psalm  cxxxvii. 
1,  2.  "  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon,  there  we  sat  down ;  yea  we  wept,  when  we  re- 
membered Zion.  We  hanged  our  harps  upon  the  willows  in  the  midst  thereof." 
Sitting  was  with  the  ancients  the  posture  of  mourning.  Job  "  sat  down  among  the 
ashes  ; "  (ii.  8) ;  and  his  friends  "  sat  down  with  him  upon  the  ground  "  (verse  13). 
"  Her  gates,"  says  Isaiah  (iii.  26),  "  shall  lament  and  mourn ;  and  she,  being  deso- 
late, shall  sit  on  the  ground."  Sitting  implies  also  a  continuance  in  the  state;  a 
waiting,  a  watching,  a  desiring,  a  looking  out  for  the  light  to  come.  But  again. 
There  is  another  word  added,  which  throws  light  upon  the  character  of  those  who 
are  visited  from  time  to  time  with  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high."  They  sit  not 
only  in  darkness,  but  in  the  shadow  of  death.  How  expressive  this  word  is — •'  the 
shadow  of  death  I "  There  are  several  ideas,  in  my  mind,  connected  with  the 
word.  We  will  look,  first,  at  the  idea  contained  in  the  expression  "  death." 
Death  with  respect  to  the  family  of  God  wears  two  aspects.  There  is  death  ex- 
penmental  in  their  hearts,  that  is,  deadness  in  their  frames  ;  and  there  is  death 
temporal — the  separation  of  soul  from  the  body.  Each  of  these  kinds  of  death 
casts  at  times  a  gloomy  shadow  over  the  souls  of  God's  people.  The  word  is  very 
expressive.  They  are  not  sitting  in  death  :  were  they  sitting  there,  they  would  be 
dead  altogether  ;  but  they  are  sitting  in  the  shadow  of  death.  Observe,  death  has 
lost  its  reality  to  them ;  it  now  can  only  cast  a  shadow,  often  a  gloomy  shadow, 
over  their  souls ;  but  there  is  no  substance.  The  quickening  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
in  them  has  destroyed  the  substance  of  death  spiritually  ;  and  the  death  and 
resurrection  of  Jesus  has  destroyed  the  substance  of  death  naturally.  Yet,  though 
the  gloomy  monster,  deadness  of  soul,  and  that  ghastly  king  of  terrors,  the  death 
of  the  body,  have  been  disarmed  and  destroyed  by  "  Immanuel,  God  vdth  us;"  yet 
each  of  them  casts  at  times  a  gloomy,  darkling  shadow  over  the  souls  of  those 
that  fear  God.  Is  not  your  soul,  poor  child  of  God,  exercised  from  time  to  time 
with  this  inward  death  ?  Deadness  in  prayer,  deadness  in  reading  the  word,  dead- 
ness in  hearing  the  truth,  deadness  in  desires  after  the  Lord,  deadness  to  every- 
thing, holy,  spiritual,  heavenly,  and  divine  ?  Do  you  not  feel  a  torpidity,  a  numb- 
ness, a  carnality,  a  worldliness,  that  seem  at  times  to  freeze  up  every  desire  of 
your  soul  ?  I  do.  O  how  this  cold,  clammy  monster  death  seems  to  wrap  its 
benumbing  arms  around  a  man's  soull  I  have  read  of  a  voyager,  who,  whilst 
looking  for  shells  on  a  desert  rock,  was  suddenly  caught  in  the  arms  of  a  huge 
polypus,  a  sea  monster.  The  sickening  sensation  produced  by  this  cold  and 
clammy  monster  clasping  him  with  his  huge  suckers,  and  drawing  him  to  his  jawa 
to  devour  him,  he  describes  as  being  unutterable,  and  he  was  only  rescued  by  the 
captain's  coming  to  his  aid  with  a  knife.  I  may  compare,  perhaps,  our  frequent 
deadness  of  soul  clasping  its  arms  around  every  desire  of  our  heart,  to  the  clasping 
of  this  poor  man  in  the  clammy  arms  of  the  sea  monster.  How  it  benumbs  and 
paralyzes  every  breathing  of  our  soul  Godward!  How  all  prayer,  all  panting 
desire,  all  languishing  affection,  all  spirituality  and  heavenly-mindedness,  all  solid 
worship,  all  filial  confidence,  all  the  fruits  and  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  bUghted 
and  withered  by  the  deathliness  that  we  so  continually  feel  I  2.  But  there  is 
another  word  added,  another  result  of  the  visiting  of  "  the  dayspring  from  on 
high  " — "  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace."  The  way  of  peace  ?  Does 
not  that  comprehend  all?  Do  those  that  fear  God  want  anything  but  peace? 
What  do  we  want?  The  way  of  war,  of  enmity,  of  rebelUon,  of  restlessness? 
No.  We  want  the  way  of  peace.  But  what  is  imphed  in  the  expression? 
Peace  implies  two  things.  It  implies,  first,  reconcihation  from  a  state  of  enmity ; 
and  secondly,  the  felt  enjoyment  of  this  reconciliation  in  the  heart.  But  we  want 
guiding  in  the  way.  And  when  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high  "  visits  the  soul, 
it  guides  the  feet  into  the  way.  There  is  something  very  sweet  in  the  expression. 
JU  does  not  drive,  does  not  force,  but  opens  a  door,  and  enables  the  soul  to  enter 


riO«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAY.  I. 

in;  discovers  the  way,  and  gives  the  soul  faith  to  walk  in  it.  (J.  C.  Philpot.) 
The  tenderness  of  God  : — God  is  not  only  energetic,  but  tender  also  in  action.  He 
is  the  God  of  the  dewdrops,  as  well  as  the  God  of  the  thundershowers  ;  the  God  ol  the 
tender  grass  blade,  as  much  as  of  the  mountain  oak.  We  read  of  grsat  machines 
which  are  able  to  crush  iron  bars,  and  yet  they  can  touch  so  gently  as  not  to  break 
the  shell  of  the  smallest  egg ;  as  it  is  with  them,  so  it  is  with  the  hand  of  the  Most 
High :  He  can  crush  a  world,  and  yet  bind  up  a  wound.  And  great  need  have  we 
of  tenderness  in  our  low  estate ;  a  little  thing  would  crush  us ;  we  have  each 
bruised  and  feeble  souls,  that  unless  we  had  One  who  would  deal  tenderly  with  us, 
we  must  soon  be  destroyed.  There  are  many  soul  diseases  to  which  a  tender  hand 
elone  can  minister;  just  as  there  are  many  states  of  body  which  need  tender  and 
patient  nursing,  and  which  cannot  otherwise  be  successfully  dealt  with,  even  by 
any  amount  of  skill.  This  tenderness  we  see  continually  in  action,  in  woman's 
ministrations  in  ordinary  life.  Her  voice  has  notes  more  sweet  and  soft  than  can  be 
distilled  from  any  instrument  of  music  ;  her  hand  has  a  touch  more  delicate  and 
fine  than  ever  the  breath  of  any  summer's  breeze ;  it  is  to  her  that  man  carries  the 
Btories  of  his  sorrows  ;  it  is  she  that  has  to  soothe  his  heavy,  aching  head ;  well  as 
he  thinks  he  can  do  without  her,  in  the  more  exciting  scenes  of  life,  he  finds  he  is 
not  independent  when  the  time  comes  for  suffering  and  grief.  And  what  makes 
woman  equal  to  sustaining  the  heavy  burden  thus  cast  upon  her?  How  comes  the 
ivy  to  be  able  to  sustain  the  oak  around  which  it  used  to  cling,  ornamenting  it, 
while  it  owned  its  lordship  and  strength  1  She  does  all  in  the  power  of  the  tender- 
ness of  her  nature ;  rugged  and  uncouth  would  life  indeed  be  if  such  tenderness 
were  withdrawn.  But  pass  away  to  Divine  things — from  woman,  to  Him  that  was 
born  of  woman,  and  what  do  we  find  but  tenderness  of  action  in  Him?  That 
tenderness  which  in  any  of  mankind  is  but  a  spark  from  the  fire,  is  perfect  in  His 
bosom ;  its  fulness  is  there  ;  and  it  is  continually  being  shown  to  them.  (P.  B.  Power, 
M.A.)  Explanation  of  the  imagery  : — A  caravan  misses  its  way,  and  is  lost  in 
the  desert ;  the  unfortunate  pilgrims,  overtaken  by  night,  are  sitting  down  in  the 
midst  of  this  fearful  darkness,  expecting  death.  All  at  once  a  bright  star  rises  in 
the  horizon  and  lights  up  the  plain :  the  travellers,  taking  courage  at  this  sight, 
arise,  and  by  the  light  of  this  star  find  the  road  which  leads  them  to  the  end  of  their 
journey.  (F.  Oodet,  D.D.)  The  night  of  humanity  : — It  may  seem  strange  that 
•we  should  call  the  condition  of  our  race  before  Christ's  appearance  night — darknesi 
and  shadow  of  death.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  its  being  night  ?  It  is  night 
where  the  light  is  wanting  that  lightens  our  way,  in  whose  brightness  we  are  able  to 
distinguish  and  understand  the  value  of  the  things  around  us ;  that  light  that  shows  os 
where  there  are  ways  to  walk  in,  the  aims  which  we  should  pursue,  and  the  means 
by  which  we  may  attain  them.  Where  there  is  such  certainty  of  knowledge  and  work 
there  is  day  ;  where  that  is  wanting,  the  light  can  only  be  a  dim  one  ;  even  with 
open  eyes,  all  knowledge  is  only  fancy,  all  work  only  groping  in  the  dark.  There 
no  life  can  bring  forth  fruit ;  it  may  be  filled  with  all  kinds  of  beautiful  dreams, 
but  only  with  dreams ;  but  upon  the  dream  follows  an  awakening  with  more  bittCT 
pain  the  more  beautiful  the  dreams  were.  .  .  .  Was  it  really  mght  upon  the 
earth,  before  the  Saviour  came  ?  Yes,  we  dare  not  judge  otherwise :  it  was  night. 
'Men  had  indeed  attempted  to  make  artificial  light,  but  it  did  not  really  illuminate. 
The  focus  in  which  at  last  all  rays  must  converge,  in  order  to  show  themselves  as 
•truth,  was  wanting.  It  was  really  night — cold,  dark,  unlovely  night.  (i2.  Rothe, 
D.D.)  The  Day  spring  from  on  high:  Christ  as  the  Dawn: — This  splendid  figure 
of  speech  is  taken  from  the  dawn  of  morning  on  the  night.  And  in  order  to  under- 
stand fully  the  force  of  the  rhetoric,  we  must  bear  in  mmd  one  of  the  natural 
phenomena  of  those  eastern  regions.  So  pure  is  the  atmosphere  there,  bo  far 
south,  that  clouds  in  the  sky  are  not  usual  save  in  the  rainy  tseason.  There  seems 
really  nothing  to  hinder  the  sun's  going  down,  nothing  to  get  in  the  way  of  his 
rising  again.  When  he  sets,  he  goes  abruptly  behind  the  adjacent  hill ;  when  he 
rises,  he  comes  up  unannounced,  and  in  a  quick  moment  is  altogether  on  hand  for 
liis  daily  work — that  is  to  say,  there  is  positively  no  twilight,  as  we  describe  it,  in 
those  latitudes.  The  instant  the  day  reaches  its  natural  close,  the  sun  appears  to 
slide  down  the  sky  without  any  leave-taking.  Just  so  when  the  dawn  starts. 
When  yesterday's  monarch  dismisses  himself,  and  it  is  time  for  to-day's  to  succeed 
him,  there  he  is,  unheralded  and  serenely  unhurried,  calmly  seated  in  his  shining 
pavilion  of  clear  air.  Zacharias  seizes  this  astonishing  figure,  and  turns  it  to 
account.  For  four  centuries  it  had  been  dark — dark  with  sin,  ignorance,  cppres- 
■ion — and  now  in  one  excited  instant  of  disclosure,  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  had 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  LUKE.  101 

risen  with  healing  in  His  wings.     No  wonder  his  heart  was  full ;  no  wonder  hi» 
dumbness  gave  way,  and  his  glad  voice  lifted  such  a  song  1    Let  us  keep  singing' 
on,  and  always  singing  on  about  the  dayspring  from  on  high  which  has  visited  U3» 
The  light  of  the  gospel  is  a  gleam  of  the  light  of  heaven.     Oh,  what  will  the  full 
splendour  of  the  noon  be  by  and  by  ?    When  the  Gauls  had  tasted  the  wine  of 
Italy,  they  began  to  ask  where  the  grapes  grew,  and  they  would  never  be  quiet  till 
they  came  there.     (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)        The  sun  an  emblem  of  Christ: : — Th» 
sun  is  the  fountain  of  light  to  this  lower  world.    Day  by  day  it  rises  on  us  with 
its  gladdening  beams,  and  with  the  return  of   light  is  connected  the  sense  of 
reviving  power  in  ourselves;  invigorated  health  and  cheerfulness;  renewed  and* 
willing  application  to  appointed  duties.    God  Himself  has  made  it  the  ruler  over 
the  day.     All  nature  seems  to  own  its  influence.    The  flowers  that  drooped,  or 
closed  their  leaves  during  the  night,  expand  themselves  again  when  the  sun  arises. 
The    gorgeous    colours  with  which  the  clouds  that  were  lately  dark  are  now 
Ulaminated,  bespeak  the  return  of  the  absent  king  ;  and  the  clouds  themselves  are 
scattered  at  his  approach.    The  loathsome  or  savage  creatures  that  love  darkness 
now  "  get  them  away  together,  and  lay  down  in  their  dens.    Man  goeth  forth  to  his 
work  and  to  his  labour  until  the  evening."     Christ  is  to  the  moral  world  what  th* 
Btin  is  to  the  natural  world  ;  the  source  of  life,  and  health,  and  motion.    He  is  the- 
"  Son  of  Righteousness,"  because  the  robe  of  righteousness  in  which  His  people 
"  shine  "  is  the  light  from  Him  which  they  reflect ;  and  on  this  account  His  Church 
is  said  to  be  "  clothed  with  the  sun."    And  the  inward  righteousness  also,  in  which 
they  are  created  anew  after  the  image  of  God,  is  derived  from  His  illuminating: 
presence  in  their  hearts.   And  He  rises  on  us  "  with  healing  in  His  wings,"  because^ 
He  brings  with  Him,  day  by  day,  spiritual  health  to  those  who  are  diseased  ia 
Boal,  comfort  to  those  who  mourn,  rest  to  the  weary  and  heavy-laden.     The  world 
had  long  lain  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  waiting  with  earnest  expecta- 
tion for  the  first  tokens  of  the  "  dayspring  from  on  high,"  even  as  travellers  in  a 
starless  night,  or  as  they  that  watch  in  loneliness  and  weariness,  wait  with  eager 
longing  for  the  burst  of  morning.     At  length  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arose,  when- 
He  who  was  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity  was  born  at  Bethlehem,  and  took- 
onr  natnre  upon  Him.    And  as  the  light  from  the  moruing  sun  travels  with  incon- 
eeivable  speed  to  the  remotest  corners   of   the  earth,   and  penetrates  into   the- 
darkest  recesses,  so  did  the  light  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  penetrate  the  dark 
places  of  the  earth.    It  scattered  the  mists  of  ignorance  and  sin,  and  called  forth 
from  the  garden  of  God's  Church  those  fruits  and  flowers  which  it  could  never 
otherwise  have  borne.   Nor  is  His  power  to  heal  and  comfort  diminished  by  the  lapse 
of  years.    As  the  sun  in  the  heavens  has  the  same  quickening  and  cheering  power 
over  the  material  world,  as  in  the  day  when  God  first  formed  it  and  set  it  in  the 
heavens ;  so  have  the  beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  the  same  efficacy  to  heal 
the  wounded  conscience,  and  to  comfort  the  afflicted  soul,  as  when  they  first  shone 
npon  His  humble  followers.    {Bishop  Trower.)        Safety  in  the  light  of  day  : — A 
band  of  fugitives  were  crossing  an  eastern  desert.     The  night  was  dark,  but  they 
determined  to  push  on.     Soon  they  lost  their  way,  and  had  to  spend  the  night  in 
anxiety  and  fear.     It  seemed  as  if  the  night  would  never  pass.     But  almost  all  at 
once  the  sun  arose,  bringing  daylight  and  showing  the  way  of  safety.     Not  one  of 
them  ever  forgot  that  sun-rising.     So  to  us,  in  our  wanderings,  the  Dayspring  has 
arisen,  pointing  out  the  way  of  safety.     Illustrate  by  the  case  of  a  man  in  an  open 
boat,  or  a  traveller  crossing  a  moor  at  night,  and  uncertain  of  hia  way.     A  cloud 
passes  from  the  sky,  and  the  polestar  is  seen.     Then  he  knows  the  way  of  safety. 
{Sunday  School  Times.)         Christ  our  Dayspring : — How  pertinent  is  that  question 
of  the  Almighty  as  it  breaks  from  the  whirlwind,  "  Hast  thou  commanded  the 
morning  since  thy  days,  and  caused  the  dayspring  to  know  his  place  T  "     He  who 
has  adjusted  the  movements  of  all  the  orbs  of  light,  brings  the  glow  of  the  new- 
bom  day  to  gladden  those  who  wait  for  the  retiring  darkness.    Christ  our  dayspring 
burst  upon  the  world  in  the  prophetic  period  of  the  Divine  arrangement.     Our 
spiritual  sun-rising,  so  long  waited  for,  came  for  the  banishment  of  sin,  and  the 
introduction  of  all  righteousness.     Christ  is  the  only  dayspring  of  light  to  the 
darkened  soul.     The  visible  creation,  conveying  by  symbols  and  material  manifes- 
tations the  thoughts  of   God,  can  bring  no  rest  to  a  soul  in  which  there  is  a 
constant  strife  between  conscience  and  passion      The  poHtical  aspects  of  society 
will  afford  little  hope ;  success  in  measures  of  reform  will  seem  hardly  valuable 
enough  to  compensate  for  their  outlay  of  exertion  ,  science,  in  all  its  departments, 
will  appear  but  as  a  perplexing  maze,  till  oui  dayspring,  knowing  its  place  in  th« 


106  .  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  U 

eounsels  of  Infinite  Wisdom  is  seen  above  them  all,  heralding  the  splendours  of  re- 
demption. Agnosticism  would  be  the  sad  inheritance  of  all,  just  leading  us  to  know 
that  we  could  not  know ;  that  the  secrets  of  the  universe  could  never  be  explained ; 
that  we,  ourselves,  were  but  perplexities  and  contradictions,  if  our  dayspring,  shining 
above  all  science,  over  all  human  wants  and  industries,  above  all  human  ignorance, 
will,  and  pride,  could  not  be  seen  by  faith,  verified  by  fact,  and  relied  upon  by 
experience.  {John  Waugh.)  God's  tender  mercy : — My  proclamation  certifies  to 
ihee,  0  trembling  heart,  that  this  mercy  is  tender  mercy.  Thy  bones  are  broken 
to-night,  thy  heart  is  wounded,  thy  spirits  are  dried  up,  and  thou  art  ready  to 
despair ;  but  I  tell  thee  that  God  has  tender  mercy  for  such  as  thou  art.  As  I  sat 
in  the  hospital,  yesterday,  and  saw  the  many  cases  of  maimed  limbs  and  gushing 
wounds,  I  could  but  think  how  tender  the  nurses  ought  to  be,  and  how  downy 
should  be  the  surgeon's  finger  as  he  set  the  broken  bone  or  bound  up  the  sore. 
Doubtless  there  are  some  persons  who  have  iron  hands  and  hard  hearts,  and  so, 
while  they  are  bone-setting  or  binding  up  wounds,  they  do  it  roughly,  and  cause  the 
patient  much  pain.  But,  0  sinner,  therein  is  the  tender  mercy  of  our  God  set 
forth,  which,  like  a  dayspring  from  on  high,  hath  visited  us;  "a  bruised  reed  will 
He  not  break,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax."  He  crowneth  us  with  loving-kind- 
nesses, and  with  tender  mercies  ;  He  bindeth  up  the  broken  in  heart,  and  healeth 
all  their  wounds.  Like  as  a  mother  comforteth  her  children,  even  so  doth  the  Lord 
comfort  His  people,  and  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth 
them  that  fear  Him.  My  Lord  is  as  gracious  in  the  manner  of  His  mercy  as  in  the 
matter  of  it.  Glory  be  to  His  name  1  0  sinner,  come  to  the  gentle  Jesus  and 
live.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Sunshine : — We  think  that  all  our  city  folk  ought 
somehow  to  get  every  week  a  few  hours  in  the  clear,  unmixed  sunshine  as  the  Lord 
pours  it  out  of  the  heavens.  Last  Sabbath  was  a  day  of  unusual  duties,  and 
Monday  morning,  with  loud-clamouring  work  all  about  us,  we  said  our  call  this 
morning  is  to  the  fields.  We  made  a  bold  dash,  and  at  a  speed  that  no  one  dared 
halt,  we  were  soon  beyond  the  city  limits.  As  we  hastened  past,  a  brother 
clergjTnan  shouted,  "  Whither  away  ?  "  We  answered — "  In  quest  of  sunshine  1 " 
And  was  there  ever  a  brighter  luxury  ?  The  cup  of  the  morning  had  been  washed 
put  by  a  shower ;  the  leaves,  autumn-turned,  shivered  their  fiery  splendour  across 
the  path ;  the  hum  of  the  city  became  fainter,  and  we  found  what  we  wanted 
floating  on  the  lake,  tangled  in  the  bushes,  rippling  among  the  green  grass,  dripping 
from  the  sky — sunshine.  Glorious  sunshine  1  With  it  we  filled  our  eyelids,  oar 
mouth,  our  hands.  We  opened  our  entire  physical  capacity  to  take  it  in.  We 
took  out  our  soul  and  saturated  it  in  the  lush  light.  We  absorbed  it  in  all  our 
pores,  and  rolled  it  around  our  nerves  ;  and  after  we  could  hold  no  more  inside, 
lifted  our  face  and  held  it  so  aslant  that  it  ran  down  over  us — the  sunshine.  What 
do  the  blind  do  without  seeing  it  ?  How  can  the  factory  employees  get  on  without 
feeling  it  ?  Let  all  the  ministry  on  Monday  morning  be  turned  out  into  it.  By  the 
following  Saturday  night  it  will  ripen  all  the  acidity  out  of  the  sermons.  The 
world  wants  more  sunshine  in  its  disposition,  in  its  business,  in  its  charities,  in  its 
theology.  For  ten  thousand  of  the  aches,  and  pains,  and  irritations  of  men  and 
women,  we  commend  the  sunshine.  It  soothes  better  than  morphine.  It 
stimulates  more  than  champagne.  It  is  the  best  plaister  for  a  wound.  The  good 
Samaritan  poured  out  into  the  fallen  traveller's  gash  more  of  this  than  wine  and 
oil.  Florence  Nightingale  used  it  on  Crimean  battle-fields.  Take  it  into  all  the 
alleys,  on  board  all  the  ships,  by  all  the  sick-beds.  Not  a  phial  full,  nor  a  cup  full, 
'.nor  a  decanter  full,  but  a  soul  full.  It  is  good  for  spleen,  for  liver  complaint,  for 
Mieuralgia,  for  rheumatism,  for  failing  fortunes,  for  melancholy.  We  suspect  that 
;heaven  itself  is  only  more  sunshine.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Philosophy  and  Chris- 
tianity .-—Philosophy,  in  the  night  of  Paganism,  was  like  the  fire-fly  of  the  tropics 
making  itself  visible,  but  not  irradiating  the  darkness.  But  Christianity,  revealing 
the  Sun  of  Kighteousness,  sheds  more  than  the  full  sunlight  of  those  tropics  on  aU 
that  we  need  to  see,  whether  for  time  or  eternity,     {Coleridge.)        Beholding  the 

^un ; I  have  read  that  near  the  North  Pole,  the  night  lasting  for  months  and 

months,  when  the  people  expect  the  day  is  about  to  dawn,  some  messengers  go  ap 
on  the  highest  point  to  watch  ;  and  when  they  see  the  first  streak  of  day  they  put 
on  their  brightest  possible  apparel,  and  embrace  each  other  and  cry,  "  Behold  the 
Bun  ! "  and  the  cry  goes  through  all  the  land,  "  Behold  the  sun  1 "  Some  of  you 
have  been  trudging  on  in  the  darkness  of  sin.  It  has  been  a  long  and  wearisome 
night  for  your  soul ;  but  now  I  cry,  "  Behold  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  rising  with 
bealing  in  His  wings  I "  or,  to  quote  from  the  chapter  that  I  read  at  the  beginning. 


OBAF.  I.]  ST.  LUKE.  lOr 

"  The  Dayspring  from  on  high  hath  visited  us  to  give  light  to  them  that  are  in 
darkness. "  Behold  the  sun !  Behold  the  sun  I  Would  God  that  every  blinded 
eye  might  now  see  it  I  (Dr.  Talmage.)  A  light  in  a  dark  "place : — A  steamboat 
was  once  carrying  a  load  of  passengers  up  one  of  the  Western  rivers.  It  was  a 
very  dark  night.  The  waters  were  dark,  tho  soil  was  black,  and  not  a  star  was  to 
be  seen.  The  air  was  full  of  sleet  and  mist,  and  altogether  it  made  a  night  when 
•*  the  darkness  could  be  felt."  The  steamboat  had  struck  a  snag,  and  was  leaking 
very  fast  and  beginning  to  sink.  The  captain  at  once  ran  her  ashore  and  lashed 
her  to  the  bank.  The  plank  was  thrust  out,  and  everybody  was  requested  to  go 
ashore  just  as  quickly  as  possible.  It  was  thought  that  if  all  could  only  lighten 
the  boat  they  might  save  it,  while  if  all  remained  on  board,  all  would  soon  go 
down  together.  But  it  was  so  dark,  the  passengers  could  not  see  either  the  plank 
or  the  shore.  The  sleet  was  falling  thick  and  covering  everything  with  ice.  The 
cold  wild  waters  of  the  river  were  rushing  past  beneath,  and  not  offering  a  very 
viBxra  reception  to  any  who  might  fall  over.  So  the  company  all  stood  still,  not 
daring  to  move.  Like  Paul,  they  chose  "  to  stay  with  the  ship."  They  seemed  to 
feel  that  it  was  better  to  stay  and  share  the  fate  of  the  boat  than  to  step  off — they 
knew  not  where ;  "  better  to  endure  the  ills  they  had,  than  to  fly  to  those  they 
knew  not  of."  The  captain  was  as  much  perplexed  as  the  people.  To  urge  them 
to  hurry  off  might  produce  a  panic,  and  make  them  rush  oft  and  push  one  another 
into  the  river.  Yet  he  knew  they  could  not  remain  long  on  deck  without  danger. 
But  he  was  equal  to  the  emergency.  Calling  from  the  upper  deck,  he  told  them  to 
be  quiet  and  wait,  and  he  would  land  them  all  safe  on  shore.  He  then  leaped  on 
to  the  bank  with  some  of  his  men,  and,  taking  a  basket  of  pitch  coal  and  arranging 
it  in  a  proper  place,  he  struck  a  match  and  lit  it.  In  a  Um  moments  it  blazed  op 
teight  and  dear,  and,  in  the  words  of  John  Hay — 

**  Bnmt  a  hole  in  the  night.** 

The  whole  hillside,  and  bank,  and  boat,  and  river,  just  glowed  in  the  brightness.  It 
was  a  wild  but  beantiful  scene — dar^ess  everywhere  but  just  there  where  they 
needed  light.  All  excitement  and  fear  ceased,  and  the  people  calmly  and  safely 
passed  one  by  one  over  the  plank  to  the  solid  shore.  Never  did  light  seem  so 
gratefnl  and  so  beautiful  as  it  did  shooting  up  there  in  that  dark  place.  The 
expression,  "  light  in  a  dark  place,"  gained  a  new  meaning  to  all  who  felt  its 
blessedness  on  that  dar&  and  perilous  night.  The  Bible  speaks  of  Christ  as  a 
**  light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness,"  and  His  truth  as  a  "  light  that  shineth  in  a 
dark  place."  There  are  a  great  many  dark  places  in  our  life,  but  there  is  no 
darker  place  than  our  sins.  Everybody  has  been  troubled  about  these,  and  nobody 
ever  knew  what  to  do  with  them.  A  great  many  people  don't  think  anything  about 
them.  So  those  men  on  that  steamboat  might  have  lain  down  and  gone  to  sleep. 
They  might  say,  •*  We  cannot  see  the  way  off,  and  we  may  just  as  well  take  our 
ease."  So  men  often  forget  their  sins  and  feel  easy  about  them.  But  whenever 
they  do  think  of  them,  they  are  troubled  and  don't  know  what  to  do  with  them. 
They  don't  know  how  to  get  rid  of  them,  and  the  wisest  men  have  been  just  as 
much  in  the  dark  as  the  most  ignorant.  This  has  always  been  a  very  dark  place. 
The  river  is  very  wild,  the  shore  is  unseen  and  the  way  to  it  is  unknown.  A  great 
many  people  have  stood  here,  like  those  men  on  the  steamboat,  waiting  for  light 
and  not  knowing  what  to  do.  Christ  lets  light  shine  right  on  this  dark  place.  He 
shows  how  men  can  get  rid  of  their  sins  and  be  forgiven.  He  shows  us  the  way. 
He  is  the  way.  The  river  is  just  as  deep,  and  the  shore  is  just  as  far  off  as  it  was 
before,  but  we  can  see  it  all,  and  find  our  way  to  where  it  is  safe  and  solid.  When 
we  come  to  see  how  fearful  it  is  to  be  in  the  dark,  and  not  know  what  to  do,  we  can 
then  know  how  beautiful  and  grateful  it  is  to  have  a  "  light  shining  in  a  dark 
place."  (R.  Cordley,  D.D.)  We  notice  then — I.  The  origin  of  our  redemp- 
TDVN — "the  tender  mercy  of  our  God."  But  though  it  be  true  that  aU  the 
attributes  of  God  were  engaged  in  planning  and  in  executing  the  work  of  our 
redemption,  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  mercy  of  God  appears  by  far  the  most 
eonspicuous.  What  is  its  nature  ?  Mercy  is  the  pity  of  the  heart ;  that  I  believe 
will  be  admitted  by  all  to  be  a  fair  and  correct  rendering  of  the  word.  Is  there  not 
misery  enough  on  the  part  of  man  to  excite  the  mercy  and  compassion  of  God  ? 
We  ask,  again,  to  what  extent  was  the  mercy  of  God  exercised  in  the  work  of 
human  redemption  T  It  extends  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  human  family.  Mercy 
then,  originated  the  plan  of  human  salvation.    Let  us  consider — II.  Its  PBoaBsss. 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

This  plan  was  not  developed  all  at  once ;  it  was  communicated  under  different  dispen 
sations  and  by  progressive  degrees,  as  the  minds  of  men  were  prepared  to  receive  it. 
The  dayspring  from  on  high,  the  great  light,  the  great  luminary  of  our  worldj  is 
come.  Now,  light  is  remarkable  for  the  power  of  communication  :  everything,  you 
know,  is  tiuged  and  irradiated  by  the  light  of  the  sun.  The  light  which  the  sun 
Bends  forth,  as  the  great  medium  of  light,  diffuses  itself  everywhere ;  and  here  we 
have  a  fair  representation  of  the  power  of  communication  which  Jesus  Christ 
possesses,  in  reference  to  the  knowledge  which  is  essential  to  the  happiness  of 
man  ;  for  wherever  He  is,  there  is  light ;  wherever  His  word  is,  there  is  truth  ;  and 
it  is  said  of  this  word  of  His,  "  the  entrance  of  it  giveth  light."  Light,  again,  is 
remarkable  for  the  rapidity  of  its  flight.  Display  but  a  glimmering  taper  on  the- 
summit  of  a  mountain,  and  it  reaches  the  eye,  placed  at  any  given  distance,  in  a 
moment.  And  here  we  may  be  reminded  of  the  rapidity  of  the  flight  of  mercy,  to 
meet  the  misery  of  man.  And  we  may  be  reminded  here,  too,  of  another  impor- 
tant fact,  connected  with  this  part  of  our  subject — the  disposition  there  ever  is,  on 
the  part  of  the  Saviour,  to  meet  the  case  of  a  poor  penitent  sinner,  or  an  afflicted 
believer.  But  again,  light  is  remarkable  for  its  purity  and  grateful  influence.  The 
influence  of  light  is  the  most  agreeable,  notwithstanding  the  velocity  with  which  it 
moves,  to  that  most  delicate  of  all  our  organs,  the  eye.  It  is  a  pleasant  thmg  to 
behold  the  sun.  When  this  light  directed  you  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  when,  in 
the  exercise  of  your  faith,  you  availed  yourselves  of  the  benefits  resulting  from  His 
redeeming  acts,  how  grateful  was  its  influence  1  It  communicated  light  to  your 
understanding,  and  peace  and  joy  unspeakable  to  your  hearts.  But  the  text  tells 
ns  that  it  came  "  from  on  high."  Why,  then,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  must  have 
existed  before  He  came  into  t)iis  world  ;  and  if  He  existed  before  He  came  into  the 
world,  He  must  have  existed  as  God  Almighty.  Now,  that  this  was  the  case,  is 
very  clear,  from  various  parts  of  Scripture.  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and 
the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God :  the  same  was  in  the  beginning 
with  God.  All  things  were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  not  anything  made 
that  was  made."  But,  in  the  text,  we  read  of  Him  in  regard  to  His  human  nature. 
The  dayspring  from  on  high  assumed  the  nature  of  man  below,  and  in  that  nature 
became  man's  suffering  substitute.  He  came  from  on  high — He  visited  us  for  this 
purpose.  I  stated  before,  and  I  must  now  recur  to  it,  that  the  light  to  which  our 
text  alludes,  was  gradual  in  its  communication.  There  was  a  ray  of  it  to  shine  on 
the  patriarchs,  a  brighter  ray  still  shone  on  the  minds  of  the  prophets  ;  but  it  was 
when  the  types  received  their  accomplishment  in  the  plains  of  Bethlehem — that 
the  words  of  this  text  were  literally  verified.  "The  dayspring  from  on  high 
visited  us,"  coming  to  this  world  of  ours  to  diffuse  His  light  and  life,  and  liberty, 
and  salvation,  from  one  end  of  the  earth  to  another.  III.  The  grand  dksign  of 
THIS  AMAZING  E^iENT — "  To  givo  light,"  says  the  inspired  writer — to  whom  ?  '*  to 
them  that  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death."  By  this  darkness  we  are 
to  understand  the  ignorance  which  is  common  to  man  ;  and,  by  death,  we  are  to 
understand  that  moral  death  which  reigns  in  the  minds  and  spirits  of  men, 
together  with  that  eternal  death,  to  which,  as  sinners,  we  are  exposed.  Now, 
where  a  shadow  is,  the  substance  cannot  be  far  off.  We  need  not  here  go  into  the 
state  of  the  heathen  world,  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  advent,  for  it  must  be 
generally  known  to  every  one  now  hearing  me  :  it  was  indeed  a  state  of  darkness 
and  death ;  nor  into  the  state  of  the  Jewish  people,  for  it.  too,  was  a  state  of 
ignorance.  But,  on  what  subjects  does  He  enlighten  men?  First  of  all,  touching 
the  being  and  perfections  of  God.  If  you  go  into  the  records  of  the  wisest  and 
best  of  the  heathen  philosophers,  whether  of  Egypt,  Greece,  or  Bome,  you  find  no 
clear  and  distinct  revelation  existing  respecting  God.  He  came,  next,  to  enlighten 
men  touching  their  own  moral  state  and  condition.  Now,  that  all  is  not  right 
with  man  must  be  obvious.  Is  man  happy  7  He  is  not — he  is  miserable  as  well  as 
wicked.  Well,  then,  there  must  be  something  wrong ;  something  must  have 
happened  to  our  world.  Let  us,  then,  thank  God  that,  in  the  midst  of  darkness 
and  misery,  we  have  the  great  light  shining  upon  us,  telling  us  how  sin  entered  our 
world,  the  end  to  which  it  would  lead,  and  the  extent  to  which  it  would  prevail,  il 
we  were  not  delivered  from  its  power.  But  He  came  to  give  light  upon  another 
subject — He  came  to  give  the  light  of  salvation.  If  He  had  merely  discovered  to 
us  our  disease  and  left  us  to  perish  in  it,  we  should  have  been  the  worse,  in  place 
of  being  bettered,  by  our  knowledge.  But  we  come,  brethren,  to  the  light ;  and 
here  we  find  mercy  and  truth  met  together,  and  righteousness  and  peace  embracing 
each  other — truth  inflexible  as  a  rock,  and  mercy,  tender  as  a  parent's  tears. 


CHAP.  1.]  ST.  LUKE.  109 

yearning  over  you  with  infinite  compassion.  He  came  to  give  light  upon  another 
subject — namely,  the  rule  of  our  duty.  What,  then,  must  be  the  rule  ?  Take  it, 
first,  in  reference  to  God,  it  commands  us  to  love  Him  supremely;  take  it  in 
reference  to  man,  and  it  enjoins  thus  much  upon  us — "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that 
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them  ;  for  this  is  the  law  and  the  prophets." 
But  Christ  came  to  give  light  on  another  subject — a  future  state.  But  Jesus 
Christ  came  to  give  more  than  light :  He  came  to  give  peace — "to  guide  our  feet 
into  the  way  of  peace."  I  can  merely  mention  particulars  here.  To  procure  peace 
was  the  grand  object  of  our  Saviour's  advent.  He  was  to  be  called  "  the  repairer 
of  the  breach — the  restorer  of  the  paths  to  dwell  in."  And  as  He  came  to  procure 
peace.  He  came  also  to  apply  it.  You  will  easily  perceive  a  difference  between 
peace  procured  and  peace  applied.  He  came  to  give  peace  —  He  came  also  to 
maintain  it  in  the  hearts  of  His  people,  causing  it  to  grow  and  increase  more  and 
more,  until  the  subject  of  it  is,  at  last,  brought  home  to  himself  to  be  one  with  the 
Lord.  Did  our  salvation,  then,  originate  in  the  mercy  of  God  ?  Let  us  learn  from 
it  a  lesson  of  humility.  But  again,  were  the  developments  of  this  mercy  gradual? 
Did  it  not  all  shine  out  at  once  ?  What  lesson  ought  we  to  derive  from  this 
circumstance  ?  Mark  this,  then  ;  your  ChristianitVought  to  be  progressive — purer, 
and  having  more  of  principle  to-day  than  yesterday  ;  and  more  of  principle,  purity, 
and  disinterestedness  to-morrow  than  to-day.  IVshould  be  gradual  and  progressive 
in  its  progress,  both  as  to  principle  and  practice.  Lastly  :  Was  this  light  sent  for 
the  good  of  the  whole  world?  Then  let  us  endeavour  to  diffuse  it  universally 
throughout  the  world.     (W.  Toase.) 

Ver.  80.  And  the  child  grew. — John's  tecluded  life: — Not  in  sandy  deserts 
like  those  of  Arabia,  but  in  the  wild,  waste  region  south  of  Jericho  and  the  fords  of 
Jordan  to  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This  was  known  as  Araboth  or  ha-Arabah. 
This  region,  especially  where  it  approached  the  Gh6r  and  the  Dead  Sea,  was  lonely 
and  forbidding  in  its  physical  features,  and  would  suit  the  stem  spirit  on  which  it 
also  reacted.  In  1  Sam.  xxiii  19,  it  is  called  Jeshimon,  or  "  the  Horror."  John 
was  by  no  means  the  only  hermit.  The  political  unsettlement,  the  shamelessness 
of  crime,  the  sense  of  secular  exhaustion,  the  widespread  Messianic  expectation^ 
marked  "  the  fulness  of  time."  Banus  the  Pharisee  also  lived  a  life  of  ascetic 
hardness  in  the  Arabah,  and  Josephus  tells  us  that  he  lived  with  him  for  three 
years  in  his  mountain  cave  on  fruits  and  water.  But  there  is  not  in  the  Gospels 
the  faintest  trace  of  any  intercourse  between  John  or  our  Lord  and  His  disciples, 
with  the  Essenes.  The  great  Italian  painters  follow  a  right  conception  when  they 
paint  even  the  boy  John  as  emaciated  with  early  asceticism.  In  2  Esdras  ix.  24, 
the  seer  is  directed  to  go  into  a  field  where  no  house  is,  and  to  "  taste  no  flesh, 
drink  no  wine,  and  eat  only  the  flowers  of  the  field,"  as  a  preparation  for  "  talking 
with  the  Most  High."  [Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Satisfactions  of  solitude : — Charles 
the  Fifth,  after  a  life  spent  in  military  exploits  and  the  active  and  energetic  prose- 
cution of  ambitious  projects,  resigned,  as  is  well  known,  bis  crown,  sated  with  its 
enjoyment.  He  left  these  words,  as  a  testimony,  behind  him: — "I  have  tasted 
more  satisfaction  in  my  solitude  in  one  day  than  in  all  the  triumphs  of  my  former 
reign.  The  sincere  study,  profession,  and  practice  of  the  Christian  religion  have 
in  them  such  joy  as  is  seldom  found  in  courts  and  grandeur."  (Baxcndale's  Anec- 
dotes.) Solitude  a  good  teacher: — St.  Bernard  said,  in  writing  to  a  pious  friend, 
"  If  you  are  seeking  less  to  satisfy  a  vain  curiosity  than  to  get  true  wisdom,  you 
will  sooner  find  it  in  deserts  than  in  books.  The  silence  of  the  rocks  and  the  path- 
less forests  will  teach  you  better  than  the  eloquence  of  the  most  gifted  men." 
{FirUlon.)  Solitude  helps  to  mature  thought : — Whenever  Michael  Angelo,  that 
"  divine  madman,"  as  Richardson  once  wrote  on  the  back  of  one  of  his  drawings, 
was  meditating  on  some  great  design,  he  closed  himself  up  from  the  world.  "  Why 
do  you  lead  such  a  solitary  life?"  asked  a  friend.  "Art,"  replied  the  sublime 
artist,  "is  a  jealous  god;  it  requires  the  whole  and  entire  man."  During  his 
mighty  labour  in  the  Sistine  Chapel  he  refused  to  have  any  communication  with 
any  person,  even  at  his  own  house.  {I.  D'Israeli.)  The  youth  of  John  the 
Baptist : — I.  Inquike  into  the  beasons  why  the  vouth  of  john  was  spent  in  ob- 
6C0RITT.  1 .  Purity  of  his  mind  shrank  from  a  society  so  devoid  of  true  religion. 
2.  Privations  fitted  him  for  the  self-denial  with  which  he  afterwards  attracted  the 
people.  3.  Arrangements  also  well  adapted  to  prevent  any  such  intimacy  with 
Christ  in  His  youth,  as  might  have  excited  suspicion  of  a  collusion  betwixt  them. 
4.  In  such  retirement  John  enjoyed,  undisturbed,  that  communion  with  the  Deity 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

BO  delightful  to  eminent  piety  like  his.  II.  Consider  the  instructions  which  this 
ACCOUNT  OF  John's  youth  holds  out  to  those  whose  views  are  pointed  to  the 
Christian  ministry.  Entire  seclusion  not  required  of  them,  but  let  them  retire  as 
often  as  they  can,  and  prefer  the  calm  of  solitude  to  the  bustle  of  dissipation.  III. 
Consider  the  lessons  held  forth  by  the  youth  of  John  to  the  young  in  generai. 
The  wisdom  and  advantage  of  frequent  retirement.  1.  What  opportunities  of  im- 
provement  solitude  will  present  to  you.  2.  From  what  temptations  it  wiU  detach 
you.  3.  To  what  solidity  of  character  it  will  form  you.  4.  How  it  will  prepare  you 
for  the  seclusion  of  days  of  darkness.    {Dr.  Belfrage.)       The  retirement  of  John  was — 

I.    A   renunciation    op    his   priestly   rights.      II.    A   BREAKING-OFF   FROM    THE    THEN 

Judaism.  III.  A  unique  realization  of  the  true  nature  of  God.  He  believed 
that  there,  in  the  desert,  as  really  as  in  the  Temple,  was  the  "  God  of  the  Temple  " 
to  be  found  and  worshipped.  IV.  Observe  that  God  the  Holy  Spirit  ministered  to 
HIM  IN  the  deserts.  (A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D)  Every  life  has  its  desert  period ; — Those 
grand  solemn  days  when  God  calls  us  out  of  the  world's  noises  to  commune  in  deep 
consultation  with  Him  until  the  soul's  purposes  are  shaped,  and  the  characters  of 
our  immortal  spirits  formed.  These  are  the  days  of  destiny,  the  birth-hours  of  all 
that  is  really  great  in  us,  times  when  we  are  truly  bom  again,  if  we  will  be,  or  when 
we  rush  back  and  plunge  into  the  troubled  sea  of  unregenerate  existence,  never  to 
find  rest.  If  we  look  back  down  the  long  line  of  God's  heroic  ones,  each  had  his 
wilderness.  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Joseph,  dwelt  all  their  lives  in 
the  grand  deserts  of  existence,  and  tabernacled  with  God.  Moses,  David,  Daniel, 
Elijah,  Jeremiah,  yea,  all  God's  great  ones,  were  caused  to  turn  their  backs  on  a 
world  and  face  the  truths  of  the  living  God,  until  those  truths  rose  up  to  them  to 
inarch  in  triumph,  through  the  opposition  of  men  and  devils,  to  glorious  victory. 
Now,  as  then,  God  calls  us  to  the  wilderness-school — calls  us  out  to  uncover  the 
great  purposes  of  truth  before  us,  and  sends  us  back  to  stand  up  for  Him,  regardless 
of  all  the  surgings  of  sin,  applause,  fear,  or  death.  Here,  and  here  alone,  is  the 
safety  of  any  Church,  age,  or  man,  in  "the  kingdom  of  God  within,"  trueness  to 
the  ideal  of  life  realized,  as  the  soul  in  its  lone  consecration  stretches  itself  on  the 
naked  will  of  God,  and  feels  the  strong  beatings  of  His  eternal  purposes  of  truth, 
justice,  and  love.  {Bishop  Penrick.)  Waxed  strong  in  spirit : — "We  need  strong 
men — Elijah-like,  John-the-Baptist-like  men  in  these  "perilous  times,"  and  "spiri- 
tual "  strength  is  incomparably  the  strongest,  the  most  celestial,  the  most  Christly 
of  all  strength.    {A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vbbs.  1-7.   A  decree  from  Csesar  Augustus,  that  an  tbs  world  ihonld  be  taxed. 

—There  is  no  grand  reason,  you  see,  given  why  Mary  and  Joseph  should  go  to 
Jndffia.  The  angel  who  is  said  to  have  announced  the  coming  birth  does  not  appear 
again  to  tell  them  that  they  must  travel,  since  otherwise  the  Son  of  David  will  not 
be  connected  with  His  ancestral  dwelling-place.  They  go  because  every  one  else  is 
going.  A  decree  of  the  Csesar  obhges  the  man  to  register  himself  in  the  village, 
whatever  it  is,  to  which  he  belongs.  It  may  be  an  awkward  contrivance,  as  a 
modem  writer  says  it  is,  to  make  the  conception  of  royalty  fit  with  the  facts. 
Assuredly  the  critic,  or  any  ingenious  man  in  this  day,  could  have  invented  a  better 
tale.  And  if  forgers  of  that  day  had,  as  he  supposes,  an  nnlimited  command  of 
supernatural  incidents,  these  poor  peasants  might  have  been  transported  by  any 
kind  of  celestial  machinery  to  the  spot  in  which  they  were  required  to  be.  Nor 
can  we  doubt  that  a  Frenchman  now,  or  an  Oriental  then,  would  have  introduced 
Buch  an  event  with  becoming  pomp.  If  it  was  part  of  the  scheme  that  the  birth 
should  be  humble,  he  would  have  taken  pains  that  we  should  observe  that  part  of 
it.  There  would  have  been  starts  of  surprise,  exclamations  at  the  stooping  of  the 
Highest  of  all  to  the  lowest  place.  Here  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  Events,  the  belief 
of  which  has  affected  all  the  art  and  speculation  of  the  most  civilized  nations  in 
the  modem  world,  are  recorded  in  fewer  words,  with  less  effort,  than  an  ordinary 
historian,  or  the  writer  of  a  newspaper,  would  deem  suitable  to  the  account  of  the 
most  trivial  transaction.    Such  marvellous  associations  have  clang  for  oeutories  to 


OUP.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  Ill 

tiiese  verses,  that  it  is  hard  to  realize  how  absolutely  naked  they  are  of  all  orna- 
ment. We  are  obliged  to  read  them  again  and  again  to  assure  ourselves  that  they 
really  do  set  forth  what  we  call  the  great  miracle  of  the  world.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  mind  of  the  evangelist  was  possessed  by  the  conviction  that  he  was  not 
recording  a  miracle  which  had  interrupted  the  course  of  history,  but  was  telling  of 
B  Divine  act  which  explained  the  course  of  history  and  restored  the  order  of  human 
life,  one  can  very  well  account  for  his  calmness ;  if  that  conviction  was  a  true  one, 
we  might  account  for  the  impression  which  his  brief  sentences  have  made  on  later 
ages.  That  the  poll-tax  of  the  first  emperors  should  be  the  instrument  of  bringing 
forth  the  King  before  whom  the  Caesars  were  to  bow,  would  then  seem  one  of  those 
incidents  in  the  drama  of  the  universe  which  discover  a  God  who  is  not  suddenly 
interfering  to  untie  knots  that  are  too  difficult  for  human  hands,  but  who  is  directing 
all  the  course  of  the  action,  from  the  beginning  to  the  catastrophe ;  not  crushing 
the  wills  of  the  persons  in  the  drama,  but  leading  them  on,  by  methods  which  we 
cannot  see  or  conjecture,  to  fill  their  places  in  it.  And  the  birth  in  the  manner 
would  be  felt,  not  as  an  embellishment  of  the  narrative,  but  a8  a  part  of  the  reve- 
lation. The  King,  who  proves  His  title  and  His  Divinity  by  stooping  to  the  lowest 
condition  of  His  subjects,  is  brought  into  direct  contrast  with  him  who  had  risen  by 
intrigues,  proscriptions,  and  the  overthrow  of  an  ancient  order,  to  be  hailed  as  the 
Deliverer  and  highest  God  of  the  earth.  (F.  D,  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  child  and  the 
emperor : — Was  that  infant  at  Bethlehem  no  more  than  a  subject  of  the  Roman 
emperor?  Was  Christianity  the  mere  product  of  these  outward  favouring  circum- 
stances? Not  so.  It  is  true  that  from  these  circumstances  the  fulness  of  time 
took  its  shape  and  colour.  Without  that  shelter  it  would  not  have  been,  humanly 
speaking,  what  now  it  is.  But  the  spark  of  life  itself  was  independent  of  any 
local  or  national  state.  The  very  characteristic  of  the  life  of  Christ  is  that  which 
doered  above  any  such  local  limit.  Therefore  it  is  that  He  was  born,  apart  from  all 
the  stir  and  tnrmoil  of  the  world,  in  a  humble  stall,  in  a  dark  cavern,  in  a  narrow 
street  of  an  obscure  mountain  village.  Therefore  it  is  that  He  lived  for  thirty 
years  in  the  secluded  basin  of  the  unknown,  unconsecrated  Nazareth  ;  that  Ha 
passed  away  without  attracting  a  single  word  of  notice  from  any  contemporary 
poet  or  philosopher  of  that  great  court,  which  has  made  the  reign  of  Caesar 
Augustus  proverbial  to  all  time  as  the  "  Augustan  age."  Born  under  the  empire, 
there  was  in  Jesus  Christ  nothing  imperial,  except  the  greatness  of  His  birth.  Born 
ander  the  Boman  sway,  there  was  nothing  in  Him  Roman  except  the  world-wide 
dominion  of  ffis  Spirit.  From  Caesar  Augustus  comes  out  a  decree  that  all  the 
world  should  be  taxed,  subdued,  civilized,  united.  All  honour  to  him  for  it !  All 
vigilance,  all  exertion,  all  prudence,  be  ours  to  watch  and  seize  all  the  opportunities 
that  are  given  to  us.  But  it  is  from  God  that  there  come  these  flashes  of  life  and 
light,  of  goodness  and  of  genius,  which  belong  to  no  age,  but  which  find  their  like- 
ness in  that  Divine  Child,  which  was  bom,  not  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the 
will  of  man,  but  of  God.  This,  then,  is  the  double  principle  of  which  the  birth  of 
Christ  is  the  most  striking  example ;  external  circumstances  are  something,  but 
they  are  not  everything  The  inward  life  is  the  essential  thing ;  but  for  its  success- 
fnl  growth  it  needs  external  circumstance.  There  are  a  thousand  ways  in  which 
this  double  lesson  is  forced  upon  us,  but  the  most  striking  illustration  is  still  to  be 
found  in  the  contrast  of  the  same  double  relation  to  the  circumstances  of  world, 
century,  country,  or  Church  in  which  we  live.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is 
our  own  separate  existence  and  character  with  its  own  work  to  do — its  own  special 
nourishment  from  God.  (Dean  Stanley.)  A  political  era  associated  with  high 
religious  experiences : — It  was  remarkable  that  the  birth  of  Christ  should  take  place 
in  connection  with  the  process  of  a  great  political  engagement.  Whilst  men  were 
moving  from  all  quarters,  in  response  to  the  decree  of  Caesar  Augustus,  the  angels 
of  heaven  were  gathering  around  the  world's  greatest  event.  We  need  historical 
landmarks  to  help  our  memory  of  the  best  things.  Blessed  is  that  nation  whose 
political  eras  are  associated  with  the  highest  religious  experiences.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Historical  difficulties  of  the  census : — Great  as  are  the  historic  difficulties  in  which 
this  census  is  involved,  there  seem  to  be  good  independent  grounds  for  believing 
that  it  may  have  been  originally  ordered  by  Sextius  Saturinus,  that  it  was  begun 
by  Publeius  Sulpicius  Quirinus,  when  he  was  for  the  first  time  legate  of  Syria  ;  and 
that  it  was  completed  during  his  second  term  of  office.  In  deference  to  Jewish 
prejudices,  any  infringement  of  which  was  the  certain  signal  for  violent  tumults 
and  insurrections,  it  was  not  carried  out  in  the  ordinary  Roman  manner,  at  each 
person's  plaoe  of  residence,  but,  according  to  Jewish  custom,  at  the  town  to  which 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Ofli*.  n. 

their  family  originally  belonged.  The  Jews  still  clung  to  their  genealogies  and  to 
the  memory  of  long-extinct  tribal  relations ;  and  though  the  journey  was  a  weary 
and  distasteful  one,  the  mind  of  Joseph  may  well  have  been  consoled  by  the  re- 
membrance of  that  heroic  descent  which  would  now  be  authoritatively  recognized, 
and  by  the  glow  of  those  Messianic  hopes  tc  which  the  marvellous  circumstances  of 
which  he  was  almost  the  sole  depositary  would  give  a  tenfold  intensity.  {Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  The  empire  of  Rome  and  the  stable  at  Bethlehem  : — I.  1.  Consider  the  decree 
that  went  forth  from  the  emperor.  How  important  it  must  have  appeared  to  the 
Eoman  authorities  1  2.  Consider  also  the  scene  that  night  at  Bethlehem.  Little  knew 
the  people  who  were  filling  that  inn  whom  they  were  turning  out  1  II.  1-  Learn 
that  God  is  working  in  all  the  events  of  life,  great  or  small ;  bringing  out  of  then* 
issues  very  different  from  the  issues  intended  by  the  actors  in  those  events.  Em 
perors  are  but  officials  in  God's  Temple,  and  their  decrees  are  but  means  by  which 
He  carries  out  His.  2.  Learn  that  God's  work  does  not  appeal  to  the  outward 
senses.  It  is  born  at  lowly  Bethlehem  rather  than  in  powerful  Kome  or  in  self- 
righteous  Jerusalem.  Yet  it  lasts  to  eternity.  3.  Learn  also  how  the  work  of  Christ 
in  us  is  like  His  work  in  the  world.  He  has  to  be  born  in  each  one  of  us.  (C<inon 
Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  God  overrules : — Augustus,  while  sending  forth  his  edicts 
to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  East,  little  knew  that  on  his  part  he  was  obeying  the 
decrees  of  the  King  of  kings.  God  had  foretold  that  the  Saviour  should  be  bom  in 
Bethlehem.  In  order  that  this  might  be  accomplished  He  made  use  of  Augustus 
and  through  this  prince  the  order  was  given  for  the  census  of  the  whole  people. 
At  the  sight  of  those  wars  and  revolutions  that  upset  the  world  you  feel  inclined  to 
imagine  that  God  no  longer  governs  the  world  or  those  in  it.  You  are  mistaken, 
God  permits  that  these  awful  catastrophes  should  take  place,  just  for  the  salvation 
and  perfection  of  this  or  that  person  whom  the  world  knows  not.  (De  Boylesve.) 
God's  time  arrives : — I.  Divine  power  in  the  Incabnation.  II.  Wisdom  (1)  in  the 
tim^;  (2)  place;  (3)  circumstances.  III.  Faithfulness.  IV.  Holiness.  Hiding 
His  wonders  from  unhehevers.  V.  Love  (John  iii.  16).  (Van  Doren.)  1.  Caesar 
Augustus.  Son  of  Octavius  and  Atia  ;  licentious  and  treacherous.  Superstitious 
— oft  borne  to  the  temple  before  day,  for  prayer.  Generous,  vain,  ambitious,  war- 
like, another  L'^uis  XIV.  Cruel — three  hundred  senators  and  two  hundred  knights 
murdered  with  his  consent.  Defeated  at  sea,  he  dragged  Neptune's  statue  into  the 
sea.  His  daughter  Julia,  by  her  infamy,  embittered  his  last  days.  Reigned  44 
years,  died  aged  76.  A  long  and  splendid  reign.  In  Augustus,  see  man's  nothing- 
ness, amid  earthly  splendour.  In  Mary,  see  highest  destiny,  amid  earthly  meanness. 
(Ibid.)  The  birth  of  Jcsut  Christ : — There  is  a  fine  propriety  in  celebrating  once 
a  year  the  nativity.  Our  ignorance  of  the  date  is  no  valid  objection.  We  do  not 
hesitate  to  date  our  letters  and  documents  Anno  Domini  1887,  although  in  doing 
so  we  commit  an  error  of  at  least  four  years,  and  perhaps  six.  The  all-important 
thing  here  is  not  the  time  of  the  nativity,  but  the  fact  of  the  nativity.  And,  if  ona 
day  in  every  week  the  Church  of  Immanuel  celebrates  the  resurrection  of  her  Lord, 
is  it  unbecoming  that  she  should  one  day  in  every  jear  celebrate  that  nativity  with- 
out which  there  had  never  been  either  resurrection  or  redemption,  or  even  the 
Church  herself  ?  And  now  let  us  attend  to  the  story  of  the  birth  of  Immanuel. 
More  than  seven  centuries  before  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  prophet  Micah  gave 
utterance  to  the  following  remarkable  prophecy : 

Thou,  Beth-lehem  Ephratah, 

Which  art  little  to  be  among  the  thousands  of  Jodah, 

Out  of  thee  shall  One  come  forth  unto  me 

Who  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel ; 

Whose  goings  forth  are  from  of  old, 

From  everlasting. 

That  same  Almighty  God  who,  through  the  restlessness  of  a  Persian  monarch,  haa 
rescued  from  annihilation  the  national  stock  from  which  His  Anointed  was  to 
spring,  prepared  a  birthplace  for  His  Anointed  through  the  edict  of  a  Roman  em- 
peror. For,  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  had  come,  and  the  Christ  was  to  be  born, 
Csesar  Augustus  issued  a  decree  that  all  the  world  should  be  enrolled.  And  thus  a 
minute  prophecy,  a  thousand  times  imperilled  in  the  course  of  seven  centuries,  was 
at  last  minutely  accomplished.  Oh,  who  does  not  feel  that  a  God  is  here  ?  Who 
can  resist  the  conviction  that  this  God  has  had  from  the  beginning  His  purposes, 
End  actually  controls  every  movement  of  every  human  will  ?    Yet  there  is  no  reasoa 


«HA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  118 

for  supposing  that  Augustus  Ctosar,  in  issuing  his  decree  for  a  universal  census, 
was  conscious  that  in  so  doing  he  was  preparing  the  way  for  the  accomplishment 
of  an  ancient  prediction.  A  Eoman,  he  cared  nothing  for  the  Hebrews.  A  pagan, 
he  knew  nothing  of  Messianic  prophecies.  His  issuing  a  decree  of  enrolment  was 
nothing  unnatural  or  extraordinary ;  it  was  one  of  the  commonest  acts  of  a  political 
ruler,  and  he  himself  was  one  of  the  most  methodical  of  men.  Yet  who  can  doubt 
that  Caesar  Augustus,  in  issuing  this  decree,  was  accomplishing  a  predetermined 
purpose  of  the  Ancient  of  Days  ?  Nevertheless,  nothing  is  clearer  than  this : 
Cassar  Augustus,  in  publishing  this  edict,  and  Joseph  and  Mary,  in  visiting  Bethle- 
hem in  accordance  with  its  requirements,  acted  as  perfectly  free,  voluntary  beings. 
Now,  I  have  not  alluded  to  this  matter  for  the  purpose  of  attempting  to  solve  a 
frequently  propounded  problem — namely,  the  reconciliation  of  Divine  sovereignty 
and  human  freedom.  Considered  practically  in  its  matter-of-fact  aspect,  this  sub- 
ject presents  no  difficulty.  It  is  only  when  we  pry  into  that  domain  of  infinite 
problems  which  God  has  not  opened  to  us  that  we  become  bewildered  and  lost. 
Duty,  not  metaphysics,  is  our  rule  for  life.  Let  me  conclude  with  three  reflections. 
I.  The  birth  at  Bethlehem  consecrated  and  glorified  all  infancy.  As 
Athena  was  fabled  to  have  sprung  full-grown  and  panoplied  from  the  cloven  brow 
of  Zeus,  so  the  Christ  and  Son  of  God  might  have  descended  into  humanity  an 
onborn,  adult  Adam  ;  for  the  distance  between  babe  and  man  is  infinitely  less  than 
the  distance  between  man  and  God.  But,  no ;  He  descended  into  humanity  through 
the  avenue  of  birth  and  babyhood,  coming,  like  any  other  infant,  under  the 
law  of  growth,  and  so  consecrating  all  life  from  cradle  to  grave,  hallowing  birth 
as  well  as  death.  The  birth  at  Bethlehem  made  babyhood  a  sacred  thing.  And  so 
the  very  infancy  oi  Jesus  ie  a  gospel.  II.  The  treatment  os"  the  holt  familt 
AT  Bethlehem's  inn  was  a  prophecy  of  the  world's  treatment  of  Jesus  Christ 
«VER  SINCE.  It  is,  I  repeat,  a  picture  of  the  world's  treatment  of  Jesus  Christ  ever 
since.  It  does  not  repulse  Him ;  it  simply  has  no  room  for  Him,  The  world  seizes 
the  inn ;  Christianity  must  put  up  with  a  stable,     (G.  D  Boardman.) 

Ver-  4.  Which  Is  called  Bethlehem. — Description  of  Bethlehem: — The  town  is 
picturesque  in  the  highest  degree.  Its  fortified  walls  have  long  vanished,  but  its 
position  on  a  long,  narrow  ridge,  has  confined  it  to  the  limits  of  three  thousand 
years  ago,  and  its  houses,  very  probably,  are  just  the  same  in  appearance  as  those 
of  the  time  of  David,  or  even  earlier.  In  fact,  we  have  before  us  an  old  Jewish  city 
Buch  as  men  inhabited  in  the  Bible  ages.  But  its  picturesqueuess  is  the  best  of  it, 
for  the  streets  are  as  far  from  being  clean  as  those  of  other  Eastern  towns.  Eivulets 
of  abomination  run  across  them  or  stand  in  puddles,  for  scavengers  are  unknown, 
and  the  masterless,  homeless  dogs  cannot  eat  all  the  garbage.  The  main  street  ia 
largely  occupied  by  workshops,  or  rather  arches,  with  no  window,  which  is  not  much 
loss  in  such  a  climate.  Looking  in,  one  sees  that  the  floor  is  covered  with  men 
sitting  cross-legged,  h.ard  at  work  making  carved  rosaries  from  the  stones  of  the 
Dom  palm,  or  the  common  date,  or  olive  wood ;  crosses  from  fig-wood,  stained 
black;  fancy  trifles  from  the  asphalt  of  the  Dead  Sea;  endless  souvenirs  of 
the  town  in  olive-wood;  but,  above  all,  cutting  medallions  from  the  mother- 
of-pearl  oyster-shells  of  the  Bed  Sea,  or  engraving  them  with  the  story  of 
our  Lord  from  His  birth  to  His  death.  In  this  one  art  alone  there  are,  perhaps, 
500  workmen  engaged.  The  staple  industry  of  the  town  is  in  fact  the  manufacture 
of  endlessly  varied  mementos  of  Bethlehem  to  be  sold,  after  they  have  been  blessed 
by  the  priests,  to  the  pilgrims.  This  being  a  Christian  town,  the  wives  and 
daughters  often  sit  with  their  husbands  or  brothers :  a  strange  sight  in  the  East, 
but  one  that  goes  far,  by  what  it  suggests,  to  account  for  the  general  prosperity. 
The  buildings  show  that  no  masons  could  be  better  than  the  Bethlehemites,  though 
there  are  not  many  good  houses  except  in  the  front  street,  and  even  this  has  its 
better  and  its  worse  end.  Inside,  some  are,  of  course,  very  superior  to  others,  and 
it  is  the  same  with  the  workshops.  Here  is  one,  where  men  and  women  are  busy 
making  beads  for  rosaries.  All  the  men  are  on  the  ground,  cross-legged ;  the  women 
sit  on  low  pieces  of  wood,  their  bare  feet  visible  outside  their  dress.  Mat  baskets, 
or  large  wooden  bowls,  of  beads  cut  from  olive  rods,  are  on  the  ground  ;  one  man 
saws  a  small  piece  of  wood  fixed  upright  in  a  vice,  another  turns  the  beads  at  a  most 
primitive  lathe,  driven  by  a  cord  stretched  on  a  bent  fiddle-stick  arrangement.  The 
work-bench  consists  of  some  beams  on  the  ground,  but  one  man  has  a  vice  fixed  in 
the  earth,  and  ii  filing  something  vigorously ;  the  women  have  fiddle-bows  of  their 
»wn,  but  the  string  is  a  fine  saw  to  cut  the  beads  apart.    The  long  stick  which  they 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 


dissect  with  this  tool  rests  on  an  upright,  and  is  held  straight  by  the  left  hand.   Th« 
workshop  of  Joseph  at  Nazareth  could  not  have  been  simpler,  or,  I  might  say, 
ruder,  for  this  one  seems  originally  to  have  been  a  small  cavern  in  the  hillside,  the 
front  being  filled  in,  except  the  door,  with  masonry,  to  fit  it  for  its  present  purpose. 
The  roof  is  ceiled  with  a  coating  of  reed-stalks,  which  sadly  needs  repair ;  the  walla 
are  in  their  natural  roughness ;  the  floor  is  the  limestone ;  the  door  might  have 
been  made  by  one  of  Noah's  carpenters,  so  roughly  is  it  put  together.     A  woman 
outside,  with  a  nearly  naked  child  astride  her  shoulder,  her  forehead  and  neck 
bright  with  coins,  is  looking  in,  with  ourselves,  at  the  busy  scene.    Turning  uppne 
of  the  short,  steep  side  lanes,  I  found  a  second  street  parallel  with  the  principal 
one,  but  dirtier.    At  some  points,  on  the  lower  side  of  the  main  street,  houses  extend 
a  short  way  down  the  hill,  with  stairs  outside.    One  I  noticed  with  the  stone  wall 
built  on  the  edge  of  the  limestone,  so  that  the  view  was  uninterrupted  to  the  bottom 
of  the  valley.    A  very  rickety  hand-rail  guarded  the  inner  side ;  such  a  rail  as  the 
whole  West  could  not  match  ;  made  of  natural  wood,  rough,  bent,  gaping,  set  on 
the  steps,  held  in  its  place  one  knew  not  how.     Stairs  and  house  alike  were  built  in 
arches ;  the  wooden  railing  alone  vindicating  the  rude  backwardness  of  the  East. 
Two  women  sat  grinding  corn  on  the  landing  above  the  first  flight ;  ayoung  woman 
and  a  young  man  were  enjoying  an  interview  lower  down,  and  a  miserable-looking 
old  woman  surveyed  the  world  from  above.     (C  Geikie,  D.D.)       The  Church  of  the 
Nativity  : — The  entrance  to  the  Church  of  the  Nativity  faces  an  open  space ;  the 
promenade  of  older  Bethlehemites,  and  the  playground  of  younger.     Old  marble 
pillars  lie  side  by  side  in  one  part  of  it,  and  serve  as  a  seat  for  the  weary  or  idle, 
and  a  centre  of  activity  for  urchins,  who  must  clamber  over  something,  even  in  the 
city  of  David.     The  old  arched  gateway  into  the  church  has  been  long  ago  filled  up 
with  heavy  square  stones,  to  resist  attack,  and  now  the  only  entrance  is  by  a  small 
door,  less  than  three  feet  broad,  and  hardly  four  feet  high  ;  but  it  is  well  that  the 
proudest  have  to  stoop  in  entering  a  buildiug  so  venerable.     Contemporary  evidence 
proves  that  it  was  built  by  order  of  Constantine,  so  that  it  is  the  oldest  church  in 
Palestine,  perhaps  in  the  world.  Within,  you  are  in  the  presence  of  sixteen  centuries, 
and  tread  ground  hallowed  by  the  footsteps  of  nearly  fifty  generations  of  believers 
in  the  Crucified  One.    You  find  yourself  in  a  small,  bare  porch,  once  approached 
through  a  spacious  quadrangle  on  the  open  space  outside,  with  covered  ways,  lined 
•with  rows  of  pillars,  in  front  and  at  the  sides,  and  provision  for  baptism  and  obla- 
tion in  the  centre.     From  this,  three  spacious  arched  gates  led  into  the  ancient 
porch,  which  ran  along  great  part  of  the  west  end  of  the  church  ;  but  two  of  the 
gates  have  been  entirely  built  up,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  only  a  very  small  doorway 
is  left  in  the   third,  for  fear  of  the  Mahommedans.     The  porch  is  dark,  and  is 
divided  by  walls  into  different  chambers.     Inside,  the  venerable  simplicity  is  very 
impressive.     You  face  the  east  end,  which  is  170  feet  from  the  western  wall,  and, 
proceeding  to  the  centre,  find  yourself  under  a  nave  which  rises  in  a  pointed  roof 
about  thirty  feet  over  the  capitals  of  the  great  pillars,  nineteen  feet  high,  which 
support  an  aisle  on  each  side.    A  clerestory,  with  five  arched  windows  at  each  side, 
admits  abundant  light.    The  aisles  are  flat-roofed,  supported  in  the  centre  by  a 
row  of  eleven  massive  pillars,  while  another  row  of  the  same  number  holds  up  the 
straight  beams  of  the  lofty  nave,  the  windows  over  which  correspond  to  the  spaces 
between  the  columns  below.    Once  elaborately  painted,  there  is  now  little  ornament 
left  on  them,  except  some  faint  indications  of  former  pictures  of  saints,  and  armorial 
bearings  and  mottoes,  left  eight  hundred  years  ago  by  the  Crusaders,  with  whose 
greatest  chiefs  it  was  a  great  matter  to  have  their  names  emblazoned  in  the  church 
of  the  Nativity.     The  columns,  each  one  mighty  whole,  are  of  reddish  liraestone  with 
white  veins,  and  rest  on  great  square  slabs,  the  capitals  being  Corinthian,  and  the 
architraves  very  simple.     The  pointed  roof  of  the  nave  was  once  richly  painted 
and  gildfd,  but  this  glory  has  long  ago  departed  ;  and  the  spaces  between  the  high 
windows  at  its  sides  were  formerly  covered  with  marbles  and  mosaics,  but  though 
the  marbles  remain,  the  mosaics  survive  only  in  fragments.     When  perfect,  these 
represented,  on  the  south  side,  the  seven  immediate  ancestors  of  Joseph,  the  hus- 
band of  the  Holy  Virgin.   Above  them,  concealed  by  curtains,  are  niches  containing 
altars,  on  which  books  of  the  Gospels  rest ;  and  on  a  line  with  these  is  a  strange 
mosaic  of  coloured  glass,  on  a  gilded  ground,  representing  a  huge  plant,  the  creation 
of  some  one's  brain  long  ago,  not  the  imitation  of  any  natural  growth.   A  short  way 
down  the  aisle  stands  the  ancient  baptismal  font,  eight-sided,  with  an  inscription  in 
Greek  on  a  table  below,  over  a  small  sculptured  cross  "  (Given)  as  a  memorial,  before 
God,  and  for  the  peace  and  forgiveness  of  the  sinners  (who  presented  itj,  of  whom 


n.]  ST.  LUKE.  115 

the  Lord  knows  the  names."  Humble  enough  I  But  all  the  more  likely  to  be  noted 
above.  It  brings  one  in  mind  of  the  dying  request  of  the  once  imperious  Alfonso  de 
Ojeda,  erewhile  the  haughtiest  knight  of  Castile,  yet  in  the  end  lowly  before  hia 
Saviour — that  they  should  bury  him  at  the  entrance  to  the  Cathedral  at  Havana, 
that  every  one,  as  he  went  in,  might  tread  on  the  dust  of  so  unworthy  a  worm.  A 
wall  on  the  east  side  of  this  many-pillared  square  space,  runs  across  aisles  and  nave 
alike  ;  the  former  ending  here,  though  the  nave  really  extends  beyond  this  line  to 
the  east  end  of  the  church,  which  is  rounded  into  a  projecting  half-circle,  or  apse ; 
the  secret  chamber  of  the  Greek  altar  and  choir,  for  in  Greek  worship  both  are 
hidden  from  the  congregation  by  a  screen.  This  apsidal  end,  with  two  similar  semi- 
circles at  the  two  ends  of  the  transept,  gives  the  shape  of  a  Latin  cross  to  the  whole 
building.  Descending  the  steps  from  the  raised  floor  of  the  eastern  part  of  the  nave, 
and  turning  sharply  to  the  left,  a  half-sunk  arched  doorway  leads  you  down  by 
thirteen  steps  to  the  Chapel  of  the  Nativity  ;  once  a  rude  cave ;  now  paved  and 
walled  with  marble,  and  lighted  by  thirty-two  lamps.  About  forty  feet  from  east  to 
west,  it  is  only  sixteen  wide  and  ten  high,  and,  of  course,  would  be  totally  dark  but 
for  the  artificial  illumination,  for  it  lies  immediately  under  the  great  choir,  at  the 
very  east  of  the  church.  The  roof  is  covered  with  what  had  once  been  striped  cloth 
of  gold ;  three  huge  candlesticks,  with  candles  rising  higher  than  your  head,  stand 
at  the  back ;  and  in  front,  between  two  marble  pillars,  a  large  picture  of  the 
Nativity,  and  some  small  ones  below  it,  rest  on  a  projecting  shelf  of  marble,  forming 
the  altar.  Below  this  is  a  shrine  unspeakably  sacred  to  millions  of  our  fellow 
Christians.  It  is  semi -circular,  arching  outwards  above,  and  at  most  only  four  feet 
high.  Fifteen  silver  lamps  burn  in  it,  night  and  day,  lighting  up  the  painted 
marbles  which  encrust  it ;  and  in  the  centre  of  its  small  floor  is  a  silver  star — 
marking  the  spot,  it  is  believed,  over  which  the  Star  of  the  East  once  rested — with 
an  inscription,  at  the  sight  of  which,  I  frankly  confess,  I  wept  like  a  child:  "Hie 
de  Virgine  Maria  Jesus  Christus  natus  est."  A  Turkish  soldier,  gun  in  hand,  and 
fez  on  head,  stood  a  few  steps  behind,  but  I  forgot  his  presence.  _  Pilgrims  kneeled 
down  and  kissed  the  silver  which  spoke  a  story  so  infinitely  touching,  and  I  did  the 
same.  There  is  no  reason,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  to  doubt  that  in  this  cave,  so  hallowed 
by  immemorial  veneration,  the  great  event  associated  with  it  actually  took  place. 
Nor  is  there  any  ground  for  hesitation  because  it  is  a  cave  that  is  regarded  as  the 
sacred  spot.  Nothing  is  more  common  in  a  Palestine  village,  built  on  a  hill,  than 
to  use  as  adjuncts  of  the  houses,  the  caves  with  which  all  the  limestone  rocks  of 
the  country  abound;  making  them  the  store-room,  perhaps,  or  the  workshop,  or  the 
stable,  and  building  the  dwellings  before  them  so  as  to  join  the  two.  (Ibid.)  Illus- 
trious  pedigree  in  obscurity : — It  need  not  surprise  us  that  the  representatives  of  such 
an  illustrious  ancestry  should  be  found  in  a  station  so  obscure.  In  the  book  of 
Judges,  we  find  a  grandson  of  Moses  reduced  to  engage  himself  as  family  priest,  in 
Mount  Ephraim,  for  a  yearly  wage  of  "ten  shekels,  a  suit  of  apparel,  and  his 
victuals."  At  the  present  day,  the  green  turban  which  marks  descent  from  Mahomet 
is  often  worn  in  the  East  by  the  very  poor,  and  even  by  beggars.  In  our  own  history, 
the  glory  of  the  once  illustrious  Plantagenets  so  completely  waned,  that  the  direct 
representative  of  Margaret  Plantagenet,  daughter  and  heiress  of  George  Duke  of 
Clarence,  followed  the  trade  of  a  cobbler  in  Newport,  Shropshire,  in  1637.  Among 
the  lineal  descendants  of  Edmund  of  Woodstock,  sixth  son  of  Edward  I.,  and 
entitled  to  quarter  the  royal  arms,  were  a  village  butcher,  and  a  keeper  of  a  turn- 
pike gate,  and  among  the  descendants  of  Thomas  Plantagenet,  Duke  of  Gloucester, 
fifth  son  of  Edward  HI.,  was  included  the  late  sexton  of  a  London  church.  The 
vicissitudes  of  the  Jewish  nation  for  century  after  century;  its  deportation  to 
Babylon,  and  long  suspension  of  national  life ;  its  succession  of  high  priestly  rulers, 
after  the  return ;  its  transition  to  the  Asmonean  line,  and,  finally,  the  reign  of  the 
Idumean  house  of  Herod,  with  all  the  storm  and  turmoil  which  marked  so  many 
changes,  had  left,  to  use  the  figure  of  Isaiah,  only  a  root  in  a  dry  ground,  an  humble 
citizen  of  Nazareth,  as  the  heir  of  its  ancient  royalty.     (Ibid.)  Subsidiary 

lives  : — Hence,  sometimes  one  life  will  appear  to  have  been  almost  solely  devoted 
to  the  mere  selecting,  developing,  and  energizing  another.  For  example,  remember 
Hannah.  Her  lot  was  an  exceedingly  humble  one.  It  seemed  linked  with  a  pur- 
pose no  more  extraordinary  than  that  of  a  hundred  other  Hebrew  mothers.  She 
came  to  Eli  at  least  twice  in  the  temple  ;  yet  so  unobtrusive  and  so  unremarkable 
was  she,  that  she  had  each  time  to  introduce  herself  to  the  busy  man,  and  repeat 
her  name  and  errand.  To  wean  the  infant  Samuel,  and  bring  him  a  little  coat 
every  year,  was  about  all  we  know  of  the  purpose  for  which  Hannah's  life  was  sel 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (cha».  n. 

in  the  infinite  counsels  of  heaven.  So  of  Andrew :  he  was  one  of  the  chosen  twelve, 
and  there  is  one  pattern  of  cross  that  bears  his  name,  because  he  was  martyred  upon 
it.  But  all  we  positively  read  about  a  man  so  true  and  good,  is  that  he  brought 
Simon  Peter  to  Jesus.  So  of  Joseph,  the  Nazarene  carpenter ;  he  shows  himself  in 
the  early  history  of  the  Bethlehem  babe ;  but  Scripture,  after  it  has  exhibited  how 
useful  he  was  in  guarding  the  reputation  of  the  Virgin-Mother,  dismisses  him  so 
suddenly  that  nobody  knows  where  he  was  buried,  or  even  where  he  died.  {R. 
Robinson.)  Christ  bom  in  Bethlehem : — 1.  The  place  where  Christ  was  bom  ii 
observable.  Not  Nazareth,  but  Bethlehem,  in  accordance  with  Micah's  prediction. 
We  may  suppose  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  little  thought  of  changing  her  place,  but 
to  have  been  dehvered  of  her  Holy  Burden  at  Nazareth,  where  it  was  conceived. 
Her  house  at  Nazareth  had  been  honoured  by  the  presence  of  the  angel ;  yea,  by  the 
overshadowing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  that  house  there,  we  may  suppose,  was  most 
satisfactory  to  the  Virgin's  desire.  But  He  who  made  choice  of  the  womb  where 
His  Son  sbould  be  conceived,  it  was  fit  He  should  also  choose  the  place  where  His 
Son  should  be  bom.  And  this  place,  many  hundred  years  before,  was  foretold 
should  be  Bethlehem.  2.  How  remarkable  was  the  providence  of  God  in  bringing 
the  Virgin  up  from  Nazareth  to  Bethlehem,  that  Christ,  as  it  was  prophesied  of  Him, 
might  be  born  there.  How  the  wisdom  of  God  overrules  the  actions  of  men,  for 
higher  or  nobler  ends  than  they  aimed  at.  The  emperor's  aim  by  this  edict  was 
to  fill  his  coffers  ;  God's  end  was  to  fulfil  his  prophecies.  3.  How  readily  Joseph 
and  Mary  yielded  obedience  to  the  edict  and  decree  of  this  heathen  emperor.  It 
was  no  less  than  four  days'  journey  from  Nazareth  to  Bethlehem  ;  how  just  an 
excuse  might  the  Virgin  have  pleaded  for  her  absence  I  What  woman  ever  under- 
took so  hazardous  a  journey,  when  so  near  her  delivery?  And  Joseph,  no  doubt, 
was  sufficiently  unwilling  to  draw  her  forth  into  so  manifest  a  hazard.  But  as  the 
emperor's  command  was  peremptory,  so  their  obedience  was  exemplary.  We  must 
not  plead  difficulty  for  withdrawing  our  obedience  to  supreme  commands.  How 
did  our  Saviour,  even  in  the  womb  of  His  mother,  yield  homage  to  civil  rulers  and 
governors  I  The  first  lesson  which  Christ's  example  taught  the  world,  was  loyalty 
and  obedience  to  the  supreme  magistrate.  4.  After  many  weary  steps  the  holy 
Virgin  comes  to  Bethlehem,  where  every  house  is  taken  up  by  reason  of  the  great 
confluence  of  people  that  came  to  be  taxed ;  and  there  is  no  room  for  Christ  but  in 
a  stable ;  the  stable  His  palace,  the  manger  His  cradle.  Oh,  how  can  we  be 
abased  low  enough  for  Him  who  thus  neglected  Himself  for  us !  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.) 
Christ's  lowly  birth :— The  lowly  birth  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world  is — 1.  Surprising, 
when  we  consider  who  He  is  that  comes.  2.  Intelligible,  when  we  ask  why  Ha 
comes.  3.  A  cause  of  joy,  when  we  see  for  whom  He  comes.  {J.  J.  Van  Oostertee, 
D.D.)  Christ's  threefold  birth:— The  threefold  birth  of  the  Son  of  God.  1. 
Begotten  of  the  Father  before  all  worlds.  2.  Born  of  flesh  in  the  world.  3.  Bom 
of  the  Spirit  in  us.  (F.  IF.  Krummaclier,  D.D. )  Birth  of  the  Son  of  Ood :— It  ia 
necessary  for  a  due  celebration  of  Christmas,  that  we  shoidd  recognize  the  Son  of 
God  in  the  new-born  child;  for,  without  this  recognition,  we  should  lack — (1)  the 
full  reason  for  and  due  appreciation  of,  this  celebration  ;  (2)  we  should  observe  it 
without  the  right  spirit ;  and  (3)  fail  to  obtain  its  true  blessing.  {Kuchler.) 
Christ's  birth  in  Bethlehem  : — The  Son  of  God  born  in  the  little  town  of  Bethlehem, 
ft  proof — (1)  that  the  Lord  certainly  performs  what  He  promises ;  (2)  that  with  God 
nothmg  is  impossible  ;  (3)  that  nothing  is  too  mean  or  too  lowly  for  God.  (Fuchs.) 
Christmas  a  children's  festival: — The  festival  of  Christmas  a  children's  festival; 
for — 1.  It  leads  us  to  a  Child.  2.  It  fills  the  world  of  children  with  joy.  3.  Its 
due  celebration  demands  a  childlike  spirit.  (Florey.)  Christ's  birth  in  an  inn : — 
Christ  was  bom  in  an  inn,  to  intimate — (1)  That  He  was  homeless  in  this  world  ;(2) 
that  He  was  a  pilgrim  on  earth,  as  we  ought  to  be  ;  (3)  that  He  welcomes  aU  comers, 
and  entertains  them,  but  without  money  and  without  price.  {Matthew  Henry.) 
The  birth  of  Jesus  the  new  birth  of  the  human  race  : — 1.  Without  the  birth  of  Jesus, 
the  new  birth  of  mankind  is  impossible.  2.  With  it,  the  new  birth  is  begun  8. 
By  it,  the  new  birth  is  assured.    (J.  J.  Van  Oostertee,  D.D.) 

Ter.  6.  The  days  were  accomplished. — The  birth  of  Christ : — The  whole  of  the 
world's  history  led  up  to  this  night.  It  is  the  hinge  on  which  the  history  of  man 
turns.  The  whole  of  mankind  from  Adam  waited  for  this  night.  All  the  prophets, 
from  righteous  Enoch  to  John  the  preacher  of  repentance,  laboured  to  prepare  the 
way  for  Him  who  came  on  this  night.  The  W'ord  was  made  flesh  to  sanetity 
human  nature.     God  descended  to  man,  to  raise  man  to  God.    Christmas  is  the 


.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  lit 

feast  of  salvation  for  all  mankind.  The  heathen  were  at  this  time  celebrating  their 
Baturnalia,  in  remembrance  of  the  Golden  Age,  which  indeed  had  never  been  since 
•in  was  in  the  world,  an  age  when,  they  said,  all  the  world  was  full  of  light,  and 
joy,  and  innocence.  But  these  were  times  for  ever  gone  by,  times  from  which  every 
century  was  removing  them  further  morally,  as  well  as  actually.  Yet,  see  1  how 
Christmas  comes  to  turn  the  vain  and  wistful  backward  look  into  a  look  forwards. 
The  evening  and  the  morning  form  the  day  according  to  the  Divine  reckoning,  not 
the  morning  and  the  evening.  First  comes  darkness,  and  then  light;  first  sadness, 
then  joy ;  first  desire,  then  fulfilment.  Christ  came  to  bid  the  old  heathens  turn 
away  from  contemplation  of  the  past,  and  through  Him  look  to  the  coming  of  the 
true  Golden  Age,  the  age  when,  from  the  new  beavcns  and  the  new  earth,  sin  and 
sighing  shall  have  fled ;  when  He,  who  is  the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the  Ever- 
lasting Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  of  His  king- 
dom there  shall  be  no  end.  Christ  has  not,  indeed,  founded  on  earth  the  Golden 
Age  such  as  the  Gentiles  lusted  after,  any  more  than  He  came  to  be  the  Messiah 
Buch  as  the  Jews  longed  for  ;  He  did  not  come  to  give  peace  to  the  world  itself,  but 
an  inner  peace,  a  peace  that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God — not  such  as  the  world  giveth 
— a  peace  which  cannot  be  broken  and  taken  away,  a  peace  to  be  won  through  con- 
flict and  storm  and  anguish.  He  came  not  to  give  earthly  riches  and  prosperity, 
but  the  true  riches,  which  are  spiritual  The  Incarnation  has  made  that  possible 
which  before  was  impossible.  The  heathen  looked  back  to  the  reign  of  Peace  and 
Innocence  and  Plenty  as  something  past  and  unattainable.  Christ  shows  it  as 
future,  and  opens  the  kingdom  of  the  Golden  Age  to  all.  Earth  and  heaven  are 
united.  Man  is  made  a  citizen  of  Heaven,  a  member  of  the  Golden  Engdom  that 
is  preparing  and  awaiting  its  manifestation.  On  earth  man  is  subject  to  temptation, 
with  the  world  ever  striving  to  stamp  out  and  destroy  the  spiritual  kingdom,  as 
Herod,  its  type,  sought  to  destroy  the  infant  Messiah ;  on  earth,  but  not  of  it,  man 
waits  and  prepares  himself,  and  prays,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  knowing  that  the 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God  in  the  coming  Golden  Age  cannot  be  till  God's 
will  is  done  by  His  subjects  on  earth  as  it  is  done  by  the  denizens  of  heaven.  At 
the  heathen  Saturnalia  all  distinction  between  slave  and  master  was  done  away,  to 
return  into  full  force  when  the  feast  was  over.  Christmas  shows  us  Him  who  is 
very  God  made  the  servant  of  all,  taking  on  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  made  in 
the  likeness  of  flesh,  that  He  might  redeem  men  from  slavery,  and  set  them  free  in 
the  glorious  liberty  of  childhood  to  God.  And  as  on  this  day  the  birth  of  the 
visible  sun  was  kept,  because  the  days  have  been  shortening,  and  now  appear  to 
lengthen  again,  Christ  calls  the  Gentiles  to  look  away  from  the  sun  that  rules  the 
day  to  Himself,  who  is  the  true  Light  of  the  world,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness, 
rising  with  healing  on  His  wings,  who  comes  with  promise  of  a  day  etenial,  in 
which  there  will  be  no  created  sun  or  moon,  or  humanly-made  candle,  but  the  Lord 
God  will  be  the  light,  and  there  shall  be  no  night  more.  {S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.) 
Tlie  joy  of  Christmas : — Christmas  Day  is  characteristically  different  from  other 
festivals,  such  as  Easter  or  Whitsunday.  It  has  a  softer,  tenderer,  more  domestio 
interest  about  it.  It  falls  in  with  other  feelings,  and  blends  with  some  of  the 
closest  and  dearest  associations  of  family  life.  A  first-born  child  in  common  life — 
born,  it  may  be,  after  a  season  of  gloom  and  distress ;  an  heir,  it  may  be,  of  a 
throne,  or  born  in  the  humblest  life,  what  is  a  first-born  child  but  the  sweet  and 
happy  embodiment  of  hope  and  promise,  of  happy  days,  of  daily  developing 
defight,  of  good  and  noble  manhood  ?  So  it  is  in  our  common  everyday  life ;  and 
those  who  do  not  know  it  of  their  own,  know  it  well  for  their  friends,  how  deeply, 
thankfully  sinks  into  the  heart  of  man  the  delight  of  a  newborn,  a  first-born  child. 
So,  I  say,  of  common  life  and  ordinary  families.  But  this  day  saw  the  birth,  not 
of  the  first-bom  of  ordinary  human  parents,  but  of  the  Child  of  heaven  and  earth, 
the  Child  of  God  and  man,  the  Child  for  whom  both  heaven  and  earth  were  waiting 
in  anxious  expectation  of  redemption  and  restitution,  the  Child  of  hopes  unspeak- 
able— hopes  that  could  not  be  frustrated  to  those  who  would  hold  them  fast ;  the 
Heir  of  heaven,  the  Heir  of  earth,  the  Heir  in  whose  inheritance  all  men  might 
regain  the  inheritance  of  their  Father's  kingdom.  .  .  .  Then  let  us  keep  this  holy 
dby  with  peaceful,  happy,  Christian  thankfulness.  Let  it  be  a  day  of  sober  joy,  of 
ontponring  charity,  of  mutual  Christian  love,  of  deepminded  peace.  It  is  a  day  of 
family  concord;  a  day  for  special  parental  love,  and  special  filial  duty  and 
obedience ;  a  day  on  which  the  internal  affection  of  families  should  be  warmest  and 
brightest ;  a  day  that  shonld  know  of  no  bickerings  or  irritations  between  those  of 
the  same  honsehold,  brothers  and  sisters,  fellow-servants,  and  aU  others.    It  is  a 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  tu 

day  for  neighbourly  kindness,  mutual  forgiveness,  interchange  of  all  friendly 
offices.  It  iB  a  day  which,  opening  our  hearts  in  grateful  love  to  God,  should  open- 
them  also  in  brotherly  kindness  to  one  another,  and  help  us  all  on  towards  thai 
blessed  goal  which  we  all  hope  to  reach,  and  which  none  will  reach  so  surely  as 
those  who  are  doing  their  best  to  enable  others  to  reach  it  also.  {Bishop  Moberly.) 
The  greatest  event  on  the  smallest  of  scales : — And  in  speaking  of  the  greatness  of 
the  event  of  Christmas  Day,  let  us  observe  further  one  peculiarity  of  its  outward 
circumstances  that  conveys  to  us  a  special  lesson  concerning  greatness  of  all  kinds. 
This  decisive  world-historical  birthday  took  place  in  a  small  inn  of  a  small  village 
of  a  small  province  of  a  small  nation.  It  was  the  greatest  of  events  on  the 
smallest  of  scales.  There  are  some  who  think  that  all  events  and  characters  are 
to  be  measured  by  the  magnitude  of  the  stage  on  which  they  appear ;  there  are 
some  who  are  perplexed  by  the  thought  that  this  globe,  on  which  the  history  of 
man  is  enacted,  is  now  known  to  be  a  mere  speck  in  the  universe :  there  are  some 
who  are  startled  on  learning  for  the  first  time  that  the  heathen  world  far  out- 
numbers the  Christian,  and  that  the  famous  Indian  teacher,  Buddha,  counts  myriads 
more  worshippers  than  Christ.  But  the  moment  we  go  below  the  surface  we  find 
that  the  truth  conveyed  to  us  by  the  birth  of  the  world's  Redeemer  in  the  Uttle 
village  of  Bethlehem  is  the  likeness  of  a  principle  which  ramifies  far  and  wide.  It 
was  once  said  to  me  by  a  distinguished  American,  "  The  truth  which  needs 
especially  to  be  impressed  rpon  us  Americans  is  that  bigness  is  not  greatness."  li 
was  a  truth  which  a  well-known  English  philosopher  had  already  impressed  upon 
his  American  audience  with  a  courage  which  they  were  honest  enough  to  appreciate. 
The  fact  is  that  the  great  nations  of  the  world  have  almost  always  been  amongst 
the  smallest  in  size.  Europe  is  diminutive  compared  with  any  of  the  other  conti- 
nents, and  yet  Europe  is  certainly  the  seat  and  centre  of  the  world's  history. 
Athens  in  its  greatest  days  was  as  nothing  compared  with  Babylon  and  Nineveh,, 
and  yet  Athens  was  the  eye  of  the  world's  civiUzation.  Palestine  was  not  nearly 
half  the  size  even  of  our  own  Uttle  island,  and  yet  Palestine  is  the  cradle  of  the 
world's  religion.  {Dean  Stanley.)  On  the  most  striking  circumstances  that  dis- 
tinguished the  birth  of  the  Redeemer  : — I.  His  immaculatb  and  utbtebiodb  con- 
ception. Ancient  mythology  teems  with  instances  of  a  fictitious  correspondence 
between  Divine  and  human  kind.  In  that  credulous  age,  whoever  had  the  good 
fortune  to  excel  his  competitors  in  wisdom,  arts,  or  arms,  boasted  an  alliance  with 
heaven.  Even  the  best  among  them  did  not  scruple  to  blast  maternal  honour  for 
the  sake  of  this  imaginary  distinction.  But,  fantastical  as  it  was  in  them,  it  is  an 
evidence  to  us,  that  the  idea  was  then  sufficiently  popular  to  warrant  and  protect 
the  fact  from  implicit  reprobation  when  it  happened.  Indeed  the  various  impoBtnw»<» 
of  this  kind,  which  mark  the  annals  of  paganism,  most  probably  resulted  from 
some  of  the  earliest  predictions  of  the  Messiah's  birth,  which  might  be  propagated 
among  the  heathen  by  tradition,  as  it  was  preserved  among  the  Jews  by  Scripture. 
II.  The  era  of  Christ's  nativity,  interesting  as  it  was  to  the  children  of  men,  was 

NOT  ANNOUNCED  BY  ANT  OP  THOSE  FULSOME   FORMS  OF  OSTENTATIOUS  SPLENDOUB  WHICH' 

MAEK  THE  BIRTH  OF  THE  GREAT.  His  kingdom  was  uot  of  thifl  world,  and  He 
deigned  not  to  borrow  its  rites.  But  His  insignia  are  stamped  in  the  heavens 
(Matt.  ii.  2).  Angels  announced  His  advent  with  strains  of  highest  rapture.  III. 
The  world  was  little  affected  by  this  event  so  essential  to  its  welfare.  This, 
perhaps,  is  the  most  extraordinary  circumstance  of  all,  that  dignified  and  dis- 
tinguished that  occasion.  Those  already  specified  were  evidently  adapted  by 
Providence  to  assert  the  importance,  and  attest  the  truth  of  His  character.  But 
what  shall  we  say  of  the  meanness,  the  ignominy,  the  contempt  to  which  the  Son 
of  God  condescended  in  taking  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  man  ?  The  gospel  accounts 
sufficiently  for  this.  It  is  intended  to  suppress  the  arrogant,  and  elevate  all  the 
milder  sensibilities  of  the  heart.  Christ  came  to  inculcate  the  principles  of  virtue 
and  rehgious  wisdom ;  not  to  swell  the  passions,  or  stimulate  the  wishes  of  am- 
bition, but  to  refine  fallen  and  degraded  human  nature;  not  to  pamper  the 
appetites  of  men,  but  to  wean  them  from  the  sensual  and  temporary  enjoyments 
of  this  life,  by  those  of  a  rational,  spiritual,  and  immortal  kind.  It  weis,  indeed,  one 
capital  object  of  this  Divine  embassy,  to  set  the  insignificance  of  those  things  whio'a 
dazzle  our  senses,  and  mislead  our  hearts,  in  the  strongest  and  most  affecting  point 
of  view.  And  how  could  He  do  it  more  efifectually  than  by  the  poverty  and  abjection 
in  which  He  made  His  appearance  and  progress  through  life  ?  The  most  likely 
means  of  detaching  His  disciples  from  the  world,  was  giving  them  in  this  manner 
an  example  of  living  above  it.     They  caxmot  consistently  be  covetous  of  dis- 


ohIlF.  n.]  8T.  LUKE  119 

tinctions,  which  are  so  uniformly  despised  by  their  Master.  Conclusion  :  Do  not 
Imagine  that  this  festival  requires  no  preparation  of  you.  Let  one  and  all  "  pre- 
pare the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  make  straight  His  paths."  Come,  ye  miserable 
sinners,  laden  with  the  insupportable  burden  of  your  sins;  come,  ye  troubled 
eonsciences,  uneasy  at  the  remembrance  of  your  many  idle  words,  many  criminal 
thoughts,  many  abominable  actions ;  come,  ye  poor  mortals,  condemned  first  to 
bear  the  infirmities  of  nature,  the  caprices  of  society,  the  vicissitudes  of  age,  the 
turns  of  fortune,  and  then  the  horrors  of  death,  and  the  frightful  night  of  the 
tomb ;  come,  behold  the  Wonderful,  the  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting 
Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace ;  take  Him  into  your  arms,  learn  to  desire  nothing  more 
when  you  possess  Him.     (B.  Murphy.) 

Yet.  7.  Her  flrst-bom  Son. — Birth  of  Christ  the  Lord  : — I.  Christ's  relation  to 
tHB  POOB.  1.  When  He  came  in  so  lowly  circumstances,  consenting  to  lay  His 
head  in  a  manger,  none  of  the  pomps  of  royalty  about  Him,  how  touchingly  and 
tenderly  He  spoke  to  the  vast  majority  of  the  world.  There  is  a  bond  of  sympathy 
between  Him  and  the  multitude  whose  condition  is  one  of  struggles,  deprivations, 
and  anxieties.  Here  is  a  warrant  of  His  love  ;  here  is  something  to  secure  their 
confidence,  draw  out  their  hearts,  lead  them  to  admiration.  2.  How  plain,  in  the 
light  of  this  event,  is  the  folly  of  estimating  men  by  their  birth  or  surroundings. 
What  a  rebuke  on  the  worldliness  of  earth,  on  our  unseemly  regard  for  temporal 
surroundings.  If  Christ,  the  King  of  kings,  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  Son  of 
the  Highest,  could  take  so  lowly  a  station,  we  are  weak  indeed,  if  we  judge  men 
hereafter  by  the  canopy  on  their  cradles  or  the  jewels  on  their  swaddling-bands.  II. 
The  importance  of  infancy.  Why  was  Christ  a  babe  ?  To  link  Himself  at  every 
Btage  with  humanity  ;  to  indicate  the  sweetness  and  preciousness  of  infant  life.  In 
that  quaint,  fragile  casket — a  babe — is  the  jewel  of  an  immortal  soul.  There  lie 
the  germs  of  immense  possibilities.  The  soul  is  as  yet  in  embryo,  but  it  is  there. 
He  turns  against  his  better  nature,  against  the  teachings  of  Christ's  life,  who  has  no 
interest  in  the  new-born  babe.  III.  The  superior  importance  of  the  spiritual  to 
•XHB  haterial.  How  little  do  we  know  of  the  material  circumstances  of  Christ's  life ! 
Even  this  great  event.  His  birth,  is  shrouded  in  comparative  darkness.  God  would 
show  us  the  comparative  insignificance  of  temporal  things.  Christ  came  to  teach 
spiritual  truth.  IV.  Christ's  coming  was  the  pivotal  event  of  the  world's  history. 
From  Bethlehem  shall  go  forth  an  influence  that  shall  move  the  world.  That  Divine 
Babe  is  the  salvation  of  a  ruined  earth  1  (A.  P.  Foster.)  The  miraculous  concep- 
tion  not  unreasonable  : — Let  me  dispute  the  case  with  a  mere  natural  man.  How 
doth  the  harvest  of  the  field  enrich  the  husbandman  ?  It  is  answered,  By  the  seed 
which  is  sown  in  the  ground.  Say  again.  How  came  seed  into  the  world  to  sow 
the  ground  ?  Surely  you  must  confess  that  the  first  seed  had  a  Maker,  who  did  not 
derive  it  from  the  ears  of  wheat,  but  made  it  of  nothing  by  the  power  of  His  own 
hand  ;  says  St.  Austin,  "  then  God  could  make  a  man  without  the  seed  of  man  in 
the  Virgin's  womb,  who  made  seed  for  the  corn  before  ever  there  was  earing  or  har- 
vest." Nay,  there  is  an  instance  for  it  in  the  little  bees,  as  the  poet  doth  philoso- 
phize, they  do  not  bring  forth  their  young  ones,  as  other  creatures  do,  by  the  help 
of  male  and  female  together  ;  but  they  gather  the  seed  which  begets  the  young 
ones  from  the  dew  of  leaves,  and  herbs,  and  flowers,  and  so  they  bring  them  forth. 
{Bishop  Hacket.)  Christ  bom  without  the  curse  of  the  flesh  : — The  Virgin  conceived 
our  Lord  without  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  therefore  she  had  not  the  pangs  and 
travail  of  women  upon  her,  she  brought  Him  forth  without  the  curse  of  the  flesh. 
These  be  the  Fathers'  comparisons  :  as  bees  draw  honey  from  the  flower  without- 
offending  it,  as  Eve  was  taken  out  of  Adam's  side  without  any  grief  to  him,  as  » 
sprig  issues  out  of  the  bark  of  the  tree,  as  the  sparkling  light  from  the  brightness 
of  the  star,  such  ease  was  it  to  Mary  to  bring  forth  her  first-born  Son  ;  and  there- 
fore having  no  weakness  in  her  body,  feeling  no  want  of  vigour,  she  did  not  deliver 
Him  to  any  profane  hand  to  be  dressed,  but  by  a  special  ability,  above  all  that  are 
newly  delivered,  she  wrapt  Him  in  swaddling  clouts.  {Ibid.)  Christ  wrapped  in 
swaddling  clothes  : — Now  these  clouts  here  meattoned  which  were  not  worth  the 
taking  up,  but  that  we  find  them  in  this  text,  are  more  to  be  esteemed  than  the 
robes  of  Solomon  in  all  his  royalty ;  yea,  more  valuable  than  the  beauty  of  the  lily^ 
or  any  flower  of  the  field  or  garden,  which  did  surpass  all  the  royalty  of  Solomon, 
I  may  say  they  are  the  pride  of  poverty,  for  I  know  not  in  what  thing  poverty  may 
better  boast  and  glory  than  in  the  rags  of  Christ.  {Ibid.)  1.  The  strange  con- 
iition  of  the  mother,  that  she  brought  forth  a  Son,  who  by  nature  was  no  bearer. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

for  she  was  a  virgin.  2.  The  strange  condition  of  the  Babe,  the  first-begotten  Son 
of  God  was  the  first-born  Son  of  flesh  and  blood.  3.  The  strange  condition  of  tha 
place,  that  she  laid  Him  in  a  manger.  4.  The  strange  condition  of  men,  that 
there  was  no  room  in  the  inn  for  Jesus  and  Mary.  (Ibid. )  The  Christ-child  : — 
Mother  and  child  !  What  more  beautiful  sight,  and  what  more  wonderful  sight  is 
there  in  the  world  ?  What  more  beautiful  ?  That  man  must  be  very  far  from  the 
Kingdom  of  God — he  is  not  worthy  to  be  called  a  man  at  all — whose  heart  has  not 
been  touched  by  the  sight  of  his  first  child  in  its  mother's  bosom.  The  greatest 
painters  who  have  ever  lived  have  tried  to  paint  the  beauty  of  that  simple  thing — a 
mother  with  her  babe  :  and  have  failed.  One  of  them,  Eataelle  by  name,  to  whom 
God  gave  the  spirit  of  beauty  in  a  measure  in  which  He  never  gave  it,  perhaps,  to 
any  other  man,  tried  again  and  again,  for  years,  painting  over  and  over  that  simple 
subject — the  mother  and  her  babe — and  could  not  satisfy  himself.  Each  of  hia 
pictures  is  most  beautiful — each  in  a  different  way  ;  and  yet  none  of  them  is  per- 
fect. There  is  more  beauty  in  that  simple  everyday  sight  than  he  or  any  man 
could  express  by  his  pencil  and  his  colours.  And  as  for  the  wonder  of  that  sight  I 
tell  you  this  :  That  physicians,  and  the  wise  men  who  look  into  the  laws  of  nature, 
of  flesh  and  blood,  say  that  the  mystery  is  past  their  finding  out ;  that  if  they  could 
find  out  the  whole  meaning,  and  the  true  meaning  of  those  two  words,  "  mother  "  and 
"  child,"  they  could  get  the  key  to  the  deepest  wonders  of  the  world — but  they  can- 
not.  And  philosophers  who  look  into  the  laws  of  soul  and  spirit  say  the  same.  The 
wiser  men  they  are,  the  more  they  find  in  the  soul  of  every  new-born  babe, 
and  its  kindred  to  its  mother,  wonders  and  puzzles  past  man's  understanding. 
This  then  we  are  to  think  of — God  revealed,  and  shown  to  men,  as  a  babe  upon 
His  mother's  bosom.  It  was  only  in  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  that  the  whole  of 
God's  character  shone  forth,  that  men  might  not  merely  find  Him  and  bow  before 
Him,  but  trust  in  Him  and  love  Him,  as  one  who  could  be  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  their  infirmities.  A  God  in  need  1  a  God  weak  I  a  God  fed  by  mortal  woman !  a 
God  wrapt  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  in  a  manger  1  If  that  sight  will  not  touch 
our  hearts,  what  will  ?  God  has  been  through  the  pains  of  infancy,  that  He  might 
take  on  Him  not  merely  the  nature  of  a  man,  but  all  human  nature,  from  the 
nature  of  the  babe  on  its  mother's  bosom,  to  the  nature  of  the  full-grown  and  full- 
flouled  man,  fighting  with  all  his  powers  against  the  evil  of  the  world.  All  this  is 
His,  and  He  is  aU  ;  that  no  human  beinf.  from  the  strongest  to  the  weakest,  from 
the  oldest  to  the  youngest,  but  may  be  ablt  tD  say,  "  What  I  am,  Christ  has  been !  " 
(C.  Kingsley.)  The  Advent  exalts  human  relations  : — Why  was  it  that  the  Eternal 
Son,  when  He  abandoned  that  "  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was,"  and  determined  to  be  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  was  pleased  to  make 
His  apparition  on  the  scene  of  the  world  even  as  others  do  ;  to  be  the  infant  and 
the  child  before  He  was  the  man  ;  to  be  subject  to  the  filial  obligation  in  the  ful- 
ness of  its  legitimate  extent ;  and  to  be  all  this  in  a  situation  in  which  such  ties 
were  stripped  of  all  that  could  recommend  them,  apart  from  their  own  intrinsic 
value — a  situation  in  which  wealth  could  not  adorn,  nor  authority  dignify 
them  ?  Assuredly  one  prominent  reason  was  that,  separatintj,  by  means  so  much 
more  intelligible  than  argumentative  statements,  what  was  essentially  excellent  in 
human  nature  from  its  depravations  and  corruptions,  He  might  bestow  a  special 
dignity  upon  those  primary  connections  of  human  life  upon  which  the  rest  so 
mainly  depend,  and  in  which  the  tenderer  and  better  affections  of  the  heart  find, 
»nd  were  meant  by  our  Creator  to  find,  their  peculiar  sphere  of  exercise.  Nothing 
can  more  truly  show  that  nature  and  revelation  came  from  the  same  hand,  than  the 
assumption  into  revelation  of  all  that  is  innocent  in  nature.  When  God,  as  Creator 
of  the  world,  bound  together  all  the  variety  of  human  connections  by  all  the  variety 
of  corresponding  affections,  He  wrought  a  work  destined  for  everlasting.  Dispensa- 
tions may  change,  but  these  things  are  not  meant  to  change.  And  thus  it  is  that, 
when  from  the  perusal  of  the  New  Testament  a  man  descends  into  the  charities  of 
social  life,  things  do  not  seem  changed  in  their  position,  but  wonderfully  beautified 
in  tbeir  complexion;  a  Diviner  glow  rests  upon  them  and  a  holier  sanctity.  There 
is  a  change,  but  it  is  a  chauge  that  adorns  without  disturbing.  It  is  as  if  a  man 
who  had  lived  in  a  twilight  world,  where  all  was  dimly  revealed  and  coldly  coloured, 
^ere  suddenly  to  be  surprised  with  the  splendour  of  a  summer  noon.  Objects 
would  still  remain,  and  relations  be  still  unbroken  ;  but  new  and  lovely  lights  and 
shadowings  would  cover  them  :  they  would  move  in  the  same  direction  as  before, 
but  under  an  atmosphere  impregnated  with  brighter  hues,  and  rich  with  a  light  that 
streamed  direct  from  heaven.    I.  Then,  by  what  means  could  this  high  result  bav* 


emr.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  121 

been  attained  with  such  force,  directness,  and  certainty,  as  has  been  effected  in  the 
adoption  by  our  God  of  those  very  connections  ?  So  far,  yon  can  perceive  a  strong 
reason  for  the  manner  of  Christ's  incarnation — for  His  advent  among  us  in  th» 
simplicity  of  our  ordinary  manhood.  Tou  can  perceive  that  it  conferred  an  inex 
pressible  dignity  upon  the  relation,  above  all  others,  of  the  mother  and  the  child. 
n.  I  would  add  that  of  His  design  to  exalt  this  as  well  as  the  other  natural 
relations,  to  make  them  high  and  sacred  elements  in  the  religion  He  was  about  to 
establish,  a  most  lovely  proof  is  insinuated  in  the  constant  employment  of  all  these 
connections  and  feelings  to  symbolize  the  eternal  realities  of  the  spiritual  world. 
in.  The  passage  before  us  speaks  not  merely  of  the  "  first-born,"  but  of  her  who 
bore  Him,  and  whose  mysterious  agonies  were  unsupported  by  the  aids  of  wealth  > 
and  the  appliances  of  luxury  ;  who  was  r©|ected  when  she  would  have  given  to  the 
Immortal  Infant  the  common  comforts  of  that  trying  hour  ;  and  who  had  to 
place  among  the  beasts  of  the  field,  less  insensate  than  man,  the  "  life  of  the . 
world  "  thus  cast  forth  to  die.  How  wondrous,  how  unf elt  before  or  since,  the  com- 
munion of  that  mother  and  that  Son  !  With  the  full  remembrance  of  His  super- 
natural descent,  to  sit  at  the  same  daily  table  for  all  those  long  and  untold  years 
that  preceded  the  public  ministry  of  the  great  prophet ;  to  recognize  in  Him  at- 
once  the  babe  of  her  bosom  and  the  God  of  her  immortality ;  to  catch,  ever  and  anon, , 
those  mystic  echoes  of  eternity  which  the  deeper  tenes  of  His  converse  would  reveal,, 
and  to  behold,  plainer  and  plainer,  as  He  grew,  the  lineaments  of  the  God  im- 
pressed upon  the  wondrous  inmate  of  her  humble  home  ;  surely  these  were 
experiences  to  dignify  that  mother  in  our  thoughts  ;  yea,  to  give  a  glory  and  a 
hallowing  to  maternity  itself  for  ever.  IV.  One  point,  above  all  others,  added  a 
peculiar  interest  to  that  wondrous  connection.  The  virgin  and  her  Son  stood  alone 
in  the  world  1  alone  in  the  long  line  of  the  human  race  1  He,  with  whom  she  waa 
60  awfully,  yet  endearingly  connected,  could  acknowledge  no  earthly  father,  no 
author  of  His  humanity,  but  that  overshadowing  Spirit  by  whose  mysterious  opera- 
tion  He  had  been  invested  with  our  nature.  In  that  awful  hour  of  Bethlehem 
there  must  have  mingled  with  the  sorrows  of  the  outcast  Virgin  the  trembling  joya 
of  one  who  knew  herself  the  supernatural  channel  of  the  Hope  of  the  human  race. 
And  though  she  might  own  to  the  feebleness  of  the  woman  in  that  hour  of  trial, 
and  deplore  amid  the  unworthy  accompaniments  of  such  a  scene  that  "low  estate" 
of  "  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord  "  which  had  reduced  her  to  them,  yet  as  she  gazed 
upon  that  Eternal  Child  in  whom  was  bound  up  the  regeneration  of  Israel,  of  the 
world,  "her  soul  could  magnify  the  Lord  and  her  spirit  rejoice  in  God  her  Saviour." 
{W.  Archer  Butler.)  The  Saviour  and  the  manger  : — For  ourselves  Christmas 
Day  is  one  of  universal  joy  ;  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  who  as  on  this  day  was  bom, 
there  is  a  loving  sadness.  His  birth  overshadowed  His  life.  His  very  coming 
into  the  world  was  a  heavy  prophecy  of  sorrow.  I.  Bokn  a  helpless  ONKNowoja 
BABB.  Unable  to  do  anything  ;  He  was  mocked  in  the  hour  of  His  Passion  ;  aa 
being  weak  and  foolish  ;  as  one  unable  to  reply  to  Herod  and  to  Pilate  (Isa.  liii.  17). 
The  burden  of  our  nature  was  laid  upon  Him  all  through  His  earthly  life,  which 
was  one  long  course  of  sacrifice  for  others.  The  weak  and  suffering  are  often  the 
workers  of  the  world.  II.  Boen  without  a  dwelling.  '•  No  room  for  Him  in  the 
inn  "  ;  whilst  living,  no  home  for  Him  in  Jerusalem  or  elsewhere  (Matt.  viii.  20). 
In  death  He  had  no  tomb  or  sepulchre  of  His  own.  Quite  possible  to  do  a  mighty 
work  for  the  world,  and  yet  have  no  lot  or  portion  in  it.  III.  Bokn  in  dakkness. 
Just  after  midnight ;  died  in  darkness  "  over  the  whole  land,"  just  after  midday. 
The  Light  of  the  world  came  into  it  at  dark,  to  make  it  bright  with  His  presence, 
which  presence  being  taken  away,  left  it  dark  again.  Type  of  a  soul  once  en- 
lightened, fallen  away  into  the  darkness  of  sin  (Matt.  vi.  23).  IV.  Born  on  a  habd 
COUCH.  Born  in  a  stable,  laid  in  a  manger.  He  died  extended  and  reposing  upon 
the  bitter  couch  of  the  cross.  A  birth,  life,  and  death  in  hardship.  This  world  a 
school  of  discipline  to  holy  souls.  V.  Boen  between  two  animals.  The  ox  and  the 
ass  were  with  Him  at  His  birth.  He  was  compelled  to  breathe  out  His  soul  be- 
tween two  thieves,  and  during  His  life  He  received  sinners.  Conclusion  :  Every  Ufa 
repeats  itself.  Marvellous  concord  between  Jesus  Christ  the  Child  and  Jesua 
Christ  the  Man,  the  manger  and  the  cross,  the  beginning  and  the  end.  {M.  Faber.) 
There  was  no  room  for  them  In  the  inn. — No  room  for  Christ  in  the  inn : — There  were 

OTEEB   EEASONS  WHT   ChRIST  SHOULD   BE   LAID   IN   THE   MANGEK.      1.   It    WaS    intended 

thus  to  show  forth  His  humiliation.  Would  it  not  have  been  inappropriate  that 
the  Bedeemer  who  was  to  be  buried  in  a  borrowed  tomb  should  be  born  anywhere 
bat  in  the  humblest  shed,  and  housed  anywhere  but  in  the  most  ignoble  manner?/^ 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA>.  «, 

The  manger  and  the  cross,  standing  at  the  two  extremities  of  the  Saviour's  earthly 
life,  seem  most  fit  and  congruous  the  one  to  the  other.  2.  By  being  in  a  manger 
He  was  declared  to  be  the  king  of  the  poor.  In  the  eyes  of  the  poor,  imperial 
robes  excite  no  affection,  but  a  man  in  their  own  garb  attracts  their  confidence. 
Great  commanders  have  readily  won  the  hearts  of  their  soldiers  by  sharing  their 
hardships  and  roughing  it  as  it  they  belonged  to  the  ranks.  3.  Further,  in  being 
thus  laid  in  a  manger.  He  did,  as  it  were,  give  an  invitation  to  the  most  humble  to 
come  to  Him.  We  might  tremble  to  approach  a  throne,  but  we  cannot  fear  to 
approach  a  manger.  4.  Methinks  there  was  yet  another  mystery.  This  place  was 
free  to  all.  Christ  was  bom  in  the  stable  of  the  inn  to  show  how  free  He  is  to  all 
comers.  Class  distinctions  are  unknown  here,  and  the  prerogatives  of  caste  are  not 
acknowledged.  No  forms  of  etiquette  are  required  in  entering  a  stable  ;  it  cannot 
be  an  offence  to  enter  the  stable  of  a  public  caravanserai.  So,  if  yon  desire  to 
come  to  Christ,  you  may  come  to  Him  just  as  you  are  ;  you  may  come  now.  6.  It 
was  at  the  manger  that  the  beasts  were  fed  ;  and  does  the  Saviour  lie  where  weary 
beasts  receive  their  provender,  and  shall  there  not  be  a  mystery  here  ?  Alas,  there 
are  some  men  who  have  become  so  brutal  through  sin,  so  utterly  depraved  by  their 
lusts,  that  to  their  own  consciences  everything  manlike  has  departed  ;  but  even  to 
such  the  remedies  of  Jesus,  the  Great  Physician,  will  apply.  Even  beastlike  men 
may  come  to  Christ,  and  live.  6.  But  as  Christ  was  laid  where  beasts  were  fed,  you 
will  recollect  that  after  He  was  gone  beasts  fed  there  again.  It  was  only  His  presence 
which  could  glorify  the  manger,  and  here  we  learn  that  if  Christ  were  taken  away 
the  world  would  go  back  to  its  former  heathen  darkness.  Christianity  itself  would 
die  out,  at  least  that  part  of  it  which  really  civilizes  man,  if  the  religion  of  Jesus 
could  be  extinguished.  II.  There  were  other  places  besides  the  inn  which  had  no 
BOOM  FOB  Jesus.  1.  The  palaces  of  emperors  and  the  haUs  of  kings  afforded  the  Boyal 
Stranger  no  refuge.  2.  But  there  were  senators,  there  were  forums  of  pohtical  dis- 
cussion, there  were  the  places  where  the  representatives  of  the  people  make  the  laws, 
was  there  no  room  for  Christ  there  ?  Alas  I  none.  3.  How  little  room  there  is  for  Him 
in  what  is  called  good  society.  There  is  room  there  for  all  the  siUy  little  forms  by 
which  men  choose  to  trammel  themselves ;  room  for  frivolous  conversation ;  room 
for  the  adoration  of  the  body ;  there  is  room  for  the  setting  up  of  this  and  that  as 
the  idol  of  the  hour,  but  there  is  too  little  room  for  Christ,  and  it  is  far  from 
fashionable  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  4.  How  little  room  for  Him  on  the  exchange. 
5.  How  little  room  for  Him  in  the  schools  of  the  philosophers.  6.  How  little  room 
has  He  found  even  in  the  Church.  Go  where  ye  will,  there  is  no  space  for  the  Prince 
of  Peace  but  with  the  humble  and  contrite  spirits  which  by  grace  He  prepares  to 
yield  Him  shelter.  III.  The  inn  itself  had  no  boom  foe  Him.  This  was  the  main 
reason  why  He  must  be  laid  in  a  manger.  1.  The  inn  represents  public  opinion. 
In  this  free  land,  men  speak  of  what  they  like,  and  there  is  a  public  opinion  upon 
every  subject ;  and  you  know  there  is  free  toleration  in  this  country  to  everything — 
permit  me  to  say,  toleration  to  everything  but  Christ.  2.  The  inn  also  represents 
general  conversation.  Speech  is  very  free  in  this  land,  but  ah  1  how  little  room  is 
there  for  Christ  in  general  talk.  3.  As  for  the  inns  of  modem  times — who  would 
think  of  finding  Christ  there  ?  IV.  Have  you  boom  fob  Christ  ?  V.  If  you  have 
room  for  Christ,  then  the  wobld  has  no  room  fob  you.  It  had  no  room  for  Joseph 
or  Mary,  any  more  than  for  the  Babe.  Who  are  His  father,  and  mother,  and 
sister,  and  brother,  but  those  who  receive  His  word  and  keep  it  ?  So,  as  there  was 
no  room  for  the  Blessed  Virgin,  nor  for  the  reputed  father,  remember  there  is  no 
room  in  this  world  for  any  true  follower  of  Christ.  1.  No  room  for  you  to  take 
your  ease.  2.  No  room  for  you  to  sit  down  contented  with  your  own  attainments. 
3.  No  room  for  you  to  hide  your  treasure  in.  4.  No  room  for  you  to  put  your  con- 
fidence. 5.  Hardly  room  of  sufferance.  Ton  must  expect  to  be  laughed  at,  and  to 
wear  the  fool's  cap  in  men's  esteem.  Will  you  enlist  on  such  terms?  Will  you 
give  room  for  Christ,  when  there  is  henceforth  no  room  for  you?  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Christ  outside  of  the  inn: — 1.  This  was  partly  the  result  of  ignor- 
ance. Had  they  known  He  was  the  Messiah,  doubtless  they  would  have  acted  other- 
vdse.  2.  But  partly  also  the  result  of  selfishness.  Had  there  been  more  of  a 
generous  humanity  in  their  hearts,  some  fitter  place  would  have  been  found  for 
Mary  and  her  child.  I.  We  may  take  this  inn  as  an  emblem  of  the  unoodlt  wobld. 
What  is  the  essential  distinction  between  an  inn  and  a  home  f  In  the  one,  as  in 
the  other,  a  number  of  individuals  dwell  together,  but  ♦'  home  "  involves  the  idea 
of  vital  unity — common  Ufe,  feeling,  experience.  In  an  inn  no  mutual  fellowship; 
each  thinks  only  of  his  own  interests.     When  Christ  was  bom,  the  Boman  Empira 


<!HA».  n.l  -ST.  LUKE.  123 

<W88  joBt  one  hnge  inn,  with  no  real  cohesion,  no  vital  unity,  amongst  the  Tarions 
provinces.  Into  this  world  of  aggregated  interests  Christ  came  ;  and  there  was  no 
room  for  Him.  Even  the  Jewish  nation,  to  whom  more  especially  He  came,  was 
split  np  into  sects  and  parties,  each  pursuing  its  own  objects,  although  living  under 
the  same  roof  of  a  common  history  and  a  common  religion  ;  and  so,  when  He  came 
unto  His  own,  they  received  Him  not.  Is  it  not  the  same  in  the  world  now  ?  II. 
An  kmblem  of  mant  an  unchbistian  household.  Many  a  household  does  not  at  all 
realize  the  idea  of  a  "home."  Its  members  eat  and  sleep  under  the  same  roof; 
but  this  is  more  like  an  arrangement  of  temporary  necessity  than  of  loving  choice. 
They  need  Christ  as  a  bond  of  union  ;  but  they  do  not  feel  their  need  of  Him,  and 
so  for  Him  they  have  no  room.  ,111.  An  emblem  op  the  worldly  heart.  It 
might  be  thought  the  very  spirit  of  selfishness  would  impart  unity  to  the  world- 
ling's nature.  But  no,  for  while  his  desires  are  imperious,  tbey  are  often  mutually 
conflicting.  He  needs  a  governing  principle — Christ  dwelling  in  the  heart.  (T.  C. 
Finlayson.)  Room  in  the  soul  for  Christ : — As  the  palace,  and  the  forum,  and  the 
inn,  have  no  room  for  Christ,  and  as  the  places  of  public  resort  have  none,  have 
you  room  for  Christ?  "Well,"  says  one,  "I  have  room  for  Him,  but  I  am  not 
worthy  that  He  should  come  to  me."  Ah  1  I  did  not  ask  about  worthiness  ;  have 
you  room  for  Him  ?  "  Oh,"  says  one,  •'  I  have  an  empty  void  the  world  can  never 
fill  I  "  Ah  I  I  see  you  have  room  for  Him.  '•  Oh  !  but  the  room  I  have  in  my 
heart  is  so  basel  "  So  was  the  manger.  "But  it  is  so  despicable  1 "  So  was  the 
manger  a  thing  to  be  despised.  "  Ah  !  but  my  heart  is  so  foul  1  "  So,  perhaps, 
the  manger  may  have  been.  "  Oh  I  but  I  feel  it  is  a  place  not  at  all  fit  for  Christ  1 " 
Nor  was  the  manger  a  place  fit  for  Him,  and  yet  there  was  He  laid.  •'  Oh  I  but  I 
have  been  such  a  sinner ;  I  feel  as  if  my  heart  had  been  a  den  of  beasts  and 
devils  1 "  Well,  the  manger  had  been  a  place  where  beasts  had  fed.  Have  you 
room  for  Him  ?  Never  mind  what  the  past  has  been ;  He  can  forget  and  forgive. 
It  mattereth  not  what  even  the  present  state  may  be  if  thou  mouruest  it.  If  thou 
hast  but  room  for  Christ  He  will  come  and  be  thy  guest.  Do  not  say,  I  pray  you, 
"I  hope  I  shall  have  room  for  Him;"  the  time  is  come  that  He  shall  be  born; 
Mary  cannot  wait  months  and  years.  Oh  I  sinner,  if  thou  hast  room  for  Him  le( 
Bim  be  bom  in  thy  soul  to-day,  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice  harden  not 
your  hearts  as  in  the  provocation."  *'  To-day  is  the  accepted  time ;  to-day  is 
the  day  of  salvation."  Eoom  for  Jesus  I  Boom  for  Jesus  now!  "  Oh  I  "  saith 
one,  *•  I  have  room  for  Him,  but  will  He  come  ?  "  Will  He  come  indeed  !  Do  you 
but  Bet  the  door  of  your  heart  open,  do  but  say,  "  Jesus,  Master,  all  unworthy  and 
nnclean  I  look  to  thee ;  come,  lodge  within  my  heart,"  and  He  will  come  to  thee, 
and  He  will  cleanse  the  manger  of  thy  heart,  nay,  will  transform  it  into  a  golden 
throne,  and  there  He  will  sit  and  reign  for  ever  and  for  ever.  My  Master 
wants  room  I  Eoom  for  Him  1  Room  for  Him !  I,  His  herald,  cry  aloud, 
Boom  for  the  Saviour !  Room  1  Here  is  my  royal  Master — have  you  room  for 
Him  ?  Here  is  the  Son  of  God  made  flesh — have  you  room  for  Him  ?  Here  is  He 
who  can  forgive  all  sin — have  you  room  for  Him  ?  There  is  He  who  can  take  you  up 
out  of  the  horrible  pit  and  out  of  the  miry  clay — have  you  room  for  Him  ?  Here  is 
He  who,  when  He  cometh  in,  will  never  go  out  again,  but  abide  with  you  for  ever  to 
make  your  heart  a  heaven  of  joy  and  bliss  for  you — have  you  room  for  Him  ?  'Tis 
all  I  ask.  Your  emptiness,  your  nothingness,  your  want  of  feeling,  your  want  of 
goodness,  your  want  of  grace — all  these  will  be  but  room  for  Him  Have  you  room 
for  Him  ?  Oh  1  Spirit  of  God,  lead  many  to  say,  "  Yes,  my  heart  is  ready."  Ah  ! 
then  He  wiU  come  and  dwell  with  you.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  waiting  for 
room : — Were  a  man  to  enter  some  great  cathedral  of  the  old  continent,  survey  the 
vaulted  arches  and  the  golden  tracery  above,  wander  among  the  forests  of  pillars  on 
which  they  rest,  listen  to  the  music  of  choirs,  and  catch  the  softened  light  that 
streams  through  sainted  forms  and  histories  on  the  windows,  observe  the  company 
of  priests,  gorgeously  arrayed,  chanting,  kneeling,  crossing  themselves,  and  wheel- 
ing in  long  processions  before  the  great  altar  loaded  with  gold  and  gems  ;  were  he 
to  look  into  the  long  tiers  of  side  chapels,  each  a  gorgeous  temple,  with  an  altar  of 
its  own  for  its  princely  family,  adorned  with  costliest  mosaics,  and  surrounded,  in 
the  niches  of  the  walls,  with  statues  and  monumental  groups  of  dead  ancestors  in 
the  highest  forms  of  art,  noting  also  the  living  princes  at  their  worship  there  among 
their  patriarchs  and  brothers  in  stone — spectator  of  a  scene  so  imposing,  what  but 
this  will  his  thought  be  :  "  Surely  the  Infant  of  the  manger  has  at  last  found  room, 
And  come  to  be  entertained  among  men  with  a  magnificence  worthy  of  His  dignity  " 
Sot  if  he  looks  again,  and  }ooks  a  little  farther  in — ^far  enough  in  to  see  the 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

miserable  pride  of  self  and  power  that  lurks  under  thia  gorgeous  show,  the  mean  ideas 
of  Christ,  the  superstitions  held  instead  of  Him,  the  bigotry,  the  hatred  of  the  poor, 
the  dismal  corruption  of  life — with  how  deep  a  sigh  of  disappointment  will  he  confess : 
♦'  Alas,  the  manger  was  better  and  a  more  royal  honour  I  "  (Horace  Bushnell,  BD.) 
Room  in  the  heart  for  Christ : — Christ  was  straitened  for  room  in  the  inn,  and  thrust 
into  the  stable,  that  you  might  open  your  heart  wide,  and  enlarge  it,  to  give 
him  a  habitation  to' content  Him.  First,  beloved,  periculosum  est  inter  delicia* 
po7ii ;  'tis  lull  of  peril  to  rest  aa:ong  pleasure!  and  delights ;  it  is  better  to  go  to 
the  houte  of  mourning  than  to  the  house  of  feasting  (Eccl.  vii.  2).  Adam  had  hia 
habitation  among  the  sweet  savours  and  most  delightful  recreations  of  the  garden 
of  Eden;  his  senses  were  so  filled  with  objects  of  pleasures,  that  he  forgot  the 
Lord  ;  therefore  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  who  came  to  restore  all  that  was 
lost,  pitched  upon  the  worst  corner  of  the  house,  where  there  were  no  delights  at 
all  to  move  temptation.  King's  houses,  and  well  furnished  mansions  have  their 
occasions  of  lewdness,  but  she  laid  her  Son  in  a  manger.  Learn  from  hence 
to  condescend  unto  the  humility  of  Christ  if  you  mean  to  ascend  unto  His  glory  ; 
for  as  the  custom  of  those  regions  was,  this  manger  was  a  vault  cut  out  of  a 
rock,  as  low  a  place  as  He  could  sast  Himself  into ;  but  no  man  projects  so  wisely 
to  raise  up  a  mighty  building  as  he  that  lays  a  low  foundation.  It  is  reported  of 
Sextus  Quintus,  how  he  was  so  far  from  shame  that  he  was  born  in  a  poor  cottage,  that 
he  would  sport  with  his  own  fortune,  and  say  he  was  born  in  a  bright  resplendent 
family,  because  the  sun  looked  in  at  every  cranny  of  the  house ;  it  is  not  the  mean- 
ness of  the  place  that  can  justly  turn  to  any  man's  scorn,  nor  doth  a  magnificent 
palace  build  up  any  man's  reputation.  Holofernes  bad  a  costly  tent  to  cover  him, 
and  yet  was  never  the  honester ;  and  it  was  a  pretty  objection  of  Plutarch's  against 
the  vain  consumption  of  cost  upon  the  decking  of  our  houses.  What  do  we  mean, 
says  he,  to  be  at  such  cost  to  deck  our  chambers  ?  Why  wiU  we  pay  so  dear  for 
our  sleep,  when  God,  if  you  please,  hath  given  you  that  for  nothing  ?  the  slenderest 
place  served  our  Saviour  to  cover  His  head,  "  she  laid  Him  in  a  manger."  (Bishop 
Ilachet.)  Christ  seeks  entrance  into  the  heart : — Why,  since  Christianity  under- 
takes to  convert  the  world,  does  it  seem  to  almost  or  quite  fail  in  the  slow  progress 
it  makes  ?  Because,  I  answer,  Christ  gets  no  room,  as  yet,  to  work,  and  be  the  fire 
in  men's  hearts  He  is  able  to  be.  We  undertake  for  Him  as  by  statecraft  and 
r.hurchcraft  and  priestcraft.  We  raise  monasteries  for  Him  in  one  age,  military 
crusades  in  another.  Raymond  Lull,  representing  a  large  class  of  teachers,  under- 
took to  make  the  gospel  so  logical  that  he  could  bring  down  all  men  of  all  nations, 
without  a  peradventure,  before  it.  Some  in  our  day  are  going  to  carry  everything 
by  steam-sliips  and  commerce ;  some  by  science  and  the  schoohng  of  heathen 
children  ;  some  by  preaching  agents  adequately  backed  by  missionary  boards  ;  some 
!•/  tracts  and  books.  But  the  work,  however  fitly  ordered  as  respects  the  machinery, 
bngers,  and  will  and  must  linger,  tiU  Christ  gets  room  to  be  a  more  complete  inspi- 
ration in  His  followers.  They  gave  Him  the  stable  when  they  ought  to  be  giving 
Him  the  inn,  put  Him  in  the  lot  of  weakness,  keep  Him  back  from  His  victories;, 
shut  Him  down  under  the  world,  making  His  gospel,  thus,  such  a  secondary, 
doubtfully  real  affair,  that  it  has  to  be  always  debating  in  the  evidences ;  instead  of 
beingitsownevidence,  and  marching  forward  in  its  own  mighty  power.  .  .  .  And  yet 
Christ  has  a  patience  large  enough  to  bear  us  still ;  for  He  came  to  bear  even  our  sin, 
and  He  will  not  start  from  His  burden,  even  if  He  should  not  be  soon  through  with  it. 
All  the  sooner  ought  we  to  come  to  the  heart  so  long  and  patiently  grieving  for  us. 
Be  it  ours  to  make  room  for  Him,  and  to  stretch  ourselves  to  the  measure  of  the 
stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  (Horace  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Shutting  out  Jesvs : — 
Unless  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been  really  given,  these  are  the  words  which  we  may 
see  written  up  here,  and  there,  and  everywhere — even  in  this  professedly  Christian 
land — "  No  room  for  Jesus  here  1  "  You  can  scarcely  find  an  inn  literally — a  hotel, 
a  public-house,  or  a  beer-shop — where  these  words  are  not  too  plainly  written  up — 
"  No  room  for  Jesus  here."  They  are  written,  too,  over  the  doors  of  how  many  so- 
called  places  of  amusement — theatres,  ball-rooms,  and  such  like  :  "  No  room  for 
Jesus  here  1  "  But  not  only  so  ;  over  how  many  places  of  business  are  there  these 
same  words  I  In  how  many  private  houses — drawing-rooms,  dining-rooms,  parlours, 
and  kitchens— may  we  look  up  and  see  the  same  sad  words — "  No  room  for  Jesui 
here  1"  And  written  on  all  these  why?  "  Who  dares,"  you  say,  •'  to  write  such 
words  ?"  They  write  them — every  one  writes  them,  wherever  he  goes,  who  has  an 
unchanged  heart ;  for  upon  every  heart  that  is  not  changed — whether  it  beats^  in 
the  bosom  of   a  prince  or  a  peasant,  of   a  professing  Christian  or  a  professing 


OHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  12fi 

heathen — the  same  sad,  solemn  words  are  written  deep — "  No  room  for  Jesns 
here  I"  {Henry  Wright,  M.A.)  Christ  found  in  lowly  places  : — And  very  like 
this  world  was  that  inn.  Eoom  and  smiling  welcome  for  the  rich  and  the 
reveller :  no  room  for  the  heavy-laden  and  the  poor.  And  very  like — because  that 
which  we  see  without  in  others  we  can  find  within  ourselves,  if  we  look — ia 
our  own  heart  unto  that  inn.  Eoom,  ample  room,  for  pride  and  display,  luxury 
and  indolence:  no  room  for  humility  and  meekness,  self-denial  and  holy  work. 
Yet,  as  surely  as  Christ  was  bom,  nigh  upon  2,000  years  ago,  in  a  manger,  so  is  He 
born  now  in  lowly  homes  and  hearts.  Does  not  your  own  experience  correspond 
with  this  ?  Have  you  not  found  Christ  in  poverty  rather  than  in  plenteousness, 
in  suffering  rather  than  in  merriment,  in  solitude  rather  than  in  multitudes,  in  the 
stable  rather  than  the  inn  ?  When  have  you  prayed  most  vehemently  ?  When 
have  you  seemed  to  know  most  clearly  that  you  had  a  soul  which  could  never  die, 
though  the  body  might  be  buried  in  a  week?  it  ha,s  been,  when  you  have  been  sent 
away  from  the  din  and  excitement  of  the  world,  to  the  lonely,  silent  places  of 
afiSiction ;  afiSiction  in  others,  or  in  yourself,  alike  meant  to  lead  us  unto  Christ. 
To  be  always  in  the  inn,  always  and  altogether  in  the  uproar,  and  heat,  and  enjoy- 
ment of  the  world ;  that  would  be  death  to  us  as  Christians,  death  to  our  spiritual 
life.  (Canon  S.  Reynolds  Hole.)  The  disowned  Saviour : — You  are  all  familiar, 
perhaps,  with  the  story  of  Ulysses,  the  great  Greek  warrior,  king  of  the  island  of 
Ithaca,  and  one  of  the  most  illustrious  heroes  of  the  Trojan  war.  After  an  absence 
from  his  home  for  twenty  years — years  consumed  in  wars  and  wanderings— he 
returned  to  his  island  empire  to  find  his  palace  beset  by  a  circle  of  gay  young  lords, 
who  were  not  only  consuming  his  substance  and  wasting  his  resources  in  riotous 
living,  but  were  adding  insult  to  injury,  on  the  one  hand  by  usurping  the  reins  of 
power  in  his  dominions,  and  on  the  other  by  their  infamous  proposals,  or,  at  least, 
by  mutually  vying  for  the  hand  of  his  beloved  and  longsuffering  Penelope.  Wisely, 
he  did  not  at  once  make  himself  known.  Had  he  done  so,  it  might  have  cost  him 
his  life.  Nay,  doubtless,  had  he  promptly  revealed  himself  in  his  own  proper 
character,  these  graceless  suitors  would  not  have  hesitated  instantly  to  put  him  out 
of  his  own  house — incontinently  and  unceremoniously  to  order  him  off  his  own 
premises  and  out  of  his  own  kingdom.  More  likely  still,  they  would  have  taken 
measures  effectually  to  compass  his  death.  Do  you  say  that  that  was  pretty  rough 
treatment  ?  I  agree  with  you ;  and  yet  it  was  not  more  so  than  that  which, 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  was  accorded  to  the  Son  of  Man.  When  the  Saviour 
of  men  came  into  this  world.  His  own  world,  the  world  He  had  made  with  His  own 
hands  and  was  about  to  redeem  with  His  own  blood,  tbere  was  yet  found  in  it  no 
room  for  Himself  No  room !  Hustled  out  of  the  inn  where  othei-s  found 
accommodation,  the  Divine  Son  of  Mary  and  of  God  was  left  to  creep  into 
the  world,  as  it  were,  through  a  back  door — to  be  ushered  into  His  earthly  exist- 
ence surrounded  only  by  the  wondering  beasts  of  the  stall.  {R.  H.  Howard.) 
Christ  waiting  to  find  room  : — On  the  birth  and  birthplace  of  Jesus  there  is  some- 
thing beautifully  correspondent  with  His  personal  fortunes  afterwards,  and  also 
with  the  fortunei  of  His  gospel,  even  down  to  our  own  age  and  time.  He  comes 
into  the  world  as  it  were  to  the  taxing,  and  there  is  scant  room  for  Him  even  at 
that.  My  subject  is  the  very  impressive  fact  that  Jesus  could  not  find  room  in  the 
world,  and  has  never  yet  been  able  to  find  it.  I.  See  how  it  was  wixf  Him  in 
His  life.  Herod's  massacre  of  innocents  ;  parents  unable  to  understand  Him,  to 
take  in  conception  of  His  Divine  childhood  ;  John  the  Baptist  growing  doubtful, 
and  sending  to  inquire  whether  He  is  really  the  Christ ,  Kabbis  with  no  room  in 
their  little  theologies  for  His  doctrine ;  His  own  disciples  getting  but  slenderest 
conception  of  His  person  and  mission  from  His  very  explicit  teachings.  II.  So  if 
WE  SPEAK  OF  Christendom,  it  might  seem  as  if  Christ  had  certainly  gotten  room, 
Bo  far,  to  enter  and  be  glorified  in  human  society.  But  (a)  what  multitudes  of 
outlying  populations  are  there  that  have  never  heard  of  Him.  And  (b)  of  the  states 
and  populations  that  acknowledge  Him,  how  little  of  Christ,  take  them  altogether, 
can  there  be  said  to  be  really  in  them  ?    III.  To  take  a  closer  inspection.    Geeat 

MULTITUDES    UTTERLY    REJECT   HiM,    AND    STAT   FAST    IN   THEIR    SINS.         They    haVe   nO 

time  to  be  religious,  or  the  sacrifices  are  too  great ;  some  too  poor,  others  too  rich. 
Some  too  much  honoured,  and  some  too  much  want  to  be.  Some  in  their  pleasures, 
some  in  their  expectations.  Some  too  young,  some  too  old,  <fec.  The  great  world 
thus  under  sin,  even  that  part  of  it  which  is  called  Christian,  is  very  much  like  the 
inn  at  Bethlehem,  preoccupied,  crowded  full  in  every  parV,  so  that,  as  the  mother  of 
Jesus  looked  up  wistfully  to  the  guest-chambers  that  cold  night,  drawing  her  Holj 


12«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHIF.  n. 

Thing  to  her  bosom,  in  like  manner  Jesus  Himself  stands  at  the  door  of  theM 
multitudes,  knocking  vainly,  tiU  His  head  is  filled  with  dew,  and  His  looks  are  wet 
with  the  drops  of  the  night.     lY.   Chubchcbai't  meantime  has  been  quite  as 

KAEKOW,  QUITE  AS  80BE  A  LIMITATION  AS  STATECBAFT.  V.  AnD  THE  ATTEMPTED  WOBK 
OF    SCIENCE,    CALLING    ITSELF    THEOLO&T,    IS     SCABCELT    MOBS    EQUAL  TO   ITS   THEME. 

VI.  But  the  most  remarkable  thing  is  that,  when  the  old  niggard  dogma  of  a  bigot 
age  and  habit  give  way,  and  emancipated  souls  begin  to  look  for  a  new  Christianity 
and  a  broader,  worthier  faith,  just  then  everything  great  in  the  gospel  vanishes 
more  strangely  than  before.  Faith  becomes  mere  opinion,  love  a  natural  sentiment, 
piety  itself  a  blossom  on  the  wild  stock  of  nature.  Jesus,  the  Everlasting  Word, 
dwindles  to  a  mere  man.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  made  to  be  very  nearly  identical  with 
the  laws  of  the  soul.  The  new  Christianity,  the  more  liberal,  more  advanced 
belief,  turns  out  to  be  a  discovery  that  we  are  living  in  nature  just  as  nature  makes 
us  live.  Salvation  there  is  none ;  nothing  is  left  for  a  gospel  but  development, 
with  a  little  human  help  from  the  excellent  Person,  Jesus.  Is  it  not  time  that 
Christ  our  Master  should  begin  to  be  more  fitly  represented  by  His  people.  Be  it 
yours,  then,  to  make  room  for  Him,  even  according  to  the  greatness  of  His  power- 
length,  breadth,  depth,  height.  (H.  Bmhnell,  D.D.)  A  fit  nursery  for  the  Holy 
Child : — We  try  to  realize  the  scene  and  situation  of  which  the  text  tells  us  ;  and 
we  feel  that  the  stable  and  the  manger  were  not  a  fit  nursery  and  cradle  for  the 
Holy  Child.  The  best  house  in  Bethlehem,  and  the  fairest  chamber  in  it,  would 
have  been  honoured  by  that  wondrous  birth.  And  pious  fancy,  offended  at  the 
lowly  birthplace  of  the  Lord,  has  constructed  legends  in  the  hope  to  hide  its 
Bhame.  They  say  that  the  cave  in  which  the  Virgin  rested  glowed  with  a  glorious 
light  as  soon  as  she  entered  it,  and  that  this  light,  excelling  the  brightness  of  the 
sun,  remained  within  the  cave  as  long  as  she  was  there.  We  share  the  feeling  out 
of  which  such  legend  grew.  And  yet,  while  lamenting  that,  through  want  of  room, 
the  Saviour  should  have  been  born  in  such  a  lowly  place,  it  may  be  that  we  are  not 
giving  Him  the  best  accommodation  that  we  can.  For  want  of  room  He  may  be 
pushed  away  into  some  cold  comer  of  our  hearts,  and  to  some  small  apartment  of 
our  thoughts.  Even  in  our  worship  He  has  often  less  room  than  He  claims.  There 
is  not  a  precious  thing  we  have  that  does  not  owe  some  of  its  preciousness  to  Him. 
Our  lives  would  be  sad  indeed,  and  all  our  merriment  would  be  but  a  surface  thing, 
like  a  hollow  laugh  or  ghastly  smile,  that  seeks  to  hide  our  inward  wretchedness, 
were  it  not  for  those  bright  hopes  that  Christ  has  enabled  us  to  cherish.  If  we 
trace  them  back  to  their  source  we  shall  find  them  all  in  Him.  Let  us  find  room 
for  Him  then  amid  all  the  gladness  of  this  season  and  all  the  pleasures  of  this  day. 
(E.  A.  Lawreiice,)  A  fit  prelude  to  a  life  of  poverty,  humiliation,  and  sacrifice  ;— 
By  a  vision  of  the  night  God  could  have  prepared  the  keeper  of  the  inn  for  the 
reception  of  the  world's  Saviour  ;  by  a  message  conveyed  by  angelic  lips  He  could 
have  commanded  the  most  sumptuous  welcome  which  earth's  palaces  could  afford ;  He 
who  created  the  beauties  which  smiled  on  the  bosom  of  paradise  could  have  called 
into  existence  a  garden  blooming  with  flowers  which  never  graced  primeval  Eden, 
and  amid  its  blushing  charms  the  "  Eose  of  Sharon  *'  might  have  budded.  But  no  I 
In  God's  estimation,  what  difference  is  there  between  a  palace  and  a  manger? 
Whatever  Christ  touched  He  dignified.  The  king,  untouched  by  Christ,  is  blind 
and  miserable  and  naked.  The  pauper  in  whose  heart  Christ  abides  is  gifted  with 
loftiest  dignity.  Christ  shed  a  glory  round  that  Eastern  stable.  Had  infant 
Caesars  pillowed  their  heads  in  the  manger  it  would  have  been  a  manger  still ;  but 
Christ  having  found  a  cradle  there,  the  manger  is  henceforth  distinguished  l)f  suoh 
«  glory  as  never  shone  on  the  palaces  of  kings.    (Dr.  Parker.) 

NO  BOOM  FOR  JESUS. 

He  was  cradled  in  a  manger ; 

His  own  angels  sung  the  hymn 
Of  rejoicing  at  His  coming. 

Yet  there  was  no  room  for  Him. 

Oh,  my  brothers,  are  we  wiser. 

Are  we  better  now  than  they  t 
Have  we  any  room  for  Jesus 

In  the  life  we  lire  to-day  f 


our.  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  Iflf 

M. l> 

Not  mnoh  room  for  our  Lord  Jeans 

Has  there  been,  or  will  there  be; 
Boom  for  Pilate  and  for  Herod— 

Not  for  Him  of  Calvary. 

Boom  for  pleasures — doors  wide  opeOt 

And  for  business, — but  for  Him 
Only  here  and  there  a  manger, 

Like  to  that  at  Bethlehem. 

iimm, 

NEW  PEINCB,  NEW  POMP. 

The  inns  are  full ;  no  man  will  yield 

This  little  pilgrim  bed ; 
Bat  forced  He  is  with  silly  beasts 

In.  crib  to  shroud  His  head. 

Despise  Him  not  for  lying  there  | 

First  what  He  is  inquire : 
An  Orient  pearl  is  often  found 

La  depth  of  dirty  mire. 

Weigh  not  His  crib,  His  wooden  dish. 

Nor  beasts  that  by  Him  feed ; 
Weigh  not  His  mother's  poor  attirSa 

Nor  Joseph's  simple  weed. 

This  stable  is  a  prince's  conrt. 

The  crib  His  chair  of  state; 
The  beasts  are  parcel  of  His  pomp* 

The  wooden  dish  His  plate. 

The  persons  in  that  poor  attire 

His  royal  liveries  wear ; 
The  Prince  Himself  is  come  from  heav8B! 

This  pomp  is  praised  there. 

With  joy  approach,  O  Christian  wight! 

Do  homage  to  thy  King ; 
And  highly  praise  this  humble  pomp 

Which  He  from  heaven  doth  bring. 

(iZ.  Southwell.) 

No  room  for  Christ :— That  night  in  Bethlehem,  if  Joseph  had  gone  to  some  house 
and  made  them  thoroughly  understand  that  the  Lord  of  Glery  was  about  to  be 
bom  in  that  village,  they  would  have  said,  "  Here  is  the  best  room  in  our  house. 
Come  in ;  come  in.  Occupy  everything."  But  when  Joseph  asked  at  this  house 
and  that  house  and  the  other  house,  they  said,  "  No  room  on  the  floor,  no  room  on 
the  lounge,  no  room  for  Christ."  Ah  !  that  has  b«en  the  trouble  in  all  the  ages. 
The  world  has  never  had  room  for  Him.  No  room  in  the  heart,  for  here  are  all 
the  gains  and  the  emoluments  of  the  world  that  are  coming  up  to  be  enrolled, 
and  they  must  find  entertainment  and  lodging.  Every  passion  full.  Every  desire 
full.  Every  capacity  of  body,  mind,  and  soul  full.  No  room  for  Christ.  Boom 
for  all  unholy  aspirations,  room  for  self-seeking,  room  for  pride,  room  for  Satan, 
room  for  all  the  concerted  passions  of  darkness,  but  no  room  for  Jesus.  I  go  into 
a  beautiful  store.  I  find  its  shelves  crowded  with  goods,  and  the  counter  crowded, 
and  the  floor  crowded.  It  is  crowded  even  to  the  ceiling.  They  have  left  just  room 
enough  in  that  store  for  commercial  men,  for  bargain-makers,  for  those  who  come 
to  engage  in  great  mercantile  undertakings,  but  no  room  in  that  store  for  Christ. 
I  go  into  a  house.  It  is  a  beautiful  home.  I  am  glad  to  see  all  those  beautiful 
surroundings.  I  am  glad  to  see  that  the  very  best  looms  wove  those  carpets,  and 
the  best  manufactory  turned  out  those  musical  instruments.  There  is  no  gospel 
against  all  that.  But  I  find  no  Christ  in  that  household.  Room  for  the 
gloved  and  the  robed ;  room  for  satin  sandals  and  diamond  head-gear ;  room  for 


12a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

gracefnl  step,  and  obsequious  bow,  and  the  dancing  np  and  down  of  quick  feet; 
room  for  all  light,  and  all  mirth,  and  all  music ;  but — hear  it,  0  thou  Ehan  of 
Bethlehem — hear  it,  you  angels  who  carolled  for  the  shepherds  in  Bethlehem- 
no  room  in  that  house  for  Christ  I  No  room  in  the  nursery,  for  the  children  are 
not  taught  to  pray ;  no  room  in  the  dining-hall,  for  no  blessing  is  asked  on  the 
food  ;  no  room  in  the  sleeping  apartment,  for  God's  protection  is  not  asked  for  the 
night.  Jesus  comes,  and  He  retorts.  He  says,  "  I  come  to  this  world,  and  I  find 
it  has  no  room  for  Me  ;  but  I  have  room  for  it.  Boom  in  My  heart— it  beats  in 
sympathy  with  all  their  sorrows.  Boom  in  My  Church — I  bought  it  with  My  blood. 
Boom  in  heaven.  Boom  in  the  anthem  that  never  dies.  Boom  in  the  banner 
procession.  Boom  in  the  joys  eternal.  Boom  in  the  doxologies  before  the  throne. 
Boom  for  ever."  {Dr.  Talmage.)  A  night  in  a  Syrian  inn: — I  found  the  house 
consisted  of  only  one  very  lofty  room,  about  eighteen  feet  square.  Just  within  the 
door  a  donkey  and  a  yoke  of  oxen  stood ;  and  I  soon  perceived  that  rather  more 
than  one-third  of  the  room  was  set  apart  for  cattle,  where  the  floor,  which  was  on 
a  level  with  the  street,  was  of  earth,  and  partially  strewn  with  fodder.  Suddenly 
the  idea  entered  my  mind  that  it  must  have  been  in  such  a  house  as  this  that 
Christ  was  born.  I  imagined  Joseph  anxiously  seeking  rest  and  shelter  for  Mary 
after  her  long  journey.  AU  the  guest-chambers  were  already  filled.  The  raised 
floor  was  crowded  with  strangers  who  had,  like  them,  come  to  be  taxed.  But 
Joseph  and  Mary  may  have  taken  refuge  from  the  cold  in  the  lower  part  of  the 
room.  The  manger  was  very  likely  close  bv  Mary's  side,  hollowed  out  at  the 
edge  of  the  dais,  and  filled  with  soft  winter  fodder.  I  raised  my  head  and  looked 
at  one  of  the  mangers,  and  I  felt  how  natural  it  was  to  use  it  as  a  cradle  for  a 
newly-born  infant.  Its  size,  its  shape,  its  soft  bed  of  fodder,  its  nearness  to  the 
warm  fire  always  burning  on  the  dais  in  mid- winter,  would  immediately  suggest 
the  idea  to  an  Eastern  mother.  (Rogers.)  No  room  for  Jesus  : — Before  you 
utterly  damn  this  unnamed  Jewish  inn-keeper  and  his  seemingly  unfeeling  guests, 
pray  be  reasonable,  and  consider  three  things  in  abatement.  (1)  That  you  bring  to 
the  judgment  a  culture  in  the  humanities  which  ,you  owe  entirely  to  this  Jesus, 
who  had  not  yet  been  born;  and  (2)  that  the  inn-keeper  had  reasons  for  hia 
conduct  quite  as  valid  as  those  which  are  perpetually  allowed  among  men ;  and  (3) 
that  towards  this  very  same  Jesus  you  and  I  have  behaved  much  worse  than 
did  these  people  whom  we  are  so  forward  to  denounce.     I.  As  to  the  first.     Men 

ABE  GENEEALHT  GUILTY  OF  HOLDING  THEIR  FELLOWS  TO  ACCOUNT  FOB  A  MEASURE  OF 
LI3HT   AND    CULTURE   WHICH    THOSE    FELLOW-MEN    DO   NOT   POSSESS,    BUT    WHICH   THEIB 

JUDGES  DO.      II.    But  as  to  the  second — Let   us    see   what   reasons  probably 

INFLUENCED    THE     INN-KEEPER,    AND     WHETHER     THE    MASS     OP     MANKIND     WOULD    NOT 

THINK  THOSE  REASONS  QUITE  VALID.  1.  He  tumed  them  oft  because  they  were  not 
known.  It  is  a  busy  time.  The  imperial  edict  for  the  enrolment  of  the  provinces 
is  bringing  multitudes  from  the  country  to  town.  At  this  juncture  two  unknown 
people  present  themselves.  One  is  a  young  woman.  Her  condition  betrays  itself. 
Who  are  they  ?  The  inn-keeper  does  not  know  them.  Now,  under  the  circum- 
stances, would  not  such  a  reception  as  they  received  in  Bethlehem  be  awarded 
to  persons  in  similar  condition  at  a  majority  of  houses  in  Christendom  on  any 
Christmas  Day  ?  2.  Their  appearance  and  the  condition  of  their  luggage  were 
against  them.  You  know  what  is  meant  by  a  "  carpet-bag,"  on  one  hand,  and  on  the 
other  by  a  "  Saratoga  trunk,"  and  what  a  bid  for  attention  a  man  makes  by  his  lug- 
gage. Little  did  Joseph  and  Mary  have.  The  inn-keeper  had  his  regular  customers. 
They  were  substantial  citizens  from  the  neighbouring  country.  To  bring  in  two 
strangers  for  a  night  might  be  to  drive  off  a  dozen  good,  responsible  customers  for 
ever.  For  you  must  mark  that  the  real  glory  of  Mary  and  Jesus  was  unknown 
to  this  tavern-keeper,  and  was  really  unsuspected.  3.  They  were  poor  and  conld 
not  pay.  It  would  have  greatly  increased  the  bill  of  a  rich  couple  who  should 
have  demanded  the  turning  of  a  guest  from  his  apartments  to  make  way  for 
themselves  in  an  emergency.  III.  Now  in  the  third  case,  after  you  have  considered 
the  difference  made  in  onr  culture  by  the  blessed  Jesus,  and  all  the  reasons 
which  the  inn-keeper  had  for  turning  Mary  into  the  stable  because  he  had  no 
room  for  her  and  Jesus  in  the  inn,  before  you  pronounce  sentence,  make  some 
little  examination  into  the  question  whether  we  have  not  treated  Jesus  worse  than 
He  was  treated  in  Bethlehem.  The  decision  of  that  question  will  obviously  mnob 
depend  upon  the  space  in  our  hearts  and  lives  which  Jesus  is  allowed  by  ne  to 
oocnpy.  Are  there  not  some  of  us  who  never  permit  Him  to  come  upon  our 
premiaei  ?    So  present  ia  He  everywhere  among  men  by  the  power  of  His  principles 


«HAJ.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  129 

and  His  Spirit,  that  it  is  not  possible  to  exclude  Him  utterly,  and  yet,  so  far  as  our 
responsibility  is  concerned,  we  do  keep  Him  out  to  the  whole  extent  of  our  failure 
to  give  Him  a  welcome  to  our  thoughts,  to  our  affections,  and  to  our  activities. 
Does  He  have  ample  welcome  to  all  these  departmeuts  of  our  existence?  Does 
He  have  the  chief  place  in  our  thoughts — the  best  place  in  our  love — the  largest 
place  in  our  work  ?  Is  He  welcomed  and  honoured  ?  1.  Jesus  is  kept  out  of 
your  heart  because  you  do  not  know  Him.  Your  ignorance  is  wilful.  Kecollect 
that  He  does  not  come  unborn  to  you,  as  He  did  to  the  inn-keeper  in  Bethlehem. 
He  comes  to  you  with  all  His  history  of  growth  and  beauty,  of  truth  and  activity, 
of  self-denial  and  suffering,  of  love  and  power.  The  innkeeper  of  Bethlehem  wUl 
rise  up  in  the  Judgment  with  many  men  of  this  generation  and  condemn  them — 
because  he  turned  away  an  unaccredited  woman,  and  you  reject  the  acknowledged 
Lord  of  Glory.  2.  And  you  have  the  inn-keeper's  second  reason  :  it  will  drive 
other  guests  away.  Perhaps  it  would  turn  other  guests  out  of  your  heart,  perhaps 
not.  If  any  depart  because  Jesus  came,  you  ought  to  be  glad  of  their  departure. 
Here  is  a  whole  room  full  of  the  members  of  the  large  family  of  the  Pleasures. 
They  are  many,  and  they  are  exacting.  They  take  large  space,  for  they  live  widely. 
Many  of  them  are  most  deceptive,  having  stolen  the  garb  and  imitatad  the  manners 
of  the  most  reputable  and  solid  Enjoyments.  These  latter  are  the  most  pleasant 
and  among  the  most  respectable  guests  that  the  heart  can  entertain.  They  will 
Btay  with  Jesus,  while  those  wild  and  giddy  and  profitless  things  you  call  Pleasures 
would  better  have  no  place  in  your  affections.  You  were  not  born  to  be  amused, 
but  to  be  disciplined.  And  there  is  Business,  taking  up  almost  all  your  heart  and 
head,  and  crowding  you,  and  calling  you,  and  botheriHfr  jou,  until  you  are  so 
nervous  that  you  can  hardly  eat  or  sleep.  Eoom  for  darkness,  and  no  room  for 
light ;  room  for  foulness,  and  no  room  for  purity ;  room  for  death,  but  no  room  for 
life !  Every  story  from  attic  to  basement  crowded,  and  Jesus  turned  out  into  the 
stable  1  3.  But  the  inn-keeper  sent  Mary  to  the  stable  because  it  would  not  be 
remunerative  to  entertain  her  in  his  house.  He  would  have  been  compelled  to  turn 
out  some  well-known  and  liberally-paying  guests.  You  know  Him  to  be  a  Prince, 
for  whose  sake  every  reasonable  man  would  think  it  quite  the  proper  thing  to 
dismiss  any  other  guest.  Does  not  "pay  "  to  entertain  Jesus!  Did  yuu  ever  know 
a  man  who  took  Jesus  into  his  intellect,  and  worked  up  his  studies  under  that 
Great  Master,  and  not  grow  in  profoundness  of  thought  and  width  of  range  of 
intellectual  vision  ?  Did  you  ever  know  an  artist  give  Jesus  a  lodging,  and  not 
thereby  have  all  his  sesthetic  nature  quickened  and  purified  and  brightened  ?  Did 
you  ever  know  any  man  to  conduct  any  business  for  Jesus,  permeating  his  life 
with  the  Spirit  of  Jesus,  basing  his  plans  on  the  principles  taught  by  Jesu?,  and 
laying  every  profitable  income  of  his  trade  as  a  tribute  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  who  did 
not  thrive  and  increase  and  have  happiness  along  the  whole  line  of  his  busiuess 
career  ?  Is  He  going  away  ?  It  may  be  that  your  years  are  drawing  to  a  close. 
Has  He  grown  weary  of  your  insulting  dismissals?  Stop!  Lord  Jesus  Christ! 
O  Son  of  Mary,  stop  !  Do  not  leave  such  of  the  readers  of  this  page  as  Lave  said 
to  Thee,  "  No  room  I  "  It  must  not  be.  I  seem  to  hear  these  busy  men  In  future 
knocking  passionately  and  desperately  at  the  gate  of  mercy,  but  without  love  of 
Jesus,  and  out  of  the  solemn  profoundness  of  eternity  there  comes  the  crushing 
echo,  "  No  room  1  "  And  conscience  shrieks  to  them,  "  No  room  I  No  room  among 
the  crowns  and  songs  and  glories  of  heaven  for  the  hearts  that  had  no  room  for 
Jeans  1 "    (C.  F.  Deems,  D.D.) 

Vers.  8,  9.     In  the  same  country  shepherds. — The  shepherds  and   the   Magi 
at  the  cradle  of  Christ : — (with  Matt.  ii.  1-12).      I.  The  shepherd  comes  fikst  to 

THE    CEADLB    OT    ChRIST,  BUT    THE    SAGE    COMES   TOO  ;    THE    JeW    FIRST,    BUT    ALSO    THE 

Gentile.  Here  we  have — 1.  A  prophecy  that,  as  in  His  cradle  the  Lord  Jesus 
received  "  in  a  figure  "  the  homage  of  the  entire  world,  so  at  last,  in  happy,  glorious 
fact,  He  will  receive  the  adoration  of  all  kindreds  and  tribes,  drawing  all  men  unto 
Himself  by  virtue  of  His  cross.  2.  A  consolation,  viz.,  that  even  the  poorest,  the 
simplest,  the  least  gifted  and  accomplished,  find  a  welcome  from  Him ,  and  may 
take  rank  among  the  very  first  in  His  kingdom.  3.  A  lesson — that  whatever  may 
be  the  distinctions  which  obtain  among  us  elsewhere,  we  are  all  one  in  the  service 
of  Christ,  and  should  use  our  several  gifts  for  each  other's  good, — the  shepherd 
Binging  his  song  to  the  sage,  and  the  sage  telhng  the  story  of  his  star  to  the  wonder- 
ing shepherd.      II.   We  may  learn  from  the  story  that  it  is  not  so  much  in  thk 

HUMBEB   ASD   UAQNITUDB  OF   OUS  OIFTS,  AS   IN   THE   USE  WE    MAES   OF  THEM,  THAI   OCB 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

TBCB  WBLFABB  AND  HAPPINESS  CONSIST.  The  shepheids,  ignorant  men,  eondenmed 
to  a  life  of  hard  toil  and  scanty  fare,  tied  and  bonnd  by  the  claims  of  their  craft, 
with  few  opportunities  for  joining  in  the  public  worship  of  the  Temple,  or  for  listen* 
ing  to  the  instructions  of  the  Babbis.  Yet,  at  the  bidding  of  the  angel,  they  leave 
their  flocks,  and  hasten  to  Bethlehem  to  verify  the  good  tidings.  The  wise  men 
from  the  East  had,  in  some  sort,  even  fewer  advantages  and  aids  than  the  shepherds. 
No  direct  message  from  heaven  was  vouchsafed  to  them.  They  see  a  new  sign  in 
the  sky.  They  believe  that  it  foretells  the  advent  of  some  great  one  upon  the 
earth.  How  hard  it  must  have  been  for  them  to  leave  the  luxuries  and  honours, 
and,  above  all,  the  scientific  pursuits  of  the  Persian  palace,  in  order  to  encounter 
the  toils  and  perils  of  a  long  and  hazardous  journey,  on  the  mere  chance  of  finding 
their  conclusion  verified  I  What  a  noble  faith  in  their  scientific  inductions,  or  in 
the  inward  leading  of  God,  is  implied  in  their  encountering  so  great  a  risk  or  so 
slight  a  chance  of  being  bettered  by  it  I  III.  If  it  be  true  that  our  place  in  Christ's 
service  and  regard  depends  on  our  fidelity  in  using  our  gifts  rather  than  on  the 
abundance  of  our  gifts,  it  is  aijSO  true  that  the  only  obnuinb  fidelity  is  that 
WHICH  LEADS  US  FOBWABD  AND  upwABD.  The  sages  and  the  shepherds  were  men  who 
looked  before  as  well  as  after,  men  who  knew  little  and  were  aware  of  it,  or  men  who 
knew  much  and  yet  accounted  that  much  but  httle  compared  with  what  God  had 
to  teach.  Let  us  be  followers  of  them,  ever  looking  for  more  truth  while  we  walk 
by  the  truth  we  know.  And,  walking  in  the  Ught  we  have,  it  will  grow  larger  and 
purer  ;  using  the  gifts  we  possess,  more  will  be  added  unto  us.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The 
shepherds : — 1.  The  time,  the  place,  the  tidings,  the  listeners,  are  all  in  unison. 
The  shepherds  were  on  historic  ground.  On  those  same  slopes,  on  those  same 
hill-sides,  David  of  old  had  fed  his  father's  flocks,  and  it  was  from  those  same  fields 
that  he  went  forth  at  God's  command  to  exchange  his  shepherd's  crook  for  the  royal 
sceptre,  and  his  lowly  dress  for  the  purple  of  a  king.  It  was  on  these  fields,  rich 
with  precious  memories,  that  the  shepherds  lay.  It  was  night,  and  the  sky  was 
cloudless.  Hill  and  dale  slept  under  the  beauty  of  the  clear  moon,  and  the  quiet 
flocks  were  gathered  to  the  shelter  of  the  fold.  To  such  a  scene  came  the  first 
tidings  of  the  world's  peace.  Not  to  man's  busy  haunts,  where  even  in  the  hush  of 
night  the  cry  of  sorrow  is  heard,  and  the  trouble  in  man's  heart  goes  on,  but  to  those 
peaceful  folds,  sleeping  in  the  bosom  of  the  voiceless  hills.  The  home  of  peace  is 
not  in  the  world's  great  centres,  but  among  the  shaggy  woods  and  grassy  vales  and 
solemn  hills.  And  when  the  angels  came  with  their  messages  of  peace  to  earth 
they  came  to  such  a  scene  as  that.  They  did  not  choose  the  Temple  in  Jerusalem, 
and  from  its  lofty  pinnacle  flash  their  glory  on  a  slumbering  city — that  would  have 
been  at  variance  with  the  character  of  their  message,  and  discordant  with  the  an« 
ostentatious  spirit  of  their  King.  2.  And  that  humble  shepherds  were  the  first  to 
receive  the  glad  tidings  is  as  instructive  as  it  is  strange.  The  event  itself  was  un- 
paralleled, and  the  simple  announcement  of  it  was  destined,  Uke  a  stone  cast  into 
the  still  lake,  to  extend  its  influence  in  ever- widening  circles ;  yet  it  was  to  men  lowly 
and  obscure,  without  worldly  place  or  power  of  any  kind,  that  the  first  proclamation 
was  made.  In  the  world's  view  it  would  have  been  deemed  an  utter  waste  to 
brighten  the  sky  with  angels,  and  pour  down  from  the  steeps  of  glory  cataracts  ol 
tumultuous  song,  for  a  few  poor  shepherds.  But  no  consideration  speaks  more  real 
comfort  to  our  hearts  than  this.  It  shows  us  plainly  that  there  is  no  respect  of 
persons  with  God ;  that  in  His  eye  the  loftiest  and  the  lowliest  are  as  one.  3.  But 
not  only  was  the  message  of  the  angels  given  to  shepherds,  it  was  given  to  them 
while  they  were  pursuing  their  work.  Idle  men  do  not  receive  visions.  It  is  not  in 
the  working  up  of  spiritual  ecstasy,  but  in  the  sober  and  honest  discharge  of  life's 
duties,  that  we  are  most  likely  to  find  God  and  be  found  of  Him.  4.  The  shepherds 
were  "  sore  afraid."  But  their  fear  soon  gave  place  to  action.  When  the  angels 
had  gone  away,  they  said  one  to  another,  "  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem  and 
see  " — not  if  the  thing  is  come  to  pass,  but — ' '  this  thing  which  is  come  to  pass. "  They 
did  not  arise  and  go  because  they  doubted,  but  because  they  believed.  Ah  1  it  was 
a  grand  journey  of  faith — this  of  the  shepherds  from  the  sheep-folds  to  the  manger, 
worthy  to  be  inserted  in  the  eleventh  of  Hebrews.  What  is  our  attitude  towards  the 
Divine  announcements?  5.  Having  seen  the  Infant  Saviour,  they  immediately 
made  known  their  story,  first  to  Mary,  who  kept  all  these  things  and  pondered  them 
in  her  heart,  and  then  to  the  busy  crowd  of  travellers  bustling  about  the  inn.  No 
sooner  had  they  found  Christ  for  themselves,  than  they  made  it  known  abroad  that 
they  had  found  Him.  6.  But  we  do  not  part  company  with  them  here.  We  are 
told  in  the  twentieth  Terse  that  they  "  returned  " — returned  to  their  ordinary  work. 


mAT.  II.]  8T.  LUKE.  181 

to  their  flooka  and  folds,  to  those  vsles  and  hills  from  which  they  had  come,  now 
for  ever  bright  to  them  with  something  of  the  angels'  glory,  and  tbere,  in  their  own 
quiet  life,  they  "  fought  the  good  fight,  and  kept  the  faith."  God  does  not  call 
every  man  to  be  an  apostle.  He  wants  preachers  in  private  as  well  as  in  pubUc. 
He  wants  the  glad  tidings  to  be  told  in  sheep-folds,  and  in  markets,  and  in  shops, 
as  much  as  in  places  set  apart  for  the  proclamation.  And  if  for  you  the  world  has 
been  transfigured,  and  common  things  have  received  the  impress  of  heaven  by  the 
vision  of  God's  salvation,  then  in  the  place  where  your  daily  lot  is  cast,  in  the  sphere 
of  your  common  duties  and  labours,  stand  forth  a  witness  for  righteousness  and  for 
God,  preach  the  gospel  of  peace  and  salvation  to  the  sin-stricken,  sorrow-laden  men 
and  women  all  around  you.  (H.  Wonnacott.)  This  angel  is  the  first  evangelist. 
He  is  a  type  of  what  gospel-preaching  should  be.  1.  His  message  is  good  news. 
The  gospel  not  a  threat  nor  a  law,  but  news  of  salvation.  2.  To  all  the  people — 
not  merely  to  an  elect  few.  To  all  classes — not  merely  to  the  intelligent  and  re- 
fined. 3.  The  cause  of  this  joy  proclaimed  is  the  advent  of  Christ,  i.e.,  tlae  Messiah, 
the  Anointed  One,  the  great  High  Priest  who  makes  atonement  for  the  pati;  sina  of 
His  people ;  a  Saviour  because  He  saves  His  people  from  their  sins  themselves.  4. 
The  attestation  of  His  Divinity  (ver.  12).  The  evidence  of  His  Divinity  is  Hia 
love — the  fact  that  He  is  placed  under  all  the  limitations  of  humanity  (see  Phil.  ii. 
6-8).  6.  Notice  also  the  first  approach  of  the  Divine  message  always  produces  fear 
in  the  heart  (ver.  9),  and  the  message  of  the  gospel  to  the  affrighted  heart  is  ever 
the  same,  "Fear  not."  6.  The  convert  becomes  at  once  a  preacher  to  others  (ver. 
17).  7.  The  shepherds  publish.  Mary  ponders.  Both  the  active  and  the  medita- 
tive temperament  have  a  place  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  (Lyman  Abbott,  D.D.) 
Highest  and  lowest  brought  together : — The  shepherds  were  chosen  on  account  of 
their  obscurity  and  lowliness  to  be  the  first  to  hear  of  the  Lord's  nativity,  a  secret 
which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world  knew.  And  what  a  contrast  is  presented  to 
as  when  we  take  into  the  account  who  were  the  messengers  to  them.  The  angels 
who  excel  in  strength,  these  did  God's  bidding  towards  the  shepherds.  Here  the 
highest  and  lowest  of  God's  rational  creatures  are  brought  together.  The  angel 
honoured  a  humble  lot  by  his  very  appearing  to  the  shepherds;  next  he 
taught  it  to  be  joyful  by  his  message.  {J.  H.  Newman.)  Finding  the  Lord 
in  daily  duties : — The  wise  woman  of  Medina  went  long  pilgrimages  to  find  the 
Lord,  but  in  vain  ;  and,  despairing,  she  returned  to  her  daily  duaes,  and  when  there 
engaged  she  found  the  Lord  she  had  elsewhere  sought  in  vain.  {See  Trench's  Poems.) 
Dignity  bestowed  on  those  following  their  daily  calling  : — Moses  received  his  cre- 
dentials as  the  legate  of  the  Almighty  and  the  lawgiver  of  a  new  nation  while  keep- 
ing the  flocks  of  Jethro.  Gideon  threshed  wheat  by  the  wine-press  when  the  angel 
brought  him  his  commission,  and  the  enemies  of  Israel  fled  before  "  the  sword  of 
the  Lord  and  of  Gideon."  Saul  going  to  seek  his  father's  asses  found  a  kingdom 
for  himself  ;  and  Samuel  waited  to  anoint  David  while  they  fetched  him  from 
"those  few  sheep  in  the  wilderness."  Elisha  was  ploughing  when  "  Elijah  passed 
by  "  and  oast  the  mantle  of  prophecy  upon  him,  and  Amos  among  the  herdmeu  of 
Tekoa  saw  God's  judgments  upon  Philistia  and  Tyre.  It  was  while  Zachariaa 
"  executed  the  priest's  ofiice  before  God  in  the  order  of  his  course  "  that  the  angel 
Gabriel  brought  him  "  joy  and  gladness,"  and  all  mankind  the  earnest  of  a  new 
aad  glorious  dispensation — and  the  first  mortals  that  ever  heard  "  the  sons  of  God 
shouting  for  joy  "  were  a  band  of  shepherds  watching  their  flocks  on  the  Judean 
hills.  {Amelia  S.  Barr.)  Joy  often  follows  fear : — Learn  in  the  first  place  from 
this  that  a  scene  that  may  open  in  darkness  and  fright  may  end  in  the  greatest  pros- 
perity and  advantage.  These  shepherds  were  alarmed  and  startled  ;  but  how  soon 
their  consternation  ended  in  exultation  and  jubilee.  Those  shepherds  may  in  their 
time  have  had  many  a  fierce  combat  with  wolves,  and  seen  many  strange  appearaccea 
of  eclipse,  or  aurora,  or  star-shooting.  But  those  shepherds  never  saw  so  exciting 
a  night  as  that  night  when  the  angel  came.  And  so  it  often  is  that  a  scene  of 
trouble  and  darkness  ends  in  angelic  tones  of  mercy  and  of  blessing.  That  com- 
mercial  disaster  that  you  thought  would  ruin  you  for  ever,  made  for  yon  a  fortune. 
Jacob's  loss  of  Joseph  opened  for  him  the  granaries  of  Egypt  for  his  famine-struck 
family.  Saul,  by  being  unhorsed,  becomes  the  trumpet-tongued  apostle  to  the 
Gentiles.  The  ship  splitting  in  the  breakers  of  Melita  sends  up  with  every  fragment 
on  which  the  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  passengers  escape  to  the  beach  the 
annunciation  that  God  will  deliver  His  ambassadors.  The  British  tax  on  tea  wag 
the  first  chapter  in  the  Declaration  of  American  Independence.  Famine  in  Irelaml 
louMd  XtxaX  nation  to  the  culture  of  other  kinds  of  product.    Out  of  pestilence  aud 


139  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  & 

plague  the  hand  of  medical  science  produced  miracles  of  healing.  It  was  through 
bereavement  you  were  led  to  Christ.  The  Hebrew  children  cast  into  the  furnace 
were  only  closeted  with  the  Son  of  God  walking  beside  them,  the  flames  only  light- 
ing up  the  splendour  of  His  countenance.  And  at  midnight,  while  you  were 
watching  your  flocks  of  cares,  and  sorrows,  and  disappointments,  the  angel  ol 
God's  deliverance  flashed  upon  your  soul,  crying,  "  Fear  not.  Behold,  I  bring 
you  good  tidings  of  great  joy  which  shall  be  to  all  people."  If  I  should 
go  through  this  audience  to-day,  I  would  find  that  it  was  through  great  dark- 
ness that  you  came  to  light,  through  defeat  that  you  came  to  victory,  through 
falling  down  that  you  rose  up,  and  that  your  greatest  misfortunes,  and  trials, 
and   disasters  have  been   your  grandest  illumination.      (Dr.  Talmage.)  The 

shepherd's  an  honourable  calling: — Hunters  and  warriors  make  a  great  figure 
in  the  world ;  but  he  that  feeds  the  sheep  is  more  honourably  employed  than  he 
■who  pursues  the  lion.  The  attendance  of  man  upon  these  innocent  creatures, 
which  God  hath  ordained  for  his  use,  is  an  employment  which  succeeded  to  the  life 
of  Paradise.  The  holy  patriarchs  and  servants  of  God  were  taught  to  prefer  the 
occupation  of  shepherds.  Their  riches  consisted  in  flocks  and  herds ;  and  it  was 
their  pleasure,  as  well  as  their  labour,  to  wait  upon  them  in  tents,  amidst  the 
various  and  beautiful  scenery  of  the  mountains,  the  groves,  the  fields,  and  streams 

of  water 0  happy  state  of  health,  innocence,  plenty  and  pleasure — plenty 

without  luxury,  and  pleasure  without  corruption  1  How  far  preferable  to  that 
artificial  state  of  life  into  which  we  have  been  brought  by  over-strained  refinement 
in  civilization,  and  commerce  too  much  extended ;  when  corruption  of  manners, 
unnatural,  and  consequently  unhealthy,  modes  of  living,  perplexity  of  law,  con- 
sumption of  property,  and  other  kindred  evils,  conspire  to  render  life  so  vain  and 
nnsatisfactory,  that  many  throw  it  away  in  despair,  as  not  worth  having.  A  false 
glare  of  tinselled  happiness  is  found  amongst  the  rich  and  great,  with  such  distress- 
mg  want  and  misery  amongst  the  poor,  as  nature  knows  nothing  of,  and  which  can 
arise  only  from  the  false  principles  and  selfish  views  and  expedients  of  a  weak  and 
degenerate  policy.  {Wm.  Jones.)  Several  of  the  most  gracious  Divine  manifes- 
tations, and  most  interesting  discoveries,  concerning  the  Messiah,  were  made  under 
the  Old  Testament,  to  men  who  followed  this  occupation,  as,  e.g.,  to  Abraham, 
Moses,  David.  In  like  manner,  a  singular  honour  was  now  preparing  for  the 
shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  who,  from  the  reception  they  gave  the  heavenly  message, 
and  the  part  they  afterwards  acted,  appear  to  have  been  believing  and  holy  men, 
whom  Divine  grace  had  taught  and  prepared  to  welcome  a  coming  Saviour.  {Ja$. 
Foote,  M.A.)  Tending  flocks  by  night : — It  is  only  in  the  cool  months  that  sheep 
feed  through  the  day.  In  the  greater  part  of  the  year  they  are  led  out  to  pasture 
only  towards  sunset,  returning  home  in  the  morning,  or  if  they  be  led  out  in  the 
morning  they  lie  during  the  hot  hours  in  the  shade  of  some  tree  or  rock,  or  in  the 
rude  shelter  of  bushes  prepared  for  them  (Cant.  i.  7).  They  are  taken  into  the 
warmth  of  caves  or  under  other  cover  during  the  coldest  part  of  winter  ;  the  lambs 
are  born  between  January  and  the  beginning  of  March,  and  need  to  be  kept  with 
the  ewes  in  the  field,  that  the  mothers  may  get  nutriment  enough  to  support  the 
poor  weak  creatures,  which  cannot  be  taken  to  and  from  the  t)asturage,  but  must 
remain  on  it.  That  many  of  them  die  is  inevitable,  in  spite  of  the  shepherd's 
utmost  care,  for  snow  and  frost  on  the  uplands,  and  heavy  rain  on  the  plains,  are 
very  fatal  to  them.  Nor  is  their  guardiau  less  to  be  pitied.  He  cannot  leave  them 
day  or  night,  and  often  has  no  shelter.  At  times,  when  on  his  weary  watch,  he 
may  be  able  to  gather  branches  enough  to  make  a  comparatively  dry  spot  on  which 
to  stand  in  the  wild  weather,  but  this  is  not  always  the  case.  I  have  heard  of  the 
skin  peeling  completely  from  a  poor  man's  feet  from  continued  exposure.  By 
night,  as  we  have  seen,  he  has  often,  in  outlying  places,  to  sleep  on  whatever  brush 
he  may  gather  ;  his  sheepskin  coat,  or  an  old  rug  or  coverlet,  his  only  protection. 
Perhaps  it  fared  thus  with  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago,  when  they  were  *'  abiding  in  the  field,  keeping  watch  over  their  flock  by  night." 
{G.  Geikie,  D.D.)  Attend  to  your  own  business : — The  business  of  these  shepherds 
that  night  was  staying  out  of  doors  to  watch  their  sheep.  It  was  while  they  were 
attending  to  their  business  that  they  had  a  visit  from  the  angels.  If  they  had  been 
at  home,  or  out  at  a  party,  or  even  in  a  prayer-meeting,  when  they  ought  to  have 
been  in  that  sheep-field  on  the  Bethlehem  hillside,  they  would  have  missed  a  sight 
of  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  If  they  had  been  playing  on  harps  at  a  sacred  concert,  or 
ornamenting  pottery  for  a  synagogue  fair,  or  even  carrying  an  offering  up  to  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  when  sheep-watching  was  their  duty,  they  would  not  have 


CBif.  n.]  8T,  LTJKE,  133 

heard  that  song  of  the  angels,  or  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord  round  about  them,  or 
received  first  of  all  the  good  tidings  for  a  lost  race.  The  best  place  in  aU  the  world 
to  be  is  at  the  post  of  duty.  Nowhere  else  can  such  blessings,  temporal  or  spiritual, 
be  fairly  looked  for.  If  the  Lord  has  a  good  gift  or  a  glad  message  to  one  of  His 
children,  He  sends  it  to  the  place  where  the  child  ought  to  be  found.  If  the  child 
is  not  there,  he  fails  of  getting  what  he  might  have  had  to  rejoice  over.  Day  or 
not — night  and  day,  be  where  you  belong.  If  your  duty  calls  you  to  stay  at  home, 
Btay  there,  and  never  suppose  that  you  can  have  a  bigger  blessing  anywhere  else. 
If  your  duty  calls  you  to  be  on  a  steamer,  or  a  railway  car,  out  in  the  streets  or  the 
fields,  at  a  party  or  a  prayer-meeting,  in  a  store  or  a  factory,  at  a  concert  or  a 
church-service,  in  the  home  of  a  friend  to  give  counsel  or  cheer,  or  in  a  dwelling  of 
poverty  to  administer  relief,  be  there,  at  whatever  cost  or  risli  is  demanded,  and 
understand  that  it  is  safest  and  best  for  you  to  be  there  only.  {Sunday  School 
Times.)  Shepherds  fit  persons  to  receive  the  gospel  message  : — The  news  of  Christ's 
birth  is  a  message  for  an  angel  to  deliver,  and  it  had  been  news  for  the  best  prince 
on  earth  to  receive.  Yet  it  fell  not  out  amiss  that  they  to  whom  it  first  came  were 
shepherds ;  the  news  fitted  them  well.  It  well  agreed  to  tell  shepherds  of  the  yeaning 
of  a  strange  Lamb,  such  a  Lamb  as  should  "  take  away  the  sins  of  the  world ;  "  such 
aLamb  as  they  might  "  send  to  the  Ruler  of  the  world  for  a  present" — Isaiah's  Lamb. 
Or,  if  ye  will,  to  tell  shepherds  of  the  birth  of  a  Shepherd.  Ezekiel's  Shepherd : 
"  Behold,  I  will  raise  you  a  Shepherd,"  "  the  Chief  Shepherd  "  (1  Peter  v.  4) ;  "  the 
Great  Shepherd"  (Heb.  xiii.  20) ;  "the  Good  Shepherd  that  gave  His  life  for  His 
flock  "  (John  X.  11).  And  so  it  was  not  unfit  news  for  the  persons  to  whom  it  came. 
(Bp.  Lancelot  Andrewes.)  The  annunciation  to  the  shepherds : — Who  the  angel 
was,  we  are  not  told.  Quite  probably  it  was  the  same  angel  who  had  already  made 
annunciation  to  Zacharias  in  the  temple,  to  Mary  at  Nazareth,  to  Joseph  in  his 
slumber — even  the  same  Gabriel,  Strength  of  God,  who,  five  centuries  before,  had 
made  annunciation  to  the  exile  by  the  Ulai.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  which  shone  round 
about  these  shepherds  was  doubtless  that  same  miraculous  effulgence  in  which 
Deity  had  been  wont  in  the  earlier  ages  to  enshrine  Himself,  and  which  the  rabbins 
called  the  Sheohinah.  Diversified  as  well  as  extraordinary  were  the  appearances  of 
that  Shechinah  in  ancient  days.  It  had  gleamed  as  a  flaming  sword,  turning  every 
way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life  ;  it  had  flickered  as  a  lambent  flame  in  the 
brier-bush  of  Horeb;  it  had  huug  as  a  stupendous  canopy  over  the  mountain  of  the 
law  ;  it  had  hovered  as  a  glittering  cloud  above  the  cherubim  overshadowing  the 
mercy-seat ;  it  had  marshalled  the  hosts  of  Israel  for  forty  years,  towering  like  a 
pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  like  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night ;  it  had  filled  the  temple  of 
Solomon,  flooding  it  with  a  brightness  so  intense  that  the  priests  could  not  enter  to 
minister ;  it  was  to  be  the  radiant  cloud  which  should  enfold  out  of  sight  the 
ascending  Lord  ;  it  will  be  the  great  white  throne  on  which  that  ascended  Lord  will 
descend  when  He  returns  in  the  pomp  of  His  second  advent.  But  never  had  it 
Berved  a  purpose  so  august  and  blissful  as  on  this  most  memorable  of  nights  when, 
after  centuries  of  eclipse,  it  suddenly  reappeared  and  shone  around  the  astonished 
shepherds.  Well  might  the  effulgent  cloud  now  return,  as  though  in  glad  homage 
to  the  Incarnation  ;  for  on  this  night  is  born  He  who  is  to  be  His  own  Church's  true 
pillar  of  fire-cloud,  to  marshal  her  through  sea  and  wilderness  into  the  true 
promised  land.  Oh,  since  the  day  was  as  the  night  when  Jesus  Christ  died,  let  u< 
be  grateful  that  the  night  was  as  the  day  when  Jesus  Christ  was  born.  But  where 
shall  we  find  this  mighty  Deliverer?  How  shall  we  know  Him  when  we  see 
Him?  The  sign  is  twofold.  The  first  sign  ia  this:  "Ye  shall  find  a  babe 
wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes."  The  Christ  of  God  might  have  descended  an 
archangel,  glittering  with  celestial  emblazonry.  And  it  is  a  siRn  as  powerful  as 
simple.  Had  He  descended  otherwise,  we  might  not  have  believed  so  easily  in 
thfi  reality  of  the  Incarnation.  We  might  have  said  that  He  was  an  augel.  But 
when  we  behold  Him  a  helpless  little  Babe,  we  feel  that  the  Incarnation  was  no 
acting — no  phantom.  We  feel  that  Deity  has  in  very  truth  come  down  within 
our  sphere,  linking  His  fortunes  with  ours,  taking  our  life,  like  ourselves,  at  its 
germ  as  well  as  at  its  fruit,  sharing  with  us  the  cradle  as  well  as  the  grave, 
the  swaddling  clothes  of  Mary  of  Bethlehem  as  well  as  the  burial  linen  of  Joseph 
of  Arimathea.  But  the  angel  gives  a  second  sign  :  "  Lying  in  a  manger."  Not, 
then,  in  choice  apartments  of  an  inn,  not  in  sumptuous  nurseries  of  the  opulent, 
not  in  palaces  of  royalty,  was  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  to  be  cradled ; 
but  in  a  crib,  amid  the  beasts  of  the  stall.  And  this  was  to  be  one  of  the  secrets 
of  his  kinghood.    In  fact,  all  society  is  built  up  from  belosv.     "  The  roof  is  mora 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf   a, 

dependent  upon  the  foundation  than  the  foundation  upon  the  roof.  Nearly  all, 
if  not  quite  all,  the  movements  which  have  changed  the  thinking  and  determined 
the  new  courses  of  the  world  have  been  upward,  not  downward.  The  great 
revolutionists  have  generally  been  cradled  in  mangers,  and  gone  through  rough 
discipline  in  early  life.  Civilization  is  debtor  to  lowly  cradles,  and  unknown 
mothers  hold  a  heavy  account  against  the  world." — "  Ecce  Deus,"  by  Joseph 
Pai.a.er,  D.D.  [G.  D.  Boardman.)  By  night: — Wherefore  at  night  this  Babe  of 
Glory  was  born  that  He  might  turn  the  night  into  day.  {Bishop  Hacket.)  Philo- 
sophy discovered  by  humble  men: — The  heathen  make  much  ado,  and  relate  it  not 
without  admiration,  by  what  mean  and  almost  despised  persons  the  deep  knowledge 
of  philosophy  was  first  found  out  and  brought  to  light.  As  Protagoras  earning  hia 
liviug  by  bearing  burdens  of  wood ;  and  Cleanthes  no  better  than  a  Gibeonite,  fain  to 
draw  water  for  his  liberty.  Chrysippus  and  Epictetus  mere  vassals  to  great  men 
for  their  maintenance,  yet  these  had  the  honour  to  find  out  the  riches  of  knowledge 
for  the  recompense  of  their  poverty ;  but  the  day  shall  come  that  these  philosophers 
will  wonder  that  they  found  out  no  more  than  they  did,  and  be  astonished  that  silly 
shepherds  were  first  deputed  to  find  out  one  thing  more  needful  than  all  the  world 
beside,  even  Jesus  Christ.  Tiberius  propounded  his  mind  to  the  Senate  of  Rome, 
that  Christ,  the  great  Prophet  in  Jewry,  should  be  had  in  the  same  honour  with  the 
other  gods  which  they  worshipped.  (Ibid.)  The  Good  Shepherd  that  giveth  Hia 
life  for  His  sheep,  would  first  be  manifested  to  those  good  shepherds  that  watched 
over  their  sheep.  (Ibid.)  Surely  these  shepherds  had  heavenly  meditations  in 
their  minds,  and  were  most  religiously  prepared,  when  His  ambassador  of  heaven 
did  approach  unto  them.  And  you,  my  beloved,  I  speak  to  one  with  another,  if 
that  innocency  and  harmlessness  were  in  you  that  was  in  them,  you  would  think 
many  a  time  that  a  Divine  beam  did  shine  upon  your  soul,  and  that  you  had  your 
conversation  with  angels.  (Ibid.)  The  first  to  tee  Christ  at  His  final  advent : — 
There  are  two  sorts  of  persons  noted  for  finding  out  Christ  more  eminently  than 
others,  the  shepherds  before  all  others  after  He  was  bom,  and  Mary  Magdalen  the 
first  of  all  men  and  women,  as  far  as  we  read,  after  His  resurrection.  The  shepherds 
were  vouchsafed  their  blessing,  because  they  watched  by  night,  a  hard  task  if  you 
consider  the  time  of  the  year  ;  and  Mary  was  so  prosperous  because  she  rose  very 
early  in  the  morning  to  seek  her  Lord.  It  is  hard  to  say  whether  ever  she  slept 
one  wink  for  care  and  grief,  since  the  Passion  of  our  Saviour ;  and  God  knows  who 
shall  be  the  first  that  finds  Him  at  His  second  coming  in  Glory,  when  He  shall 
come  also  like  a  thief  in  the  night ;  but  whosoever  he  be,  this  I  am  sure  of,  he  must 
be  none  of  them  that  sleep  in  gluttony,  that  are  heavy  with  surfeiting  and  drunken- 
ness, with  chambering  and  wantonness,  he  must  watch  or  be  fit  to  waken  to  find 
the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  A  watchful  shepherd : — Suffer  not  your  eyelids  to  shut,  but 
sift  and  shake  your  own  heart ;  examine  yourself,  remember  what  a  blessing  it  ia 
to  be  a  watchful  shepherd,  that  an  angel  of  comfort  may  come  and  sing  salvation 
unto  you.  (Ibid.)  A  flock  to  look  after : — To  include  you  all,  every  man  and 
woman  in  the  application,  suppose  j'ou  are  nobody's  keeper  but  your  own ;  why  be 
watchful  and  prudent  over  the  safety  of  your  own  soul ;  and  when  I  have  spoke 
that  word,  your  soul,  I  perceive  instantly  that  you  have  a  whole  flock  to  look  to, 
and  it  is  all  your  own,  the  affections  and  passions  of  your  mind,  them  I  mean ;  if 
you  bridle  their  lust  and  wantonness,  if  they  do  you  reasonable  service,  you  have  a 
rich  flock,  sheep  that  shall  stand  upon  the  right  hand  of  God :  if  they  usurp  and 
fill  you  full  of  uncleanness,  they  are  a  flock  of  goats,  that  shall  be  condemned  unto 
the  left.  "What  says  Cato  of  our  affections  ?  They  are  to  be  governed  like  a  flock 
of  sheep,  you  may  rule  them  altogether  so  long  as  they  follow  and  keep  good  order, 
but  single  one  out  alone,  and  it  will  be  unruly  and  offend  you ;  as  who  should  say 
all  our  affections  must  be  sanctified  to  God,  the  whole  flock  ;  let  one  passion  have 
leave  to  straggle  and  all  will  follow  it  to  destruction  Let  the  watchfulness  of  the 
heart  especially  be  fixed  upon  ibis  flock,  the  desires,  the  passions  over  all  that  issues 
out  of  the  souk  (Ibid.)  1.  The  Lord  did  put  on  this  glorious  apparel,  even  » 
robe  of  light  to  express  the  Majesty  of  His  Son,  who  was  born  to  save  the  world. 
2.  This  Ughtsome  apparition  about  the  shepherds,  a  type  of  the  light  and  per- 
spicuousness  which  is  genuine  and  proper  to  the  gospel.  3.  The  dark  night  was 
brightened  with  a  shining  cloud  at  our  Saviour's  nativity,  to  signify  that  He  should 
be  a  light  of  consolation  to  them  that  sate  in  the  dark  night  of  persecution  and 
misery.  The  most  obscure  things  shall  be  made  manifest  unto  His  light,  and  the 
thoughts  of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed  unto  Him.  4.  No  sooner  was  the  world 
Uest  witli  the  bixth  of  this  holy  Child,  God  and  Man,  but  the  angels  pat  on  white 


.  II.]  ST.  LUKE.  135 

apparel,  the  air  grows  clear  and  bright,  darkness  is  dispelled ;  therefore  let  us  casi 
off  the  works  of  darkness  and  walk  as  children  of  the  light ;  the  earth  should 
be  more  innocently  walked  on  to  and  fro,  because  Christ  hath  trod  upon  it ;  oui 
bodies  kept  clean  in  chastity,  because  He  hath  assumed  our  nature  and  blessed  it. 
6.  A  glimpse  of  some  celestial  light  did  sparkle  at  His  birth  to  set  our  teeth  on  edge 
to  enjoy  Him  who  is  Light  of  lights,  very  God  of  very  God,  and  to  dwell  with  Him 
in  that  city  which  hath  no  need  of  the  sun,  neither  of  the  moon,  to  shine  in  it,  for 
the  Glory  of  God  did  enlighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.  I  conclude 
with  St.  Paul  (Col.  i.  12).     (Ibid.)   ' 

Ver.  10 — I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  Joy.  Christmas-day  lessons : — 1.  The 
whole  thought  and  idea  of  all  that  is  told  us  about  Christmas  Day  suggests  the  con- 
BoUng,  the  cheering  thought,  that  however  gloomy  our  lot,  however  distressed  our 
portion,  God,  the  Almighty  God,  has  not  forsaken  us.  2.  There  is  the  truth  which 
the  heathen,  and  we  must  also  add,  which  Christians  have  often  been  very  slow  to 
acknowledge,  that  the  Divine  is  only  another  word  for  the  perfectly  good,  that  God 
is  goodness,  and  that  goodness  is  God.  S.  Let  me  take  one  special  mark  of  the  life 
of  Christ  which  extends  through  the  whole  of  it,  by  which  His  career  from  tba 
cradle  to  the  grave  is  distinguished  from  that  of  any  of  the  other  founders  of  re- 
ligions. Let  me  sum  it  up  in  one  expression  which  admits  of  many  forms  :  Ha 
was  the  Mediator  between  the  Divine  and  human,  because  He  was  the  Mediator, 
the  middle  point,  between  tue  conflicting  parts  of  human  nature.  (Dean  Stanley.) 
The  joy -producing  power  of  Christianity : — 1.  What  is  Christianity  itself,  that  is  said 
to  have  this  power  of  producing  joy  ?  It  is  that  system  of  influence,  which  was 
designed  of  God,  and  which  is  destined  to  educate  the  whole  human  race  to  perfect 
manhood.  2.  When  we  say  that  Christianity  tends  to  produce  joy,  we  are  instantly 
pointed  to  the  wretched  condition  of  things  which  exists.  Men  say,  "Christianity 
produce  joy  I  Have  there  ever  been  such  bloody  wars  as  it  has  produced  ?  such 
quarrelhng  and  dissensions?  Where  is  your  joy  ?  Besides,  these  flighty  angels  may 
have  said  something  about  joy,  but  what  did  the  Master  Himself  say  I  Did  He  not 
Bay  '  Take  up  your  cross '  &c.  ?  "  I  do  not  say,  however,  that  Christianity  instantly 
produces  joy.  I  do  not  say  that  it  produces  joy  always.  While  man  is  being  edu- 
cated into,  I  concede  that  there  is  much  suffering.  But  it  is  not  suffering  for  the 
sake  of  the  suffering — not  aimless  void  and  useless  suffering.  3.  But  while  this 
grand  education  is  evolving  we  must  not  think  that  joy  is  absent  wholly,  and  w« 
must  not  pass  too  sunamarily  by  what  has  actually  been  gained  by  Christianity  in 
the  production  of  joy  in  the  world.  The  earliest  period  of  Christian  Hfe  I  suppose 
to  have  been  transcendently  joyful.  The  apostles  had  nothing  that  men  usually 
call  elements  of  happiness.  Yet  I  will  defy  you  to  find  in  literature,  ancient  or 
modem,  so  high  a  tone  of  cheerfulness  as  you  will  find  in  their  history.  And  since 
the  days  of  the  apostles  how  many  Christian  men  have  there  not  been  who  have 
been  lifted  up  into  that  sphere  where  joy  abode  with  them.  There  is  yet  to  be  a 
revelation  of  what  Christianity  has  done  for  the  internal  man.  The  whole  range  of 
joy  throughout  the  world  has  been  augmented  and  elevated.  The  civilized  world  in 
ancient  times  was  never  so  happy  as  it  is  now.  The  world  is  better  off  to-day  than 
it  was  at  any  five  hundred  years  previous.  Agassiz  says  that  the  growth  of  a  plant 
is  in  three  stages :  first,  by  the  root,  which  is  invisible,  and  is  the  slowest  and  longest ; 
second,  by  the  stem,  which  is  perhaps  not  half  as  long ;  third,  by  maturation  or 
ripening,  which  is  the  quickest  of  all.  So  it  is  in  history.  The  past  has  been  largely 
occupied  with  root-growth  in  moral  things.  The  present  may  be  considered  the 
period  of  growth  by  the  stem.  And  I  think  we  are  standing  on  the  eve  of  a  period 
of  growth  by  maturation  and  ripening.  It  is  for  me,  therefore,  a  very  joyful  thought, 
not  only  that  we  have  a  religion  which  is  joy-producing  in  its  ultimate  fruits,  but 
that,  looked  upon  comprehensively,  it  has  alreadv  produced  vast  cycles  of  joy,  and 
is  going  forward,  not  having  expended  half  its  force  yet,  to  an  era  in  which  joy- 
producing  shall  be  more  apparent,  and  upon  a  vaster  scale,  and  with  more  exquisite 
fruit,  and  m  infinite  variety.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Glad  news  .-—Christianity  is 
glad  news.  1.  Because  it  revealed  God  to  man.  Consider  the  state  of  the 
world  before  Christianity  was  born.  Here  and  there  an  old  sage  had  groped  hia 
way  to  a  knowledge  of  the  alphabet  of  truth.  Here  and  there  the  Divine  Spirit  had 
communicated  to  a  tribe  or  nation  so  much  of  the  Divine  wisdom  that  they  lived 
faithful  to  their  marriage  vows,  knew  the  blessings  of  home,  acknowledged  the 
rights  of  property  and  life  to  such  an  extent  that  they  would  not  steal  nor  kill.  But 
of  God  thej  knew  little— of  the  life  beyond  the  grave  nothing.   But  when  Christianity 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  ii. 

was  bom,  a  sun  arose  into  the  darkness  of  the  world.  Men  saw  what  they  had 
felt  must  be,  but  what  they  had  never  before  seen.  And  chiefest  among  all  sights 
revealed,  stood  God.  The  heavens  were  no  longer  a  vacuum,  Christianity  told  them 
that  God  is  their  Father.  II.  Because  it  eevealed  man  to  himselt.  Never  till 
Jesus  was  born — never  till  he  had  lived  and  passed  away — did  man  know  the 
nobility  of  his  species.  Never  until  God  dwelt  in  the  flesh  could  any  man  know  what 
flesh  might  become.  Never  until  the  fulness  of  God  was  in  man  bodily,  might  the 
race  get  even  a  hint  of  that  Divine  receptiveness  that,  above  all  else  perhaps,  most 
nobly  characterises  human  nature.  III.  Because  it  beveals  God  in  man.  The  pro- 
clamation of  the  angels  is  confirmed  in  our  experience  and  corroborated  by  our 
knowledge  that  the  birth  of  Christianity  was  indeed  "  glad  news  "  to  men,  because 
it  brought  God  out  of  distance  and  darkness  into  light,  and  made  Him  nigh,  aa 
He  is  nigh  who  shares  our  burdens,  consoles  our  sorrows,  and  in  every  pinch  and 
ctress  of  disastrous  fortune  rescues  us  from  peril  and  saves  us  from  loss.  (TT.  H. 
Murray.)  Ohristian  joy  fulness  : — Have  you  no  song  in  you  to-day  ?  Have  yon 
received  no  mercy  that  can  make  you  tuneful  ?  Do  you  not  know  that  birds  sing 
when  they  get  wings  ?  And  shall  God  wing  you  with  powers  and  yet  you  remain 
eUent  ?  Look  abroad  over  the  world  and  see  how  it  is  being  lifted  towards  Christ ; 
how  the  old  barbarisms  are  melting  away ;  how  the  dungeons  of  old  oppressions  are 
crumbling  into  ruins  ;  how  the  tyrannies  that  trampled  on  men  are  being  shorn  of 
their  power.  See  the  torch  and  the  sword  drop  from  the  hand  of  persecution,  now 
nerveless,  but  once  potent  to  strike  and  to  light  the  martyr's  firel  Hear  the  chains 
of  slavery  snap  1  The  ring  and  clash  of  the  fetters  falling  from  wrist  and  ankle 
«ound  round  the  world.  What  is  doing  it  I  Jesus  is  doing  it.  The  Galilean  has 
triumphed !  Old  things  are  passing  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  becoming  new  1  Is 
there  no  joy  in  our  hearts  at  the  sight  of  all  this  ?  Shall  we  sit  stolid  and  un- 
moved while  before  our  eyes  the  influence  of  the  Birth  is  moving  to  its  triumph  ? 
Should  we  do  so,  Eeligion  would  disown  us  as  unworthy  of  her  favours,  and  piety 
itself  rebuke  us  as  incapable  of  gratitude.  (Ibid.)  Joy  born  at  Bethlehem: — In 
our  text  we  have  before  us  the  sermon  of  the  first  evangelist  under  the  gospel  dispen- 
sation. The  preacher  was  an  angel,  and  it  was  meet  it  should  be  so,  for  the 
grandest  and  last  of  all  evangels  will  be  proclaimed  by  an  angel  when  he  shall  sound 
the  trumpet  of  the  resurrection,  and  the  children  of  the  regeneration  shall  rise  into 
the  fulness  of  their  joy.  The  key-note  of  this  angeUc  gospel  is  joy — "  I  bring  unto 
you  good  tidings  of  great  joy."  Nature  fears  in  the  presence  of  God — the  shepherds 
were  sore  afraid.  The  law  itself  served  to  deepen  this  natural  feeling  of  dismay ; 
seeing  men  were  sinful,  and  the  law  came  into  the  world  to  reveal  sin,  its  tendency 
was  to  make  men  fear  and  tremble  under  any  and  every  Divine  revelation.  But  the 
first  word  of  the  gospel  ended  all  this,  for  the  angelic  evangelist  said,  "  Fear  not, 
behold  I  bring  you  good  tidings."  Henceforth,  it  is  to  be  no  dreadful  thing  for  man 
to  approach  his  Maker ;  redeemed  man  is  not  to  fear  when  God  unveils  the  splen- 
dour of  His  majesty,  since  He  appears  no  more  a  judge  upon  His  throne  of  terror, 
but  a  Father  unbending  in  sacred  familiarity  before  His  own  beloved  children.  The 
joy  which  this  first  gospel  preacher  spoke  of  was  no  mean  one,  for  he  said,  "  I  bring 
you  good  tidings  " — that  alone  were  joy  :  and  not  good  tidings  of  joy  only,  but  "good 
"tidings  of  great  joy."  Man  is  like  a  harp  unstrung,  and  the  music  of  his  soul's 
living  strings  is.  discordant,  his  whole  nature  wails  with  sorrow ;  but  the  son  of 
David,  that  mighty  harper,  has  come  to  restore  the  harmony  of  humanity,  and 
where  His  gracious  fingers  move  among  the  strings,  the  touch  of  the  fingers  of  an 
incarnate  God  brings  forth  music  sweet  as  that  of  the  spheres,  and  melody  rich  as 
a  seraph's  canticle.  I.  The  jot  mentioned  in  the  text — whence  comes  it,  and  what 
is  it?  1.  A  great  joy.  2.  A  lasting  joy.  3.  A  pure  and  holy  joy.  Bvt  why  is  it 
that  the  coming  of  Christ  into  the  world  is  the  occasion  of  joy  ?  The  answer  is  as 
follows  :  (1)  Because  it  is  evermore  a  joyous  fact  that  God  should  be  in  alliance 
with  man,  especially  when  the  alliance  is  so  near  that  God  should  in  very  deed 
take  our  manhood  into  union  with  His  Godhead ;  so  that  God  and  man  should  con- 
stitute one  Divine,  mysterious  person.  From  henceforth,  when  God  looks  upon 
snan.  He  will  remember  that  His  own  Son  is  a  man.  As  in  the  case  of  war,  the 
feud  is  ended  when  the  opposing  parties  intermarry,  so  there  is  no  more  war  be- 
tween God  and  man,  because  God  has  taken  man  into  intimate  union  with  Himself. 
Herein,  then,  there  was  cause  for  joy.  (2)  But  there  was  more  than  that,  for  the 
shepherds  were  aware  that  there  had  been  promises  made  of  old  which  had  been 
the  hope  and  comfort  of  believers  in  all  ages,  and  these  were  now  to  be  fulfilled.  (3) 
But  the  angel's  song  had  in  it  yet  fuller  reason  for  joy ;  for  oar  Lord  who  was  bom 


OBAV.  n.]  ST,  LUKE.  18% 

in  Bethlehem  came  as  a  Saviour.  "  Unto  y on  is  bom  thia  day  a  Saviour."  Qoi 
had  come  to  earth  before,  but  not  as  a  Saviour.  The  Lord  might  have  come  with 
thunderbolts  in  both  His  hands,  He  might  have  come  like  Elias  to  call  fire  from 
heaven  ;  but  no,  His  hands  are  full  of  gifts  of  love,  and  His  presence  is  the  guaran- 
tee of  grace.  4.  This  Saviour  was  the  Christ.  "Anointed"  of  God,  i.e.,  duly 
authorized  and  ordained  for  this  particular  work.  (5)  One  more  note,  and  this  the 
loudest,  let  us  sound  it  well  and  hear  it  well — "which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  Now 
the  word  Lord,  or  Kurios,  here  used  is  tantamount  to  Jehovah.  Our  Saviour  is 
Christ,  God,  Jehovah.    No  testimony  to  His  divinity  could  be  plainer ;  it  is  indis- 

Eutable.  And  what  joy  there  is  in  this  ;  for  suppose  an  angel  had  been  our  Saviour, 
e  would  not  have  been  able  to  bear  the  load  of  my  sin  or  yours ;  or  if  anythrng 
less  than  God  had  been  set  up  as  the  ground  of  our  salvation,  it  might  have  been 
found  too  frail  a  foundation.  II.  Follow  Me  vhile  I  briefly  speak  of  the  peoplk  to 
whom  this  joy  comes.  1.  Observe  how  the  angel  begins,  "  Behold  I  bring  you  good 
tidings  of  great  joy,  for  unto  you  is  born  this  day."  So,  then,  the  joy  began  with 
the  first  who  heard  it,  the  shepherds.  "  To  you,"  saith  he  ;  "  for  unto  you  is  born." 
Beloved  hearer,  shall  the  joy  begin  with  you  to-day? — for  it  little  avails  you  that 
Christ  was  born,  or  that  Christ  died,  unless  unto  you  a  Child  is  born,  and  for  you 
Jesus  bled.  A  personal  interest  is  the  main  point.  2.  After  the  angel  had  said' 
"  to  you,"  he  went  on  to  say,  "  it  shall  be  to  all  people."  But  our  translation  is  not 
accurate,  the  Greek  is,  "  it  shall  be  to  all  the  people."  This  refers  most  assuredly 
to  the  Jewish  nation  ;  there  can  be  no  question  about  that ;  if  any  one  looks  &t 
the  original,  he  will  not  find  so  large  and  wide  an  expression  as  that  given  by  our 
translators.  It  should  be  rendered  "  to  all  the  people."  And  here  let  us  speak  a: 
word  for  the  Jews.  How  long  and  how  sinfully  has  the  Christian  Church  despised 
the  most  honourable  amongst  the  nations !  How  barbarously  has  Israel  been 
handled  by  the  so-called  Church  I  Jesus  the  Saviour  is  the  joy  of  all  nations,  but 
let  not  the  chosen  race  be  denied  their  peculiar  share  of  whatever  promise  Holy  Writ 
has  recorded  with  a  special  view  to  them.  The  woes  which  their  sins  brought  upon 
them  have  fallen  thick  and  heavily ;  and  even  so  let  the  richest  blessings  distil  upon 
them.  3.  Although  our  translation  is  not  literally  correct,  it,  nevertheless,  expresses 
a  great  truth,  taught  plainly  in  the  context ;  and,  therefore,  we  will  advance  another 
step.  The  coming  of  Christ  is  a  joy  to  all  people.  "  Goodwill  towards  " — not  Jewe 
but  "  men  " — all  men.  There  is  joy  to  all  mankind  where  Christ  comes.  The  re- 
ligion of  Jesus  makes  men  think,  and  to  make  men  think  is  always  dangerous  to  a. 
despot's  power.  It  is  joy  to  all  nations  that  Christ  is  born,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the 
King  who  rules  in  righteousness.  III.  The  sign.  The  shepherds  did  not  ask  for  a 
sign,  but  one  was  graciously  given.  Wilful  unbelief  shall  have  no  sign,  but  weak 
faith  shall  have  compassionate  aid.  Every  circumstance  is  therefore  instructive. 
The  Babe  was  found  "wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes.  1.  There  is  not  the  remotest 
appearance  of  temporal  power  here.  2.  No  pomp  to  dazzle  you.  3.  Neither  wa» 
there  wealth  to  be  seen  at  Bethlehem.  4.  Here  too,  I  see  no  superstition.  5.  Nor 
does  the  joy  of  the  world  lie  in  philosophy.  God's  work  was  sublimely  simple. 
Mysterious,  yet  the  greatest  simplicity  that  was  ever  spoken  to  human  ears,  and' 
seen  by  mortal  eyes.  In  a  simple  Christ,  and  in  a  simple  faith  in  that  Christ, 
there  is  a  deep  and  lasting  peace,  an  unspeakable  bliss  and  joy.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.}- 
God  incarnate,  the  end  of  fear  : — I.  As  to  the  fear  of  the  text,  it  may  be  well  to- 
discriminate.  There  is  a  kind  of  fear  towards  God  from  which  we  must  not  wish, 
to  be  free.  There  is  that  lawful,  necessary,  admirable,  excellent  fear  which  is^ 
always  due  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator,  from  the  subject  to  the  king,  ay,  and! 
from  the  child  toward  the  parent.  To  have  a  holy  awe  of  our  most  holy,  just, , 
righteous,  and  tender  parent  is  a  privilege,  not  a  bondage.  Godly  fear  is  not  the? 
"  fear  which  hath  torment ;  "  perfect  love  doth  not  cast  out,  but  dwells  with  it  in. 
joyful  harmony.  The  fear  which  is  to  be  avoided  is  slaving  fear — that  tiembling- 
which  keeps  us  at  a  distance  from  God,  which  makes  us  think  of  Him  as  a  Spirit 
with  whom  we  can  have  no  communion,  as  a  Being  who  has  no  care  for  us  except 
to  punish  us,  and  for  whom  consequently  we  have  no  care  except  to  escape  if  possible- 
from  His  terrible  presence.  1.  This  fear  sometimes  arises  in  men's  hearts  from 
their  thoughts  dwelling  exclusively  upon  the  Divine  greatness.  Is  it  possible  to 
7>eer  long  into  the  vast  abyss  of  Infinity  and  not  to  fear  ?  Can  the  mind  yield  itsell 
up  to  the  thought  of  the  Eternal,  Self -existent.  Infinite  One  without  being  filled  first 
with  awe  and  then  with  dread?  What  am  I  ?  An  aphis  creeping  upon  a  rosebud  ia, 
a  more  considerable  creature  in  relation  to  the  universe  of  beings  than  I  can  be  ire 
comparison  with  God.     We  have  had  the  impertinence  to  be  disobedient  to  the  wiU^ 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  this  great  One ;  and  now  the  goodness  and  greatness  of  His  nature  are  as  a  car- 
rent  against  which  sinful  humanity  struggles  in  vain,  for  the  irresistible  torrent 
must  run  its  course,  and  overwhelm  every  opponent.  What  does  the  great  God 
seem  to  us  out  of  Christ  but  a  stupendous  rock,  threatening  to  crush  us,  or  a  fathom- 
less  sea,  hastening  to  swallow  us  up  ?  The  contemplation  of  the  Divine  greatness 
may  of  itself  fiU  man  with  horror,  and  cast  him  into  unutterable  misery  1  2.  Each 
one  of  the  sterner  attributes  of  God  will  cause  the  like  fear.  Think  of  His  power  by 
which  He  roUs  the  stars  along,  and  lay  thy  hand  upon  thy  mouth.  Think  of  Hia 
wisdom  by  which  He  numbers  the  clouds,  and  settles  the  ordinances  of  heaven. 
Meditate  upon  any  one  of  these  attributes,  but  especially  upon  His  justice,  and  upon 
that  devouring  fire  which  burns  unceasingly  against  sin,  and  it  is  no  wonder  if  the 
Boul  becomes  full  of  fear.  Meanwhile,  let  a  sense  of  sin  with  its  great  whip  of  wire 
flagellate  the  conscience,  and  man  vnti.  dread  the  bare  idea  of  God.  3.  Wherever 
there  is  a  slavish  dread  of  the  Divine  Being,  it  alienates  man  most  thoroughly  from 
his  God.  Those  whom  we  slavishly  dread  we  cannot  love.  Here  is  the  master- 
piece of  Satan,  that  he  will  not  let  the  understanding  perceive  the  excellence  of 
God's  character,  and  then  the  heart  cannot  love  that  which  the  understanding  does 
not  perceive  to  be  loveable.  4.  Fear  creates  a  prejudice  against  God's  gospel  of 
grace.  People  think  that  if  they  were  religious  they  would  be  miserable.  Oh,  could 
they  comprehend,  could  they  but  know  how  good  God  is,  instead  of  imagining  that 
His  service  would  be  slavery,  they  would  understand  that  to  be  His  friends  is  to 
occupy  the  highest  and  happiest  position  which  created  beings  can  occupy.  6.  This 
fear  in  some  men  puts  them  out  of  all  heart  of  ever  being  saved.  Thinking  God  to 
be  an  ungenerous  Being,  they  keep  at  a  distance  from  Him.  6.  This  wicked  dread 
of  God  frequently  drives  men  to  extremities  of  sin.  7.  This  fear  dishonours  God. 
8.  This  fear  hath  torment.  No  more  tormenting  misery  in  the  world  than  to  think 
of  God  as  being  our  implacable  foe.  II.  The  cube  fob  this  feab.  God  with  us : 
God  made  flesh — that  is  the  remedy.  1,  According  to  the  text  they  were  not  to  fear, 
because  the  angel  had  come  to  bring  them  good  news.  He  who  made  the  heavens 
Blambers  in  a  manger.  What  then  ?  Why,  then  God  is  not  of  necessity  an  enemy 
to  man,  because  here  is  God  actually  taking  manhood  into  alhance  with  Deity.  Is 
there  not  comfort  in  that  ?  2.  The  second  point  that  takes  away  fear  is  that  thiB 
man  who  was  also  God  was  actually  bom.  He  is  more  man  than  Adam  was,  for  Adam 
never  was  born ;  Adam  never  had  to  struggle  through  the  risks  and  weaknesses  of 
infancy ;  he  knew  not  the  littlenesses  of  childhood — he  was  full-grown  at  once;  where- 
as Jesus  is  cradled  with  us  in  the  manger,  accompanies  us  in  the  pains  and  feebleness 
and  infirmities  of  infancy,  and  continues  with  us  even  to  the  grave.  3.  Christ's  office  is 
to  deliver  us  from  sin.  Here  is  joy  upon  joy.  III.  Apply  the  cube  to  vabious  cases. 
Encouragement  to  the  weak,  the  sinful,  the  lonely,  the  tempted.  There  is  no  cause  for 
any  to  keep  away  from  God,  since  Jesus  has  come  to  bring  all  to  Him.  (C  H.  Spur y eon.) 
The  joyful  tidings  of  Christmas : — Now,  if,  when  Christ  came  on  this  earth,  God 
had  sent  some  black  creature  down  from  heaven  (if  there  be  such  creatures  there) 
to  tell  us,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men," 
and  if  with  a  frowning  brow  and  a  stammering  tongue  he  delivered  his  message,  if 
I  had  been  there  and  heard  it,  I  should  bave  scrupled  to  believe  him,  for  I  should 
have  said,  "  You  don't  look  hke  the  messenger  that  God  would  send — stammering 
fellow  as  you  are — vdth  such  glad  news  as  this."  But  when  the  angels  came  there 
was  no  doubting  the  truth  of  what  they  said,  because  it  was  quite  certain  that  the 
angels  believed  it ;  they  told  it  as  if  they  did,  for  they  told  it  with  singing,  with 
joy  and  gladness.  If  some  friend,  having  heard  that  a  legacy  was  left  you, 
should  come  to  you  with  a  solemn  countenance,  and  a  tongue  like  a  funeral  bell, 
saying,  "  Do  you  know  so-and-so  has  left  you  £10,000  ?  "  Why,  you  would  say, 
*'  Ah  I  I  dare  say,"  and  laugh  in  his  face.  But  if  your  brother  should  suddenly 
burst  into  your  room,  and  exclaim,  "  I  say,  what  do  you  think  ?  You  are  a  rich 
man.  So-and-so  has  left  you  £10,000  1  "  Why,  you  would  say,  "  I  think  it  is 
very  likely  to  be  true,  for  he  looks  so  happy  over  it."  Well,  when  these  angela 
-came  from  heaven,  they  told  the  news  just  as  if  they  believed  it ;  and  though  I 
have  often  wickedly  doubted  my  Lord's  good  will,  I  think  I  never  could  have 
doubted  it  while  I  heard  those  angels  singing.  No,  I  should  say,  "  The  messengers 
themselves  are  proof  of  the  truth,  for  it  seems  they  have  heard  it  from  God's  lips ; 
they  have  no  doubt  about  it,  for  see  how  joyously  they  tell  the  news."  Now,  poor 
soul,  thou  that  art  afraid  lest  God  should  destroy  thee,  and  thou  thinkest  that  God 
-will  never  have  mercy  upon  thee,  look  at  the  singing  angels  and  doubt  if  thoa 
darest.    Do  not  go  to  the  synagogue  of  long-faced  hj'pocrites  to  hear  the  minister 


mup.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  13£ 

who  preaches  with  a  nasal  twang,  with  misery  in  his  face,  whilst  he  tells  you  that 
God  has  goodwill  towards  men ;  I  know  you  won't  believe  what  he  says,  for  he 
does  not  preach  with  joy  in  his  countenance  ;  he  is  telling  you  good  news  with  a 
grant,  and  you  are  not  likely  to  receive  it.  But  go  straightway  to  the  plain  where 
iBethlehedi  shepherds  sat  by  night,  and  when  you  hear  the  angels  singing  out  the 
gospel,  by  the  grace  of  God  upon  you,  you  cannot  help  believing  that  they  mani- 
festly feel  the  preciousness  of  telling.  Blessed  Christmas,  that  brings  such 
creatures  as  angels  to  confirm  our  faith  in  God's  goodwill  to  men  1  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  joy  of  Christmas  : — The  incarnation,  such  a  great  and  manifold 
blessing  to  our  race,  must  bring  with  it  a  feeling  of  joy ;  and  not  to  our  race  alone, 
but  also  to  other  beings  whose  destinies  are  bound  up  with  ours.  The  nativity 
brought  joy — 1.  In  heaven,  to  the  angel  spirits.  Their  ruin  was  now  repaired 
(Isa.  li.  3).  Zion  here  represents  those  who  are  ever  beholding  the  Father's  face; 
who  rejoice  that  the  loss  to  their  heavenly  country  is  now  made  good,  for  the  Lord 
will  be  able  to  lead  all  the  faithful  thither,  where  with  the  angels  they  will  be  in 
eternal  joy.  2.  In  the  unseen  world,  to  the  faithful  departed.  Joyful  to  the  old 
fathers,  it  is  their  longed-for  redemption.  Adam's  sin  brought  our  race  into 
eaptivity  to  the  devil.  Eedemption  began  to-day.  3.  In  the  world,  among  all 
people.  Joy  for  the  new  manifestation.  He  who  before  was  invisible  was  made 
visible  to-day  by  opening  the  eyes  of  the  human  race.  The  light  of  wisdom  has 
put  to  flight  all  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  and  brought  joy  in  the  place  of  despair. 
{Anon.)  Joy  at  the  birth  of  Jesus : — To  us  men,  more  than  to  the  angels  or  to 
any  other  created  beings,  is  this  day's  joy.  It  is  the  great  festival  of  humanity. 
He  who  was  born  to-day  was — I.  A  Kedebmkb.  Delivering  us  from  the  servitude 
of  sin  and  Satan — a  worse  bondage  than  that  of  Egypt.  Think  what  songs  of 
praise  (Ex.  xv.  1)  are  due  to  Jesus  Christ  to-day,  who,  by  the  baptism  reddened  by 
His  blood,  hath  delivered  us  from  the  power  of  our  spiritual  foes.  II.  A  Subets. 
Taking  upon  Himself  all  our  debts  and  the  condemnation  of  their  punishment.  A 
new,  the  greatest  and  unheard-of  benefit  (Col.  ii.  14).  He  came  to-day  to  remit 
that  vast  debt  of  sin  which  God  alone  could  pay ;  that  the  bond  might  be  burnt 
in  the  fire  of  His  love,  or  be  affixed  to  the  cross  on  Mount  Calvary.  HI.  A 
BEAVENLT  Phtbicun.  Prepared  and  willing  to  heal  all  diseases,  again  and  again, 
without  fee  or  reward,  without  pain  to  the  patient  (Matt.  ix.  12 ;  Luke  iv.  23). 
lY.  A  Sdn  to  the  wobld.  Enlightening  a  darkness  more  dense  than  any  natural 
or  physical  darkness  (John  i.  9  ;  ix.  5).  A  light — 1.  Eternal.  2.  Cheering.  3. 
Glorifying.  Y.  A  Gnics  to  the  tbue  and  blessed  life  (Micah  il.  13).  Going  before 
in  difficulties,  smoothing  rough  ways.  YI.  A  Noubisheb  of  the  wobld.  Sustain- 
ing us  in  the  way  with  "Uving  bread."  YII.  A  Peincb  of  Peace.  Bringing 
peace — 1.  With  God.  2.  To  one's  own  conscience.  3.  With  each  other.  (Psa.  xi. 
6-10.)  YIII.  A  Savioub.  Who  will,  after  this  life,  bring  us  safely  to  the  blessed  and 
eternal  country  and  being.  Think  on  all  these  things  and  say  (Psa.  cxvii.  1).  (M. 
Faber.)  Joy  follows  sorrow : — It  is  the  presence,  or  the  memory,  of  something 
BToided,  which  gives  point  to  our  warmest  rejoicings.  In  man  grief  is  linked  on  to 
happiness,  and  suffering  to  joy.  Just  as  a  life  without  need  of  care  is  not  a  happy 
life,  so  if  there  were  no  fasts  there  could  be  no  feasts.  You  must  have  shadow  to 
ghow  the  light.  So  if  there  had  been  no  fall  there  could  have  been  no  rising  again. 
If  there  had  been  no  Adam,  there  could  have  been  no  Christ.  It  was  not  only  for 
His  own  pleasure,  and  not  at  all  for  His  own  profit,  but  for  us,  that  Christ  was 
bom.  Not  for  Adam,  nor  the  old  patriarchs,  nor  for  very  wicked  men,  but  because 
we  are  what  we  are — that  is  why  God  must  needs  deny  His  own  nature,  and  be 
born.  Thus  the  little  Infant  Child  appeals  to  us,  as  from  the  cross  the  Saviour 
crucified.  Shall  we  then  be  sad  and  sorrowful  on  such  a  day  ?  It  is  not  sadness 
to  remember  an  escape  from  danger,  nor  sadness  to  see  a  harbour  in  a  storm. 
Those  to  whom  this  Christmas-time  is  not  all  mere  pleasure,  but  whose  sad 
memories  and  present  troubles  are  too  heavy,  may  sympathize  with  the  Child 
born  to  suffer,  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  born  to  save.  It  is  for  you  to  whom  the 
world  is  not  too  dear,  that  you  may  have  a  world  where  sorrows  enter  not,  that 
Christ  was  born.  And  for  those  who  have  no  weight  of  care  and  sorrow,  let  the 
memory  of  Christ  make  them  generous  and  thoughtful  and  kindhearted  ;  not  hard 
and  selfish  in  their  enjoyment,  but  longing  to  make  all  as  merry  and  lighthearted 
•s  themselves,  remembering  that  the  first  Christmas  gift  was  given  by  God  to  us, 
when  the  Son  of  God  gave  to  mankind  Himself.      (Bp.   E.   Steere.)  Oood 

tiding$ :  —  The  gospel  may  be  called  "  good  tidings." — 1.  Because  it  is  so 
beneficial.     2.  Because  it  is  so  appropriate.     3.   Because  it  is  so  peisooaL 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  n 

4.  Eecanse  it  is  so  unexpected.  5.  Because  it  is  bo  sabserrient  to  th« 
illustration  of  all  the  other  dispensations  of  God  toward  us.  ((?.  Brooks.) 
The  duty  of  Christian  joy  : — We  are  incapable  of  omniscience  in  the  region  alike  oi 
enjoyment  and  of  suffering.  God  has  so  made  the  eye  of  this  body  that  it  discerns 
not  the  animalcules  swallowed  in  water,  nor  the  tiny  reptiles  that  are  crushed  by 
each  tread  of  the  foot.  This  limitation  of  the  natural  vision  is  a  type  to  us  of  a 
principle  which  is  the  very  condition  of  being.  We  are  not  to  scrutinize  sufferings 
which  we  cannot  alleviate.  We  are  not  to  allow  pain  to  annihilate  pleasure.  W« 
are  not  to  set  God's  dispensation  of  sorrow  at  variance  with  God's  other  dispensa* 
tion  of  joy.  Where  there  is  the  remotest  chance  of  alleviating,  there  we  are  to  bt 
keen-sighted  in  investigation.  The  eye  is  to  be  open — but  let  it  be  the  natural 
eye,  not  the  microscope.  We  are  not  intended  so  to  realize  the  woe  which  cannot 
be  mitigated,  as  to  foster  a  general  depression  of  tone,  or  a  practical  insensibility 
to  the  blessings  which  are  largely  mingled  (none  can  deny  it)  in  the  cup  of  human 
being.  It  is  needful,  too,  that  we  should  none  of  us  so  enjoy  as  to  forget  the 
suffering  which  is  for  another  and  which  shall  be  for  us.  On  this  ground,  with 
this  view,  to  this  extent,  we  are  bound  to  remember,  and  to  take  into  our  reckoning, 
the  hardships,  the  calamities,  and  the  miseries,  which  abound  in  the  world.  Bui 
it  is  not  by  refusing  to  rejoice  that  we  shall  really  either  learn  to  feel  or  learn  to 
bear.  {J.  Vaughan^  The  gospel  to  be  presented  as  great  joy : — It  is  the  boundea 
duty  of  each  one  of  us,  in  his  own  place  and  sphere,  to  present  the  gospel  to  the 
world  as  good  tidings — of  great  joy — to  all  people.  If  we  once  lose  this  view  of 
it,  we  have  parted  with  its  chief  power  over  one  large  section  at  least  of  mankind. 
To  the  young,  to  the  strong,  to  the  busy,  to  the  happy,  it  is  idle  to  offer  a  consola- 
tion which  they  need  not,  or  a  gloom  which  they  repudiate.  Tell  them  that  the 
gospel  is  a  great  joy — that  it  heightens  all  other  joys,  that  it  makes  that  everlast- 
ing which  else  must  be  temporal,  that  it  makes  the  strong  man  stronger,  and  the 
young  man  younger,  and  the  wise  man  wiser,  and  the  delightful  man  more 
delightful,  and  thus  completes  and  perfects  every  part  and  every  kind  of  human 
vigour  and  of  human  usefulness  and  of  human  hope — you  make  Christ  then  what 
prophecy  writes  Him,  the  Desire  of  Nations;  and  you  make  the  gospel  what  the 
angel  calls  it,  great  joy,  and  to  all  people.  Nor  do  you,  in  so  painting  it,  detract 
from  anyone  of  its  charms  for  the  struggling  and  the  sorrow-laden.  "The  spirit  of 
the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,  because  He  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
the  poor.  He  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  appoint  unto  them  that 
mourn  in  Zion,  to  give  unto  them  beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning, 
the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."  (Ibid.)  Christmas  Day  the 
turning  point : — Do  you  remember  that  Christmas  Day  is  the  first  day  in  the  year 
in  which  the  days  begin  to  lengthen  ?  On  the  21st,  the  22nd,  the  23rd,  and  the 
24th  of  December  they  are  substantially  at  a  standstill ;  but  on  the  25th  of 
December  the  hand  of  the  poetic  year  cuts  one  lock  from  the  head  of  darkness,  and 
hangs  it  like  a  star  on  the  forehead  of  the  day ;  and  to-day  is  a  minute  longer 
than  yesterday.  And  the  sun  will  not  go  back  now.  It  has  set  its  face  toward 
the  summer ;  and  though  there  are  going  to  be  great  storms  in  January,  though 
vast  shrouds  of  snow  will  cover  the  ground,  yet  you  know  and  I  know  that  the  sun 
has  gone  to  its  farthest  limit,  and  has  begun  to  turn  back ;  and  that  just  as  sure  as 
nature  is  constant  in  her  career,  that  sun  is  retracing  his  steps  with  summer  in  his 
bosom,  and  that  there  are  fruits,  and  there  are  flowers,  and  there  is  a  whole  realm 
of  joy  coming.  You  have  no  doubt  of  this  in  the  natural  world.  And  I  say  that 
though  the  days  of  the  world's  winter  are  not  over,  yet  I  beheve  that  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  has  gone  as  far  away  as  He  ever  will,  and  has  turned,  and  is  coming 
back ;  and  that  there  is  to  be  a  future  summer  of  joy  and  rejoicing  in  things 
spiritual  as  well  as  in  things  temporal.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Heathen  religions  and 
Christianity  : — There  have  been  many  religions  which  have  made  men  much  more 
joyful  than  Christianity  has;  but  they  played  upon  the  nature  just  as  it  was,  and 
never  sought  to  change  it.  The  religion  of  the  Greeks  was  a  gay  and  festive 
rehgion.  They  wreathed  themselves  with  flowers ;  they  anointed  themselves 
with  sweet  perfumes ;  they  surrounded  their  temples  with  every  attraction ;  they 
invoked  every  pleasure  that  they  could  think  of ;  they  sought  to  make  the  hour  of 
their  worship  a  beautiful  and  charming  hour.  They  sought  joy  without  seeking 
manhood.  Theirs  was  a  religion  which  took  men  just  where  they  were,  and  left 
them  where  they  were,  and  wrung  out  of  them  all  the  joy  that  there  was  in  them 
at  that  point  of  development — and  that  was  all.  But  Christianity  takes  men,  and 
says,  "Ye  are  capaUlu  of  mightier  thmgs  than  these,"  and  so  begins  to  open  up 


out.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  Ul 

the  nature,  to  Moord  the  nature,  to  discipline  the  nature,  and  make  manhood 
vaster  with  the  volume  of  joy  by-and-by  wrung  out  of  their  faculties — so  vast 
that  it  shall  transcend  immeasurably  that  which  was  possible  in  the  beginning  or 
at  the  earher  stages.  It  is  a  great  comfort  to  me,  that  have  looked  with  so  much 
sympathy  upon  the  whole  long  requiem  of  time  past,  and  upon  the  groaning  and 
travailing  in  pain  until  now  that  is  in  the  world,  to  believe,  as  I  do  heartily 
believe,  that  the  future  of  Christianity  is  to  be  far  brighter,  and  that  the  day  of 
struggle  is  comparatively  past.     (Ibid.)  All  creatures  interested  in  the  incarna- 

tion of  Christ : — Men  did  share  in  Him  in  His  own  sex  and  person  ;  women  in  tha 
womb  that  bare  Him  ;  poor  men  in  the  shepherds,  great  ones  iu  the  sages  of  the 
East ;  the  beasts  by  the  stable  wherein  Ha  was  born  ;  the  earth  in  the  gold  that 
was  offered  ;  the  trees  in  the  myrrh  aud  frankincense;  and  to  reckon  up  no  more» 
the  heavens  in  the  star  that  blazed.  All  the  works  of  God,  even  they  which  by 
natural  obedience  bless  Him  and  magnify  Him  for  ever,  did  claim  some  office  to 
make  one  in  the  solemnity  when  their  Creator  was  born.  ^Vhy  surely  some  room 
was  left  for  the  angels.  It  was  fit  they  should  be  in  the  train  at  the  inauguration 
of  this  mighty  Prince,  and  their  place,  according  to  their  dignity,  was  very 
honourable ;  they  were  God's  ambassadors,  and  as  if  they  had  a  patent  to  use  their 
office  frequently,  they  had  many  errands  from  heaven — to  Mary,  to  Joseph. 
{Bishop  Hatket.)  Behold: — Of  which  word  staading  in  this  place  I  note  three 
things — admiration,  demonstration,  aud  attention.  1.  Ecce,  see  and  admire  this 
is  the  greatest  wonder  that  ever  was.  If  you  love  to  cast  your  eyes  upon  that 
which  is  miraculous,  look  this  way,  and  see  the  greatest  miracle  that  ever  was 
brought  to  light.  2.  To  cry  out  unto  the  shepherds,  behold,  is  an  adverb  of 
demonstration.  Things  hard  by  make  us  look  towards  them  more  than  those  that 
are  farther  o£E ;  we  sit  still  and  muse  upon  that  which  we  hope  will  come  to  pass, 
but  when  we  hear  the  bridegroom  coming,  then  we  bustle  and  look  out.  And 
though  the  senses  of  our  body  do  not  fix  themstilves  upon  Him,  yet  faith  will  per- 
ceive Him  strongly  and  certainly  that  He  is  truly  present ;  faith  will  assure  itself 
how  He  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks,  and  how  it  hears  His  voice.  Furthermore 
let  this  demonstrative  direction  put  you  in  mind  to  live  so  justly  and  inoffensively 
as  if  you  did  always  behold  God  in  the  flesh.  But — 3.  Ecce,  behold,  it  doth  not 
beg,  but  command,  attention.  When  the  Lord  sends  a  messenger,  is  it  not  fit  to 
note  him  diligently,  and  to  ponder  his  sayings  in  your  mind?  (Ibid.)  Good  newt 
to  all  people  : — A  good  harvest  is  not  welcome  to  one  village,  hut  it  is  gladsome  to 
the  whole  country  round  about ;  aud  when  spoils  are  divided  after  the  vanquishing 
of  an  enemy,  every  soldier  is  enriched,  aud  hath  his  share.  Such  a  communica- 
tive blessmg  is  our  Saviour's  incarnation — every  man  fills  his  bosom  with  the 
sheaves  of  the  harvest ;  every  Christian  soldier  that  fights  a  good  warfare  plucks 
somewhat  from  the  spoils  of  the  enemy.  (Ibid.)  The  birth  of  Jesus: — I.  Thr 
MESSENGER  EMPLOYED.  One  of  the  dignified  sons  of  light.  An  ambassador  from 
heaven  to  earth,  from  God  to  man.  A  service  of  unrivalled  glory  and  benevolence, 
calculated  to  excite  wonder  and  abundant  praise.  By  the  redemption  which  is  in 
Christ  angels  become  our  brethren,  our  friends,  and  onr  companions  for  ever.  It 
is  probaole  tnerr  joys  aud  honours  are  greatly  enhanced  by  the  work  of  the 
Messiah.  II.  Tnii  persons  addressed.  Jewish  shepherds.  What  a  contrast 
between  the  ambassador  ana  those  to  whom  he  appeared.  How  different,  too,  to 
the  doings  of  men  and  to  human  expectations.  It  would  have  been  supposed  the 
tidings  should  have  been  given  to  kmgs,  or  philosophers,  or  assuredly  to  the 
priests.  But  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways.  In  all  the  work  and  life  of  Christ 
God  poured  contempt  upon  worldly  glory  and  distinctions.  IIL  The  messags 
coMMDNiCAnsD.  1.  '£hb  angel  describes  tlie  person  of  Him  who  is  born.  (1) 
Saviour,  ^^i  Christ.  (3)  The  Lord.  2.  He  announces  His  birth.  The  end  of 
prophecy.  The  fuliilment  of  types.  The  fulness  of  the  times.  3.  He  affirms 
this  to  be  an  event  of  good  tidings.  Tidings  of  Divine  grace  and  salvation — all 
others  are  insigiiinoant  in  comparison.  Life,  light,  happiness,  eternal  glory.  4. 
He  notices  the  univeiSul  application  of  these  good  tidings.  (1)  To  the  Jew  first. 
"You."  (2;  "All  people."  None  shut  out.  How  comprehensive.  Wherever  we 
find  even  »  horde  of  wandering  savages,  Cnrist  is  born  for  them.  Application  :  1. 
is  tha  end  of  Cnrist's  birth  answered  in  you?  2.  If  so,  rejoice.  3.  Caution 
ujraiadt  tha  temptations  of  the  season.  Let  your  joy  be  "in  the  Lord."  (JabeM 
hai lu,  h.D.)  Site  angeVs  message  to  the  shepherds  : — 1.  The  time.  Not  in  tha 
m6ridian  eplenaour  of  the  sun,  when  his  unnumbered  glories  might  have  added  to 
tlie  laatre  of  the  scene,  and  charmed  aud  gratified  senses  and  imagination.    Silence 


14S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  ii. 

of  night  is  more  favourable  to  devotion  than  bustle  of  day.  The  errand  of  the 
heavenly  messengers  was  of  a  religious  nature,  therefore  they  arrive  in  the  dark- 
ness and  stillness  of  night.  Long  before  this  silent  hour  the  sun  had  set  in  the 
western  sky.  The  stars  appeared,  and  the  moon  could  not  certainly  withhold  her 
light  and  her  attendance  upon  such  an  occasion ;  everything  conspired  to  direct 
the  pious  mind  to  solemn  contemplation.  2.  The  persons.  Not  to  rulers  or  great 
men  was  the  message  sent,  but  to  humble  shepherds.  Why,  then,  say  the  poor, 
that  religion  is  not  for  them,  that  they  are  neglected  and  forgotten  ?  It  was  to 
poor  men  that  this  wondrous  announcement  was  made.  3.  The  tidings  revealed. 
Were  they  not  "good  tidings"?  Would  not  the  poor  afflicted  and  oppressed 
debtor,  who  was  just  about  to  be  dragged  by  a  merciless  creditor  from  Ma  homa 
and  family,  to  be  shut  up  in  prison,  esteem  it  glad  tidings  if  he  should  be  in  that 
hour  informed  that  one,  completely  able,  had  sent  an  express  messenger  to  the 
hard-hearted  creditor,  saying,  "  Place  all  this  man's  debt  to  my  account ;  set 
him  at  liberty  to  go  home  to  his  afflicted  wife  and  famishing  children "  ?  And 
was  it  not  good  tidings  to  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt  when  Moses  was  sent 
by  God  to  be  their  deliverer,  and  to  lead  them  to  the  promised  land  T  But  what 
is  here  announced  far  exceeds  the  joy  of  such  occasions  as  these,  for  they  refer 
to  temporal  concerns,  this  to  eternal.  {H.  Venn,  M.A.)  Oreat  joy  is  often — 1. 
Secret.  2.  Silent.  3.  Childlike.  4.  Modest  6.  Elevated.  Christ  is  the  onlj 
source  of  rational  joy  among  fallen  men.  (FJn  Doren.)  The  ChrUtnuu  fettival 
a  festival  f(yr  the  whole  world  ; — 1.  This  it  is  designed  to  be.  2.  This  it  can  be.  8. 
This   it  must  be.      4.    This  it  will  be.      (J.  J.    Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  Thg 

message  to  the  shepherds : — L  How  sure  is  God's  word.  Ages  had  rolled  by  since 
the  promise  was  first  made.  Saints  had  waited ;  types  had  prefigured ;  prophets 
had  foretold :  at  last,  when  all  preparation  is  complete,  the  Divine  decree  is 
accomplished.  II.  How  wondebi'vl  abe  God's  ways.  III.  How  olobious  is 
God's  salvation.  God,  and  yet  man ;  a  babe,  and  yet  Lord  of  all.  How  great 
the  Father's  love ;  how  wonderful  the  Son's  condescension  I  {W.  S,  Bruce,  M.A.) 
Christianity  a  cheerful  religion : — It  is  necessary  for  some  people  to  remember 
that  cheerfulness,  good  spirits,  light-heartedness,  merriment,  are  not  unchristian 
nor  unsaintly.  We  do  not  please  God  more  by  eating  bitter  aloes  than  by  eating 
honey.  A  cloudy,  foggy,  rainy  day  is  not  more  heavenly  than  a  day  of  sunshine. 
A  funeral  march  is  not  so  much  Uke  the  music  of  angels  as  the  song  of  birds  on  a 
May  morning.  There  is  no  more  reUgion  in  the  gaunt  naked  forest  in  winter  than 
in  the  laughing  blossoms  of  the  spring,  and  the  rich  ripe  fruits  of  antomn.  It 
was  not  the  pleasant  things  in  the  world  that  came  from  the  devil,  and  the  dreary 
things  from  God ;  it  was  sin  brought  death  into  the  world  and  all  oar  woe  ;  as  the 
sin  vanishes,  the  woe  will  vanish  too.  God  Himself  is  the  ever-blessed  God.  He 
dwells  in  the  light  of  joy  as  well  as  of  purity,  and  instead  of  becoming  more  like 
Him  as  we  become  more  miserable,  and  as  all  the  brightness  and  glory  of  life  are 
extinguished,  we  become  more  like  God  as  our  blessedness  becomes  more  complete. 
The  great  Christian  graces  are  radiant  with  happiness.  Faith,  hope,  charity — 
there  is  no  sadness  in  them;  and  if  penitence  makes  the  heart  sad,  penitence 
belongs  to  the  sinner,  not  to  the  saint.  As  we  become  more  saintly,  we  have  less 
sin  to  sorrow  over.  No ;  the  religion  of  Christ  is  not  a  religion  of  sorrow.  It 
consoles  wretchedness,  and  brightens  with  a  Divine  glory  the  lustre  of  every 
inferior  joy.  It  attracts  to  itself  the  broken-hearted,  the  lonely,  the  weary,  the 
despairing ;  but  it  is  to  give  them  rest,  comfort,  and  peace.  It  rekindles  hope ;  it 
inspires  strength,  courage,  and  joy.  It  checks  the  merriment  of  the  thoughtless 
who  have  never  considered  the  graver  and  more  awful  realities  of  man's  life  and 
destiny ;  but  it  is  to  lead  them  through  transient  sorrow  to  deeper  and  more  perfect 
blessedness,  even  in  this  world,  than  they  had  ever  felt  before  the  sorrow  came, 
(r.  Dale,  M.A.)  The  great  birthday  : — I.  The  bibth  of  Chbist  should  be  thb 
SUBJECT  OF  supBEUE  JOT.  We  have  the  angelic  warrant  for  rejoicing  becanse 
Christ  is  born.  It  is  a  truth  so  full  of  joy  that  it  caused  the  angel  who  came  to 
announce  it  to  be  fiUed  with  gladness.  He  had  little  to  do  with  the  fact,  for  Christ 
took  not  up  angels,  but  He  took  up  the  seed  of  Abraham ;  but  I  suppose  that  the 
very  thought  that  the  Creator  should  be  linked  with  the  creature,  that  the  great 
Invisible  and  Omnipotent  should  come  into  alliance  with  that  which  He  Himself 
had  made,  caused  the  angel  as  a  creature  to  feel  that  aU  creatureship  was 
elevated,  and  this  made  him  glad.  Besides,  there  was  a  sweet  benevolence  of 
spirit  in  the  angel's  bosom  which  made  him  happy  because  he  had  such  glad- 
some  tidings  to  bring  to  the  fallen  sons  of  men.    1.  The  birth  of  Christ  was  th« 


eHAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  143 

incarnation  of  God.  This  is  a  wondrous  mystery,  to  be  believed  in  rather  than 
to  be  d3fined.  Mankind  is  not  outlawed  or  abandoned  to  destruction,  for,  lo  1 
the  Lord  has  married  into  the  race,  and  the  Son  of  God  has  become  Son  of 
Man.  This  proves  that  God  loves  man,  and  means  man's  good;  that  He  feels 
for  man  and  pities  him ;  that  He  intends  to  deliver  man  and  to  bless  him.  2. 
He  who  was  bom  is  unto  us  a  Saviour.  Those  who  will  be  most  glad  of  this 
will  be  those  who  are  most  conscious  of  their  sinnership.  If  you  would  draw 
music  out  of  that  ten-stringed  harp,  the  word  "  Saviour,"  pass  it  over  to  a 
sinner.  "  Saviour  "  is  the  harp,  but  "  sinner  "  is  the  finger  that  must  touch  the 
strings  and  bring  forth  the  melody.  3.  This  Saviour  is  Christ  the  Lord,  and 
there  is  much  gladness  in  this  fact.  We  have  not  a  nominal  Saviour,  but  a 
Saviour  fully  equipped ;  one  who,  in  all  points,  is  like  ourselves,  for  Ho  is  Man, 
but  in  all  points  fit  to  help  the  feebleness  which  He  has  espoused,  for  He  is  the 
Anointed  Man.  The  godlike  in  dominion  is  joined  with  the  human  in  birth. 
4.  The  angel  called  for  joy,  and  I  ask  for  it  too,  on  this  ground,  that  the  birth 
of  this  child  was  to  bring  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  goodwill 
toward  men.  The  birth  of  Christ  has  given  such  glory  to  God  as  I  know  not 
that  He  could  ever  have  had  here  by  any  other  means.  We  must  always  speak  in 
accents  soft  and  low  when  we  talk  of  God's  glory ;  in  itself  it  must  always  be 
infinite  and  not  to  be  conceived  by  us,  and  yet  may  we  not  venture  to  say  that 
all  the  works  of  God's  hands  do  not  glorify  Him  so  much  as  the  gift  of  His  dear 
Bon,  that  all  creation  and  all  providence  do  not  so  well  display  the  heart  of 
Deity  as  when  He  gives  His  Only-Begotten,  and  sends  Him  into  the  world  that 
men  may  live  through  Him  ?  What  wisdom  is  manifested  in  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion of  which  the  incarnate  God  is  the  centre  1  What  love  is  there  revealed  I 
What  power  is  that  which  brought  the  Divine  One  down  from  glory  to  the 
manger ;  only  Omnipotence  could  have  worked  so  great  a  marvel  1  WTiat  faith- 
fulness to  ancient  promises  1  What  truthfulness  in  keeping  covenant  1  What 
grace,  and  yet  what  justice  I  H.  Let  us  consider  to  whom  this  joy  belongs.  1. 
It  belongs  to  those  who  tell  it.  2.  It  belongs  to  those  who  hear  it.  3.  It  belongs 
to  those  who  believe  it.  III.  How  that  joy  should  be  manifested,  1.  Pro- 
claim the  Saviour.  2.  Sing  God's  praises.  3.  Spread  the  news — as  the  shepherds 
did.  4.  Ponder  this  miracle  of  love — as  Mary  did.  6.  Go  and  do  good  to 
others.  Come  and  worship  God  manifest  in  the  fiesh,  and  be  filled  with  His 
light  and  sweetness  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
ChrisVs  Nativity : — 1.  Observe  the  interest  which  the  angels  felt  on  the  occasion. 
While  men's  mmds  are  intent  on  the  decree  of  the  emperor,  theirs  are  centred  on 
Christ.  2.  Not  only  did  an  angel  appear  to  the  shepherds,  but  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  shone  round  about  them.  Evidence  of  a  message  immediately  from  God. 
8.  The  effect  it  had  rpon  the  shepherds.  Sore  afraid,  but  afterwards  cheered.  4. 
The  object  prodaiiued  is  the  "  Saviour."  Not  themselves,  but  Christ.  5.  The 
good  news  was  common  to  all  people,  not  to  one  nation  only.  6.  The  good  news, 
though  common  to  all  people,  was  more  immediately  addressed  to  the  shepherds, 
who  like  many  others  were  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  The  gospel  is 
addressed  to  individuals,  as  if  they  only  were  the  objects  of  it.  Salvation  is  directly 
offered  to  every  soul.  7.  In  this  heavenly  message  particular  attention  is  paid  to 
time,  place,  and  other  circumstances,  to  show  their  agreement  with  ancient 
prophecy.    Not  even  an  angel  may  speak  anything  contrary  to  the  Scriptures  (GaL 

1.  8).       I.    CONSIDEB  THE    SCBJECT   OF     THE   ANOELIO    MESSAGE,   AND     SEE   WHAT   GOOD 

TiDiNas  ABB  CONTAINED  IN  IT.  1,  The  birth  of  Jesus  Christ  was  itself  good  news. 
The  great  object  of  prophecy  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  the  hope  of  the 
Church  in  all  ages.  2.  The  gracious  design  of  His  incarnation  imparted  good 
tidings  to  a  guilty  and  ruined  world.  3.  The  way  of  salvation,  which  was  effected 
by  the  coming  of  Christ,  forms  an  essential  part  of  the  good  tidings  brought  to  us 
by  the  angel.  Bepentance  and  remission  of  sins  preached  among  all  nations.  II. 
These  tidings  ake  matters  op  joy,  of  great  joy  to  all  people.  The  word  used 
is  strong,  and  only  used  for  such  great  occasions  as  the  joy  of  harvest  or  au 
important  victory ;  but  is  fully  applicable  to  this  subject.  1.  The  coming  of  Christ 
was  the  joy  of  the  Old  Testament  Church,  while  they  lived  only  in  hope  of  this 
great  event  (Isa.  xzv.  9  ;  John  viii.  56).     How  much  more  when  it  is  fully  realized. 

2.  All  the  joy  of  believers  during  the  lifetime  of  our  Saviour  centred  entirely  in 
Him.  3.  All  the  joy  in  the  times  of  the  apostles  had  an  immediate  reference  ta 
Christ  and  His  salvation.  The  apostles  triumphed  in  every  place,  but  it  was  because  the 
Bavooi  of  His  name  was  spread  abroad.    4.  Christ  and  His  salvation  made  all  theii 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

troubles  and  sorrows  light  and  momentary ;  yea,  they  connted  not  their  lives  dear 
for  His  sake;  The  history  of  the  primitive  Church  is  a  history  of  sufferings  in  the 
cause  of  Christ,  and  of  joy  and  rejoicing  in  His  holy  name.  This  also  is  the  way 
for  us  to  bear  up  under  all  the  sorrows,  trials,  and  afiQictions  of  this  life.    III. 

IkQUIBE   what   is  NECESSABT  to   bender  these     good    tidings    a    MATTBB    of    BBAI) 

JOY  TO  vs.  It  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  they  do  not  produce  joy  in  all :  they  did 
not  then,  and  they  do  not  now.  Many  think  the  tidings  of  the  gospel  not  worth 
hearing.  Many  who  hear,  neglect  them,  or  feel  no  interest  in  them.  Some  who 
seem  to  rejoice  for  a  time  become  indifferent,  and  afterwards  wither  away.  1.  To 
become  the  subject  of  real  joy,  these  tidings  require  to  be  believed  as  true,  and  to 
be  received  with  the  utmost  cordiality.  2.  It  requires  a  deep  conviction  of  our  guilty, 
lose,  and  ruined  state,  which  is  presupposed  by  the  gospel,  and  which  must  be  fell 
and  realized  before  it  can  convey  to  us  tidings  of  great  joy.  3.  A  cordial  reception 
of  the  gospel  itself,  as  revealing  the  only  way  of  salvation ;  obeying  it  from  the 
heart,  and  receiving  the  truth  in  love.  {Theological  Sketch-book.)  The  firtt 
Christmas: — I.  That  a  scene  of  fbight  often  becomes  a  scene  of  exaltation. 
Joseph's  way  to  authority  led  through  the  pit,  slavery,  and  prison.  How  many 
through  affliction  have  found  spiritual  triumph.  II.  Wb  see  why  Christ 
finds  so  POOR  a  beoeption  upon  earth.  Room  for  outward  pomps,  but  none  for 
the  lowly  Son  of  God.  In  yonder  store  there  is  room  for  trade,  for  money,  but  no 
room  for  Christ.  There  is  no  war  between  prosperity  and  Christ.  III.  That  whilb 
virtue  is  often  roBCED  TO  plain  lodgings,  wickedness  is  provided  with  finb 
QUABTEBS.  Guilt  On  the  throne,  innocence  in  the  cabin ;  Nero  in  the  palace,  Paul 
a  prisoner ;  Nebuchadnezzar  walking  in  the  hanging  gardens,  Shadrach  in  the 
fire.  Remember  the  order :  first  the  manger  ;  second,  the  cross  ;  third,  the  crown. 
IV.  That  joy  is  a  dominant  element  in  religion.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  The  first 
Christmas  morning : — I.  The  advent  op  Christ  was  good  tidings  to  the  slave. 
When  He  came,  a  large  part  of  the  race  were  held  in  abject  servitude.  Slavery 
prevailed  extensively  in  cultivated  Greece,  in  imperial  Eome,  and  even  in  Palestine 
— in  the  very  shadow  of  the  temple  of  the  Most  High.  Some  Roman  masters  held 
from  ten  to  twenty  thousand  slaves,  and  the  condition  of  the  slave  was  hard  in 
the  extreme.  He  was  treated  and  held  simply  as  a  "  thing"  ;  bought  and  sold  as 
men  deal  in  sheep  and  horses,  he  was  absolutely  the  property  of  his  master ;  he 
had  no  rights  as  a  man — no  place  under  the  law  ;  could  be  beaten,  scourged,  and 
put  to  death  at  the  will  of  the  master.  Such  was  the  condition  of  half  the  world 
when  the  angel  choir  sang  their  Gloria  in  Excelsis.  But  that  song  was  the  death- 
knell  to  human  bondage.  The  Infant  that  lay  in  the  manger  hard  by  was  to  be 
the  great  Deliverer.  Glorious  emancipation  I  Glorious  harbinger  of  that  spiritual 
liberty  which  Christ  is  yet  to  achieve!  II.  The  advent  of  Cheist  was  gooi> 
tidings  to  the  laboueeb.  The  mass  of  men  belong  to  the  labouring  class — are 
forced  to  earn  their  bread  in  the  sweat  of  their  brows.  The  honour,  the  dignity,  of 
labour  was  not  at  all  understood  before  Christ's  advent.  Philosophers  taught  that 
all  forms  of  manual  labour  were  degrading.  In  Eome  only  three  kinds  of  occupa- 
tion  were  considered  respectable,  viz. :  medicine,  commerce,  and  architecture. 
Free  men  had  to  work  side  by  side  with  slaves.  But  Christ  taught  a  new  doctrine. 
He  consecrated  and  made  honourable  all  honest  labour,  both  by  the  precepts  He 
taught  and  by  His  own  example.  And  just  as  the  spirit  and  teachings  of  the  great 
Master  prevail,  the  labouring  classes  will  be  elevated  and  prosperous,  and  human 
society  will  approximate  the  heavenly  world.  III.  The  advent  op  Chbist  revealed 
TO  eabth  the  true  idea  op  humanity.  The  ancients  had  no  just  conception 
of  man  as  man.  At  best,  he  was  considered  of  no  account,  except  as  related  to  the 
State  or  the  crown.  IV.  The  advent  op  Chbist  was  good  tidings  to  the  family. 
The  ancients  had  very  imperfect  ideas  about  it.  Marriage  was  simply  the  meang 
the  State  had  to  produce  citizens.  But,  oh,  the  power,  the  blessedness,  of  the 
religion  of  Jesus  on  the  family  1  V.  The  advent  op  Chbist  was  glad  tidings 
because  it  gave  the  world  a  new  hope.  The  song  of  the  angels  on  that  eventful 
Christmas  morning  was  the  song  of  hope  to  a  despairing  world.  {D.  W.  Lusk.) 
Good  tidings  oj  great  joy : — The  sweet  air  of  the  gospel  hath  some  harsh  tidings, 
to  take  up  the  cross,  and  endure  unto  blood,  and  death,  but  these  were  tidings  of 
joy.  1.  Joys  are  of  several  sizes,  this  is  a  great  one,  nay,  none  so  great.  2.  Joys 
and  great  ones  are  quickly  done,  this  is  joy  that  shall  be  and  continue.  3.  A  man 
may  be  a  conduit-pipe  to  transmit  joy  to  others,  and  have  no  benefit  himself  ;  thia 
is  joy  to  you,  to  every  ear  that  hears  it.  4.  A  good  nature  would  not  engross  a 
blessing,  but  desires  to  have  it  diffused,  and  so  was  this  joy  to  all  people.    Tbc 


<jHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  145 

angel  said  unto  them,  "  Fear  not."     "What  should  they  not  fear  :  first,  non  a  splen- 
dore  divino,  let  not  their  hearts  be  troubled  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone 
round  about  them.     Sore  eyes  are  distempered  at  much  light,  and  it  is  a  sign  there 
is  some  darkness  within  us  all,  which  loves  not  to  be  discovered ;  that  the  best  of 
ns  all  are  much  perplexed  if  any  extraordinary  brightness  flash  upon  us.     {Bishop 
Hacket.)        Fear  not : — So  if  there  be  not  a  mixture  of  fear  with  our  love,  it  falleth 
asleep,  it  waxeth  secure,  and  loseth  her  Beloved.     If  the  comfort  of  our  joy  be  not 
allayed  with  some  fear,  'tis  madness  and  presumption.     Again,  if  our  fear  be  not 
intermixed  with  the  comfort  of  some  joy,  'tis  sullenness  and  desperation.     As  the 
earth  caunot  be  without  summer  and  winter  to  make  it  fruitful,  the  pleasure  of  the 
one  and  the  austerity  of  the  other  make  up  the  revolution  of  a  good  year,  so  faith  ia 
the  parent  both  of  a  cloudy  fear,  and  a  smiling  hope  :  faith  begets  fear  in  us  in  regard 
of  our  own  weakness,  and  hope  in  regard  of  the  goodness  of  God ;  hope  ariseth  out 
of  the  faith  of  the  gospel,  and  fear  out  of  the  faith  of  the  law.     These  cannot  be 
parted.     (Ibid.)        That  bondage  which  makes  us  liable  to  judgment  is  naught  ; 
but  the  fear  which  issues  from  a  conscientiousness  of  that  bondage  flying  to  God 
that  it  may  fly  from  judgment  is  holy  and  good.    Briefly,  let  them  thus  be  compared 
together ;  a  filial  fear,  which  loves  God  for  His  own  goodness,  is  like  a  bright  day  which 
hath  not  a  cloud  to  disfigure  it ;  a  servile  fear,  that  dreads  God  because  it  dreads  the 
wrath  to  come,  is  like  a  day  that  is  overcast  with  clouds,  but  it  is  clearer  than  the 
fairest  moonshine  night.     It  is  good  to  have  the  spirit  of  adoption,  but  it  is  better  to 
have  the  spirit  of  bondage  than  the  spirit  of  slumber  ;  it  is  good  to  be  in  Canaan,  but  • 
it  is  better  to  be  in  the  wilderness  than  in  Egypt ;  it  is  good  to  be  a  child,  but  it  is 
better  to  be  a   servant  than  a  stranger  to  the  Lord.     (Ibid.)        This,  then,  is 
another  fear  which  belongs  to  our  allowance,  but  there  is  a  fear  which  hath  a  nolite 
Bet  before  it,  an  immoderate  horror  of  heart,  a  symptom  of  desperation,  or  at  least 
of  infidelity  and   diffidence;    this  is   that  quivering  with  which  God  strikes  His 
enemies,  as  k  tree  is  shaken  by  the  wind  to  unfasten  it  from  the  root.     (Fbid.) 
Nothing,  you  see,  is  comfortable  to  them  that  have  not  the  true  comforter,  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  their  soul.     [Ibid.)        Satan  feels   some  horror  that  gnaws  and 
torments  him,  but  he  feels  not  the  blessing  of  that  fear  which  should  discipline  him 
from  sin,  and  amend  him.     (Ibid.)         Then  it  were  good,  methinks,  that  discretion 
and  consideration  of  Christ's  merciful  gospel  did  mitigate  their  zeal,  who  think 
they  are  bound  to  thunder  nothing  so  much  to  the  people  as  fears,  and  terrors,  like 
the  writer  of  lambiques  that   spoke  anger  and  poison  to    put  Archilochus  into 
desperation.    Let  vices  be  threatened,  but  let  the  hope  that  accompanies  true  repen- 
tance go  together.    Let  judgment  be  put  home  to  the  obdurate  conscience,  but  let 
mercy  be  an  advocate  for  the  broken  in  heart.     Let  the  strictness  of  law  and  the 
curse  thereof  fetch  a  tear  from  our  eyes  ;  but  let  therausom  of  our  sins  be  set  before 
us,  and  that  Christ  will  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes.     St.  Paul  wished  himself  at 
Corinth,  not  to  affright  them,  but  to  rejoice  with  the  brethren  ;  as  it  was  said  of  the 
mild  nature  of  the  Emperor  Vespasian,  he  never  sent  any  man  from  him  discontent, 
but  gave  him  some  comfort  and  satisfaction.    So  the  gospel  is  such  a  sweet  demulcing 
lesson,  that  if  it  be  truly  preached  it  must  always  revive  the  heait,  it  cannot  leave 
a  sting  behind  it.     You  see  the  angel  delights  not  to  scare,  but  to  comfort  the 
shepherds,  "  Fear  not."     (Ibid.)         Gospel  joy  continuous  .-—This  spiritual  gladness 
and  festivity  is  the  principal  assistance  to  vanquish  Satan,  and  all  desperate  doubts 
with  which  he  would  perplex  our  conscience  :  it  is  a  ro.val  joy  which  comforts  us 
that  we  shall  be  heirs  of  a  glorious  kingdom ;  it  is  a  sanctified  joy  which  gives  us 
promise  that  we  shall  not  only  be  kings  but  priests  for  ever,  to  offer  up  the  sweet 
odours  of  our  prayers  to  God  ;  it  is  a  superlative  joy  which  cries  down  all  other 
petty  delights,  and  makes  them  appear  as  nothing ;  it  is  endless  joy  of  durance 
and  lasting  for  ever  and  ever  ;  for  my  text  says  it  is  "  joy  that  shall  be  unto  you." 
Times  of  feasting  have  a  period,  every  man  is  glutted  at  last ;  he  that  hath  his  fill  of 
sport  is  weary  by  the  late  of  night,  and  glad  to  take  his  rest.     But  the  joy  that  you 
have  in  Christ  is  with  you  all  the  year,  in  all  your  sorrow,  in  all  your  adversities  ;  it 
sleeps  with  you,  it  grows  old  with  you,  it  wiU  change  this  life  with  you,  and  follow 
you  into  a  better  :  "  And  My  joy  shall  no  man  take  from  you,"  says  our  Saviour 
(John  xvi.  22).     Christmas  joy  was  not  only  for  the  first  twelve  days  when  the  Son 
of  God  was  born,  but  for  all  the  twelve  months  of  twelve  hundred  years,  and 
many  hundreds  after  them  unto  the  world's  end.     So  St.  Peter  doth  solace  us 
(1  Pet.  i.   8),  "  Though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  believing  ye  rejoice  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.     (Eccles.  xi.  9.]         So  that  let  the  wicked  speed 
never  bo  well  in  his  frolics  and  jocundities,  he  returns  home  as    Theseus   did, 

10 


X4I  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chat.  & 


with  black  eaUs  of  sorrow ;   as  if  he  had   never  made  a  saving  voyage.    AQ 
their  laughter  is  like  the  the  joy  of  Herod's  birthday ;  dancing,  and  revels,  and 
offering  of  great  gifts  last  for  a  while,  but  before  evening  you  shall  see  an  altera- 
tion ;  and  when  their  surfeited  tables  are  removed  away,  the  last  service  in  the 
platter  is  the  head  of  John  the  Baptist.     But  the  mirth  which  we  have  in  the  Mediator 
of  our  salvation  is  a  song  which  hath  no  rest  in  it,  nor  ever  shall  have  a  close.    Wo 
begin  the  first  part  here,  that  we  may  sing  the  other  part  in  psalms  and  hallelajabs 
with  the  saints  for  ever.    As  Christmas  is  celebrated  part  of  the  new  year,  and  part 
of  the  old,  so  it  is  joy  that  is  in  this  life,  and  shall  be  in  the  life  to  come.    (Ibid.) 
The  nativity  of  our  Lord,  tidings  of  great  joy : — 1.  Let  us  consider  that  the  nativity 
doth  import  the  completion  of  many  ancient  promises,  predictions,  and  prefigura- 
tions  concerning  it ;  that  whereas  all  former  dispensations  of  favour  and  merey 
were  as  preludes  or  preambles  to  this ;  the  old  law  did  aim  to  represent  it  in  its 
mysterious  pomps ;   the  chief  of  providential  occurrences  did  intimate  it ;   the 
prophets  often  in  their  mystical  raptures  did  allude  to  it,  and  often  in  clear  terms 
did  express  it ;  the  gracious  designs  of  God,  and  the  longing  expectations  of  man- 
kind being  so  variously  implied  in  regard  thereto ;  now  all  is  come  to  be  fulfilled, 
and  perfected  in  most  clear,  most  effectual,  most  substantial  accomplishment. 
Now  what  can  be  more  delightful,  or  satisfactory  to  our  mind,  than  to  reflect  oa 
this  sweet  harmony  of  things,  this  goodly  correspondence  between  the  old  and  new 
world ;  wherein  eo  pregnant  evidences  of  God's  chief  attributes  (of  His  goodness, 
of  His  wisdom,  of  His  fidelity  and  constancy),  all  conspiring  to  our  benefit,  do 
shine  ?    Is  it  not  pleasant  to  contemplate  how  provident  God  hath  ever  been  for 
our  welfare?  what  trains  from  the  world's  beginning,  or  ever  since  our  unhappy 
fall.  He  hath  been  laying  to  repair  and  restore  us  ?  how  wisely  He  hath  ordered  all 
dispensations  with  a  convenient  reference  and  tendency  to  this  masterpiece  of 
grace  7  how  steady  He  hath  been  in  prosecuting  His  designs,  and  how  faithful  in 
accomplishing  His  promises  concerning  it  ?     If  the  "  holy  patriarchs  did  see  this 
day,  and  were  glad  "  ;  if  a  glimpse  thereof  did  cause  their  hearts  to  leap  within  them  ; 
it  its  very  dawn  had  on  the  spirits  of  the  prophets  so  vigorous  an  influence,  what 
comfort  and  complacence  should  we  feel  in  this  its  real  presence,  and  bright  aspect 
on  UB 1    2.  Let  us  consider  what  alteration  our  Lord's  coming  did  induce,  by  com- 
paring  the  state  of  things  before  it  with  that  which  followed  it.    The  old  world 
then  consisting  of  two  parts,  severed  by  a  strong  wall  of  partition,  made  up  of  dif- 
ference in  opinion,  in  practice,  in  affection,  together  with  a  strict  prohibition  to  one 
of  holding  intercourse  with  the  other.    Such  was  the  state  of  the  world  in  its  parts; 
and  jointly  of  the  whole  it  may  be  said  that  it  was  "  shut  up  under  sin  "  and  guilt, 
under  darkness  and  weakness,  under  death  and  corruption,  under  sorrow  and  woe : 
that  no  full  declaration  of  God's  pleasure,  no  clear  overture  of  mercy,  noexpresB 
grant  of  spiritual  aid,  no  certain  redemption  from  the  filth  or  the  force  of  sin,  from 
the  stroke  of  death,  from  due  punishment  hereafter ;  no  encouragements  suitable 
to  high  devotion,  or  strict  virtue,  were  anywise  in  a  solemn  way  exhibited  or  dis- 
pensed before  our  Lord's  appearance  :  so  that  well  might  all  men  be  then  repre- 
sented as  Cimmerians,  "  sitting  in  darkness,  in  the  region  and  shadow  of  death." 
Now  the  Spirit  of  God  (the  Spirit  of  direction,  of  succour,  of  comfort  spiritual)  is 
poured  on  all  flesh.     "Now  the  grace  of  God,  that  bringeth  salvation,  hath 
appeared  to  all  men."    Now  Jew  and  Gentile  are  reunited  and  compacted  in  one 
body ;  walking  in  the  same  light,  and  under  obligation  to  the  same  laws.     But 
farther,  that  we  may  yet  more  nearly  touch  the  point — 3.  Let  us  consider  that  the 
nativity  of  our  Lord  is  a  grand  instance,  a  pregnant  evidence,  a  rich  earnest  of 
Almighty  God's  very  great  affection  and  benignity  toward  mankind  ;  for,  "  In  this," 
saith  St.  John,  "  the  love  of  God  was  manifested,  that  God  sent  His  only  begotten 
Son  into  the  world:"  and,  "Through  the  tender  mercies  of  our  God,"  sang  old 
Zachariah,  "  the  Day-spring  from  on  high  did  visit  us  :  "  this  indeed  is  the  pecuUar 
experiment,  wherein  that  most  Divine  attribute  did  show  and  signalize  itself.    And 
what  greater  reason  of  joy  can  there  be,  than  such  an  assurance  of  His  love,  on 
whose  love  all  our  good  dependeth,  in  whose  love  all  our  felicity  consisteth  ?    Wnat 
can  be  more  delightful  than  to  view  the  face  of  our  Almighty  Lord  so  graciously 
smiling  on  us  ?     Should  we  not  be  extremely  glad,  should  we  not  be  proud,  if  out 
earthly  prince  by  any  signal  mark  would  express  himself  kindly  affected  to  ns  ? 
How  much  more  should  we  resent  such  a  testimony  of  God's  favour  !  how  worthily 
may  our  souls  be  transported  with  a  sense  of  such  affection  I     4.  We  may  consider 
our  Lord's  nativity,  as  not  only  expressing  simple  good-will,  but  implying  a  perfect 
zecouciliation,  a  firm  peace,  a  steady  friendship  established  between  God  and  as ; 


mu».  n.]  -ST.  LUKE.  147 

or  that  it  did  not  only  proceed  from  love,  but  did  also  produce  love  to  us.  Now, 
then,  what  can  be  more  worthy  of  joy  than  such  a  blessed  turn  of  affairs?  How 
can  we  otherwise  than  with  exceeding  gladness  solemnize  such  a  peace  ?  5.  Our 
Lord's  nativity  doth  infer  a  great  honour,  and  a  high  preferment  to  us :  nowise 
indeed  could  mankind  be  so  dignified,  or  our  nature  so  advanced  as  hereby :  no 
wisdom  can  devise  a  way  beyond  this,  whereby  God  should  honour  His  most  special 
favourites,  or  promote  them  to  a  nearness  unto  Himself.  This  is  a  peculiar  honour, 
to  which  the  highest  angels  cannot  pretend;  "  for  He  took  not  the  nature  of  angels, 
but  He  took  the  seed  of  Abraham."  And  is  it  not  good  matter  of  joy  to  be  thus 
highly  graced  ?  "When  are  men  better  pleased  than  when  they  are  preferred ;  than 
especially,  when  "  from  the  meanest  state,  from  the  dunghill,  or  from  the  dust, 
they  are  raised  to  be  set  among  princes,  and  made  to  inherit  the  throne  of  glory  "  ? 
6.  Finally,  if  we  survey  all  principal  causes  of  joy  and  special  exultation,  we  shall 
find  them  all  concurring  in  this  event.  Is  a  messenger  of  good  news  embraced 
with  joy  ?  Behold  the  great  Evangelist  is  come,  with  His  mouth  full  of  news,  most 
admirable,  most  acceptable :  He,  who  doth  acquaint  us  that  God  is  well  pleased, 
that  man  is  restored,  that  "the  adversary  is  cast  down,"  that  paradise  is  set  open, 
and  immortality  retrieved ;  that  truth  and  righteousness,  peace  and  joy,  salvation 
and  happiness  are  descended,  and  come  to  dwell  on  earth.  Is  the  birth  of  a  prince 
by  honest  subjects  to  be  commemorated  with  joyous  festivity  ?  Behold  a  Prince 
born  to  all  the  world!  a  Prince  undertaking  to  rule  mankind  with  sweetest  clemency 
and  exact  justice.  May  victory  worthily  beget  exultation  ?  See  the  invincible 
warrior  doth  issue  forth  into  the  field,  "  conquering  and  to  conquer "  :  He  that 
shall  baffle  and  rifle  the  strong  one,  our  formidable  adversary  ;  that  shall  rout  all 
the  forces  of  hell,  and  triumph  over  the  powers  of  darkness.  Is  a  proclamation  ol 
peace,  after  rueful  wars,  to  be  solemnized  with  alacrity  ?  Behold  then  everlasting 
peace  between  heaven  and  earth,  a  general  peace  among  men.  Is  satisfaction  of 
desire  and  hope  very  pleasant  ?  Behold  the  "  desire  of  all  nations,  the  expectation 
of  Israel,"  He  for  whom  the  whole  creation  groaned,  is  come.  Is  recovery  of  liberty 
delectable  to  poor  slaves  and  captives  ?  Behold  the  "  Eedeemer  is  come  out  of 
Sion " ;  the  precious  ransom,  sufficient  to  purchase  the  freedom  of  many  worlds, 
is  laid  down.  Is  an  overture  of  health  acceptable  to  sick  and  languishing  persons? 
Behold  the  great  Physician,  endued  with  admirable  skill,  and  furnished  with 
infallible  remedies,  is  come,  to  cure  us  of  our  maladies,  and  ease  us  of  our  pains. 
Is  mirth  seasonable  on  the  day  of  marriage  ?  Behold  the  greatest  wedding  that 
ever  was  is  this  day  solemnised ;  heaven  and  earth  are  contracted ;  divinity  is 
espoused  to  humanity;  a  sacred,  an  indissoluble  knot  is  tied  between  God  and  man. 
Is  the  access  of  a  good  friend  to  be  received  with  cheerful  gratulation  ?  Behold 
the  dearest  and  best  Friend  of  all  mankind.  Is  opportune  relief  grateful  to  persons 
in  a  forlorn  condition,  pinched  with  extreme  want,  or  plunged  in  any  hard  distress? 
Behold  a  merciful,  a  bountiful,  a  mighty  Saviour  and  succourer.  Is  the  sun-rising 
comfortable  after  a  tedious,  darksome,  and  cold  night?  See,  "  the  Sun  of  Eighteous- 
ness  is  risen  with  healing  in  His  wings,"  dispensing  all  about  His  pleasant  rays 
and  kindly  influences.  (J.  Barroiv,  D.D.)  Beligious  joy  : — Let  us  consider  thia 
more  at  length,  as  contained  in  the  gracious  narrative  of  which  the  text  is  part. 
1.  What  do  we  read  just  before  the  text  ?  that  there  were  certain  shepherds  keeping 
watch  over  their  flock  by  night,  and  angels  appeared  to  them.  Why  should  the 
heavenly  hosts  appear  to  these  shepherds  ?  What  was  it  in  them  which  attracted 
the  attention  of  the  angels  and  tl;  o  Lord  of  angels  ?  Were  these  shepherds  learned, 
distinguished,  or  powerful  ?  Wi  re  they  especially  known  for  piety  and  gifts  f 
Nothing  is  said  to  make  us  think  so.  Almighty  God  looks  with  a  sort  of  especial 
love,  or  (as  we  may  term  it)  affection,  upon  the  lowly.  Perhaps  it  is  that  man, 
a  fallen,  dependent,  and  destitute  creature,  is  more  in  his  proper  place  when  he  is 
in  lowly  circumstances,  and  that  power  and  riches,  though  unavoidable  in  the  case 
of  some,  are  unnatural  appendages  to  man,  as  such.  And  what  a  contrast  is  pre- 
sented  to  us  when  we  take  into  account  who  were  our  Lord's  messengers  to  them ! 
The  angels  who  excel  in  strength,  these  did  His  bidding  towards  the  shepherds. 
Here  the  highest  and  the  lowest  of  God's  rational  creatures  are  brought  together. 
A  set  of  poor  men,  engaged  in  a  life  of  hardship,  exposed  at  that  very  time  to  the 
cold  and  darkness  of  the  night,  watching  their  flocks,  with  the  view  of  scaring  away 
beasts  of  prey  or  robbers.  We  know  the  contracted  range  of  thought,  the  minute 
and  ordinary  objects,  or  rather  the  one  or  two  objects,  to  and  fro  again  and  again 
without  variety,  which  engage  the  minds  of  men  exposed  to  sooh  a  life  of  heat, 
oold,  and  wet,  hunger  and  nakedness,  hardship  and  servitude.     They  cease  to 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHl»  n. 

«are  much  for  anything,  but  go  on  in  a  sort  of  mechanical  way,  without  heart,  and 
Btill  more  without  reflection.  To  men  so  circumstanced  the  angel  appeared,  to 
open  their  minds,  and  to  teach  them  not  to  be  downcast  and  in  bondage  because 
they  were  low  in  the  world.  He  appeared  as  if  to  show  them  that  God  had  chosen 
the  poor  in  this  world  to  be  heirs  of  His  kingdom,  and  so  to  do  honour  to  their  lot. 
2.  And  now  comes  a  second  lesson,  which  I  have  said  may  be  gained  from  the 
festival.  The  angel  honoured  a  humble  lot  by  his  very  appearing  to  the  shepherds ; 
next  he  taught  it  to  be  joyful  by  his  message.  The  angel  said,  "Fear  not,"  when 
he  saw  the  alarm  which  his  presence  caused  among  the  shepherds.  Even  a  lesser 
wonder  would  have  reasonably  startled  them.  Therefore  the  angel  said,  "  Fear 
not."  We  are  naturally  afraid  of  any  messenger  from  the  other  world,  for  we  have 
an  uneasy  conscience  when  left  to  ourselves,  and  think  that  his  coming  forebodes 
evil.  Besides,  we  so  liUle  realize  the  unseen  world,  that  were  angel  or  spirit  to 
present  himself  before  us  we  should  be  startled  by  reason  of  our  unbelief,  ft  truth 
being  brought  home  to  our  minds  which  we  never  apprehended  before.  A  little 
religion  makes  us  afraid;  when  a  little  light  is  poured  in  upon  the  conscience, 
there  is  a  darkness  visible  ;  nothing  but  sights  of  woe  and  terror  ;  the  glory  of  God 
alarms  while  it  shines  around.  His  holiness,  the  range  and  difficulties  of  His  com- 
mandments,  the  greatness  of  His  power,  the  faithfulness  of  His  word,  frighten  the 
sinner,  and  men  seeing  him  afraid,  think  religion  has  made  him  so,  whereas  he  is 
not  religious  at  all.  But  religion  itself,  far  from  inculcating  alarm  and  terror,  says, 
in  the  words  of  the  angel,  "  Fear  not ;  "  for  such  is  His  mercy,  while  Almighty 
God  has  poured  about  us  His  glory,  yet  it  is  a  consolatory  glory,  for  it  is  the  light 
of  His  glory  in  the  face  of  .'esus  Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  If  all  these  things  be  so, 
surely  the  lesson  of  joy  WL'?h  the  incarnation  gives  us  is  as  impressive  as  the 
lesson  of  humility,  be.  Paul  gives  us  the  one  lesson  in  his  Epistle  to  the  PhiUp- 
pians  :  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus :  who,  being  in 
the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God :  but  made  Himself 
of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the 
likeness  of  men."  (J.  U.  Newman,  D.  D.)  Glad  news  : — The  days  of  life  are  not 
lived  on  one  level  range.  There  are  days  that  are  lifted,  and  days  that  are  depressed ; 
days  which  stand  out  radiant  with  opportunity,  as  summits  of  mountains  stand 
forth  to  the  eye  when  the  sun  shines  upon  them.  Now  and  then  yon  come  to  a 
day  so  auspicious,  so  prophetic  of  good,  that  it  sings  through  all  its  hours,  and  ia 
as  a  hymn  and  a  psalm.  Not  only  do  men  come  to  such  days,  not  only  do 
individuals  find  themselves  lifted  by  God's  mercy,  to  such  summits  of  feeling  and 
expression,  but  nations  and  cities,  governments  and  institutions,  come  to  the  same 
happy  fortune.  There  are  days  in  national  life  linked  with  such  victorious  memo- 
ries, full  with  such  present  triumphs,  that  at  the  rising  of  the  sun  every  patriotic 
citizen  flings  out  to  the  morning  air  the  national  banner.  Institutions,  too,  have 
their  glorious  days.  Popular  movements  that  represent  great  causes  and  grand 
effects  roll  up  like  waves  to  their  cresting,  and  the  power  of  the  forces  which  moved 
them  on  culminates  in  popular  gladness.  Keligion  shares  in  the  action  of  this  law. 
And  it  is  because  Christianity  helps  men  that  it  is  properly  named  "  glad  newg  " ; 
and  it  may  be  well  for  us  who  are  in  worship  assembled  to  ask  ourselves  and  to 
consider  wherein  Christianity  is  glad  news,  and  why,  being  accepted,  it  brings  joy 
to  the  human  heart.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  glad  news  because  it  is  a  revelation 
of  God — both  as  to  what  He  is  in  Himself,  and  what  His  feelings  are  toward  man. 
The  highest  conception  the  human  mind  can  form  is  that  of  Deity.  It  is  too 
great  in  itself  to  go  on  without  conceiving  of  a  greater.  The  human  constitution 
is  of  so  noble  a  sort,  is  so  majestic  in  its  vision,  so  profound  in  its  necessities,  that 
it  must  have  a  God.  The  greatness  of  man  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  in  him  is  an  actual 
craving  to  bow  down  to  some  one  or  to  something  that  symboUses  some  one. 
Look,  then,  at  and  consider  the  state  of  the  world  before  Christianity  was  born. 
Here  and  there  an  old  sage,  by  sixty  years  of  studentship,  had  groped  his  way  up 
until  his  fingers  had  felt  out  a  knowledge  of  the  alphabet  of  truth  which  taught 
him  the  rudiments  of  righteousness.  But  of  God  they  knew  little.  Of  the  Ufe 
beyond  the  grave  they  knew  nothing.  The  consolation  which  comes  from  know- 
ledge they  had  not  amid  their  trials.  They  died  blindly  submissive  ;  they  died 
wretcheclly  patient ;  they  died  stoically  indifferent.  And  those  that  were  left  to 
mourn  above  their  graves  mourned  without  hope.  But  when  Christianity  was  born, 
a  sun  rose  into  the  darkness  of  the  world.  Men  saw  what  they  had  felt  must  be, 
but  what  they  had  never  before  seen.  And  chief  est  among  all  sights  revealed 
Btood  God.    It  told  them  of  His  afCeotion,  of  His  patience,  of  His  mercy.    It  told 


«BJJP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  U9 

them  that  He  was  mindful  of  them,  that  His  ears  were  open  to  their  cries,  and  Hia 
eyes  noted  the  falling  of  their  tears.  What  a  revelation  was  this  I  How  satis- 
factory in  its  nature  I  How  sublime  in  its  significance  I  How  far-reaching  in  it» 
influence  I  How  could  piety  ever  become  intelligent?  How  could  devotion  ever 
be  ardent  and  sincere  until,  in  the  person  of  God,  the  source  and  pattern  of  all 
purity,  of  all  justice,  of  all  affection,  should  be  revealed  unto  man  ?  Let  it  b« 
known,  then,  and  profoundly  felt  by  us  all  here  to-day,  that  Christianity  was 
*'  glad  news  "  unto  man,  first  and  foremost,  because  it  revealed  God.  We  do  not 
realize,  so  familiar  are  we  with  the  thought,  what  a  gap  would  be  made  in  our  lives 
if  from  our  minds  the  knowledge  we  have  of  God  were  stricken.  Such  a  removal 
would  be  like  taking  one's  heart  from  his  bosom.  As  in  the  one  case  physically  we 
could  not  survive,  so  in  the  other  case  spiritually  we  could  not  survive.  And  the 
second  great  and  emphatic  reason  is,  as  it  seems  to  me,  because  it  revealed  man 
to  himself.  Never  till  Jesus  was  born — never  till  He  had  lived  and  passed  away — 
did  man  know  the  nobility  of  his  species.  Never  until  God  dwelt  in  the  flesh  could 
any  man  know  what  flesh  might  become.  For  natures  are  measured,  not  by  what 
they  can  impart  primarily,  but  by  what  they  can  receive.  The  ox  can  receive  but 
little.  The  sweetness  of  the  grass,  the  pungency  of  the  budding  shrubbery  he 
crops,  the  coolness  of  the  water  that  he  drinks  when  athirst — these  measure  his 
being.  They  minister  to  his  structure,  and  its  wants  being  supplied  his  life  is 
satisfied.  The  dog  can  receive  yet  more.  He  craves  food,  but  he  also  craves  affec- 
tion. A  life  higher  than  his  own  is  needed  for  his  happiness.  He  looks  at  the 
hand  of  his  master  as  the  inferior  looks  at  the  superior  when  itself  is  great  enough 
to  discover  greatness.  The  dog  finds  deity  in  his  master.  From  him  he  learns 
law  and  love  both.  From  him  he  receives  joy  so  intense  that  even  his  master 
marvels  at  it,  and  wonders  that  so  slight  a  motion  of  his  hand,  so  brief  an  utterance 
from  his  lips,  can  make  any  being  so  happy.  It  is  because  the  dog  can  receive  so 
much  that  thought  ranks  him  so  high.  And  the  capacity  of  receptiveness  gives 
accurate  measurement  and  gradation  to  animals  and  to  men.  I  say  to  men ;  for 
the  same  law  holds  good  in  the  human  species.  There  are  some  who  receive  little. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  are  those  who  are  as  a  house  when  its  windows  are  all 
open,  and  the  sun  and  the  wind  play  through  its  chambers.  There  is  no  form  of 
beauty ;  there  is  no  shade  of  loveliness ;  there  is  no  odour  or  perfume,  nor  any 
melodious  sound,  that  appeals  to  them  in  vain.  And  when  we  view  them  on  the 
higher  levels  of  receptiveness — the  levels  of  mind  and  soul — we  find  that  their 
intellect  and  their  spirits  alike  are  as  pools  that  stand  waiting  for  the  streams  to 
flow  into  them.  From  history  and  poetry,  from  science  and  art,  from  past  and 
present,  they  are  ministered  unto  ceaselessly.  Nor  is  there  anything  religious, 
anything  sacred  and  devout,  anything  spiritual  and  Divine,  which  does  not  find 
ready  entrance  into  their  natures.  So  freely  do  they  receive  of  these,  that  by  them 
at  last  they  are  possessed.  Eenewed  in  mind,  transformed  in  spirit,  sanctified  in 
Boul,  they  become  like  Him  of  whom  they  have  received.  So  that  their  walk  and 
conversation  is  with  God.  Never,  as  we  have  said,  until  Christ  came  was  the 
greatness  of  this  capacity  to  receive  demonstrated.  Christ  showed  what  man  might 
be,  and  thereby  fixed  his  value.  Heaven  paid  such  a  price  for  man  that  man  him- 
self was  astonished.  God's  acts  are  based  on  knowledge.  The  second  reason, 
then,  why  Christianity  is  glad  news  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  beyond  any  mere 
religion,  beyond  all  philosophies,  it  tells  me  what  man  is.  We  who  are  here  can 
rise  up  and  say,  "  We  know  what  man  is  !  "  The  world,  from  east  to  west,  from 
north  to  south,  can  say,  speaking  through  all  her  myriad  mouths,  "  We  know  what 
man  is  I  "  The  great  continents,  the  islands  of  the  sea,  the  far  shores  and  the  far 
climes,  through  all  their  industries,  through  all  their  commerce,  through  their 
intelligence,  through  the  glory  of  their  bloom  and  the  pendent  wealth  of  their 
harvests,  can  say,  "  We  know  what  man  is  1 "  Ay,  and  the  spirits  of  the  redeemed 
in  heaven  and  the  great  angels  that  wait  before  God,  mighty  in  their  power  and 
intelligence,  can  bow  down  before  Him  who  made  the  revelation  in  His  Son,  and 
murmur,  in  the  hush  of  holy  awe,  "  We  know  what  man  is  1 "  We  have  said  that 
the  first  reason  why  Christianity  was  glad  news  was  found  in  the  fact  that  it 
revealed  God ;  and  the  second  great  reason  that  it  was  glad  news  was  found  in  the 
fact  that  it  revealed  man;  and  now  we  say,  lastly,  that  the  third  great  reason 
why  Christianity  is  glad  news  is  found  in  the  fact  that  it  reveals  God  in  man. 
Theodore  Parker,  of  pleasant  memory  to  many,  to  whom  this  city  owes  much,  and 
to  whom  humanity  owes  more,  had  a  splendid  conception  of  God.  No  nobler 
Deity  was  ever  preached  than  he  proclaimed.    Many  who  deride  him,  but  have 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi».  ir. 

never  read  him,  would  be  richer  Bpiritually  than  thej  are  if  in  their  minds  and 
Bcmls  they  had  his  conception  of  Divinity.  In  addition  to  his  splendid  conception 
of  God,  he  had  the  noblest  possible  conception  of  man — of  his  nature,  of  his  possi- 
bilities, of  his  rights,  and  of  his  destiny.  But  of  God  in  man  he  seems  to  have  had 
little,  if  any,  conception.  On  his  right  hand  stood  God,  like  a  hewn  pillar,  massive 
and  polished  to  the  finest  gleam ;  on  the  left  stood  man,  a  companion  pillar,  of 
which  in  way  of  description  it  is  enough  to  say  that  it  was  the  reflection  of  the 
other.  But  God  in  man,  or  the  God-man — that  white  arch  that  should  connect 
and  span  the  space  between  the  two — he  did  not  discern.  And  that  the  object 
of  this  incarnation  of  Deity  was  the  salvation  of  men  from  their  sins  we  know. 
The  mighty  and  benevolent  uses  of  incarnation  are  patent.  Only  so  could  God 
be  revealed,  in  such  a  way  that  the  human  mind  might  apprehend  Him  clearly, 
and  the  human  soul  in  Him  find  courage.  Only  by  such  an  incarnation  could  the 
requisite  authority  be  given  to  human  utterance,  and  the  requisite  wisdom  be 
imparted  to  human  understanding.  Only  by  such  an  incarnation  could  the  holy 
example,  whose  presence  was  needed,  be  given  unto  the  world,  and  the  adequate 
inspiration  be  imparted  to  humanity.  And  only  by  such  an  incarnation,  only 
through  the  lips  of  His  own  Son,  could  the  Divine  Fatherhood  be  properly  declared, 
the  Divine  life  properly  lived,  and  the  victorious  sacrifice,  required  both  for  the 
justice  of  heaven  and  the  moral  necessities  of  men,  be  made.  We  rejoice,  there* 
fore,  in  the  incarnation  of  God  in  Christ  as  those  who  apprehend  the  high  spiritual 
nses  it  subserves,  the  profound  spiritual  necessities  it  meets,  and  the  otherwise 
incomprehensible  truths  that  it  makes  familiar  unto  us.  {W.  H.  Aitken.)  Good 
tidings  of  great  joy: — The  message  was  one  bearing  "good  tidings  of  great  joy." 
"  Good  tidings  "  in  view  of  the  light  which  was  to  be  shed,  the  deliverance  which  was 
to  be  wrought,  and  the  union  of  the  whole  race  which  was  contemplated,  and  shall  in 
due  course  be  effected.  I.  ♦'  Good  tidings  of  great  joy  "  in  view  of  the  light  which 
WAS  TO  BE  SHED.  Christ  in  His  coming  has  shed  light  upon  the  Divine  tenderness  and 
grace.  Christ,  in  His  coming,  has  shed  light  upon  the  moral  obligations  of  men. 
"  The  law  was  given  by  Moses."  And  Christ  in  His  coming  has  shed  light  upon 
human  destiny.  II.  "Good  tidings  of  great  joy" in  view  of  the  deliverance  which 
WAS  TO  BE  wrought.  "  FoT  unto  you  is  born  this  day  in  the  city  of  David  a  Saviour, 
which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  The  deliverance  Christ  came  to  effect  for  all  who  should 
trust  to  Him  is  both  a  present  and  an  eternal  deliverance.  He  secures  deliverance 
from  the  burden  of  unforgiven  sin.  He  sets  free  from  the  defilement  of  sin.  Ha 
preserves  from  remorse.  And  He  saves  from  despondency  and  distrust.  But  He 
came  to  effect  our  eternal  deliverance.  III.  "  Good  tidings  of  great  joy,"  in  view 
of  the  union  of  the^whole  race  which  was  contemplated,  and  which  shall,  in  dux 
COURSE,  BE  accomplished.  "Behold,  I  bring  you  tidings  of  great  joy  which  shall  be 
to  all  people."    Judaism  was  marked  by  its  ezclusiveness.    (S.  D,  HillTnan,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  For  nnto  you  1b  bom  this  day. — Lestonsfrom  the  lirtMay  of  Chri$t:— 
The  birthday  of  Christ ! — a  name  which  connects  with  the  familiar  associations  of 
home-life  the  opening  of  the  heavens  to  human  hope,  the  inconceivable  grace  and 
condescension  of  Almighty  God,  the  beginning  of  a  state  of  things  on  earth  in 
which  God  our  Maker  has  united  Himself  for  ever  with  humankind.  I.  Bkveoencb. 
In  thinking  of  Christ's  birthday,  we  are  between  two  dangers.  It  may  have  become 
a  mere  name  and  word  to  us,  conventionally  accepted  and  repeated,  but  conveying 
no  really  living  meaning ;  or  it  may  have  come  with  such  fulness  of  meaning  as  to 
overwhelm  and  confound  our  thoughts,  making  us  ask,  "  How  can  such  things 
be  t  "  Let  us  remember  that  "  God  is  Love ;  "  and  that  the  mystery  of  the  incar- 
nation is  the  manifestation  of  that  infinite  Love.  Let  us  try  to  take  a  true  measure  of 
the  unspeakable  majesty  and  living  goodness  with  which  we  have  to  deal.  H.  Purity. 
The  Incarnation  was  the  mind  and  atmosphere  of  heaven,  coming  with  all  the  height 
of  their  sanctities  into  human  flesh — a  spectacle  to  make  us  stop  and  be  thoughtful, 
and  consider  our  own  experience  of  life  and  society.  Let  us  pass  from  thmgs 
which  fashion  and  custom  do  not  mind,  but  which  do  lower  the  tone  and  health  of 
Boul  and  character,  which  often  tempt  and  corrupt  it ;  let  us  turn  away  our  eyea 
from  what,  however  captivating  and  charming,  is  dangerous  to  know  and  look  at, 
to  the  little  child  and  His  mother,  and  learn  there  the  lesson  of  strength,  of  man- 
liness— for  purity  means  manliness — of  abhorrence  of  evil.  III.  Humility.  The 
human  mind  cannot  conceive  any  surrender  of  place  and  claims,  any  willing  lowliness 
and  self-forgetf  ulness,  any  acceptance  of  the  profoundest  abasement,  comparable  to 
that  which  is  before  us  in  the  birth,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  birth,  of  Jesus 


CBtr.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  151 

Christ.  The  measure  of  it  is  the  measure  of  the  distance  between  the  Creator  and 
the  creature,  and  the  creature  in  the  most  unregarded,  most  uncared-for  condition, 
helpless,  unknown,  of  no  account  for  the  moment  among  the  milliona  of  mea 
whom  He  had  made,  and  whose  pride,  and  loftiness,  and  ambition  filled  Hia  owi* 
world.  There  He  was  for  the  time,  the  youngest,  weakest,  poorest  of  them  all  ^ 
and  He  came  thus,  to  show  what  God  thinks  of  human  pride,  ambition,  loftiness^ 
He  came  thus,  to  show  how  God  despises  the  untruth  of  self-esteem,  the 
nntruth  of  flattery,  and  to  teach  how  little  the  outward  shows  of  our  present  con- 
dition answer  to  that  which,  in  reality  and  truth,  it  ia  worth  while  for  a  living  soul, 
an  immortal  being,  to  be.  IV.  The  lesson  of  not  putting  odr  trust  in  the  aem 
OF  FLESH.  Contrast  the  birthday  of  Christ  with  the  purpose  of  His  coming — to 
reform,  conquer,  and  restore  the  world.  Of  all  that  mighty  order  which  was  to  be, 
of  all  that  overwhelming  task  and  work  before  Him,  here  were  the  first  steps,  in  the 
lowliest  paths  of  human  life  I  He  it  was  to  whom  was  committed  this  great 
work  of  God.  Not  in  the  way  which  men  understood  or  anticipated,  not  by  forces 
and  measures  suggested  by  their  experience,  but  in  the  exact  way  of  God's  perfect 
holiness  and  righteousness.  He  began  and  finished  the  work  which  the  Father 
gave  Him  to  do.  In  the  utter  unlikelihood  of  His  success,  there  is  a  lesson  for 
us.  In  doing  His  work,  and  in  doing  our  own  work,  we  are  often  sorely 
tempted  to  depart  from  His  footsteps.  In  doing  His  work,  in  maintaining  Hi» 
cause,  in  fighting  for  His  kingdom,  it  has  always  been  too  common  for  man  to 
think,  that  all  the  same  means  are  available  which  are  used  in  human  enterprises, 
that  success  depended  on  the  same  conditions,  that  it  was  impossible  without 
employing  weapons  which  were  not  like  His.  They  have  trusted  to  energy, 
strength,  sagacity;  they  have  distrusted  the  power  of  single-hearted  obedience, 
prayer,  patience,  faith,  self-sacrifice,  goodness ;  they  have  thought  it  weak  to 
be  over-scrupulous ;  they  have  forgotten  how  far  beyond  the  reach  and  touch 
of  human  power  are  the  fortunes  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Most  Holy.  And  so  in 
doing  our  own  work,  it  is  hard  for  us  all  not  to  do  the  opposite  to  what  our 
Master  did ;  hard  not  to  trust  to  the  arm  and  the  ways  of  flesh,  instead  of  trusting 
with  our  eyes  shut  the  path  of  duty,  truth,  obedience.  The  trader  has  before  hira 
the  way  of  unflinching  honesty,  or  the  way  in  which  custom  and  opinion  allow  hina 
to  take  advantage  and  make  shorter  cuts  to  profit  and  increaEed  business ;  which, 
path  will  he  take  ?  Will  he  have  faith  in  principle,  and  perhaps  wait,  perhaps 
lose ;  or  will  he  do  as  others  do,  and,  highly  respecting  principle,  yet  forget  it 
at  the  critical  moment  ?  The  young  man  entering  into  life  wishes  to  get  on.  Will 
he  ti'ust  to  what  he  is,  to  his  determination  to  do  right,  to  straightforwardness  and 
simplicity,  to  God's  blessing,  or  what  God  has  blessed  and  promised  to  bless,  or  will 
he  push  his  fortunes  by  readiness  to  appear  what  he  is  not,  by  selfishness,  by  man- 
pleasing,  by  crooked  paths  and  questionable  compliances  ?  The  boy  has  to  do  his 
lessons  and  satisfy  his  teachers.  Will  he  be  content  to  appear  no  cleverer  than  he' 
is,  to  be  conscientious,  diligent,  faithful,  dutiful,  whatever  comes  of  it ;  or  will  he- 
be  tempted  to  save  himself  labour  and  trouble  by  shorter  and  easier  wajs  which 
many  will  tell  him  of,  and  gain  credit  for  what  he  has  no  right  to?  Here,  to  warn 
us,  to  teach  us,  to  comfort  us,  in  all  our  varied  conditions  and  employments,  we 
have  the  beginning  of  Christ's  conquest  of  the  world.  The  footsteps  of  His  great 
progress  begin  from  the  cradle  of  the  nativity.  V.  Gladness  and  joy.  Sometimes 
we  feel  hardly  in  tune  for  the  rejoicing  of  Christmas.  It  contrasts  sharply  with 
the  bitterness  of  a  recent  bereavement,  the  sorrowful  watch  round  a  hopeless  sicK:; 
bed.  Or  it  may  be,  while  we  are  saluting  our  Lord's  coming  with  h^mns  and^ 
carols  of  childlike  exultation,  and  repeating  the  angelic  welcome  to  the  Prince  o£. 
Peace,  that  by  a  terrible  irony  the  heavens  around  us  are  black  with  storm  and; 
danger :  that  great  nations  are  involved  in  the  horrible  death-struggle  of  war ;  that 
day  by  day  men  are  perishing  by  every  form  of  carnage,  and  suffering  every  form 
of  pain  ;  and  that  by  each  other's  hands.  We  almost  ask,  in  such  a  case,  whether 
it  is  not  mockery  to  think  of  gladness.  Yet  it  is  in  place  even  then ;  and  Christmas 
claims  it  from  us.  Those  great  gospel  songs  which  heralded  the  Incarnation  of; 
the  Son  of  God — the  Magnificat,  the  Benediotus,  the  Song  of  the  angels — were 
themselves  but  the  prelude  to  the  life  of  the  «'Man  of  Sorrows."  They  aro^ 
followed  immediately  by  Bachel  weeping  for  her  children  at  Bethlehem,  and  the 
flight  from  the  sword  of  Herod.  But  yet  in  those  dreadful  days  on  earth,  of  bloo^ 
and  pain  and  triumphant  iniquity,  there  was  peace  in  heaven  and  the  joy  of  th© 
angels ;  for  amid  the  cloud  and  storm  of  the  conflict  which  men  could  not  see 
through,  the  angels  knew  who  was  conquering.    He  is  conquering,  and  to  conques 


159  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  o, 

Btill.  All  falsehood,  iruelty,  selfishness,  oppression,  and  tyranny,  are  to  fall  before 
Him.  Amid  the  darkness  of  our  life,  the  Iiope  of  man  is  still  on  Him,  as  fixed  and 
sure  as  ever  it  was.  He  will  not  disappoint  man  of  his  hope.  {Dean  Church.) 
The  message  of  the  shepherds  : — I.  How  sure  is  God's  Word  !  II.  How  wondebful 
ARK  God's  waysI  III.  How  glorious  is  God's  salvation  1  (W.  S.  Bruce,  M.A.) 
The  two  advents : — I.  The  first  coming  was  In  weakness,  the  glory  hidden  ;  the 
second  wiU  b«  in  power,  the  glory  revealed.  II.  The  first  coming  was  intbo> 
DXJCTivB  TO  AN  EXPERIENCE  OF  LABOUR  AND  SUFFERING  ;  the  second  will  be  the 
inauguration  of  coronation  and  triumph.  III.  In  first  coming  Christ  MU>8 
SALVATION  possible;  in  second  He  will  prove  how  His  work  has  sped.  IV.  Ik 
FIRST  coming  He  INVITED  MEN  TO  RECONCILIATION  AND  PEACE ;  in  sccond  He  shall 
descend  to  bless  the  behoving,  but  judge  the  impenitent.  Lessons  :  As  wo  are 
sure  concerning  the  record  of  the  first  advent,  let  us  also  be  as  to  the  prediction  of 
the  second.  Have  we  used  the  first  so  as  to  be  prepared  for  this  ?  (G.  McMichael, 
B.A.)  Unto  us  a  child  is  bom: — I.  1.  Consider  the  revelation  thus  delivered 
by  the  angel — "  Unto  you  is  bom  a  Saviour."  Jesus  is  born  a  Saviour ;  we  do  not 
make  Him  a  Saviour ;  we  have  to  accept  Him  as  such.  Neither  does  salvation 
come  from  us  or  by  us,  but  it  is  bom  to  us.  2.  Consider  the  outward  sign  by  which 
the  Saviour  was  to  be  known — "  A  babe  lying  in  a  manger  I "  Children  are  the 
saviours  of  society :  the  human  race  renewing  itself  perpetually  in  the  freshness 
and  innocence  of  childhood  is  prevented  from  becoming  utterly  corrupt.  This  ia 
just  the  lesson  the  world  needed.  Philosophy,  art,  law,  force,  all  had  tried  to  raise 
mankind  out  of  sin,  and  all  had  failed.  In  the  fulness  of  time  '•  unto  us  a  Child  is 
bom,"  and  in  the  weakness  of  that  Childhood,  the  human  race  is  renewed,  its  flesh 
comes  again  "as  the  flesh  of  a  little  child."  II.  1.  What  a  message  from  heaven  to  a 
world  weary  of  life  and  sick  with  sin — "  Unto  you  is  bom  a  Saviour !  "  2.  What  a 
message  to  those  who  are  trusting  in  the  pride  of  intellect,  or  in  the  pride  of  wealth,  or 
in  the  pride  of  earthly  position,  or  in  the  pride  of  character — "  This  shall  be  the  sign: 
a  Babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  and  lying  in  a  manger  I  "  The  signs  which  be- 
token the  presence  of  the  Eternal  are  not  always  such  as  commend  themselves  to 
men's  reasoning,  for  we  are  living  among  shadows  which  are  not  realities,  although 
we  mistake  them  for  such.  (Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  The  nature  of  Christ's 
salvation : — He  is  not  a  temporal  Saviour :  He  is  not  a  Saviour  from  mere  temporal 
calamity;  He  is  not  a  Saviour  such  as  the  saviours  among  the  Jews  were,  who  had 
emancipated  them  from  their  civil  foes;  but  He  is  a  Saviour  from  spiritual  evils.  He 
saves  us  from  spiritual  darkness  by  His  Word;  from  the  pollution  and  power  of  sin, 
by  His  merit  and  grace  ;  from  the  bondage  of  Satan,  by  His  energy ;  from  hell,  by  be- 
coming  a  curse  for  us,  that  we  may  attain  eternal  life.  His  salvation  extends  to  the 
Boul  as  well  as  the  body ;  to  eternity  as  well  as  to  time.  (Dr.  Beaumont.)  Universality 
of  tlie  gospel  offer : — In  the  further  prosecution  of  this  discourse,  we  shall  first  say 
a  few  words  on  the  principle  of  the  gospel  message — good-will :  Secondly,  on  the 
object  of  the  gospel  message — men — it  is  a  message  of  good-wiU  to  men :  And, 
Thirdly,  on  the  application  of  the  gospel  message  to  the  men  who  now  hear  ns. 
I.  When  we  say  that  God  is  actuated  by  a  principle  of  good-wiU  to  you,  it  sounds  in 
your  ears  a  very  simple  proposition.  There  is  a  barrier  in  these  evil  hearts  of  un^ 
behef ,  against  the  admission  of  a  filial  confidence  in  God.  We  see  no  mildness  in  the 
aspect  of  the  Deity.  Our  guilty  fears  suggest  the  apprehension  of  a  stern  and 
vindictive  character.  It  is  not  in  the  power  of  argument  to  do  away  this  im- 
pression. We  know  that  they  will  not  be  made  to  see  God,  in  that  aspect  of 
graciousness  which  belongs  to  Him,  till  the  power  of  a  special  revelation  be  made 
to  rest  upon  them — till  God  Himself,  who  created  light  out  of  darkness,  shine  in 
their  hearts.  But  knowing  also  that  He  makes  use  of  the  Word  as  His  instrument, 
it  is  our  part  to  lay  the  assurances  of  that  Word,  in  all  their  truth  and  in  all  their 
ienderness,  before  you.  II.  We  now  proceed,  in  the  second  place,  to  the  object  of 
•the  gospel  message — men — a  message  of  good-will  to  men.  The  announcement 
which  was  heard  from  the  canopy  of  heaven  was  not  good- will  to  certain  men  to  the 
exclusion  of  others.  It  is  not  an  offer  made  to  some,  and  kept  back  from  the  rest 
of  the  species.  It  is  generally  to  man.  We  know  well  the  scruples  of  the  discon- 
flolate ;  and  with  what  success  a  perverse  melancholy  can  devise  and  multiply  its 
arguments  for  despair.  But  we  will  admit  of  none  of  them.  We  look  at  our  text, 
and  find  that  it  recognizes  no  outcast.  Tell  us  not  of  the  malignity  of  your  disease 
— it  is  the  disease  of  a  man.  Tell  us  not  of  your  being  so  grievous  an  offender 
that  you  are  the  very  chief  of  them.  Still  you  are  a  man.  The  offer  of  God'a 
food- will  is  through  Christ  Jesus  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe.     We  want 


n.]  ST.  LVKE.  lea 

to  whisper  peace  to  year  souls ;  bat  you  refuse  the  voice  of  the  charmer,  let  him 
charm  never  bo  wisely.  And  here  the  question  occurs  to  as — how  does  the  declaration 
ci  God's  good-will  in  the  text  consist  with  the  entire  and  everlasting  destruction  of 
80  many  of  the  species  ?  In  point  of  fact,  all  men  are  not  saved.  We  hold  out  a 
gift  to  two  people,  which  one  of  them  may  take  and  the  other  may  refuse.  The 
good-will  in  me  which  prompted  the  offer  was  the  same  in  reference  to  both.  God 
in  this  sense  willeth  that  all  men  shall  be  saved.  There  is  no  limitation  with  Him  ; 
and  be  not  you  limited  by  your  own  narrow  and  fearful  and  superstitious  con- 
ceptions of  £Qm.  III.  But  this  leads  us,  in  the  last  place,  to  press  home  the  lesson 
of  the  text  on  you  who  are  now  sitting  and  listening  around  us.  God,  in  the  act 
of  ushering  the  gospel  into  the  world,  declares  good-will  to  man.  He  declares  it 
therefore  to  you.  Now,  you  are  liable  to  the  same  fears  with  these  shepherds.  You 
are  guilty;  and  to  you  belong  all  the  weakness  and  all  the  timidity  of  guilt.  (T. 
Chalmers,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Saviour: — At  the  very  utterance  of  the  name 

Saviour,  every  heart  exalts  with  a  delight  otherwise  unknown.  To  the  generous 
breast,  no  other  object  is  so  beautiful,  no  other  sound  so  welcome.  Never  do  we 
shed  such  rapturous  tears,  or  feel  so  passionate  a  joy,  as  when  we  witness  the 
heroism  and  the  self-devotion  of  some  act  of  magnanimous  deliverance.  Power 
softens  into  loveliness,  when  thus  exerted.  Danger  and  toil,  encountered  in  such  a 
cause,  impart  a  stern,  yet  irresistible  attraction.  It  is  thus  we  think  of  the  patriot, 
bleeding  for  the  freedom  of  his  country  ;  of  the  philanthropist,  regardless  of  his 
own  security  amidst  pestilence,  and  darkness,  and  the  ministers  of  death,  that  he 
may  release  the  wretched  captive,  and  break  the  yoke  of  the  oppressor ;  of  the 
advocate,  defending  the  house  of  the  widow  or  the  heritage  of  the  orphan,  and 
turning  into  mockery  the  venality  of  accusation,  and  the  menaces  of  vengeance ;  of 
the  statesman,  who  stands  forth  single-handed,  but  with  a  dauntless  heart,  to  turn 
back  the  flood  of  tyranny  or  faction,  when  threatening  to  engulf  in  common  ruin 
the  welfare  of  his  people  and  the  safety  of  mankind ;  and  of  the  pilot,  adventurously 
urging  his  way  through  the  pitiless  and  maddening  surge,  that  he  may  snatch  soma 
solitary  victim  from  the  horrors  of  shipwreck,  and  bear  him,  naked  and  shivering, 
to  the  shore.  What,  then,  shall  be  the  glory  of  Him  who  plunged,  with  aU  the 
consciousness  of  unsheltered  perU,  into  the  very  depths  of  misery,  to  rescue  the 
perishing  soul  I  Or  what  shall  be  the  measure,  either  of  our  admiration  or  OOT 
gratitude,  when  we  celebrate,  beholding  its  last  triumphs,  the  emancipation  of  a 
world  1  Advocate,  Friend,  Brother,  these  are  beloved  names ;  and,  like  a  grateful 
odour,  they  give  life  to  the  drooping  spirit ;  but  if  the  name  of  Saviour  be  more 
endearing  than  them  all,  then  what  is  that  ravishment  of  love  with  which  the 
rescued  sinner  shall  hail  at  length  the  blessed  name  of  Jesus!  (S.  McAll.) 
The  Saviour's  love  : — Like  the  sanshine  that  falls  with  magical  flicker  on  pearl  and 
ruby,  lance  and  armour,  in  the  royal  hall,  yet  overflows  the  shepherd's  home,  and 
quivers  through  the  grating  of  the  prisoner's  cell ;  pours  glory  over  the  monntain« 
range ;  flames  in  playful  splendour  on  the  wave ;  floods  the  noblest  scenes  with 
day,  yet  makes  joy  for  the  issect ;  comes  down  to  the  worm,  and  has  a  loving  glance 
for  the  life  that  stirs  in  the  fringes  of  the  wayside  grass  ;  silvers  the  moss  of  the 
marsh  and  the  scum  of  the  pool ;  ghstens  in  the  thistle-down ;  lines  the  shell  with 
crimson  fire,  and  fills  the  little  flower  with  light ;  travels  millions  and  millions  of 
miles,  past  stars,  past  constellations,  and  all  the  dread  magnificence  of  heaven,  oa 
purpose  to  visit  the  sickly  weed,  to  kiss  into  vividness  the  sleeping  blooms  of  spring, 
and  to  touch  the  tiniest  thing  with  the  gladness  that  makes  it  great :  so  does  the 
Saviour's  love,  not  deterred  by  our  unworthiness,  not  offended  by  our  slights,  come 
down  to  teach  and  bless  the  meanest  and  the  lowliest  life  in  the  new  creation.  He 
restores  the  bruised  reed ;  the  weakest  natures  share  His  visits,  and  revive  beneatli 
His  smile.  (Charles  Stanford,  D.D,)  The  great  announcement: — I.  A  Saviour  ia 
BOBN.  II.  A  SA.vionB  is  bom.  III.  A  Saviour  is  born  unto  tou.  IV.  This  day. 
(VanDoren.)  A  Saviour  from  spiritual  ruin: — I  know  not  how,  but  when  we 
hear  of  saving,  or  mention  of  a  Saviour,  presently  our  mind  is  carried  to  the  saving 
of  our  skin,  of  our  temporal  state,  of  our  bodily  life ;  further  saving  we  think  not 
of.  But  there  is  another  life  not  to  be  forgotten,  and  greater  the  dangers,  and 
the  destruction  there  more  to  be  feared  than  of  this  here,  and  it  would  be  well 
sometimes  we  were  reminded  of  it.  Besides  our  skin  and  flesh,  a  soul  we  have,  and 
it  is  our  better  part  by  far,  that  also  hath  need  of  a  Saviour;  that  hath  hei 
destruction  out  of  which,  that  hath  her  destroyer  from  which  she  would  be  saved, 
and  those  would  be  thought  on.  Indeed,  our  chief  thought  and  care  would  be  for 
that  i  how  to  escape  the  wrath,  how  to  be  saved  from  the  destruction  to  come, 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

whither  our  Bins  will  certainly  carry  us.  Sin  ■will  destroy  us  all.  And  to  speak  ol 
a  Saviour,  there  is  no  person  on  earth  has  so  much  need  of  a  Saviour  as  has  a 
einuer.  Nothing  so  dangerous,  so  deadly  unto  us,  as  is  the  sin  in  our  bosom ; 
nothing  from  which  we  have  so  much  need  to  be  saved,  whatsoever  account  we  make 
of  it.  From  it  comes  upon  us  all  the  evil  of  this  life,  and  of  the  life  to  come,  in 
comparison  whereof  these  here  are  not  worth  speaking  of.  Above  all,  then,  we  need 
a  Saviour  for  our  souls,  and  from  our  sins,  and  from  the  everlasting  destruction 
which  sin  will  bring  upon  us  in  the  other  life  not  far  from  us.  Then  if  it  be  good 
tidings  to  hear  of  a  Saviour,  where  it  is  but  a  matter  of  the  loss  of  earth,  or  of  this 
life  here  ;  how  then,  when  it  comes  to  the  loss  of  heaven,  to  the  danger  of  hell, 
when  our  soul  is  at  stake,  and  the  well-doing  or  un-doing  of  it  for  ever?  Is  not  such 
a  Saviour  worth  hearkening  after  ?  {Bp.  Lancelot  Andrews.)  Christ  the  Saviour 
of  men : — What  does  that  word  Christ  mean,  and  what  does  it  teach  us  ?  To  the 
Jew  of  that  day,  and  even  to  the  Pagan,  there  could  have  been  no  doubt  as  to  the 
meaning  of  this  word  Christ,  the  Christos,  the  Anointed,  one  representing  to  him 
some  person  who  had  been  publicly  set  apart  to  some  great  office  among  men. 
Anointing  was  that  act  by  which,  especially  among  the  Jews,  a  man  was  set 
apart  to  some  Divinely  appointed  office  among  the  people  ;  the  prophet  who  was  to 
epeak  to  the  people  from  God,  the  priest  who  was  to  minister  to  the  people  in  holy 
things  for  God,  the  king  who  was  to  rule  in  God's  glory  over  God's  own  people,  were 
eolemnly  set  apart  by  anointing  to  their  office.  What  they  would  have  called 
anointing  we  now  call  consecration — the  publicly  and  divinely  ordered  sanctioning 
and  setting  apart  of  a  man  for  an  office  in  which  he  is  to  minister  unto  men  and 
for  God.  This  is  anointing,  and  more  than  this,  it  implies  that  with  the  appoint- 
ment and  consecration  came  a  power  and  a  grace  to  fit  a  man  for  the  office  ha 
received.  When  our  Lord,  then,  is  called  the  Anointed  One,  the  Christ,  it  meana 
that  He  is  the  One  of  all  humanity,  who  is  divinely  consecrated  and  set  apart  to 
noble  office  and  high  service,  and  whose  whole  life  and  being  is  filled  with  the 
Divine  light  necessary  for  doing  the  work  of  that  office — the  Anointed,  consecrated 
One,  in  whom  all  consecration  and  Divine  unction  centres  for  the  performance  of 
all  offices.  And  every  one  of  these  offices,  observe,  was  in  the  service  of  mankind. 
The  prophetic  office  was  His,  and  He  claims  it  as  His  own  when  He  says,  "  The 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me,  for  He  hath  anointed  Me  " — what  for  ?  "  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  the  poor."  The  i^rophet's  office  was  an  office  to  serve  mankind  as 
their  teacher,  their  guide,  and  their  counsellor.  The  priestly  office  was  His,  and 
for  what  ?  Tliat  He  might  offer  Himself  as  a  Lamb  without  spot  or  blemish  to 
God,  and,  having  entered  by  a  new  and  living  way  with  His  own  blood,  should  live 
for  intercession  and  sacrifice,  coming  forth  with  blessings  for  God's  people.  God 
made  Him  king  over  tliem,  and  gave  Him  heaven  for  an  inheritance — for  what  ? 
That  He  might  rule  tbem  in  righteousness  and  peace.  Prophet,  Priest,  King :  in 
each  one  of  these  He  was  the  servant  of  mankmd,  and  so  He  says  of  Himself,  "  The 
8on  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister."  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords  He  is,  but  Servant  of  servants  to  His  brethren,  and  the  lordship  and  the 
kingdom  that  He  won  was  won  by  faith  and  suffering,  won  by  faithful  service,  and 
He  served  that  He  might  reign,  and  through  it  all  He  was  sustained  by  the  in- 
dwelling power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  gave  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him. 
This  is  the  idea  of  the  Christ,  the  consecrated  One.  It  means  One  whose  whole 
life  on  earth,  whose  whole  life  ever  since  He  has  left  this  earth,  was  devoted,  is  de- 
■voted,  to  the  service  of  mankind.  {Bislwp  W.  C.  Magee.)  A  consecrated  life  : — Not 
60  long  ago  the  inhabitants  of  the  Sandwich  Islands  were  sorely  smitten  and  plagued 
by  leprosy.  They  resolved  at  last  to  gather  all  the  lepers  from  the  islands  round 
about,  all  tainted  with  the  slightest  symptoms  of  leprosy,  and  banish  them  to  one 
island,  where  they  should  dwell  and  perish  slowly,  while  the  rest  of  their  fellow- 
citizens  were  saved  from  the  plague — and  they  did  so.  And  this  band  of  pilgrims, 
on  a  pilgrimage  of  death,  were  gathered  on  the  shore  of  one  of  these  islands,  about 
to  depart  by  a  ship  which  would  carry  them  away  for  life,  and  standing  on  the  shore 
was  a  priest,  a  Eoman  Catholic  priest,  and  he  saw  this  multitude  going  away  with- 
out a  shepherd  to  care  for  their  souls,  and  he  said,  •'Take  me,  let  me  go  amongst  them; 
I  will  dwell  amongst  these  lepers,  and  will  give  them  the  ministrations  of  religion 
which  otherwise  they  would  be  without."  He  went,  and  for  some  time  his  courage 
eustained,  and  his  ministrations  blessed  that  people  amongst  whom  he  had  cast  hia 
lot  for  life,  for  he  might  never  leave  that  place ;  and  then  we  hear  in  a  letter, 
written  by  himself  calmly  and  cheerfully,  how  that  the  disease  has  at  last  assailed 
luinself ,  and  that  his  hours  of  labour  are  numbered,  and  before  him  lies  the  death  oi 


eSAT.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  155 

■low  and  bideoBS  decay  to  which  he  had  doomed  himself  that  he  might  save  others. 
In  that  man  was  the  heart  of  the  priest;  in  that  man  was  to  be  seen  a  mani- 
festation of  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  the  Anointed  One  ;  full  surely  on  that  soul 
rested  the  Divine  unction  that  strengthens  and  blesses  men  for  noble  deeds 
of  sacrifice;  and  there  is  not  one  of  us  who,  in  our  boasted  Protestantism, 
might  be  disposed  to  look  down  upon  "  the  benighted  priest,"  there  is  not 
one  of  us  who  might  not  say,  "  Let  my  soul  be  with  his  soul  in  the  day 
when  men  will  have  to  give  an  account  before  the  judgment  seat  of  God."  {Ibid.) 
The  good  newt  is  for  each  and  all: — It  is  very  pleasant  to  hear  good  tidings  for  all 
the  rest  of  the  world  ;  but  it  is  pleasanter  to  know  thax  we  have  a  personal  share  in 
the  benefits  of  which  those  tidings  tell.  There  may  be  safety  to  others  who  are 
endangered,  and  not  to  us.  The  lifeboat  may  come  and  go,  and  we  be  left  on  the 
wreck.  Bread  may  be  distributed  to  the  hungry,  and  we  fail  of  a  share  which  shall 
keep  us  from  starving.  The  physician  may  bring  health  to  many,  and  pass  us  by 
imnoticed.  All  of  our  condemned  fellows  might  be  pardoned,  and  we  have  no 
release.  Unless  the  good  tidings  are  to  us  also,  we  cannot  welcome  them  with 
boundless  joy,  however  glad  we  are  that  there  is  help  for  others.  The  writer  found 
himself,  in  the  fortunes  of  war,  a  prisoner  in  the  Libby,  at  Kichmond.  One  even- 
ing, as  the  prisoners  lay  down  to  sleep,  the  story  was  whispered  among  them  that 
a  flag-of-truce  boat  had  come  up  the  river,  and  that  some  one  of  their  number  was 
to  be  released  the  next  day.  That  was  glad  tidings  for  all.  But  the  question  in 
every  prisoner's  mind  was,  "Am  I  to  be  released?"  There  were  many  dreams  of 
home  that  night  on  that  prison  floor.  In  the  early  morning,  after  roll-call,  there 
was  breathless  expectancy  for  the  name  of  the  favoured  prisoner.  It  was  the  name 
of  Chaplain  Trumbull.  Those  glad  tidings  had  a  meaning  for  him  they  could  not 
have  for  any  of  his  companions.  To  him  there  came  that  day  the  message  of  de- 
liverance from  bondage,  and  he  passed  out  from  the  prison-house  thanking  God 
that  the  message  was  to  him.  "  Unto  you  "  is  a  Saviour  born.  Whoever  you  are, 
whatever  are  your  sins  there  is  salvation  for  you.  {H.  G.  Trumbull.)  Joy  in 
the  Saviour  fully  received: — He  is  the  most  joyful  man  who  is  the  most  Christly 
man.  I  wish  that  some  Christians  were  more  truly  Christians :  they  are  Christians 
and  something  else ;  it  were  much  better  if  they  were  altogether  Christians.  Per- 
haps you  know  the  legend,  or  perhaps  true  history  of  the  awakening  of  St.  Augus- 
tine. He  dreamed  that  he  died,  and  went  to  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  the  keeper 
of  the  gates  said  to  him,  "  Who  are  you  ?  "  And  he  answered,  "  Christianus  sum," 
I  am  a  Christian.  But  the  porter  replied,  "  No,  you  are  not  a  Christian,  you  are  a 
Ciceronian,  for  your  thoughts  and  studies  were  most  of  all  directed  to  the  works  of 
Cicero  and  the  classics,  and  you  neglected  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  We  judge  men 
here  by  that  which  most  engrossed  their  thoughts,  and  you  are  judged  not  to  be  a 
Christian  but  a  Ciceronian."  When  Augustine  awoke,  he  put  aside  the  classics 
which  he  had  studied,  and  the  eloquence  at  which  he  had  aimed,  and  he  said,  "  I 
will  be  a  Christian  and  a  theologian ; "  and  from  that  time  he  devoted  his  thoughts 
to  the  Word  of  God,  and  his  pen  and  his  tongue  to  the  instruction  of  others  in  the 
truth.  Oh  I  would  not  have  it  said  of  any  of  you,  "  Well,  he  may  be  somewhat 
Christian,  but  he  is  far  more  a  keen  money-getting  tradesman."  I  would  not  have 
it  said,  •'  Well,  he  may  be  a  believer  in  Christ,  but  he  is  a  good  deal  more  a  politi- 
cian." Perhaps  he  is  a  Christian,  but  he  is  most  at  home  when  he  is  talking  about 
science,  farming,  engineering,  horses,  mining,  navigation,  or  pleasure-taking.  No, 
no,  you  will  never  know  the  fulness  of  the  joy  which  Jesus  brings  to  the  soul,  un- 
less under  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  you  take  the  Lord  your  Master  to  be  your 
All  in  all,  and  make  Him  the  fountain  of  your  intensest  delight.  "  He  is  my 
Saviour,  my  Christ,  my  Lord,"  be  this  your  loudest  boast.  Then  will  you  know 
the  joy  which  the  angel's  song  predicts  for  men.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  lesson 
of  Christmas : — In  the  light  of  the  Son  of  God  becoming  flesh,  we  dare  not  degrade 
or  defile  ourselves.  We  see  how  base  an  apostasy  it  is  to  abnegate  the  Divine  pre- 
rogative of  our  being.  The  birth  of  Christ  becomes  to  us  the  pledge  of  immortality, 
the  inspiration  of  glad,  unerring,  life-long  duty  to  ourselves.  And  no  less  does  it 
bring  home  to  us  the  new  commandment  of  love  to  our  brethren.  It  becomes  the 
main  reason  why  we  should  luve  one  another.  If  men  were  indeed  what  Satan 
makes  them,  and  makes  us  try  to  believe  that  they  solely  are — hopelessly  degraded 
unimaginably  vile ;  if  human  life  be  nothing  at  the  best  but  the  shadow  of  a  passing 
and  miserable  dream,  I  know  not  how  we  could  love  one  another.  We  could  only 
turn  with  loathing  from  all  the  vice  and  blight,  the  moral  corruption,  the  manifold 
Jbaseuess  of  vile,  Ij  ing,  degraded  lives.    How  is  all  trunsfigured,  how  is  the  poorest 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

wretch  earth  ever  bore  transfigured,  when  we  remember  that  for  these  Christ  beoam* 
man,  for  these  He  died  1  Shall  we,  ourselves  so  weak,  bo  imperfect,  so  stained  with 
evil,  shall  we  dare  to  despise  these  whom  Christ  so  loved  that  for  them — yea,  for 
those  blind  and  impotent  men,  these  publicans  and  sinners,  these  ragged  prodigala 
of  humanity  still  voluntarily  lingering  among  the  husks  and  swine — for  these,  even 
for  these,  He,  so  pure,  so  perfect,  took  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  went,  step  by 
step,  down  all  that  infinite  descent  ?  Despise  them  ?  Ah  1  the  revealing  light  of 
the  God-man  shows  too  much  darkness  in  ourselves  to  leave  any  possibihty  for 
pride.  If  we  have  learnt  the  lesson  of  Christmas,  the  lesson  of  Bethlehem,  let  us 
live  to  counteract  the  works  of  the  devil ;  let  it  be  the  one  aim  of  our  hves  to  love 
and  not  to  hate ;  to  help,  not  to  hinder ;  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted,  not  to 
add  to  and  multiply  their  temptations ;  to  make  men  better,  not  worse ;  to  make 
life  a  Utile  happier,  not  more  deeply  miserable ;  to  speak  kindly  words,  not  worda 
that  may  do  hurt ;  to  console  and  to  encourage,  not  to  blister  and  envenom  with 
slanderous  lies ;  to  live  for  others,  not  for  ourselves  ;  to  look  each  of  us  not  on  hia 
own  things,  but  on  the  things  of  others ;  to  think  noble  thoughts  of  man  as  well  as 
of  God ;  to  be  kind  to  one  another,  tender-hearted,  forgiving  one  another,  even  as 
God  in  Christ  has  forgiven  us,  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  A  Saviour: — The  Esqui- 
maux have  no  word  in  their  language  to  represent  the  Saviour,  and  I  could  never 
find  out  that  they  had  any  direct  notion  of  such  a  Friend.  But  I  said  to  them, 
"  Does  it  not  happen  sometimes  when  you  are  out  fishing  that  a  storm  arises,  and 
some  of  you  are  lost  and  some  saved?"  They  said,  "  Oh  yes,  very  often."  "But 
it  also  happens  that  you  are  in  the  water,  and  owe  your  safety  to  some  brother  or 
friend  who  stretches  out  his  hand  to  help  you."  "  Very  frequently."  "  Then  what 
do  you  call  that  friend  ?  "  They  gave  me  in  answer  a  word  in  their  language,  and 
I  immediately  wrote  it  against  the  word  Saviour  in  Holy  Writ,  and  ever  afterwards 
it  was  clear  and  intelligible  to  all  of  them.  (ColeTneister.)  Christmas  day  explains 
two  dispensations : — Those  who  have  travelled  in  mountainous  countries  know  how 
the  highest  crest  of  the  mountain  range  is  always  known  by  seeing  from  that  point, 
and  that  point  only,  the  streams  dividing  on  either  side.  Even  so  it  is  with 
the  event  of  this  day.  The  whole,  or  nearly  the  whole,  history  of  the  ancient 
world,  and  specially  of  the  Israelite  people,  leads  us  up  to  it  as  certainly  on 
the  one  side,  as  the  whole  history  of  later  times,  especially  of  the  Christian 
world,  leads  us  up  to  it  from  the  other  side.  Other  events  there  are  which 
explain  particular  portions  of  history;  other  birthdays  can  be  pointed  out; 
other  characters  have  arisen  which  contain  within  themselves  the  seed  of 
much  that  was  to  follow.  There  is  none  which  professes  hke  this  to  com- 
mand both  views  at  once,  and  thus,  even  if  we  knew  no  more  concerning  it,  we 
should  feel  that  a  life  and  character  which  so  explains  two  dispensations  comes  to 
US  with  a  double  authority.  Either  would  be  enough  to  constitute  a  claim  to  our 
reverence ;  both  together  make  a  claim  almost  irresistible.  (Dean  Stanley.) 
Christ  born  in  the  city  of  David: — A  poor  casket  to  contain  so  great  a  Jewel. 
"Thou  Bethlehem,"  says  the  Prophet  Micah,  "the  least  among  the  princes  of 
Judah ; "  yet  big  enough  to  contain  the  Prince  of  heaven  and  earth.  Little  Zoar, 
Bays  Lot,  and  yet  Zoar  was  big  enough  to  receive  him  and  his  children  safe  out  of 
the  fire  of  Sodom.  Mean  Bethlehem,  unless  the  angel  had  spoke  it,  the  prophet 
foretold  it,  and  the  star  had  showed  it  to  the  wise  men,  who  would  not  have  gain- 
said that  the  Saviour  of  all  men  could  be  laid  in  such  a  village  ?  The  Roman 
historian  made  a  marvel  that  so  noble  an  emperor  as  Alexander  Severus  was,  could 
come  out  of  Syria,  Syrus  Archisynagogus,  as  they  called  him  in  scorn.  Behold 
that  emperor's  Lord,  comes  not  only  out  of  Syria,  but  out  of  the  homeliest  corner 
in  Syria,  out  of  the  despicable  tributary  city  of  David.  {Bishop  Hacket.)  A 
Saviour: — But  that  the  name  may  not  be  an  empty  sound  to  us  as  it  was  to  them, 
consider  these  three  things.  1.  With  what  honour  it  was  imposed.  2.  What  ex- 
cellency it  includes.  3.  What  reverence  it  deserves.  (Ibid.)  His  words.  His 
actions.  His  miracles,  His  prayers,  His  sacraments.  His  sufferings,  all  did  smell  of 
the  Saviour.  Take  Him  from  His  infancy  to  His  death,  among  His  disciples  and 
among  the  publicans,  among  the  Jews,  or  among  the  Gentiles,  He  was  all  Saviour. 
(Ibid.)  The  sun  enlightens  half  the  world  at  once,  yet  none  discern  colours  by 
the  light  but  they  that  open  their  eyes  ;  and  a  Saviour  is  born  unto  us  all,  which  ia 
Christ  the  Lord :  but  enclasp  Him  in  thine  heart  as  old  Simeon  did  in  his  arms, 
and  then  thou  mayest  sing  his  "  Nunc  Dimittis,"  or  Mary's  "  Magnificat,"  "  My 
spirit   rejoiceth    in    God    my    Saviour.      (Ibid.)  ChrisVs    birth   city  :—ThB 

Athenians  were  proud  of  Pompey's  love,  that  he  would  write  his  name  a  citizen 


emu.  n.]  ST.  tUKE.  15T 

of  their  citj.  For  a  princely  person  to  accept  a  freedom  in  a  mean  corporation 
is  no  little  kindness;  how  much  more  doth  it  aggravate  the  love  of  Christ  to 
oome  from  heaven,  and  be  made  a  citizen  of  this  vile  earth,  to  be  bom  after  a 
more  vile  condition  than  the  most  abject  of  the  people.  (Ibid.)  The  merit 
of  Christ's  birth : — ^For,  as  we  say  of  the  sin  of  Adam,  the  act  passed  away  at 
the  first,  but  the  guUt  remains  upon  his  posterity :  so  our  Saviour  was  born  upon 
one  particular  day  which  is  passed,  but  the  merit  and  virtue  of  it  is  never 
passed,  but  abides  for  ever.  (Ibid.)  1.  Then  with  reverend  lips  and  circum- 
cised ears  let  us  begin  with  the  joyful  tidings  of  a  Saviour.  2.  Here's  our  partici- 
pation of  Him  in  His  nature,  natus,  He  is  born,  and  made  like  unto  us.  3.  It  is 
honourable  to  be  made  like  us,  but  it  is  beneficial  to  be  made  for  us ;  "  unto  you  is 
born  a  Saviour."  4.  Is  not  the  use  of  His  birth  superannuated,  the  virtue  of  it  long 
since  expired?  No,  'tis  fresh  and  new ;  as  a  man  is  most  active  when  he  begins  first 
to  run — He  is  born  this  day.  5.  Is  He  not  like  the  king  in  the  Gospel  who  journeyed 
into  a  far  country,  extra  orbem  solisque  vias,  quite  out  of  the  way  in  another  world? 
no — the  circumstance  of  place  points  His  dwelling  to  be  near — He  is  "  born  in  the 
city  of  David.  6.  Perhaps  to  make  Him  man  is  to  quite  unmake  Him ;  shall  we 
find  Him  able  to  subdue  our  enemies,  and  save  ua,  since  He  hath  taken  upon  Him 
the  condition  of  human  fragility  ?  Yes,  the  last  words  speak  His  excellency  and 
power,  for  He  is  such  a  "  Saviour  as  is  Christ  the  Lord."  (Ibid.)  A  Saviour: — 
It  comprehends  all  other  names  of  grace  and  blessing ;  as  manna  is  said  to  have 
all  kind  of  sapors  in  it  to  please  the  taste.  When  you  have  called  Him  the  glass 
in  which  we  see  all  truth,  the  fountain  in  which  we  taste  all  sweetness,  the  ark  in 
which  all  precious  things  are  laid  up,  the  pearl  which  is  worth  all  other  riches,  the 
flower  of  Jesse  which  hath  the  savour  of  hfe  unto  life,  the  bread  that  satisfieth  all 
hunger,  the  medicine  that  healeth  all  sickness,  the  light  that  dispelleth  all  dark- 
ness ;  when  you  have  run  over  all  these,  and  as  many  more  glorious  titles  as  you 
can  lay  on,  this  one  word  is  above  them,  and  you  may  pick  them  all  out  of  these 
eyllables,  "a  Saviour  which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  (Ibid.)  The  nativity : — Let 
U3  consider  the  message  itself,  the  foundation  of  all  our  spiritual  joy.  I.  What  la 
He  who  is  born  ?  He  is  "  a  Saviour,"  a  Deliverer.  Good  indeed  are  the  tidings  of 
a  saviour.  Delightful  to  one  languishing  on  a  bed  of  pain  and  sickness  is  He  that 
comes  with  power  and  skill  to  heal  and  to  restore.  Most  joyful  to  the  wretch  con- 
demned to  die  for  his  crimes,  is  the  sound  of  pardon.  II.  What  are  the  titles 
GIVEN  to  this  Savioub?  1.  He  is  "Christ."  As  His  name,  Jesus,  signifies  a 
saviour,  so  Christ  signifies  the  anointed.  He  is  an  anointed  Saviour.  Thus  is  He 
distinguished  from  all  other  saviours.  The  title  "  Christ "  also  teaches  us  His  office. 
2.  He  is  "  the  Lord."  High  and  glorious  name  I  He  is  Jehovah.  He  is  "Lord" 
by  right  of  creation,  in  His  Divine  and  eternal  nature.  He  is  "  Lord  "  by  right  of 
inheritance;  man,  as  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  He  is  more  particularly 
our  "  Lord  "  by  redemption.  These  names,  then,  "  Christ,  the  Lord,"  show  Him, 
an  all-suflScient  Saviour ;  show  Him,  God  and  man  united  in  one  Person :  as  man  to 
suffer,  as  God  to  redeem.     (E.  Blencowe,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  And  this  shall  be  a  sign  tmto  you. — What  the  angels  said  to  the  shep- 
herds was,  "  This  shall  be  the  sign  unto  you;  ye  shall  find  a  babe,"  a  babe  like  any 
other,  "wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes,"  differing  from  other  babes  only  in  the 
lowliness  of  His  birth,  "lying  in  a  manger."  The  absence  of  any  adventitious 
source  of  interest,  anything  awe-inspiring  in  the  circumstances  of  the  birth  of 
Christ,  was  no  mere  casual  incident ;  it  was  eminently  significant,  characteristic  of 
His  life,  a  symbol  of  His  sway.  The  identifioation  of  "signs"  with  "wonders" 
was  the  common  error  of  the  Jews.  All  Israel  was  expectant  of  the  Messiah.  The 
reason  why  they  received  Him  not  was  that  they  could  not  recognize  the  Divine  in 
the  ordinary.  A  babe  was  born  in  Bethlehem:  only  by  those  who  shared  the 
mother's  prophetic  insight  was  the  mystery  of  God's  interposition  seen  in  His 
birth.  Angels  sang  of  His  advent ;  their  song  was  mute  save  to  the  listening  ear 
of  a  few  shepherds.  And  this  is  the  common  error  of  us  all.  "  He  that  receiveth 
a  prophet."  says  Christ,  "in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  receive  a  prophet's 
reward."  Yes,  we  respond,  that  is  well ;  we  all  shall  know  a  prophet  when  we  see 
him.  But  Christ  also  says,  "  Whoso  shall  receive  a  little  child  in  My  name  re- 
ceiveth Me."  He  who  is  blind  to  the  Christ  in  the  little  child  may  also  fail  to  see 
the  prophet  when  he  comes.  Such  as  Christ  was  manifested  here,  such  did  He 
ever  continue.  He  would  steal  into  the  life  of  humanity  as  a  babe  twines  round  a 
mother's  heart.   He  would  draw  men  to  Him  by  the  charm  and  sweetness  of  humna 


158  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

sanctity ;  and  to  those  who  were  thus  attracted  to  Him  and  abode  in  His  fellowship, 
there  came  at  length  the  revelation  that  this  was  the  Divine.  The  cross  lay  hidden 
in  the  manger  of  Bethlehem.  He  was  already  bearing  the  only  cross  a  babe  can 
bear,  poverty  and  man's  contempt ;  sweetened  by  a  mother's  care,  the  symbol  of 
that  affection  of  pious  hearts  which  never  failed  Him  throughout  His  vexed  and 
troubled  history ;  and  hallowed  by  the  Father's  approval  of  the  well-beloved  Son, 
in  whom,  now  as  ever,  He  was  well  pleased.  The  sacrificial  purpose  and  saving 
energy  of  His  life  already  appeared.  •♦  Though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes," 
&c.  The  mother  of  Jesus  and  the  adoring  shepherds  must  have  been  struck  by 
the  contrast  between  the  honour  of  His  annunciation  and  the  meanness  of  Hia 
birth ;  between  the  splendours  of  the  angelic  host,  and  the  manger  where  He  lay. 
Eighteen  centuries  of  Christian  history  have  taught  us  that  herein  is  no  contrast, 
but  profound  consistency.  What  honour  could  the  world  hare  rendered  the  Son  of 
God  which  would  not  have  more  sharply  contrasted  with  His  character  and  mission 
than  poverty  and  the  world's  neglect  ?  There  is  nothing  in  common  between  Christ 
and  the  luxury  of  wealth,  the  ostentation  of  a  palace,  the  statecraft  of  a  Court. 
The  manger  of  Bethlehem  is  the  sign  of  the  Messiah  ;  the  lowly,  self-accepted  loj 
of  Jesus  is  the  seal  of  His  divinity.  Men  soar,  God  stoops ;  ambition  is  human, 
condescension  is  Divine.  When  God  reveals  Himself  for  man's  salvation  it  can 
only  be  by  sacrifice  ;  and  the  more  complete  the  sacrifice,  the  fuller  is  the  revela- 
tion. {A.  Mackennal,  D.D.)  The  sign  of  Jesus  Christ: — What  a  wonderful 
contrast  between  this  verse  and  that  which  follows  1  What  greatness  on  the  one 
Bide,  what  humility  on  the  other  1  That  humility  is  the  sign  of  the  greatness.  I. 
The  sign  of  humility  by  which  the  entrance  of  Jesus  into  the  world  was  announced, 
is  found  throughout  the  whole  course  of  His  history.  II.  The  same  contrast  is 
found  in  the  institutions  \vhich  Jesus  has  left  to  preserve  in  His  Church  the  remem- 
brance of  His  benefits.  III.  There  is,  again,  this  same  contrast  of  grandeur  and 
humility  to  mark,  with  a  Divine  seal,  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  In  its  origin, 
composed  of  obscure  persons  from  lowest  ranks  of  a  small  unknown  people.  2. 
As  it  exists  to-day  wherever  the  true  Church  is  to  be  found.  IV.  The  same  sign  of 
humility  will  enable  us  to  recognize  the  worship  with  which  God  is  pleased.  V. 
The  sign  of  humility  which  is  constantly  found  in  Christ,  and  in  all  that  springs 
from  Christ,  must  be  found  also  among  His  disciples.  (Horace  Monod.)  Lessons 
of  the  holy  manger : — At  the  cradle  of  Christianity,  we  may  observe  something  of 
the  predestined  form  both  of  Christian  doctrine  and  Christian  life.  In  the  bud  we 
trace  the  probable  shape  and  colour  of  the  coming  flower.  When  standing  at  the 
source  of  a  river  we  can  determine  at  least  the  general  direction  of  its  course.  In 
the  Sacred  Infancy,  too,  we  may  discern,  without  risk  of  indulgence  in  over-fanciful 
analogies,  a  typical  portraiture  of  the  Christian  creed,  and  a  precious  lesson  for 
good  Christian  liviug.  To  the  theologian  and  the  practical  Christian,  the  sign  of 
the  manger  and  of  the  swaddling  clothes  is  at  least  as  fuU  of  meaning  now  as  it 
was  of  old  to  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem.  I.  Look  then  at  the  creed  of  the 
Church.  It  has  two  sides,  two  aspects.  It  is  one  thing  to  sight,  another  to  faith. 
To  si^^ht,  it  is  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  and  laid  in  a  manger.  To  faith,  it  is 
revealed  from  heaven  as  supernatural  and  Divine.  II.  Consider  the  moral  import 
OF  the  manger-bed  of  the  infant  Jesus.  The  world-widQ  principle  of  spiritual 
death  needed  to  be  e/ipelled  by  a  stronger  and  not  less  universal  principle.  It  de- 
manded a  regeneroting  force,  resting  n-'t  on  theory  but  on  fact,  a  principle  human 
in  its  form  and  action,  but  Divine  in  its  strength  and  origin.  Such  a  privilege  we 
find  in  the  Babe,  wrapped,  &c.  This  was  indeed  the  Divine  Word,  engrafted  on 
human  nature,  and  able  to  save  the  souls  of  men.  The  Incarnation  was  the  source 
of  a  moral  revolution.  By  sa^dng  man  it  was  destined  to  save  human  society.  It 
confronted  sensuality  by  endurance  and  mortification.  It  confronted  covetousneBB 
by  putting  honour  upon  poverty.  It  taught  men  that  a  man's  highest  life  consisteth 
not  iu  the  abundance  of  the  things  that  he  possesseth.  But  its  great  lesson  was  a 
lesson  of  humility.  In  the  humiliation  of  the  Highest,  the  nations  read  the  truth 
which  the  incarnate  Lord  taught  in  words: — "Except  ye  be  converted,  and 
become  as  little  children,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  For 
lis  men  humility  is  the  law  of  progress,  because  it  is  the  admission  of 
truth.  At  Christ's  manger  may  we  learn  the  blessed  temper  which  makes 
faith,  repentance,  perseverance,  easy,  and  to  which  are  promised  the  crowns 
of  glory,  worn  by  the  blessed  around  His  throne.  (Canon  Liddon.)  The 
babe  :  A  Christmastide  meditation : — The  Incarnation  was  the  great  event  in 
the  world's  history.    Nothing  can  rival  in  interest  to  us  the  coming  of  God  in  our 


OTAT.  n  J  8T.  L  UKE.  159 

mortal  flesh;  the  shadowing  of  Deity  in  a  human  form,  so  that  we  might  see 
Him ;  the  manifestation  of  Deity  in  a  saving  love,  so  that  we  might  be  drawn  to 
Him ;  the  shinings  in  our  humanity  of  a  Divine  purity ;  which  should  at  once 
reveal  to  us  our  sins;  and  deliver  us  from  their  power.  I.  Ocb  Saviour  was  a 
BEAL  MAN.  All  are  alike  at  birth — babes.  Christ  came  as  we  came.  He  passed 
through  the  entire  experience  of  human  life,  starting  from  the  cradle,  right  up  to 
and  beyond  the  tomb.  II.  Oob  Savioub  was  simply  a  ma».  "  Ye  shall  find  the 
babe  "  :  just  a  babe,  no  more.  No  accident  of  birth  limited  Jesus  to  any  part  of 
the  community ;  there  were  none  of  those  things  about  Him  on  which  men  pride 
themselves.  He  belongs  to  all,  however  humble,  obscure,  poor,  simple,  needy. 
HI.  He  was  a  loving  man.  A  babe  is  the  emblem  of  the  mightiest  thing  on 
earth — love — the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  radience.  IV.  He  was,  for  the  most  part, 
A.  BEJECTED  MAK.  There  never  seemed  to  be  any  room  for  Him,  from  His  birth 
onwards.  V.  He  is  all  in  all  to  those  who  keceive  Him.  1.  To  find  this 
Babe  will  be  the  beginning  of  truest  peace  to  our  own  hearts.  2.  To  find  this  Babe 
will  be  the  beginning  for  us  of  a  better,  nobler  life.  3.  To  find  this  Babe  will  give 
to  us  the  true  spirit  of  brotherhood  and  charity.  (R.  Tuck,  B.A.)  The  sign  of 
the  manger : — Let  us  think  what  is  the  connection  here.  A  sign — a  signal :  how 
BO?  In  what  sense  did  the  mode  and  circumstance  of  the  birth  make  it  typical  of 
the  thing  which  Christ  comes  to  do  ?  What  is  that  thing  which  Christ  comes  to 
do  ?  He  has  come  to  be  the  God-man,  the  Redeemer,  the  Emmanuel,  and  the 
Saviour — the  God  for  us,  and  God  with  us,  and  God  in  us — of  the  fallen,  the 
sinful,  the  erring  and  straying  man.  Now,  to  be  this.  He  must  first  incorporate 
Himself  with  men,  take  the  flesh  and  blood,  the  nature  and  body  and  spirit  of  the 
race  which  He  comes  to  save.  He  must  first  of  all  incorporate  Himself — not  with 
a  man,  or  a  few  men,  but  with  humanity — with  man  as  man,  and  not  with  certain 
privileged  specimens  and  choice  individuals  of  the  race.  He  has  come  to  undo 
the  fall.  He  has  come  to  bear  the  sins,  to  wipe  away  the  tears,  to  take  the  sting 
out  of  the  death  of  the  Adam  race  as  a  whole ;  therefore  He  must  not  only  take 
flesh  and  blood— become  one  of  us  and  live  our  very  life  :  that  is  not  enough.  He 
must  go  down  to  the  very  rock  from  which  we  are  hewn,  and  He  must  put  on  our 
nature — not  in  its  ornamental  but  in  its  bare  form — not  as  it  may  deck  itself  in  the 
embellishment  of  rank  or  wealth,  of  social  distinction  or  philosophical  culture,  but 
as  it  is  in  itself  and  in  the  commonest  experiences  of  its  humblest  children.  If 
the  Divine  Saviour  had  appeared  in  any  other  form  than  this,  He  would  have 
misled  men  as  to  the  thing  which  He  came  to  do,  and  as  to  the  relation  in  which 
He  desired  to  stand  as  to  the  lower  and  the  lowest  portions  of  the  human  family. 
The  sign  of  the  helpless  babe  and  the  manger  cradle  was  no  capricious  or 
accidental  idea  ;  for,  inasmuch  as  it  is  Christ  the  Lord,  therefore  ye  shall  find  Him 
not  in  the  miraculous  strength  of  an  instantaneous  maturity,  and  not  in  the 
guest-chambers  of  a  king's  palace,  but  as  a  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  and 
lying  in  a  manger.  There  was  a  connection  and  a  congruity  between  the  sign  and 
the  reality  ;  for  thus  it  was  that  Christ  became,  not  the  faith  of  a  few,  but  the 
Saviour  of  all.  None  are  poorer,  none  are  humbler,  none  are  less  learned,  none  are 
less  noble  after  the  flesh,  than  He.  None  can  say  now,  "  His  is  the  reUgion  of  the 
educated — of  the  philosophical — of  kings  and  princes — His  is  the  religion  which 
admits  or  which  favours  a  position  of  comfort  or  respectability,  and  I  am  none  of 
these,  so  Christ  is  not  for  me."  And  when,  at  this  Cliristmas  season,  wealth 
eurrounds  itself  with  all  its  luxuries  of  mind  and  body,  and  thinks  it  much  if,  for  a 
moment  and  in  the  most  perfunctory  way,  it  remembers  the  poor,  we  feel  how 
slight  must  be  the  hold  of  these  self-iudulgers  upon  the  faith  which  they  profess  to 
honour.  If  we  would  know  the  mystery  of  Christmas;  if  we  would  read  the 
fiddie  of  the  angel;  if  we  would  know  why  he  said,  "  The  Saviour  is  bom, and  the 
sign  is  the  manger,"  we  should  turn  our  steps  to  some  poor  man's  chamber  with  its 
highbacked  chair  and  its  open  Bible.  We  shall  hear  that  man  say,  "  Oh,  I  love 
both  to  be  abased  and  to  abound.  I  am  instructed  both  to  be  full  and  to  be 
hungry,  for  Christ  the  Lord  was  born  this  day  for  our  salvation,  and  His  first 
earthly  resting  place  was  a  yard  and  a  manger."  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Divine 
things  veiled  under  earthly  forms  : — This  shall  be  your  sign:  not  the  march  of  & 
conqueror,  not  the  splendour  of  a  king,  but  the  Babe  wrapped  in  swaddling  bauds 
and  lying  in  a  manger!  Wherever  God  is,  the  pieseuce  is  secret.  What,  for 
example,  is  the  Book  of  God — the  Bible — but  an  example  of  this  sancfcily  in  coiu- 
monness  :  a  heap  o-!  leaves,  marked  with  ink  and  baud,  stamped  with  pipjns  for 
Boimds,  mullii>hcu  bj  printiiiii-pixss  and  bteam-engine,  convcj'ea  iiithoi  ana  ihitiict 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

b,y  railways,  bought  and  sold  in  shops,  tossed  from  hand  to  hand  in  schools  and 
homes,  lost  and  dissipated  by  vulgar  wear  and  tear  ?  But  go  back  to  its  composi- 
tion. What  was  the  Bible  as  it  came  forth  originally,  book  by  book,  and  chapter 
by  chapter,  from  the  mind  which  thought,  and  from  the  hand  which  wrote  it? 
Was  it  not  written,  after  all,  both  in  composition  and  in  dictation,  like  any  other 
work  of  poetry  or  philosophy,  of  history  or  fiction — by  the  brain  and  nerve  powei 
of  common  human  beings  ?  Was  it  not  given  forth  line  by  line  from  the  lips  of  a 
Paul  sitting  at  the  tent-making,  or  some  other  evangelist  alternating  between 
preaching  and  handicraft — by  the  utterance  of  sounds  in  an  imperfect  human 
language  to  some  obscure  Persis  or  other  amanuensis  reporting  r  Yet  in  that  Book 
of  books,  thus  material,  thus  earthly,  thus  human  in  its  circumstances,  there  lies 
concealed  the  very  breath  and  spirit  of  God  Himself,  mighty  to  stir  hearts,  and 
mighty  to  regenerate  souls.  The  swathing  bands  of  sense  and  time  enclose  the 
living  and  moving  power  which  is  of  eternity,  which  is  Divine.  Nay,  the  sign  of 
the  true  Deity  is  the  fact  that  the  form  is  human.  Take  another  example  of  this 
from  another  of  God's  instruments  of  communication.  What  is  that  vessel 
for  holding  common  water,  which  is  the  appendage  of  every  Christian  place 
of  worship  1  Is  there  anything  in  that  laver — that  font — but  what  is  of  thy 
earth,  and  of  the  very  commonest  of  all  earth's  gifts  for  refreshing  and  purify, 
ing?  "What  can  be  the  use,"  some  might  inquire,  "of  bringing  that  earthly 
water  into  the  House  of  God's  worship,  as  though  we  had  forgotten  our  Master's 
own  words,  '  God  is  a  Spirit '  ?  What  significance  can  there  be — certainly  what 
virtue — in  sprinkling  those  few  drops  of  common  water  upon  the  forehead  of  a 
child,  with  or  without  a  particular  form  of  sacred  words  accompanying  7  What, 
again,  can  be  less  intelligible  than  that  sight  of  that  little  frugal  table  of  common 
bread  and  common  wine,  standing  there  in  front  of  the  congregation  ?  How  can 
eating  and  drinking  in  God's  house  affect,  in  any  degree,  for  good  the  soul  of  the 
worshipper?"  We  can  but  answer  that  Christ  our  Master  commanded  the  one 
sacrament  as  the  appointed  way  of  dedicating  a  new  life  to  His  service,  and  that 
He  appointed  the  other  sacrament  as  commemorative  of  His  own  death  and 
passion — as  instrumental,  also,  in  nourishing  the  soul  that  in  it  feeds  upon  Him  by 
faith.  And  though  it  would  be  presumptuous,  indeed,  to  attach  any  value  to  a  form 
of  man's  invention,  we  feel  that  the  presumption  would  be  all  the  other  way  if  we 
neglected  an  ordinance  of  Jesus  Christ,  because  it  was  either  too  mysterious  for  us, 
or  too  carnal.  Nay,  we  can  almost  read  in  the  very  simplicity  a  signal  of  His 
working,  who,  when  He  came  on  earth  came  as  a  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling 
clothes,  and  made  it  a  sign  of  His  presence  that  He  was  lying  in  a  manger.  But 
the  same  thing  which  is  true  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  sacraments,  is  true  also  of  the 
Church  and  of  the  Christian.  Where  is  it,  we  ask,  that  God  in  Christ  dwells  most  cer 
tainly,  most  personally,  on  this  earth  ?  It  is  no  word  of  man's  invention  which  answers 
to  the  Church — "  Ye,  collectively,  are  the  temple  of  God,"  and,  to  the  Christian— 
"your  body  is  the  shrine  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  in  you."  Yet  if  we  look  at 
the  men  and  the  women  and  the  children  thus  spoken  to,  we  see  nothing  but 
human  beings,  frail  and  fallen,  occupied  for  a  large  part  of  their  life  in  the 
employments  and  the  relaxations,  in  the  talk  and  in  the  seeking,  which  are 
common  alike  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  and  which  would  equally  be  theirs 
if  they  had  neither  faith  nor  heaven.  The  treasure  of  the  Divine  light  is  always 
held  in  earthen  vessels ;  not  until  the  pitcher  is  broken  at  the  fountain  shall  the 
full  radiance  shine  out  so  as  to  be  read  of  all  men.  Meanwhile  the  sign  of  God  is  the 
commonness.  Christ  came  not  to  take  men  out  of  the  world,  but  to  consecrate  and 
keep  them  in  it.  Coming  to  redeem  earth,  He  takes  earth  as  it  is :  not  the  ideal, 
but  the  real ;  and  makes  this  the  very  token  of  His  being  amongst  us — that  we  find 
a  helpless  babe  and  a  manger  cradle.  {Ibid.)  The  practice  of  swathing  infants  : — 
When  the  GospeLs  were  translated  in  our  venerable  version,  it  did  3aot  occur  to  any 
of  the  translators  that  the  word  "  swaddling  clothes  "  would  ever  be  an  obsolete 
word,  needing  to  be  illustrated  by  a  description  of  ancient  or  foreign  customs. 
And  yet  so  it  is  at  this  day.  The  usage  which  is  alluded  to  in  this  word  is  to  us 
entirely  strange.  Few  things  among  the  old  world  customs,  I  venture  to  say, 
strike  some  of  us  as  more  outlandish — more  pitiable  even — more  entirely  removed 
from  our  notions  of  good  care  and  right  training — than  the  swaddling  of  little 
helpless  babies,  as  it  is  practised,  for  instance,  in  Germany.  I  do  not  believe  an 
American  mother  can  generally  pass  one  of  those  poor  little  Wickelkinder,  strapped 
down  on  its  Lack  to  a  pillow  by  spiral  after  spiral  of  convoluted  bandagee,  without 
longing  to  apply  the  scissors  and  let  the  little  prisoner  go  free.    And  yet  it  is  oulj 


n.]  ST.  LUKE.  161 

few  generatipns  since  this  way  of  treating  new-born  children  prevailed,  with 
variations  and  aggravations,  in  all  nations,  even  the  most  civilized.  We  owe  ou» 
own  emancipation,  in  this  land  and  century,  from  this  and  other  artificial  traditiona, 
lo  no  other  single  influence  so  much  as  to  a  remarkable  book  published  in  the 
middle  of  the  last  century  by  a  citizen  of  Geneva — the  "  Emile  "  of  Jean  Jacques 
Moussean.  It  speaks  thus  of  the  universally  prevalent  treatment  of  an  infant 
child  as  it  had  continued  to  his  day :  "  Scarcely  does  the  child  begin  to  enjoy  the 
liberty  of  moving  and  stretching  its  limbs,  when  it  is  placed  anew  in  confinement. 
It  is  wound  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  laid  down  with  its  head  fixed,  its  legs 
extended,  its  arms  at  its  sides.  It  is  surrounded  with  clothes  and  bandages  of  all 
sorts  that  prevent  it  from  changing  its  position.  It  is  a  good  thing  if  they  do  not 
even  draw  the  bands  so  tight  as  to  hinder  respiration,  and  if  they  have  the  fore- 
sight to  lay  it  on  its  side  to  avoid  the  danger  of  strangulation.  •  .  .  The  inaction 
and  constraint  in  which  the  child's  limbs  are  confined  must  necessarily  disturb  the 
circulation,  hinder  the  child  from  gaining  strength,  and  affect  its  constitution.  .  .  . 
Is  it  possible  that  such  cruei  constraint  can  fail  to  affect  the  character  of  the  child, 
as  well  as  its  physical  temperament?  Its  first  conscious  feeling  is  a  feeling  of  pain 
and  suffering.  It  finds  nothing  but  hindrances  to  the  motions  which  it  craves. 
More  wretched  than  a  criminal  in  irons,  it  frets  and  cries.  The  first  gifts  H 
receives  are  fetters ;  the  first  treatment  it  experiences  is  torture."  Such  was  the 
practice  of  a  hundred  years  ago  in  the  highest  families  of  the  most  civilized 
country  in  the  world.  In  many  lands,  partly  owing  to  this  very  protest,  the 
practice  is  better  now.  But  in  the  slow-going  East  the  common  practice  of  the 
nursery  is  no  better,  and  it  is  probably  no  worse  than  it  was  nineteen  hundred 
years  ago.  But  it  is  worse  than  anything  we  ever  see  or  hear  of  in  this  part  of  the 
world.  In  fact,  it  comes  nearer  to  the  binding  of  an  Indian  papoose  to  a  board, 
than  to  anything  that  we  are  accustomed  to  see  in  the  families  of  Christendom. 
Once  wound  around  with  these  swathing-bands,  sometimes  with  an  addition  of 
fresh  earth  against  the  skin,  and  packed  in  their  cradles  like  a  little  mummy  in  its 
coffin,  the  poor  little  babies  are  expected  to  stay  there,  all  cries  and  complaints 
notwithstanding ;  they  are  not  removed  by  their  mothers  even  for  such  necessary 
occasions  as  to  be  fed.  I  have  heard  pitiful  stories  told  by  missionaries'  wives, 
and  by  missionary  physicians,  in  the  East,  of  the  sufferings  of  little  infants  in 
consequence  of  the  obstinate  persistence  of  parents  in  a  usage  which  we  clearly  see 
to  be  so  unreasonable  and  unnatural.  {Leonard  W.  Bacon.)  The  sign  of  the 
twaddling  clothes : — Is  it  not  strange,  you  will  ask,  that  when  the  shepherds  were 
given  a  sign  by  which  they  should  know  their  new-born  Saviour,  they  should  be 
told,  not  of  something  distinguishing  BUm  from  all  children  beside,  but  of  some- 
thing common  to  all  the  infants  that  were  bom  that  night  in  all  Judea  ?  •'  Ye 
shall  find  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes."  Why  not  say,  according  to  the  instincts 
of  heathen  mythology.  Ye  shall  know  Him  by  the  bees  that  gather  to  suck  the 
honey  of  His  lips,  or  the  strangled  serpents  that  lie  about  His  cradle  ?  Why  not 
say,  according  to  the  suggestions  of  Christian  legend  and  art.  Ye  shall  know  Him 
by  the  aspect  of  supernatural  majesty,  which  it  shall  be  the  dream  and  the  dis- 
appointment of  all  the  world's  artists  to  attempt  to  portray  ?  Or,  Ye  shall  know 
Him  by  the  halo  of  celestial  light  beaming  from  His  brow,  as  in  the  "  Holy 
Nig^t "  of  Correggio,  and  filling  the  rude  stall  with  an  unearthly  brightness  ?  Or, 
Ye  shall  know  Him  by  some  accessories  worthy  of  so  royal  a  birth,  by  gifts  of  gold 
and  myrrh  and  frankincense  that  strew  the  humble  shed?  The  very  question 
brings  its  answer :  You  are  to  know  Him  from  all  these  natural  dreams  of  a  fond 
imagination,  from  the  hopeful  prognostications  of  Hebrew  mothers,  or  the 
impatient  fancies  of  fanatics,  or  the  artful  fictions  of  impostors  taking  advantage 
of  the  general  expectation  with  which  the  very  atmosphere  of  Palestine  was 
saturated,  to  set  forth  some  feigned  Messiah — you  are  to  know  Him  from  all  these 
by  the  fact  that  He  is  just  the  opposite  of  all  such  imaginings — that  He  is  to  all 
appearance  just  a  helpless  human  infant,  the  most  helpless  thing  in  the 
whole  creation,  bound  and  bandaged  in  swaddling  clothes.  And  if  you 
would  know  how  to  distinguish  Him  from  other  such,  it  is  not  by  His 
grandeur  but  by  His  poverty.  There  is  no  room  in  the  inn  for  such  as 
He ;  and  they  have  laid  Him  in  the  manger,  among  the  cattle.  •  .  .  The  sign 
given  to  the  shepherds  is  a  sign  also  to  us — that  we  find  the  Holy  Child  wrapped 
in  Bwaddling  clothes.  Illustrious  men  have  sometimes  had  an  honest  pride  in 
inscribing  upon  their  escutchon,  beneath  a  noble  crest,  the  symbol  of  the  humble 
mechiMiic  rank  in  which  they  had  their  origin.     So  the  Church  of  Christ,  beneath 


16»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  n. 

the  diadem  of  supreme  royalty,  quarters  upon  its  shield,  beside  the  cross  and  the 
thongs,  the  manger  and  the  swaddling  bauds,  and  invites  the  world  to  read  the 
blazon.  That  family  group  which  the  painters  of  every  later  age  have  been  essay- 
ing to  depict — the  carpenter  with  his  simple,  uninquisitive  faith  obedient  to 
heavenly  visions,  the  pure  Virgin  with  her  unskilled  maiden  tenderness 
pondering  strange  memories  in  her  heart,  both  leaning  over  the  Wonderful, 
but  understanding  not  the  saying  which  He  speaks  to  them — these  speak 
over  again  to  us  the  language  of  that  prophet  who  first  called  his  child 
••  Immanuel,"  "  Behold  we  and  the  Child  whom  the  Lord  hath  given  U3 
are  for  signs  and  for  wonders  from  the  Lord  of  hosts."  (Ibid.)  Natural- 
ness of  the  truly  great:— To  illustrate  the  use  of  such  a  sign  as  was  given  to 
the  shepherds,  let  me  suppose  some  traveller  accustomed  to  the  splendour  and 
reserve  of  royal  courts  visiting  the  city  of  Washington,  and  asking,  on  his  way  to 
the  White  House,  how  he  should  find  the  President.  We  should  tell  him,  "You 
may  know  him  by  this  sign.  He  is  a  plain  man,  plainly  dressed  in  a  black  suit, 
and  you  will  find  him  in  the  centre  of  the  thickest  crowd,  and  everybody  coming 
up  to  shake  hands  with  him.  First,  he  is  not  distinguished  in  the  way  you  expect 
him  to  be ;  and,  secondly,  he  is  unmistakably  distinguished  in  just  the  opposite 
way."  But  for  some  such  "sign"  as  this  our  traveller  might  naturally  mistake 
for  the  President  some  attacM  of  a  South  American  Embassy  standing  apart  in  a 
halo  of  dignity  and  a  light  bla^e  of  gold  lace.  This  "  wrapped  in  swaddling-clothea 
and  lying  in  a  manger  "  was  just  the  sign  the  shepherds  needed.  And  we  do  well 
if,  looking  for  the  Christ,  we  take  heed  to  it  ourselves.  We  are  not  yet  safe  from 
the  error  of  them  of  old  time,  who  thought  to  find  the  Lord  clothed  in  soft 
raiment  and  dwelling  in  king's  palaces.  (Ibid.)  Christ's  humility: — In  Hia 
nativity,  and  in  His  temptation  (Mark  i.  13),  Christ  was  among  beasts.  Believers, 
ambitious  of  high  place,  forget  tneir  Master's  cradle,  A  manger  is  here  honoured 
above  a  thousand  glittering  thrones.  It  is  an  ornament  of  His  royalty,  a  throne  of 
His  glory.  He  comes  in  humility ;  He  reigns  in  humility ;  He  leads  by  humility. 
The  manger  and  the  cross  are  stumbling-blocks  to  many.  His  infancy  and  death 
are  still  rocks,  wrecking  human  pride.  (Van  Doren.)  The  sign  of  the  Incarna- 
tion : — Christmas  is  full  of  surprises.  It  brings  in,  as  no  other  event  ever  did, 
the  element  of  mystery,  of  wonder.  Its  testimony  is,  God  became  manifest  in  the 
flesh.  The  Eternal  Word  was  joined  with  a  perfect  human  nature.  "The  miracle 
of  the  Incarnation  transcends  every  other  that  has  been  and  will  be  wrought.  It 
is  in  itself  a  wonder  so  great  that  all  the  accompaniments  of  the  birth  of  Jesus 
sink  into  comparative  insignificance.  We  are,  I  fear,  inclined  to  forget  the 
majesty  of  the  fact  in  the  strangeness  of  its  surroundings.  We  count  it  a 
wonderful  thing  that  He  should  have  been  born  in  the  stable  of  a  country  inn, 
whereas  the  real  wonder  is  that  such  a  birth  should  take  place  anywhere,  and  so  I 
ask  you  to  contemplate  one  of  the  signs  by  which  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem 
were  to  find  and  know  the  incarnate  God — "  Ye  shaU  find  the  babe  wrapped  in 
swaddling  clothes."  I.  It  reminds  us,  by  way  of  analogy,  of  a  fact  which 
constitutes  the  most  trying  element  in  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  namely,  that 
God  thebkby  came  within  certain  limitations.  How  an  uncreated  and  omni- 
present, that  is,  a  boundless.  Infinite  Being  could  be  contracted  within  the  circum- 
ference of  a  himian  life  is  the  most  puzzling  problem  of  revelation.  The 
impossibility  of  our  understanding  this  is  a  temptation,  not  perhaps  to  deny,  but 
to  forget  the  deeper  meaning  of  the  Christmas  feast.  Bemember,  then,  that 
within  these  swathing  bands  which  encircled  the  infant  form  of  Jesus  there  was 
bound  the  nature  of  a  Being  more  than  human,  even  God  Himself.  Men  may  call 
this  an  unreasonable  tax  upon  our  faith.  It  is  rather  a  sign  of  God's  condescen- 
sion to  human  weakness.  The  whole  secret  of  the  history  of  idolatry  among  the 
Jews  and  the  Gentiles  was  a  longing  for  some  visible  manifestation  of  Him  whom 
they  felt  they  must  worship.  Man  instinctively  longs  for  some  incarnate  form, 
some  Word  of  his  Maker  manifest  in  the  flesh,  some  finite  manifestation  of  the 
Infinite  Father.  And  the  birth  of  Jesus,  the  enshrining  of  God  within  a  human 
form,  the  swathing  of  that  power,  which  otherwise  knows  no  bounds,  was  but  an 
answer  to  man's  desire.  II.  The  sign  holds  good,  not  only  of  the  nature  of  Christ, 
but  likewise  of  the  life  which,  fkom  first  to  last,  He  lived.  That  also  was 
like  every  purely  human  life,  hemmed  in.  It  unfolded  according  to  the  ordinary 
laws  of  growth.  His  babyhood  was  as  real  as  His  manhood.  He  increased  in 
wisdom  as  well  as  stature.  He  learned  gradually  the  wisdom  which  all  the  world 
now  confesses.    The  common  idea  which  people  have  of  Jesus  is  that,  being 


CHAP.  II.]  ST.  LUKE.  ]fiS 

Divine,  He  was  exempt  from  the  ordinary  conditions  of  common  men ;  that  He 
never  knew  constraint ;  that  there  were  no  barriers  opposing  Him,  no  bands 
lettering  the  free  exercise  of  that  Divine  power  which  lay  hidden  within 
Him.  Yet  duty  was  sometimes  hard  for  Him.  He  longed  to  do  things  which  He 
might  not  attempt,  because  the  higher  and  more  spiritual  dictates  of  His  con- 
science forbade  it.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  and  their  glory  looked  as  fair  and 
tempting  to  His  soul  as  they  do  to  ours.  But  the  law  of  righteousness,  the 
Bwathing-bands  of  duty,  the  rules  of  obedience  which  God  throws  around  us, 
likewise  constrained  Him.  IH.  The  manner  of  the  Incarnation  shows  God's 
ESTIMATE  OF  HUMAN  NATDBB.  If  you  are  ever  tempted  to  despise  human  nature 
because  you  see  it  now  and  then  wearing  disagreeable  phases,  or  to  think  ill  of, 
nay,  to  slight,  your  friends,  remember  God's  estimate  of  them.  He  does  not 
thus  stoop  and  toil  to  save  the  worthless.  From  being  a  King  He  descended  to 
the  lowest  form  of  human  life,  entered  the  world  in  utter  helplessness,  was 
wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes,  and  during  all  His  development  here  on  earth 
never  rose  above  that  form  of  a  servant  which  He  had  taken.  And  He  did  all 
this,  because  even  fallen  man  was  dearer  to  His  heart  than  the  world  of  lost 
angels.  {E.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Great  things  from  small  beginnings  : — Not,  Ye 
shall  find  the  angel  in  the  heavens,  the  king  on  his  throne,  the  young  prince  in  a 
palace,  the  commander  at  the  head  of  his  armies,  but  "the  babe  in  a  manger." 
How  strange  are  God's  ways  of  working  out  His  strange  plans  I  It  is  not  by 
might,  nor  by  power,  that  His  agencies  accomplish  their  vast  work.  The  least 
things  are  often  the  greatest  in  His  providence  (1  Cor.  i.  27-29).  It  may  be  tha 
shepherd  boy  with  his  sling  who  gains  victory  over  the  mailed  giant  in  whose 
presence  the  whole  army  of  Israel  stands  trembling ;  it  may  be  the  tinker  in 
Bedford  Jail  who  writes  a  masterpiece  in  religious  literature,  to  be  honoured  for 
centuries  for  its  work  and  its  worth  ;  it  may  be  the  unschooled  clerk  from  a 
Boston  shoe-store  who  proclaims  the  gospel  with  a  fervency  and  power  which 
the  best-cultured  divines  of  all  Christendom  have  not  attaiued  to ;  or  it  may  be 
in  the  most  unprepossessing  child  of  your  school  or  class  that  the  grandest 
possibilities  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  to-day  lie  hid.  {H.  C.  Tnimbull.)  The 
fitness  of  the  sign: — "  This  shall  be  the  sign,"  saith  the  angel.  "  Shall  be"  ;  but 
should  it  be  this  ?  No ;  how  should  it  be  ?  Let  us  see.  Why,  this  shall  be  the 
sign ;  ye  shall  find  the  Child,  not  in  these  clouts  or  cratch,  but  in  a  crimson 
mantle,  in  a  cradle  of  ivory.  That,  lo,  were  somewhat  Saviour-like  1  But  in  vain 
take  we  upon  us  to  teach  the  angel ;  we  would  have — we  know  not  what.  We 
forget  St.  Augustine's  distingue  tempora  ;  as  the  time  is  the  angel  is  right,  and  a 
fitter  sign  could  not  be  assigned.  Would  we  have  had  Him  come  in  power  and 
great  glory  ?  and  so  He  will  come,  but  not  now.  He  that  cometh  here  in  clouts 
will  one  day  come  in  the  clouds.  But  now  His  coming  was  for  another  end,  and 
so  to  be  in  another  manner.  His  coming  now  was  "  to  visit  us  in  great 
humility,"  and  so  His  sign  to  be  according.  Nay,  then,  I  say,  first  go  to  tha 
nature  of  a  sign ;  if  Christ  had  come  in  His  excellency,  that  had  been  no  sign, 
no  more  than  the  sun  in  the  firmament  shining  in  his  full  strength.  Contrary  to 
the  course  of  nature  it  must  be,  else  it  is  no  sign.  The  sun  eclipsed,  the  sun  in 
sackcloth ;  that  is  signum  in  sole,  "  the  sign  indeed  "  (Luke  xxi.  25).  And  that  ia 
the  sign  here :  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  entering  into  His  eclipse  begins  to  be 
darkened  in  His  first  point,  the  point  of  His  nativity.  This  is  the  sign,  say  I, 
and  that  had  been  none.      (Bishop  Lancelot  Andrewes.)  The  sign  nothing  ;  the 

treasure  all : — Make  of  the  sign  what  ye  will ;  it  skills  not  what  it  be,  never  so 
mean.  In  the  nature  of  a  sign  there  is  nothing,  but  it  may  be  such  ;  all  is  in  the 
thing  signified.  So  it  carry  us  to  a  rich  signatum,  and  worth  the  finding,  what 
matter  how  mean  the  sign  be  ?  We  are  sent  to  a  crib,  not  to  an  empty  crib ; 
Christ  is  in  it.  Be  the  sign  never  so  simple,  the  signatum  it  carries  us  to  make! 
amends.  Any  sign  with  such  a  signatum.  And  I  know  not  the  man  so  squeamish, 
but  if,  in  his  stable  and  under  his  manger,  there  were  a  treasure  hid,  and  he  were 
sure  of  it,  but  thither  he  would,  and  pluck  up  the  planks,  and  dig  and  rake  for  it, 
and  be  never  a  whit  offended  with  the  homeliness  of  the  place.  If,  then,  Christ  be  a 
treasure,  as  in  Him  are  "  all  the  treasures  of  the  wisdom  and  bounty  of  God," 
what  skills  it  what  be  His  sign.  With  this,  with  any  other,  Christ  is  worth  the 
finding.  He  is  not  worthy  of  Christ  who  will  not  go  anywhither  to  find  Christ. 
(Ibid.)  Christ  born  in  a  manger : — At  midnight  from  one  of  the  galleries  of  the 

sky  a  chant  broke  forth.  To  an  ordinary  observer  there  was  no  reason  for  such  a 
celestial  dunonstration.    If  there  had  been  such  brilliant  and  mighty  recognitluu 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  n. 

at  an  advent  in  the  House  of  Pharaoh,  or  at  an  advent  in  the  Honse  of  Caesar, 
or  the  House  of  Hapsburg,  or  the  House  of  Stuart,  we  would  not  so  much  have 
wondered  ;  but  a  barn  seems  too  poor  a  centre  for  such  delicate  and  archangelio 
circumference.  The  stage  seems  too  small  for  bo  great  an  act,  the  music  too 
grand  for  such  unappreciative  auditors,  the  windows  of  the  stable  too  rude  to  be 
serenaded  by  other  worlds.  I.  That  night  in  the  Bethlehem  manoeb  was  bobs 
ENCOUEAOEMENT  FOB  AiiL  THE  POORLY  STARTED.  Ho  had  Only  two  frieuds — they 
His  parents.  No  satin-lined  cradle,  no  delicate  attentions,  but  straw  and  the 
cattle,  and  the  coarse  joke  and  banter  of  the  camel  drivers.  From  the  depths  of 
that  poverty  He  rose,  until  to-day  He  is  honoured  in  all  Christendom,  and  sita  on 
the  imperial  throne  in  heaven.  Do  you  know  that  the  vast  majority  of  the  world's 
deliverers  had  barnlike  birthplaces  ?  Luther,  the  emancipator  of  religion,  bom 
among  the  mines.  Shakespeare,  the  emancipator  of  literature,  born  in  a  humble 
home  at  Stratford-on-Avon.  Columbus,  the  discoverer  of  a  world,  bom  in  poverty 
at  Genoa.  Hogarth,  the  discoverer  of  how  to  make  art  accumulative  and  adminis- 
trative of  virtue,  born  in  a  humble  home  at  Westminster.  Eitto  and  Prideaux, 
whose  keys  unlocked  new  apartments  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  which  had  never 
been  entered,  born  in  want.  Tea,  I  have  to  tell  you  that  nine  out  of  ten  of 
the  world's  deliverers  were  bom  in  want.  I  stir  your  holy  ambitions  to-day,  and 
I  want  to  tell  you,  although  the  whole  world  may  be  opposed  to  you,  and  inside 
and  outside  of  your  occupations  or  professions  there  may  be  those  who  would 
hinder  your  ascent,  on  your  side  and  enlisted  in  your  behalf  are  the  sympathetic 
heart  and  the  almighty  arm  of  One  who,  one  Christmas  night  about  eighteen 
hundred  and  eighty  years  ago,  was  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes  and  laid  in  a 
manger.  Oh,  what  magnificent  encouragement  for  the  poorly  started  I  II. 
Again,  I  have  to  tell  you  that  in  that  village  barn  that  night  was  bobn  good- 
will TO  MEN,  whether  you  call  it  kindness,  or  forbearance,  or  forgiveness,  or 
geniality,  or  affection,  or  love.  It  says,  *'  Sheathe  your  swords,  dismount  your 
guns,  dismantle  your  batteries,  turn  the  warship  Constellation,  that  carried  shot 
and  shell,  into  a  grain  ship  to  take  food  to  famishing  Ireland,  hook  your  cavalry 
horses  to  the  plough,  use  your  deadly  gunpowder  in  blasting  rocks  and  in 
patriotic  celebration,  stop  your  lawsuits,  quit  writing  anonymous  letters,  extract 
the  sting  frorii  your  sarcasm,  let  your  wit  coruscate  but  never  burn,  drop  all  the 
harsh  words  out  of  your  vocabulary — Goodwill  to  men."  III.  Again,  I  remark 
that  BORN  that  Chbistmas  night  in  the  village  baen  was  sympathetic  union 
WITH  OTHER  WORLDS.  Move  that  supernatural  grouping  of  the  cloud  banks  over 
Bethlehem,  and  from  the  special  trains  that  ran  down  to  the  scene  I  find  that  our 
world  is  beautjiuUy  and  gloriously  and  magnificently  surrounded.  The  meteors 
are  with  us,  for  one  of  them  ran  to  point  down  to  the  birthplace.  The  heavens 
are  with  us,  because  at  the  thought  of  our  redemption  they  roll  hosannas  out  of 
the  midnight  sky.  IV.  Agiain,  I  remark  that  that  night  bobn  in  that  villagk 
BABN  WAS  the  OFFENDER'S  HOPE.  Some  sermouizers  may  say  I  ought  to  have  pro- 
jected this  thought  at  the  beginning  of  the  sermon.  Oh,  no !  I  wanted  you  to 
rise  toward  it.  I  wanted  you  to  examine  the  cornelians  and  the  jaspers  and  the 
emeralds  and  the  sardonyx  before  I  showed  you  the  Kohinoor — the  crown  jewel  of 
the  ages.  Oh,  that  jewel  had  a  very  poor  setting !  The  cub  of  the  bear  is  bom 
amid  the  grand  old  pillars  of  the  forest,  the  whelp  of  a  lion  takes  its  first  step 
from  the  jungle  of  luxuriant  leaf  and  wild  flower,  the  kid  of  the  goat  is  bom  in 
cavern  chandeliered  with  stalactite  and  pillared  with  stalagmite.  Christ  was  bom 
in  a  bare  barn.  Yet  that  nativity  was  the  offender's  hope.  Over  the  door  of 
heaven  are  written  these  words,  "None  but  the  sinless  may  enter  here."  "Oh, 
horror,"  you  say,  "  that  shuts  us  out  1 "  No.  Christ  came  to  the  world  in  one 
door,  and  He  departed  through  another  door.  He  came  through  the  door  of  the 
manger,  and  He  departed  through  the  door  of  the  sepulchre ;  and  His  one  busi- 
ness was  so  to  wash  away  our  sin  that  after  we  are  dead  there  will  be  no  more 
sin  about  us  than  about  the  eternal  God.  I  know  that  is  putting  it  strongly, 
but  that  is  what  I  understand  by  full  remission.  All  erased,  all  washed  away,  all 
scoured  out,  all  gone.  Oh !  now  I  see  what  the  manger  was.  Not  so  high  the 
gilded  and  jewelled  and  embroidered  cradle  of  the  Henrys  of  England,  or  the 
Louis  of  France,  or  the  Fredericks  of  Prussia.  Now  I  find  out  that  that  Beth- 
lehem crib  fed  not  so  much  the  oxen  of  the  stall  as  the  white  horses  of  Apocalyptio 
vision.  Now  I  find  the  swaddling  clothes  enlarging  and  emblazing  into  an 
imperial  robe  for  a  conqueror.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  The  Child  in  the  manger : — L 
Learn  from  this  story  of  the  birth  of  Jesus,  in  the  first  place,  that  indigekob  m 


81IAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  163 

HOT  ALWAYS  siGNH'iCANT  OJ  DEGRADATION.  WheH  princes  are  bom,  heralds  pro- 
elaim  it,  and  flags  wave  it,  and  cannon  thunder  it,  and  illuminations  set  cities 
on  fire  with  the  tidings  ;  but  when  Christ  was  born  there  was  no  demonstration  of 
earthly  honour  or  homage.  Poor,  and,  if  possible,  getting  poorer,  and  ret  the 
recognition  of  the  angel  host  proves  the  truth  of  the  proposition  that  indigence 
is  no  sign  of  degradation.  In  all  ages  of  the  world  there  have  been  great 
hearts  throbbing  under  rags,  gentle  spirits  under  rough  exterior,  gold  in  the 
quartz,  Parian  marble  in  the  quarry,  and  in  the  very  stables  of  poverty  wonders 
of  excellence  that  have  been  the  joy  of  the  heavenly  host.  Poetry,  and  science, 
and  law,  and  constitutions,  and  commerce,  like  Christ,  were  born  in  a  manger. 
Great  thoughts  that  seem  to  have  been  the  axle-tree  on  which  the  centuries  turned, 
started  in  some  obscure  corner,  and  had  Herods  who  tried  to  slay  them,  and 
Iscariots  who  betrayed  them,  and  Pilates  who  unjustly  condemned  them,  and 
rabbles  who  crucified  them,  and  sepulchres  which  confined  them  until  they  broke 
forth  again  in  glorious  resurrection.  Men  are,  like  wheat,  worth  all  the  more  for 
being  flailed.  Strong  character,  like  the  rhododendron,  is  an  alpine  plant  which 
grows  best  in  the  tempest.  There  are  a  great  many  men  who  are  now  standing  in 
the  front  rank  of  the  Church  of  God  who  would  have  been  utterly  useless  had 
they  not  been  ground  and  hammered  in  the  foundries  of  disaster.  II.  Again,  I 
learn  from  the  text  that  it  is  when  wb  ase  engaged  in  our  lawful  occupations 
THAT  WE  HAVE  DiviNE  MANIFESTATIONS  MADE  TO  US.  If  these  sheplieids  had  gone 
that  night  into  the  village,  and  risked  their  flocks  among  the  wolves,  they  would 
not  have  heard  the  song  of  the  angels.  In  other  words,  he  sees  most  of  God  and 
heaven  who  minds  his  own  business !  We  are  all  shepherds,  and  we  have  large 
flocks  of  cares,  and  we  must  tend  them.  I  know  there  are  a  great  many  busy  men  who 
say,  "  Oh,  if  1  had  only  time,  I  would  be  good.  If  I  had  the  days  and  the  months 
and  the  years  to  devote  to  the  subject  of  religion,  I  should  be  one  of  the  best  of 
Christians."  A  great  mistake  are  you  making.  The  busiest  men  are  generally  the 
best  men.  There  is  no  point  from  which  you  can  get  clearer  views  of  duty  than 
at  the  merchant's  counter,  or  the  accountant's  table,  or  on  the  mason's  wall.  III. 
Again,  the  story  of  the  text  strikes  at  the  popular  fallacy  that  the  religion 
OP  Christ  is  dolorous  and  grief-infusing.  The  music  that  broke  through  that 
famous  birth-night  was  not  a  dirge,  but  an  anthem.  It  shook  joy  over  the  mid- 
night hills.  It  not  only  dropped  among  the  shepherds,  but  it  sprang  upward 
among  the  thrones.  The  robe  of  righteousness  is  not  black.  The  religious  life  is 
not  all  weeping  and  sighing,  and  crobs-bearing  and  warfare.  Christianity  does  not 
frown  on  amusements  and  recreations.  It  quenches  no  light.  It  defaces  no  heart. 
Among  the  happy  it  is  the  happiest.  Heaven  itself  is  only  a  warmer  love  and  a 
brighter  joy,  IV  Again,  I  learn  from  this  subject,  what  glorious  enpixgs  comb 
FROM  SMALL  AND  INSIGNIFICANT  BEGINNINGS.  The  New  Testament  Church  was  on  a 
small  scale.  The  fishermen  watched  it.  Small  beginnings,  but  glorious  endings. 
A  throne  linked  to  a  manger.  Mansions  of  light  at  God's  right  hand  associated 
with  stables  of  poverty.  V.  I  learn,  finally,  from  this  story  of  the  birth  of  Christ, 
THE  GLORIOUS  RESULT  OF  A  Saviour's  MISSION.  Havc  you  ever  thought  how  strangely 
this  song  of  peace  must  have  sounded  to  the  Pioman  Empire  ?  Why,  that  Koman 
Empire  gloried  in  its  arms,  and  boasted  of  the  number  of  men  it  had  slain,  and 
with  triumph  looked  at  conquered  provinces.  Sicily,  Sardinia,  Corsica,  Macedonia, 
Egj'pt,  had  bowed  to  her  sword,  and  crouched  at  the  cry  of  her  war  eagles.  Their 
highest  honours  had  been  bestowed  upon  Fabius  and  Scipio  and  CiBsar.  It  was 
men  of  blood  and  carnage  that  they  honoured.  With  what  conieiupt  they  must 
have  looked  upon  a  kingdom  the  chief  principle  of  which  was  to  be  ^roodwill  to  men, 
and  upon  the  unarmed,  penniless  Christ,  who,  in  Nazarene  garb,  was  about  to 
start  out  for  the  conquest  of  the  nations.  If  all  the  blood  which  has  been  shed  iu 
battle  were  gathered  together  in  one  great  lake,  it  would  bear  up  a  navy.  The 
blow  that  struck  Abel  into  the  dust  has  had  its  echo  in  the  carnage  of  all  the 
centuries.  If  we  could  take  our  stand  on  soiue  high  mountain  of  earth,  and  ha've 
all  the  armies  of  other  a^es  pass  along,  what  a  sp^ctacle  !  There  go  the  hosts  of 
the  Israelites  throiigli  scores  of  Pied  Seas,  one  of  them  of  water,  the  rest  of  blood. 
There  go  the  armies  of  Cyrus,  lifting  their  infuriate  yell  over  prostrate  Babylon. 
There  goes  Alexander,  with  his  innumerable  host,  conquering  all  but  himself,  and 
snaking  the  earth  to  reel  under  the  battle  gash  of  Persepolis  and  Chaeronia.  "rhera 
goes  the  great  Frenchman,  down  through  Egvpt  like  one  of  its  own  plagues,  and  up 
through  Eussia  like  one  of  its  own  ice-blasts.  Host  after  host.  Tramp,  tramp, 
tramp.     Coming  down  to  our  day,  I  appeal  to  the  grave-trench  under  the  shadow 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


of  Sebastopol,  and  ttrniug  to  India  I  show  you  fallen  Delhi,  and  Allahabad,  and 
the  inhuman  Sepoys,  and  the  regiments  of  Havelock  avenging  the  insulted  flag  of 
Great  Britain.  On  this,  the  day  before  Christmas,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  ol 
great  joy.  A  Saviour  for  the  lost.  Medicine  for  the  sick.  Light  for  the  blind. 
Harbour  for  the  bestormed.    Eternal  life  for  the  dead.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  With  the  angel  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host. — Tlie  angeV$  $ong : — 
I.  Consider  the  passage  as  it  lies  before  us  in  the  history.  II.  Make  bomb 
PBACTiCAL  remarks  UPON  THE  SUBJECT.  1.  If  this  be  the  song  and  taste  and  senti- 
ment of  heaven,  what  is  the  taste  and  sentiment  of  the  men  of  the  earth  who  call 
themselves  wise,  and  call  us  fools  for  believing  the  Bible?  2.  We  learn  from  the 
Bong  that  no  goodwill  from  heaven  can  be  communicated  to  man,  nor  any  peace  on 
earth,  but  what  is  consistent  with  the  glory  of  God.  3.  Herein  are  afforded  suffi- 
cient encouragement  and  direction  to  every  believing  heart.  (R.  Cecil,  M.A.) 
A  multitude  of  the  lieavenly  host : — In  that  distant  age,  as  by  no  means  since,  the 
ministry  of  angels  was  familiar  to  the  human  mind — was  required  to  answer,  in  fact, 
the  necessities  of  human  thought.  On  occasions  infinitely  less  important  than  the 
birth  of  One  whose  name  should  be  called  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  the  angels  then  came 
and  went  in  the  universe  freely,  because  in  miud  and  for  mind  the  universe  was 
what  it  was.  Since  then  not  one  has  come.  So  the  impression  made  then  by  ita 
being  said  that  this  event  was  made  illustrious  by  the  attendance  of  a  multitude  of 
the  heavenly  host,  and  that  which  is  made  now,  cannot  be  wholly  the  same. 
With  all  our  ideas  of  the  universe,  it  is  infinitely  more  wonderful  now  than  it  waa 
then.  As  it  is  so  much  more  wonderful,  it  is  so  much  more  difficult  to  realize  in 
thought.  And  so  it  is  with  reference  to  all  else  that  is  wonderful  in  the  story  ol 
that  birth  to  which  the  thoughts  of  the  best  part  of  the  human  race  go  back  as  to 
no  other  event  in  all  human  history.  The  modes  of  thought  and  of  expression 
with  regard  to  all  that  are  unchanged  by  the  lapse  of  ages — in  the  letter  unchanged 
— but  are  they  actually  the  same  in  spirit  to  us  as  they  were  in  another  age  under 
cruder  and  almost  opposite  conditions  of  human  thought  ?  So  shadowy  has  the 
angelic  host  become  to  mortal  men  now,  to  whom  in  their  direst  need  or  in  their 
loftiest  ecstasies  no  angels  come,  that  the  joy  of  that  angelic  host  over  the  birth  ol 
the  Saviour  of  mankind,  so  far  from  communicating  itself  to  the  Christian  world  of 
to-day,  as  it  did  once,  is  never  felt  save  at  Christmas,  and  then  it  would  be  hard  to 
say  by  whom.  This  is  not  as  it  should  be.  To  the  thought  of  Christian  men  and 
women  eighteen  centuries  ago  the  angelic  host  and  their  joy  were  real.  Why 
should  they  not  be  so  to  our  thought  too  ?  That  these  men  and  women  were  even 
as  we  are  is  the  key  to  all  history.  With  all  that  there  is  in  Qur  modern  modes  ol 
thought  to  make  tiae  supernatural  seem  to  us  in  fact,  however  it  may  be  in  name,  on© 
and  the  same  thing  with  the  incredible  or  faintly  believed — with  all  that  there  is  ol 
this  in  our  modern  modes  of  thought,  that  which  is  in  them,  too,  of  a  powerful 
apprehension  of  the  idea  of  Christ's  life  as  the  most  signal  manifestation  of  the 
Divine,  is  enough,  if  it  be  only  well  and  truly  considered,  to  make  the  angelic  host 
and  their  song  as  real  to  us  as  ever  they  were  to  any  generation  of  men — much 
more  real,  at  any  rate,  than  they  have  been  to  many  in  this  generation.  {J. 
Service,  D.D.)  Music  : — Music  has  been  called  the  speech  of  angels.  I  will  go 
further  and  call  it  the  speech  of  God  Himself.  Without  words  it  is  wonderful — 
blessed — one  of  God's  best  gifts  to  men.  But  in  singing  you  have  both  the  wonders 
together,  music  and  words.  Why  is  there  music  in  heaven  ?  Because  in  musio 
there  is  no  self-will.  It  goes  on  certain  laws  and  rules  which  man  did  not  make, 
but  has  only  found  out.  Music  is  a  pattern  of  the  everlasting  life  of  heaven, 
because  in  heaven,  as  in  music,  is  perfect  freedom  and  perfect  pleasure ;  and  yet 
that  freedom  comes  not  from  throwing  away  law,  but  from  obeying  God's  law 
perfectly ;  and  that  pleasure  comes  not  from  a  self-will,  and  doiug  each  what  he 
likes,  but  from  perfectly  doing  the  will  of  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  And  that 
in  itself  would  be  sweet  music,  even  if  there  were  neither  voice  nor  sound  in 
heaven.  Some  of  us  may  not  be  able  to  make  music  with  our  voices  ;  but  we  can 
make  it  with  our  hearts,  and  join  in  the  angel's  song  this  day,  if  not  with  our  Hps, 
yet  in  our  lives.  Christmas  has  always  been  a  day  of  songa,  of  carols,  and  ol 
nymns ;  and  so  let  it  be  for  ever.  For  on  Christmas  Day,  most  of  all  days  (if  I 
may  talk  of  eternal  things  according  to  the  laws  of  time)  was  manifested  on  earth 
the  everlasting  music  which  was  in  heaven.  {Charles  Kingsley.)  Suddenly,  or 
tpirit  and  understanding : — There  are  two  classes  of  persons  between  whom  • 
mutual  distrust  exists,  because  they  fail  to  appreciate  each  other's  attitude  towazil 


«HAr.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  167 

the  events  of  the  nniverse.  I.  The  first  class  expects  all  things  to  come  to  pass 
gradually,  so  that  their  courses  may  be  traced.  The  motive  of  this  class  is  intel- 
lectual ;  the  mind  wants  to  correlate  facts.  Sudden  transitions,  having  been 
hitherto  supposed  to  argue  the  absence  of  natural  causes,  are  unwelcome  to  the 
scientific  mind,  II.  The  other  class  cares  little  for  natural  causes,  but  rather 
delights  in  things  supposed  to  be  unexplainable  by  any  but  extra-natural  interven- 
tions. It  knows  that  worship  is  the  highest  exercise  of  the  mind,  and  it  desirea 
sudden  and  mysterious  events  to  quicken  the  feeling  of  reverence.  III.  Between 
these  extremes  our  text  mediates  by  afiBrming  the  sudden  occurrences,  but  associ- 
ating them  by  a  copulative,  rather  than  an  adversative  conjunction  with  the  things 
that  went  before  them.  In  this  it  has  the  authority  of  many  scientific  men  (notably 
Dr.  Maudsley),  who  assert  that  there  are  indeed  leaps  and  sudden  changes  and 
specific  diiferences,  while  they  assign  them  to  natural  causes,  thus  contrasting 
them  only  with  other  events  and  things,  not  with  nature  as  a  whole,  and  connecting 
them  copulatively  instead  of  adversatively  with  other  phenomena.  Nor  does  thia 
destroy  the  value  of  such  events  as  calls  to  worship.  The  surprise  caused  by  a 
sudden  event  often  wakes  up  a  sleeping  sense  of  reverence  whether  the  event  is 
explainable  or  not,  God  means  to  surprise  us,  but  He  does  not  mean  to  put  us  to 
confusion.  The  scientific  mind  is  compelled  by  the  facts  to  concede  the  actual 
occurrence  of  sudden  and  surprising  events.  With  the  universe  full  of  God  the 
devout  mind  can  afford  to  concede  the  presumptive  universality  of  natural  causes. 
Science  has  kept  saying  ♦'  not  suddenly  ;  "  religion  has  reiterated  "  but  suddenly ;  " 
the  Bible  calmly  says  "  and  suddenly."  The  ' '  and  "  suits  science,  the  "  suddenly  " 
suits  religion.  Let  us  seek  to  be  devout  and  scientific  both,  and  sing  with  spirit 
and  understanding.  {American  Homiletie  Review.)  The  birth  of  our  Lord : — The 
manner  and  spirit  in  which  we  ought  to  spend  Christmas.  L  Let  us  asobibb 
6L0BT  TO  God.  The  Lord  incarnate  is  placed  before  us ;  the  Conqueror  of  Satan ; 
the  Saviour  of  man  is  thus  revealed.  Surely,  if  our  hearts  can  be  touched  by  the 
motive  of  gratitude  to  God  for  His  mercies,  we  must  feel  it  in  the  commemoration 
of  the  arrival  of  His  Son.  Surely  we  must  feel  some  inclination  this  day  to  join 
the  angelic  host  in  "  blessing,  praising,  and  magnifying  His  Holy  Name."  II.  Lkt 
us  SPBEAD  PEACE  ON  THE  EABTH.  All  auimositics  should  cease.  If  God  desire  to  be 
at  peace  with  us,  let  us  imitate  the  heavenly  pattern  set  us  at  Bethlehem.  All  is 
peace  in  heaven,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  promote  it  on  earth.  III.  Let  us  exebcisb 
GooDwiLii  TOWABDS  MEN.  IV.  Let  me  impress  upon  you  to  maintain,  when  this 
day  and  year  have  been  added  to  the  past,  and  even  to  the  end  of  your  lives,  thb 
SEVEBAii  qbaces  TO  WHICH  I  HAVE  ADVERTED.  Becoming  as  they  are  at  this  season, 
they  become  us  always.  (A.  Gatty,  M.A.)  The  song  of  the  angels : — I.  The  bono 
ITSELF.  I.  The  song  consists  of  a  proclamation  of  peace.  We  are  in  a  state  of 
hostility  and  alienation.  Not  an  easy  thing  to  restore  peace,  consistently  with  the 
Divine  nature  and  glory.  Not  only  is  the  birth  of  Christ  the  occasion  of  a  procla- 
mation of  peace  between  us  and  God,  but  it  restores  peace  to  our  own  mind. 
There  is  also  peace  made  with  oar  fellows  and  neighbours  and  kindred,  and  with 
the  whole  oreaturely  universe.  II.  The  sono  as  suno  on  this  occasion — that  is,  as 
sung  by  angels.  1.  They  are  the  most  intellectual  part  of  God's  creation ;  they 
have  the  purest  intellect.  2.  Observe  not  merely  their  intellectuality  by  their  dis- 
interestedness and  impartiality.  We  are  ourselves  interested  in  the  whole  affair ; 
not  so  with  them.  They  were  never  polluted.  3.  Tneir  unanimity  in  singing  it. 
There  was  no  jarring  string  in  that  song ;  no  dissenting  voice  in  that  harmony. 
Salvation  affects  heaven  as  well  as  earth.  Lessons :  1.  A  lesson  of  gratitute  to  God. 
2.  Kindness  to  each  other,  especially  the  poor.  (J.  Beaumont,  D.D.)  The  nativity 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — His  own  appearance  was  despicable ;  that  of  His 
retinue  was  most  magnificent.  He  who  was  the  ancient  of  days  became  a  helpless 
infant :  He  who  was  the  hght  of  the  sun,  comes  into  the  world  in  the  darkness  of 
the  night :  He  who  came  that  He  might  lay  as  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  is 
Himself  laid  in  the  manger  of  a  stable.  But  though  meanly  welcomed  on  earth, 
yet  heaven  makes  abundant  amends  for  all.    I.  For  the  first  it  is  said  that  ah 

INNDMEBABLB    COMPANY    OF    THE    HEAVENLY    HOST   PBAISED   GoD.      Strange   that    they 

should  make  this  day  of  heaven's  humiliation  their  festival  and  day  of  thanks- 
giving.  1.  The  holy  angels  rejoiced  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  because  it  gave  them 
occasion  to  testify  their  deepest  humility  and  subjection.  To  be  subject  to  Christ 
while  He  sat  upon  the  throne  of  His  kingdom,  arrayed  with  unapproachable  Hght, 
controlling  all  the  powers  of  heaven  with  a  beck,  was  no  more  than  His  infinite 
glory  exacted  from  them :  but  to  be  subject  to  Him  in  a  oratch,  when  He  hid  Bia 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

beams,  was  not  obedience  only  but  condescension.  Now  the  time  is  come  when 
they  may  express  their  fidelity  and  obedience  in  the  lowest  estate  of  their  Lord. 
2.  The  angels  rejoiced  at  the  birth  of  Christ  because  the  confirmation  of  that 
blessed  estate  of  grace  and  glory,  wherein  they  now  stand,  depended  upon  His 
incarnation.  The  government  of  all  creatures  is  laid  upon  His  shoulders.  He  is 
the  "  head  of  all  principality  and  power  "  (Col.  ii.  10 ;  Ephes,  i.  10).  The  Mediator 
confirms  them  in  their  holy  estate ;  therefore  they  rejoiced  at  the  birth  of  Christ, 
wherein  they  saw  the  Godhead  actually  united  to  the  human  nature ;  since  the 
merit  of  this  union,  long  before  that,  prevailed  for  their  happy  perseverance.  3. 
The  holy  angels  rejoiced  at  the  birth  of  Christ,  from  the  fervent  desire  they  have 
of  man's  salvation.  II.  What  this  angelical  bono  contains  in  it  ?  1.  God's 
glory.  God's  glory  is  of  two  sorts,  essential  and  declarative.  The  abasing  nativity 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  highest  advancement  of  God's  glory.  This  is  a  strange  riddle 
to  human  reason,  for  God  to  raise  His  glory  out  of  humiliation.  (1)  In  the  birth 
of  Christ  God  glorified  the  riches  of  His  infinite  wisdom.  This  was  a  contrivance 
that  would  never  have  entered  into  the  hearts  either  of  men  or  angels.  It  is  called 
the  wisdom  of  God  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  The  question  was  how  to  satisfy  justice  in  the 
punishment  of  sinners,  and  yet  to  gratify  mercy  in  their  pardon.  (2)  The  birth  of 
Christ  glorified  the  almighty  power  of  God.  Is  it  not  almighty  power  that  the 
infinite  Godhead  should  unite  to  itself  dust  and  ashes,  and  be  so  closely  united, 
that  it  should  grow  into  one  and  the  same  person.  (3)  By  the  birth  of  Christ  God 
glorified  the  severity  of  His  justice.  His  Son  must  rather  take  flesh  and  die  than 
that  this  attribute  should  remain  unsatisfied.  (4)  By  the  birth  of  Christ  the  truth 
and  veracity  of  God  is  eminently  glorified,  by  fulfilling  many  promises  and  predic- 
tions. (5)  The  birth  of  Christ  glorifies  the  infinite  purity  and  holiness  of  God. 
(6)  Hereby  the  infinite  love  and  pity  of  God  are  eminently  glorified.  2.  Peace  on 
earth.  (1)  Peace  mutually,  between  man  and  man.  (2)  Peace  internally,  with  a 
man's  self,  in  the  region  of  his  own  spirit  and  conscience.  (3)  Peace  with  God. 
Christ  was  sent  into  this  world  as  a  minister  of  peace,  as  a  mediator  of  peace,  (a) 
All  the  precepts  of  His  doctrine  do  directly  tend  to  the  establishing  of  peace  among 
men.  Christianity  teaches  us  not  to  offer  any  injury  to  others.  Christ  forbids 
private  revenge  and  retaliating  of  wrongs.  (6)  The  examples  of  Christ  all  tend  to 
peace.  But  Christ  says  (Matt.  x.  34,  35),  we  must  distinguish  between  the  direct 
end  of  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  and  the  accidental  issue  of  it.  3.  The 
infinite  love  and  goodwill  that  God  hath  shown  towards  men.  (1)  If  you  consider 
the  Person  sent,  this  will  exalt  the  goodness  of  God  toward  us.  He  lay  under  no 
necessity  of  saving  us.  (2)  Consider  the  manner  and  circumstances  of  Christ's 
coming  into  the  world,  then  will  appear  the  infinite  love  and  goodwill  of  God.  That 
Christ  was  sent,  as  from  the  Father,  freely :  as  to  Himself,  ignominiously.  (3)  The 
infinite  goodwill  of  God  in  sending  Jesus  Christ  into  the  world  appears  to  be  glorious 
and  great,  if  you  consider  the  persons  to  whom  He  was  sent.  This  love  is  pitched 
upon  froward,  peevish,  and  rebellious  creatures,  (4)  It  is  evident  from  these  many 
great  benefits,  of  which,  by  Christ's  coming,  we  are  made  partakers.  (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.) 
The  glory  of  the  heavenly  host  an  argument  for  more  than  bare  necessity  in  the 
service  of  God : — May  not  sundry  ceremonies  be  left  out,  say  the,y,  and  yet  our 
religion  be  sound  and  entire?  Indeed,  our  ceremonies  are  not  necessary  in  them- 
selves we  grant  it ;  why,  and  what  if  such  great  cathedral  churches  had  not  been 
built,  nor  such  rich  costly  ornaments  bestowed  upon  the  roof,  upon  the  choir,  upon 
the  Communion  Table,  might  not  prayers  be  read,  and  sermons  preached  with 
poorer  habiliments  and  in  meaner  places  ?  Well,  no  man  denies  but  God  was  faith- 
fully served  in  dens,  and  rocks,  and  caves  of  the  earth,  when  the  apostles  and 
prophets  were  persecuted.  Besides,  there  are  that  complain,  when  one  minister 
may  sufficiently  and  audibly  read  service  to  the  congregation  :  frustra  fit  per  plura, 
what  a  needless  thing  it  is,  to  have  a  choir  of  singers  discharge  that,  which 
ordinarily  is  no  more  than  one  man's  labour  ?  They  that  make  these  objections, 
let  them  consider  what  errors  they  fall  into.  They  may  as  well  tax  God  Himself  for 
sending  a  multitude  of  angels  to  congratulate  the  birth  of  His  Son,  when  two  or 
three  would  have  done  the  business ;  for  out  of  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses 
shall  every  word  be  justified.  Why  should  a  reasonable  man  think  it  fit  to  glorify 
God  with  bare  scanty  provision  ?  God  hath  given  us  full  measure  of  all  His 
blessings,  and  running  over;  therefore  no  decent  ceremony  is  superfluous,  no  rich 
ornament  too  gorgeous,  no  strain  of  our  wit  too  eloquent,  no  music  too  sweet,  no 
multitude  too  great  to  advance  His  name,  who  hath  exalted  us  by  the  humiliation 
of  His  Son,  and  made  us  capable  to  live  with  angels  in  heaven,  because  Christ  WM 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  169 

content  to  lie  among  beasts  in  a  manger.  {Bishop  Haeket.)  Multitude  pleasing 
to  God : — ^And  remember  that  there  is  no  variation  or  change  in  God ;  as  He 
appointed  many  angels  to  sing  out  His  birth,  so  to  this  time  and  for  ever  He  loves 
to  be  glorified  by  multitudes.  Let  two  or  three  be  gathered  together  in  His  name 
rather  than  one  separatist  alone ;  but  if  you  will  multiply  those  two  or  three  to 
hundreds,  to  thousands  of  souls,  0  then  His  desire  is  upon  them  that  fear  Him, 
and  upon  those  thwackt  congregations  that  caU  upon  His  name.  He  that  invited 
the  guests  in  the  Gospel  did  not  think  his  feast  well  bestowed  till  his  room  was 
full ;  therefore  he  bid  his  servants  scour  the  highways  and  bring  them  in,  that  his 
number  might  be  augmented.  I  commend  your  private  exercises  of  prayer  between 
God  and  your  own  heart,  that  your  Father  that  sees  you  devout  in  secret  may 
reward  you  openly  :  but  those  prayers  which  you  would  have  most  prosperous  and 
successful,  send  them  up  in  the  thickest  press  of  prayers,  when  a  great  assembly 
open  their  lips  together.  He  that  joins  his  spirit  with  the  spirit  of  the  Church 
shall  be  heard  as  if  he  prayed  with  ten  thousand  voices.  (Ibid.)  Trust  the 
heavenly  forces : — 0  see  how  many  legions  He  can  command  from  heaven,  and  then 
eay,  it  is  a  vain  thing  to  trust  in  the  forces  of  man  ;  it  is  the  Lord  that  hath  powers 
and  principalities  in  store  to  awe  the  world:  lo.  He  cometh  with  a  multitude  of  the 
heavenly  host.  {Ibid.)  One  good  work  quickly  followed  by  another : — The  choir 
was  not  long  a-tuning,  but  the  hymn  was  sung  immediately  after  the  sermon  was 
ended,  like  a  chime  that  follows  a  clock  without  distinction  of  a  minute  :  one  good 
work  follows  another  incontinently  without  any  tedious  pause  or  lingering  respite. 
Quick  motions  of  zeal  and  devotion  are  ever  most  acceptable.  Procrastinating  of 
time  is  the  ready  way  to  be  taken  tardy  like  the  foolish  virgins.  {Ibid.)  Church 
Psalmody  : — If  Asaph  and  that  choir  did  lift  up  their  note  with  all  sorts  of  musical 
instruments  in  the  old  law,  while  the  sacrifice  was  burning  upon  the  altar,  I  am 
sure  we  have  much  more  cause,  not  in  imitation  of  Asaph,  but  of  the  angels,  to 
praise  the  Lord  with  psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs.  Luther,  I  know  not 
upon  what  reason,  unless  it  were  because  the  angels  in  my  text  did  begin  the 
gospel  with  melody,  he  makes  psalmody  to  be  one  of  the  notes  of  the  orthodox 
Church  of  Christ.  The  voice  of  man  certainly  is  to  praise  God  in  its  best  tunes 
and  elegancies :  and  the  reasons  why  musical  notes  are  most  fit  and  necessary 
amidst  our  Christian  prayers  are  these  four :  1.  Eules  of  piety  steal  into  our  minii 
with  the  delight  of  the  harmony.  The  Agathyrsians,  even  to  Plato's  days,  were 
wont  to  sing  their  laws,  and  put  them  in  tune,  that  men  might  repeat  them  in 
their  recreations.  2.  It  kindles  devotion,  and  fills  the  soul  with  more  loving 
affections.  Make  a  cheerful  noise  to  the  God  of  Jacob,  says  David.  As  the  noise 
of  flutes  and  of  trumpets  inspire  a  courage  into  soldiers,  and  inflame  them  to  be 
victorious,  so  the  psalms  of  the  Church  raise  up  the  heart,  and  make  it  leap  to  be 
with  God  ;  as  if  our  soul  were  upon  our  lips,  and  would  fly  away  to  heaven.  3.  An 
heavy  spirit  oppresseth  zeal,  and  that  service  of  God  is  twice  done  which  is  done 
with  alacrity :  and  our  Christian  merriment  by  St.  James's  rule  is,  singing  and 
making  melody  to  the  Lord.  When  our  Saviour  and  His  company  were  sad  the 
night  before  His  Passion,  to  put  away  that  heaviness  they  sang  an  hymn,  when 
they  went  to  Mount  Olivet.  4.  To  sing  some  part  of  Divine  doctrine  is  very 
profitable,  because  that  which  is  sung  is  most  treatibly  pronounced ;  the  under- 
standing stajs  long  upon  it,  and  nails  it  the  faster  to  the  memory.  (Ibid). 
Angelic  insight : — So  my  text  lets  you  see,  that  if  men  be  silent,  and  set  not  forth 
the  praise  of  the  Lord,  the  angels  will  speak,  and  give  Him  glory.  It  were  a  great 
shame  for  the  Commons  to  be  rude  and  irrespectful  towards  their  king,  when  the  nobles 
and  princes  of  the  people  are  most  dutiful  and  obsequious  ;  so  when  the  Cherubins 
devote  their  songs  to  extol  the  most  High,  it  were  a  beastly  neglect  in  man,  a  worm 
in  respect  of  a  Cherubin,not  to  bear  a  part  in  that  humble  piety:  but  to  speak  after 
the  method  of  reason,  had  it  not  been  more  proper  for  the  angels  at  this  time  to 
have  proclaimed  Christ's  poverty  than  His  power,  His  infancy  than  His  majesty, 
His  humility  in  the  lowest,  rather  than  His  glory  in  the  highest  ?  If  there  were 
any  glory  coming  out  of  this  work  of  the  Incarnation,  it  may  seem  we  had  it  rather 
than  our  Saviour,  and  He  lost  it.  But  the  piercing  eye  of  those  celestial  spirits 
could  see  abundant  honour  compassing  Christ  about,  where  ignorant  man  could 
espy  nothing  but  vileness  and  misery.  1.  They  celebrate  the  glory  of  God's 
justice  in  sending  His  Son  made  of  a  woman,  and  made  under  the  law,  to  suffer  for 
us  that  had  sinned  against  the  law,  because  that  justice  would  not  receive  man  inta 
favour  without  a  satisfaction.  2.  They  divulge  the  honour  of  Christ  unto  the 
ends  of  the  world,  for  the  mercy  that  came  down  with  Him  upon  all  those  that 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHi».  n. 

should  believe  in  His  name  ;  if  His  justice  was  not  forgotten  in  their  song,  surely 
His  mercy  should  be  much  more  solemnized.  The  angels  for  their  own  share  were 
unacquainted  with  mercy,  'twas  news  in  heaven  till  this  occasion  happened ;  for 
those  rebellious  ones  of  their  order  that  had  sinned,  they  found  no  grace  to  remit 
their  trespasses  ;  properly  that  is  called  mercy,  but  a  thing  so  rare  and  unheard  of 
in  heaven,  that  as  soon  as  ever  they  saw  it  stirring  in  the  earth,  they  sing  "  Glory 
to  God  in  the  highest."  3.  They  praise  the  Lord  on  high  for  the  Incarnation 
of  His  Son,  because  the  dignity  of  the  work  was  so  from  Himself,  that  no  creature 
did  merit  it,  none  did  beseech  or  intercede  unto  Him  for  it,  before  He  had  destinate 
it,  nothing  but  His  own  compassion  could  move  Him  to  it.  (Ibid.)  The  song  of 
angels : — 1.  They  knew,  in  the  first  place,  the  glory  and  greatness  of  that  Being 
who  was  cradled  in  the  manger.  2.  The  angels  knew  the  sinfulness  and  misery 
from  which  the  Saviour  came  to  rescue  fallen  man,  as  we  have  never  known  them. 
3.  These  visitants,  again,  knew,  as  we  do  not,  the  happiness  of  that  state  to  which 
Christ's  mission  would  raise  us.  We  have  seen,  then,  that  angels  praised  God  with 
such  lively  fervours,  because  they  had  so  much  clearer  views  than  we  of  what 
Christ  came  to  accompUsh,  when  He  was  bom  at  Bethlehem.     (fF.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Glory  to  God  In  the  highest. — The  angels'  song  {A  Christmas  sermon)  : — 
First  heard  above  the  plains  of  Bethlehem  it  is  one  day  to  be  heard  over  all  the 
world.  Its  sweet  melody  is  to  be  woven  into  every  language  which  men  have 
learnt  to  speak.  Tiie  angels  are  to  hear  it  in  all  dialects  and  tongues.  It  is  to  be 
the  choral  response  of  a  gladdened  world  to  the  birthday  joy  which  was  once 
poured  forth  upon  the  shepherd  hearts  at  Bethlehem.  I.  We  owe  Chbistmas-tidb 
TO  Chbistianity.  II.  Let  us  bemembeb  the  association  of  Cheistmas-tidb  with 
"peace  on  eaeth  and  good- will  to  men."     III.  Theee  is  joy  in  thinking  op  the 

PABTIAL  PBEVALENCE  OF    THIS    DiVINE    INFLUENCE   AMONGST   THE    FAMILY   OF    MAN.       IV. 

How  may  the  Advent  of  Chbist  be  made  to  eepeat  itself  this  Cheistmas-tide  ? 
Whenever  peace  and  goodwill  mightily  prevail  amongst  men,  that  is  a  time  when 
Christ  has  a  fresh  hold  upon  human  hearts.     V.  We  may  not  forget  that  thebb 

ABE  homes  which  WILL  DEPEND  FOB  ChBISTMAS  JOY  UPON  THE  CABEFUL  THOUGHT  AND 
KINDLINESS  OF  OTHEBS.  VI.  ThEEE  ABE  SOME  WHOSE  HEABTS  WILL  BE  TEOUBLED  WITH 
MEMOBIES  WHICH  WILL  CBOWD  ABOUND  THIS  OTHEBWISE  HAPPY   PEBIOD.       (W.    DoHing.) 

A  Christmas  carol : — I.  How  did  the  appeaeing  of  Chkist  being  gloey  to  God  ?  1. 
In  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  2.  In  the  salvation  of  man.  3.  In  exhibiting  God's 
love  without  detracting  from  any  other  attribute.  II.  How  peace  on  eaeth  ?  1. 
It  was  not  peace  at  first  certainly.  Describe  the  state  of  the  world,  especially 
Palestine,  when  Christ  came,  and  during  succeeding  years.  2.  But  in  proportion 
as  Christ  is  known  and  felt,  there  will  surely  be  peace  on  earth.  3.  Peace  in  the 
city,  town,  or  village  in  which  Christians  dwell.  4.  Peace  in  the  family.  5.  Peace 
in  the  heart.  6.  And  all  this  will  result  from  the  practice  of  the  principles  of  that 
religion  whose  Founder  was  cradled  in  Bethlehem's  manger,  for  that  religion  (1) 
Subdues  the  passions  ;  (2)  Regulates  the  life  ;  (3)  Elevates  the  soul.  III.  How 
GOOD-WILL  TowABD  MEN  ?  1.  When  oue  makes  a  present  to  another  we  look  upon 
it  as  an  expression  of  good-will.  The  value  of  the  present  is  often  indicative  of  the 
measure  oi  esteem  or  good-will.  God  has  given  us  His  greatest,  choicest  gift,  for 
He  bestowed  His  only  Son.  2.  God's  good-will  becomes  even  more  apparent  when 
we  contemplate  our  own  guilt.  3.  What  have  you  to  say  in  answer  to  all  this  ?  All 
God  requires  from  us  in  recognition  of  His  love  is  our  heart.  And  if  we  give  Him 
oiu:  heart,  we  s-hall  surely  give  our  service.  Have  you  given  yours  to  Him  ?  {A.  F. 
Barjield.)  The  Divine  method  in  tlie  world  : — This  is  the  key-note,  not  only  of 
the  Christian  message,  but  of  Divine  religion  from  the  beginning.  It  is  ours  to 
follow,  not  to  precede  ;  to  ask  what  has  been  the  Divine  method,  not  to  ask  what 
it  should  have  been  ;  and  when  once  we  begin  to  have  some  light  on  that  view, 
then  it  will  be  ours  to  ask  what  are  the  signs  of  accomplishment.  I.  What  has 
been  THE  Divine  method  ?  1.  We  learn  that  there  is  a  Divinity  in  this  world 
which  secures  the  direction  of  growth,  but  leaves  the  operative  influences  that  pro- 
duce it,  and  the  working  out  of  results  to  great  natural  laws.  2.  We  learn  that  the 
Divine  method  implies  great  length  of  time.  3.  We  learn  that  one  universal  and 
insuperable  difficiUty  has  been  in  teaching  men  how  to  live  together  peaceably.  II. 
What,  now,  is  the  condition  and  the  pbospect,  thboughout  the  entibk  wobld,  o» 

GOOD-WILL    AND    PEACE,    OB    THE    AET    OF    LIVING    TOGETHEB  ?        1.    The    possibility    of 

happiness  among  the  poor,  who  constitute  by  far  the  largest  part  of  the  human 
race,  has  been  bo  immensely  increased  as  to  form  a  broad  platform  on  which  to  put 


CBAP.  XI.]  8T.  LUKE.  171 

onr  feet  and  form  an  estimate  of  the  gains  that  have  been  made.  2.  In  the  mind 
of  the  very  labourers  themselves  there  is  springing  up  a  spirit  of  organization  and 
thrift.  3.  There  is  coming,  gradually,  the  admission  of  the  great  under-class  of 
the  human  family  to  a  participation  in  government.  4.  The  influence  of  nation 
tipon  nation  must  also  be  taken  into  consideration  in  estimating  the  advance  of  the 
latter-day  glory.  The  globe  has  become  but  a  single  neighbourhood.  5.  Look  at 
how  God  has  been  raising  up  four  great  languages  on  the  globe  which  ultimately,  I 
think,  will  result  in  one.  Look  at  what  treasure  is  stored  up  in  the  French,  in  the 
German,  in  the  English,  and  in  the  Latin.  Shall  I  add  the  Greek — the  language 
of  science  ?  The  language  of  men,  the  language  that  contains  the  doctrines  of 
independence,  of  liberty,  of,  I  trust,  man  in  man,  is  the  English  tongue.  It  is  spoken 
more  widely  over  the  globe  than  any  other.  I  rejoice  with  exceeding  great  joy  that 
the  English  tongue  is  a  charter  of  liberty  to  the  human  race.  III.  If  tou  accept 
THE  PBOPHECiES  OF  THE  New  TESTAMENT,  Interpketino  THEM  aloug  the  liucs  of  ex- 
perience, showing  what  is  the  Divine  method  of  working  upon  the  human  race,  the 
angels  that  sang  peace  and  good-will  at  the  Advent  will  not  be  long  delayed  before 
they  will  sing  again.  I  shall  hear  that  song,  not  here  but  yonder.  And  perhaps 
joined  with  it  will  be  the  outcry  of  this  glorious  achievement  which  seems  to  us  to 
have  lingered,  but  that  has  not  lingered,  according  to  the  thought  of  God,  who 
hath  done  and  is  doing  all  things  well,  and  who  is  the  Conqueror  of  conquerors,  the 
King  of  kings,  the  Lord  of  lords,  my  Saviour  and  my  God,  your  Saviour 
and  your  God.  Trust  Him ;  rejoice  in  Him  ;  love  Him  ;  and  reign.  (JEf. 
W.   Beecher.)  The  angels^   text : — Such  was  the  text  of  the  angels  on  the 

night  of  our  Saviour's  birth  ;  and  to  that  text  our  Saviour's  life  furnished 
the  sermon.  I.  The  first  words  of  it  are,  ♦•  Globt  to  God  !  "  and  a  most 
weighty  lesson  may  we  draw  for  ourselves  from  finding  the  angels  put  that 
first.  A  world  is  redeemed.  Millions  on  millions  of  human  beings  are  rescued 
from  everlasting  death.  Is  not  this  the  thing  uppermost  in  the  angels'  thoughts  ? 
No,  it  is  only  the  second  thing.  The  first  is,  Glory  to  God  1  Why  so  ?  Because 
God  is  the  giver  of  this  salvation  ;  nay,  is  Himself  the  Saviour,  in  the  person  of 
the  only-begotten  Son.  Moreover,  because  in  heavenly  minds  God  always  holds 
the  first  place,  and  they  look  at  everything  with  a  view  to  Him.  Now,  I  would  have 
you  look  to  God  in  exactly  the  same  manner.  Whether  you  eat  or  drink,  or  what- 
ever you  do,  you  should  do  all  to  God's  glory.  Then  will  you  be  like  the  angels 
who  began  their  text  with,  Glory  to  God  I  II.  The  next  branch  of  the  text  is 
•'  PEACE  ON  EABTH."  Our  Saviour  Himself  is  the  Prince  of  Peace— 1.  Because  His 
great  purposes  were  to  bring  down  peace  to  man.  2.  Because  He  made  it  one  of 
His  prime  objects  to  plant  and  foster  peace  within  man.  Peace  was  His  legacy  to 
His  apostles.  3.  But  what  kind  of  peace  f  Truly  every  kind  which  man  can 
enjoy.  (1)  Peace  of  conscience  ;  (2)  peace  of  heart ;  (3)  peace  of  a  mind  at  ease 
about  worldly  matters  ;  (4)  peace  and  union  between  brethren,  that  we  may  all 
make  up  one  body  under  Jesus  Christ  our  Head.  Now,  let  each  of  us  ask  himself 
with  all  seriousness.  Do  I  feel  anything  of  this  godly  peace  ?  III.  There  is  a  third 
part  of  the  angels'  text,  namely,  "  Good-will  to  men  :  "  and  a  very  important  part 
it  is.  For  it  sets  forth  the  ground  of  our  salvation.  It  was  no  excellency  or  merit 
of  ours  that  drew  our  Saviour  down  from  heaven.  It  was  the  wretchedness  of  our 
fallen  state.  Herein,  as  St.  Paul  teUs  us,  "  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  us," 
&o.  (Bom.  V.  8).  But  though  this  love  of  God  for  His  sinful  creatures  is  worthy  of 
all  gratitude  and  praise,  the  good-will  declared  in  the  angels'  text  means  something 
more  than  mere  love.  The  word  which  we  translate  "  Good-wUl,"  is  a  word  very 
full  of  meaning,  and  signifies  that  mixture  of  goodness,  and  kindness,  and  wisdom, 
which  tends  to  good  and  wise  plans.  The  good-will  then  in  the  angels'  text  is  no 
other  than  the  great  and  merciful  purpose  of  our  redemption.  Have  we  any  proper 
sense  and  feeling  of  this  good-will  ?  I  have  spoken  to  you  on  the  angels'  text,  and 
in  so  doing  have  spoken  of  man's  salvation.  The  end  of  the  whole  is  God's  glory  ; 
the  means  is  peace  on  earth ;  the  sole  motive  is  goodness  and  loving-kindness  to  us 
miserable  sinners.  IV.  There  are  still  three  words  in  this  text  which  I  have 
not  noticed.  The  angels  did  not  simply  say,  "  Glory  to  God ;  "  but,  "  Globt  to  God 
IN  THE  hiohebt,"  that  is,  in  heaven.  Here  is  a  wonderful,  a  glorious,  a  soul- sustain- 
ing scene  opened  to  us.  The  angels  in  the  very  presence  of  God  are  moved  by  our 
Bufferings  and  our  redemption.  Shall  they  glorify  God  for  His  goodness  to  us,  and 
shall  we  forget  to  glorify  Him  for  His  goodness  to  ourselves  ?  Ui.  W.  Hare.) 
Christmas  Day  : — There  is  considerable  difference  of  opinion  as  to  what  is  the  best 
teading  and  the  best  rendering  of  this  passage.    According  to  Dean  Alfoid  and  th< 


171  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

BeviBed  Version,  we  should  understand  it  to  mean,  "  Peace  among  men  towards 
whom  God  has  a  good-will " — that  is,  in  whom  He  is  well  pleased.  According  to 
the  Vulgate  the  meaning  should  be,  peace  to  men  who  exhibit  a  good-will.  This  is 
the  sense  adopted  by  Keble  in  his  Christmas  hymn.  The  reading  of  the  Authorised 
Version  is  not,  perhaps,  the  best  ;  but,  as  being  more  familiar,  and  at  the  same 
time  so  thoroughly  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  the  day,  I  will  venture  to  take  it 
as  a  motto.  1.  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  conduct  of  professing  Christians  has 
often  been  such  as  to  make  the  angels'  song  sound  like  an  ironical  sarcasm, 
rather  than  an  eulogy.  Church  history,  for  example,  to  a  passionate  lover 
of  peace  and  good-will,  must  be  very  melancholy  reading.  2.  But  I  hear  some 
one  say,"  things  are  improved  now-a-days."  Well,  yes,  I  suppose  they  are 
a  little.  Still  many  of  those  who  call  themselves  Christians  seem  to  be 
characterized  by  the  very  opposites  of  peace  and  good-will.  I  remember  that  in  the 
preface  to  the  second  edition  of  his  Belfast  Address,  Professor  Tyndall  said  he  was 
not  surprised  at  the  bitter  things  which  had  been  uttered  against  him  by  Christians, 
when  he  remembered  how  bitterly  they  were  in  the  habit  of  recriminating  one 
another.  ♦'  'Tis  true,  'tis  pity  ;  pity  'tis,  'tis  true."  Peace  and  good-will — peace, 
or  the  absence  of  quarrelsomeness  ;  good- will,  or  the  actual  performance  of  deeds 
of  kindness,  are  essential  characteristics  of  genuine  diseipleship.  3.  Let  us,  to- 
day, apply  this  test  of  diseipleship  to  ourselves.  Of  all  the  provisions  made  for  our 
spiritual  welfare,  nothing,  perhaps,  more  helpful  than  the  periodical  recurrence  of 
days  like  the  present.  4.  But  it  was  Christ's  aim  that  every  day  should  be  in  this 
respect  a  Christmas  Day.  Is  that  the  case  with  us  7  There  was  a  curious  instita- 
tion  in  the  Middle  Ages  called  the  ecclesiastical  truce  or  peace  of  God.  Feuds  legally 
stopped  for  four  days  a  week.  The  bell  tolled  on  a  Wednesday.  All  hostilitiss  were 
to  cease  till  the  following  Monday.  And  until  the  Monday  they  were  suspended  ; 
but  then  they  were  always  faithfully  resumed.  Shall  it  be  so  with  ns  ?  After  mani- 
festing peace  and  good-will  on  the  25th  of  December,  must  we  relapse  again  into 
practical  paganism  on  the  26th  ?  We  cannot  be  always  making  presents,  but  we  may 
be  always  doing  good.  5.  When  peace  and  good-will  are  universal,  human 
eocietj  will  be,  as  Christ,  wished  to  make  it,  a  heaven  upon  earth. 

For  lo  I  the  days  are  hastening  on 

By  prophet-bands  foretold, 
When  with  the  ever-circling  yean 

Comes  back  the  age  of  gold — 
When  peace  shall  over  all  the  earth 

Its  blessed  banner  fling. 
And  the  whole  world  send  back  the  song 

Which  now  the  angels  sing. 

{Professor  A.  W.  Momerie.y 

The  tmgelie  hymn  : — The  song  consists  of  three  propositions,  of  which  two 
are  parallel,  and  the  third  forms  a  link  between  the  other  two.  In  the  first, 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  places,"  the  angels  demand  that,  from  the  lowei 
regions  to  which  they  have  just  come  down,  from  the  bosom  of  humanity,  praise 
shall  arise,  which,  ascending  from  heavens  to  heavens,  shall  reach  at  last  the 
supreme  sanctuary,  the  highest  places,  and  there  glorify  the  Divine  perfections  that 
shine  forth  in  this  birth.  The  second,  "Peace  on  earth,"  is  the  counterpart  of 
the  first.  While  inciting  men  to  praise,  the  angels  invoke  on  them  peace  from  God. 
This  peace  is  such  as  results  from  the  reconciliation  of  man  with  God ;  it 
contains  the  cause  of  the  cessation  of  all  war  here  below.  These  two  propositions 
are  of  the  nature  of  a  desire  or  prayer.  The  verb  understood  is  torw,  let  it  be.  The 
third,  which  is  not  connected  with  the  preceding  by  any  particle,  proclaimi 
the  fact  which  is  the  ground  of  this  twofold  prayer.  If  the  logical  connection  were 
expressed,  it  would  be  by  the  word  for.  This  fact  is  the  extraordinary  favour 
shown  to  men  by  God,  and  which  is  displayed  in  the  gift  He  is  bestowing  upon 
them  at  this  veiy  time.  The  sense  is  :  "  for  God  takes  pleasure  in 
men."  In  speaking  thus,  the  angels  seem  to  mean,  "  God  has  not  be- 
stowed as  much  on  ns "  (Heb.  ii.  16).  The  idea  of  "  good-will  "  recalls 
the  first  proposition,  "  Glory  to  God  1  "  while  the  expression,  "  towards 
men,"  reminds  us  of  the  second,  "  peace  on  earth  1  "  {F.  Godet,  D.D.) 
TTie  Gloria  in  excelsis : — In  the  account  of  this  eventful  night,  the  words  heard  are 
alone  mentioned ;  one  might  be  pardoned  for  wishing  we  had  also  the  score  1    Wc 


OHAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  173 

all  know  how  an  interesting  strain  of  melody  will  fix  itself  in  our  memories ;  some- 
times we  can  hardly  keep  from  humming  it  over,  repeating  snatches  of  it  we  have 
caught,  and  rehearsing  to  others  the  way  it  went,  so  as  to  give  an  idea.  It  may  be 
that  the  shepherds  remembered  parts  of  this  ;  but  if  so,  we  have  no  means  of 
ascertaining  it.  Only  the  words  reach  us  ;  but  they  are  well  worth  the  study  of  the 
world.  The  startUng  abruptness  with  which  this  seraphic  anthem  fell  on  the  ears 
of  the  shepherds  that  first  Christmas  night,  adds  greatly  to  the  dramatic  effect  of 
the  scene.  Hardly  lingering  for  their  leader  to  end  his  communication,  that  choir 
of  singers  "  suddenly "  burst  forth  with  loud  volume  of  exquisite  harmony, 
celebrating  the  praises  of  Jehovah,  whom  they  saw  in  a  fresh  field  of  splendid 
display.  There  were  a  vast  number  of  singers — "  a  host,"  that  is  to  say,  an  army  ; 
"  an  army  celebrating  a  peace."  Surely  there  was  enough  to  inspire  their  music ; 
and  great  armies  of  voices  sing  together  quite  often  with  immense  power  of  rich 
and  voluminous  harmony.  It  was  an  exaggeration,  no  doubt,  but  ancient  history 
gravely  records  that,  when  the  invader  of  Macedon  was  finally  expelled,  the 
victorious  Greeks,  who  heard  the  news  and  so  learned  that  freedom  had  come,  and 
fighting  was  over,  and  home  was  near,  raised  along  the  lines  and  throughout  the 
camp  such  a  shout  of  "  Soter  1  Soter  1 "— "  a  Saviour  I  A  Saviour  1 " — that  birds 
on  the  wing  dropped  down.  It  may  have  been  so;  but  what  was  that  little 
peninsula  of  Greece,  as  compared  with  this  entire  race  redeemed  from  Satan  unto 
God?  What  were  the  actual  words  of  this  angels'  song?  It  is  well  that  we  all 
recollect  them  —  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  goodwill 
towards  men  1 "  Three  stanzas  in  one  hymn.  1.  The  first  of  them,  and  the  fore- 
most in  thought,  is  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  This  is  not  a  prayer  at  all,  but 
an  ascription.  It  was  no  time  to  be  asking  that  God  be  glorified,  when  the  whole 
universe  was  quivering  with  new  disclosure  of  a  "  Gloria  in  Excelsis,"  such  as  blind 
men  could  see  and  deaf  men  could  hear.  Those  angels  did  not  pray — Glory  be  to 
God— but  they  exclaimed— Glory  is  to  God  in  the  highest  1  And  then  they  rush 
rapidly  into  an  enumeration  of  particulars-  The  connection  of  thought  is  close. 
Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  because  peace  has  come  on  the  earth,  and  goodwill 
has  already  gone  out  toward  men.  These  angels  are  making  proclamation  that  the 
rebellious  race  is  for  evermore  subdued.  No  longer  was  this  planet  to  circle  around 
among  loyal  worlds  in  space,  flaunting  the  defiant  flag  of  a  belligerent  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Men  should  be  redeemed  ;  sin  should  be  positively  checked  ; 
all  the  ills  of  a  worn-out  and  wretched  existence  should  be  banished;  poverty 
should  be  removed,  sickness  and  death  find  a  Master ;  Satan  should  be  foiled  by 
Imttianuel  in  person.  Hence  this  entire  vision,  which  flashed  on  the  awakened 
intelligence  of  the  angels  and  inspired  their  song,  was  simply  reversive  and 
revolutionary.  The  whole  earth  seemed  to  rouse  itself  to  a  new  being.  Cursed 
for  human  sin,  it  saw  its  deliverance  coming.  The  day  had  arrived  when  streams 
and  lakes  should  gleam  in  the  sunshine,  when  the  valleys  should  smile  and  laugh 
and  sing,  when  flowers  should  bloom  and  stars  should  flash — all  to  the  glory  of 
God  I  2.  Then  "  peace  on  earth  "  ;  God  was  at  last  in  the  world  reconcihng  itunto 
Himself  ;  the  hearts  of  His  creatures  were  coming  back  to  Him ;  their  allegiance 
was  to  be  restored,  their  wills  were  to  be  subjugated,  their  minds  were  to  be 
enlightened ;  thus  peace  over  all  the  world  would  be  established,  God's  wrath  would 
be  averted,  and  the  long  wrestle  of  man  with  Satan  would  reach  its  end.  For  when 
men  are  really  at  peace  with  God,  they  will  come  to  peace  with  each  other.  3.  And 
BO,  at  last,  "  goodwill  toward  men.  That  ends  this  song  of  the  angel ;  that  is 
what  ought  to  be  the  beginning  of  each  Christmas  anthem  and  carol.  God  loves 
us  ;  oh,  how  touchingly  does  the  aged  Paul  in  one  place  tell  his  young  brother 
Titus  about  that  "  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  men  1  "  God 
cherishes  only  goodwill  toward  any  of  us.  Even  the  wicked  ;  He  takes  no  pleasure 
in  their  death.  He  would  rather  they  would  turn  unto  Him,  and  live.  Oh,  happy 
day  is  that  in  which  He  tells  us  all  this  unmistakably,  with  perfect  plainness. 
Brethren,  if  God  so  loved  us,  then  ought  we  also  to  love  one  another.  «'  All  ye  art 
brethren,"  Away  with  all  fancied  superiorities  and  aristocracies  on  the  common 
Christmas  day— the  gladsome  birthday  of  Christ  1  Herdsmen  are  on  a  visit  to  a 
carpenter  at  an  inn ;  and  they  are  told  to  go  to  the  outhouse  to  find  him  I  Beasts 
are  standing  by  a  manger  in  which  lies  the  Child — King  David  the  Second  1  But, 
for  all  this  seems  so  democratic  and  small,  please  remember  that  a  choir  of  angels 
have  been  singing  outside.  Who  among  us  is  too  proud  to  listen  ?  (C.  S.  Robin- 
ion,  D.D.)  The  angelic  anthem  : — In  this  Divine  anthem  we  are  taught  that — 
I.  Tax  Incaenation  was  a  bkioht  exhibition  of  the  glory  op  God.    Hitherto 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  n. 

the  holy  angels  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Divine  justice  in  the  punishment  of  their 
sinning  compeers ;  and  something  like  mercy  in  the  suspension  of  the  sentence 
pronounced  on  man.  Bat  here  they  see  justice  and  mercy  blended  in  a  wonderful 
manner ;  and  they  give  vent  to  their  ecstasy  in  shouts  of  praise.  II.  Thb  Incar- 
nation  WAS  THE   MEANS   OF   BBINGING   PEACE   UPON   EARTH.      1.    Siu   had    Created   WSf 

in  every  man's  own  bosom.  Christ  alone  can  put  an  end  to  that  war,  by  procuring 
pardon  of  sin,  peace  for  the  conscience,  tranquillity  for  the  passions,  subordination 
of  the  appetites — reconciling  reason  to  conscience,  and  conscience  to  the  law  of 
God.  2.  Sin  had  created  a  horrible  war  between  man  and  man.  Strife,  envy, 
jealousy,  oppression,  ambition,  prevailed ;  Christ  came  to  preach  and  exemplify 
universal  charity.  Wherever  the  influence  of  His  gospel  is  felt,  peace  follows 
between  man  and  man  ;  wherever  His  government  is  established,  man  embraces  his 
brother.  3.  Sin  had  caused  war  between  man  and  his  Maker.  Terrible  contest — 
the  potsherd  striving  with  Him  who  made  it.  Christ  reconciles  God  and  man. 
He  is  Himself  both  God  and  man ;  so  He  can  both  pardon  sin  and  bestow  needed 
grace.  III.  The  Incabnation  was  a  marvellous  display  of  thb  goodwill  or 
God  to  man.  1.  Most  astonishing  condescension.  2.  Unparalleled  love.  8. 
Prodigious  disinterestedness.  4.  Universality.  All  are  included  in  this  goodwill, 
IV.  What  ought  to  be  our  views,  and  feelings,  and  conduct.  1.  They  should  be 
laudatory.  We  have  far  more  occasion  to  praise  God  for  the  Incarnation,  than  the 
angels.  2.  We  should  proclaim  the  Saviour  to  others.  In  trying  to  kindle  a 
brother's  faith  and  devotion,  onr  own  will  born  brighter  and  clearer.  (John 
Stephens.)  I.  The  choir — singers  from  the  new  Jerusalem.  II.  The  theme- 
salvation.  III.  The  listeners — dwellers  in  heaven  and  earth.  (Van  Doren.) 
The  angels*  song  : — What  does  the  angels'  song  announce  to  men  ?  1.  Bethlehem's 
miracle.  2.  Jesus'  greatness.  3.  The  Father's  honour.  4.  The  Christian's 
calling.    6.  Heaven's  likeness.       (J.  J.    Van  Oostertee,  D.D.)  A    ChrUtmat 

motto : — "  With  malice  toward  none,  with  charity  for  all."  This  truly  Christian 
motto  of  President  Lincoln,  sounds  almost  like  an  earthly  echo  of  the  heavenly 
anthem,  and  certainly  proves  its  power  and  influence  in  the  history  of  the  world. 
(P.  Schaff,  D.D.)  The  first  Christmas  carol: — I.  Instructive  thoughts.  The 
angels  sang  something  which  men  could  understand — something  which  will  make 
men  much  better  if  they  will  understand  it.  The  angels  were  singing  about  Jesus 
who  was  born  in  the  manger.  We  must  look  upon  their  song  as  being  built  upon 
this  foundation.  They  sang  of  Christ,  and  of  the  salvation  which  He  came  into 
this  world  to  work  out.  1.  They  said  that  this  salvation  gave  glory  to  God  in  the 
highest — that  salvation  is  God's  highest  glory.  God  is  glorified  in  every  dewdrop 
that  twinkles  in  the  morning  sun.  He  is  magnified  in  every  wood-flower  that 
blossoms  in  the  copse,  although  it  lives  to  blush  unseen,  and  waste  its  sweetness  in 
the  desert  air.  He  is  glorified  in  every  bird  that  warbles  on  the  spray ;  in  every 
lamb  that  skips  the  mead.  All  created  things  extol  Him.  Is  there  aught  beneath 
the  sky,  save  man,  that  does  not  glorify  God  t  Do  not  the  stars  exalt  Him,  when 
they  write  His  name  upon  the  azure  of  heaven  in  their  golden  letters  ?  Do  not  the 
lightnings  adore  Him,  when  they  flash  His  brightness  in  arrows  of  light  piercing 
the  midnight  darkness  f  Do  not  thunders  extol  Him,  when  they  roll  like  drums  in 
the  march  of  the  God  of  armies  ?  Do  not  all  things  exalt  Him,  from  the  least  even 
to  the  greatest  ?  But  though  creation  may  be  a  majestic  organ  of  praise,  it  cannot 
reach  the  compass  of  the  golden  canticle — Incarnation !  There  is  more  in  that 
than  in  creation,  more  melody  in  Jesus  in  the  manger  than  there  is  in  worlds  on 
worlds  rolling  their  grandeur  round  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.  See  how 
every  attribute  is  here  magnified.  Lo  1  what  wisdom  is  here.  God  becomes  man 
that  God  may  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  the  ungodly.  Lo  1  what  power,  for  where 
is  power  so  great  as  when  it  conceals  power  ?  Behold,  what  love  is  thus  revealed 
to  us  when  Jesus  becomes  a  man  1  Behold  what  faithfulness  I  How  many 
promises  are  this  day  kept ;  how  many  solemn  obligations  discharged  f  2.  When 
they  had  sung  this,  they  sang  what  they  had  never  sung  before.  "  Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest,"  was  an  old,  old  song  ;  they  had  sung  that  from  before  the  foundations 
of  the  world.  But  now,  they  sang  as  it  were  a  new  song  before  the  throne  of  God; 
for  they  added  this  stanza — "on  earth,  peace."  They  did  not  sing  that  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden.  There  was  peace  there,  but  it  seemed  a  thing  of  course,  and 
scarce  worth  singing  of.  But  now  man  had  fallen,  and  since  the  day  when 
cherubim  with  fiery  swords  drove  out  the  man,  there  had  been  no  peace  on  earth, 
save  in  the  breast  of  some  believers,  who  had  obtained  peace  from  the  living  foun- 
tain of  this  incarnation  of  Christ.     Wars  had  raged  from  the  ends  of  the  world  i 


OHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  175 

men  had  slaughtered  one  another,  heaps  on  heaps.  There  had  been  wars  within 
as  well  as  wars  without.  Conscience  had  fought  with  man  ;  Satan  had  tormented 
man  with  thoughts  of  sin.  There  had  been  no  peace  on  earth  since  Adam  fell. 
But  now,  when  the  newborn  King  appeared,  the  swaddling  baud  with  which  He 
was  wrapped  up  was  the  white  flag  of  peace.  3.  And,  then,  they  wisely  ended  their 
Bong  with  a  third  note.  They  said,  "  Goodwill  to  mau."  Philosophers  have  said 
that  God  has  a  goodwill  toward  man ;  but  I  never  knew  any  man  who  derived 
much  comfort  from  their  philosophical  assertion.  Wise  men  have  thought  from 
what  we  have  seen  in  creation  that  God  had  much  goodwill  toward  man,  or  else 
His  works  would  never  have  been  so  constructed  for  their  comfort ;  but  I  never 
heard  of  any  man  who  could  risk  his  soul's  peace  upon  such  a  faint  hope  as  that. 
But  I  have  not  only  heard  of  thousands,  but  I  know  them,  who  are  quite  sure  that 
God  has  a  goodwill  towards  men  ;  and  if  you  ask  their  reason,  they  will  give  a  full 
and  perfect  answer.  They  say.  He  has  goodwill  toward  man,  for  He  gave  His  Son. 
No  greater  proof  of  kindness  between  the  Creator  and  His  subjects  can  possibly 
be  afforded  than  when  the  Creator  gives  His  only  begotten  and  well  beloved  Son  to 
die.  Though  the  first  note  is  God-like,  and  though  the  second  note  is  peaceful, 
this  third  note  melts  my  heart  the  most.  U.  Emotional  thoughts.  Does  not 
this  Bong  of  angels  stir  your  hearts  with  happiness?  With  confidence?  HI. 
Pbopbetio  dtteranceb.  The  angels  sang,  "Glory  to  God,"  &c.  But  I  look 
around,  and  what  see  I  in  the  wide,  wide  world?  I  do  not  see  God  honoured.  I 
Bee  the  heathen  bowing  down  before  their  idols  ;  I  see  tyranny  lording  it  over  the 
bodies  and  souls  of  men ;  I  see  God  forgotten.  IV.  Now,  I  have  one  more  lesson 
for  you,  and  I  have  done.  That  lesson  is  peeceptive.  I  wish  everybody  that  keeps 
Christmas  this  year,  would  keep  it  as  the  angels  kept  it.  Now,  Mr.  Tradesman, 
you  have  an  opponent  in  trade,  and  you  have  said  some  very  hard  words  about  him 
lately.  If  you  do  not  make  the  matter  up  to-day,  or  to-morrow,  or  as  soon  as  you 
can,  yet  do  it  on  that  day.  That  is  the  way  to  keep  Christmas,  peace  on  earth  and 
glory  to  God.  And  oh,  if  thou  hast  anything  on  thy  conscience,  anything  that 
prevents  thy  having  peace  of  mind,  keep  thy  Christmas  in  thy  chamber,  praying  to 
God  to  give  thee  peace ;  for  it  is  peace  on  earth,  mind,  peace  in  thyself,  peace  with 
thyself,  peace  with  thy  fellow  men,  peace  with  thy  God.  And  do  not  think  thou 
hut  well  celebrated  that  day  till  thou  canst  say,  "  0  God, 

•  With  the  world,  myself,  and  Thee 
I  ere  I  sleep  at  peace  will  be.'  " 

And  when  the  Lord  Jesus  has  become  your  peace,  remember,  there  is  another  thing, 
goodwill  towards  men.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Spreading  the  news  of  peace: — 
At  the  close  of  the  last  war  with  Great  Britain,  I  was  in  the  city  of  New  York. 
It  happened  that,  on  a  Saturday  afternoon  in  February,  a  ship  was  discovered 
in  the  ofSng,  which  was  supposed  to  be  a  cartel,  bringing  home  our  com- 
missioners at  Ghent  from  their  unsuccessful  mission.  The  sun  had  set 
gloomily  before  any  intelligence  from  the  vessel  has  reached  the  city.  Expectation 
became  painfully  intense  as  the  hours  of  darkness  drew  on.  At  length  a  boat 
reached  the  wharf,  announcing  the  fact  that  a  treaty  of  peace  had  been  signed,  and 
waiting  for  nothing  but  the  action  of  our  government  to  become  a  law.  The  men 
on  whose  ears  these  words  first  fell  rushed  in  breathless  haste  into  the  city  to  repeat 
them  to  their  friends,  shouting  as  they  ran  through  the  streets,  "  Peace,  peace, 
peace  1 "  Every  one  who  heard  the  sound  repeated  it.  From  house  to  house,  from 
street  to  street,  the  news  spread  with  electric  rapidity.  The  whole  city  was  in 
commotion.  Men  bearing  lighted  torches  were  flying  to  and  fro,  shouting  like 
madmen,  '•  Peace,  peace,  peace  I  "  When  the  rapture  had  partially  subsided,  one 
idea  occupied  every  mind.  But  few  men  slept  that  night.  In  groups  they  were 
gathered  in  the  sireets  and  by  the  fireside,  beguiling  the  hours  of  midnight  by 
reminding  each  ether  that  the  agony  of  war  was  over,  and  that  a  worn  out  and 
distracted  country  was  about  to  enter  again  upon  its  wonted  career  of  prosperity 
Thus,  every  one  becouiing  a  herald,  the  news  soon  reached  every  man,  WDman,  and 
child  in  the  city ;  and  in  this  sense  the  city  was  evangelized.  All  this,  you  see, 
was  reasonable  and  proper,  but  v,hen  Jehovah  has  offered  to  our  world  a  treaty  of 
peace,  when  men  doomed  to  hell  may  be  raised  to  seats  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
why  is  not  a  similar  zeal  displayed  in  proclaiming  the  good  news?  Why  are  men 
perishing  all  around  us  and  no  one  has  ever  personally  offered  to  them  salvation 
through  a  crucified  Eedeemer?     {Dr.    Way  land.)         The  perfections   of  the  In- 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  o. 

carnation : — ^Before  the  Incarnation  God  showed  some,  but  not  all,  His  perfections. 
He  showed — 1.  His  goodness,  in  creating  man  after  His  own  image.  2.  His  love, 
when  He  led  Eve  and  the  animals  to  Adam.  3.  His  pity,  by  clothing  Adam  and 
Eve  with  coats  of  skins.  4.  His  power,  in  creating  the  world  out  of  nothing. 
6.  His  justice,  in  expelling  our  first  parents  from  Paradise,  deluging  the  wicked 
world,  wasting  the  cities  of  the  plain.  6.  His  wisdom,  confounding  the  tongues 
of  the  builders  of  Babel.  7.  His  providence,  in  saving  Egypt  by  means  of  Joseph. 
In  the  Incarnation  these  perfections  shone  out  with  greater  clearness.  We  note 
here — I.  The  goodkess  of  God.  He  clothed  Himself  with  our  nature,  that  His 
virtues,  grace,  and  glory,  yea,  and  Himself,  He  might  communicate  to  us. 
1.  Naturally,  by  preserving  the  order  of  nature.  2.  By  the  supernatural  order  of 
grace.  3.  By  His  particular  personality.  II.  The  love  of  God.  Seen  in  the 
close  union  between  God  and  man  (Rom.  viii.  32).  1.  He  became  incarnate  to 
suffer  and  die  for  man.  2.  And  that  for  man.  His  enemy.  III.  The  pity  of  God. 
In  person  coming  to  relieve  our  miseries,  making  Himself  capable  of  sorrow  and 
Buffering  (Heb.  iv.  15).  IV.  The  power  of  God.  Uniting  the  highest  nature  with 
the  lowly  nature  of  man ;  the  human  and  the  Divine,  without  any  confusion  of 
substance,  in  unity  of  person.  V.  The  justice  of  God.  Not  rescuing  man  from 
sin  and  death  by  might  or  by  power,  but  paying  a  full  and  sufficient  satisfaction 
for  all  men's  sins:  making  an  infinite  satisfaction  for  infinite  sin,  VI.  Thb 
WISDOM  OF  God.  In  planning  the  redemption  of  man.  Neither  man  nor  God, 
singly,  could  redeem  man ;  it  needed  a  God-man  to  do  this.  VII.  The  pbovidencb 
OF  God.  Which  saw  how  to  help  and  enrich  man,  when  he  was  poor  and  naked, 
|nd  destitute  of  all  things,  (M.  Faber.)  A  dying  saint: — This  doxology  of  the 
angels  has  sometimes  filled  the  thoughts  of  dying  saints.  The  final  words  of  the 
Kev.  Edward  Perronet,  author  of  the  hymn,  "  All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name," 
were,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  height  of  His  Divinity  !  Glory  to  God  in  the  depth  of 
His  humanity  1  Glory  to  God  in  His  all-sufficiency  1  and  into  His  hand  I  com- 
mend my  spirit."  The  last  words,  too,  of  Kev.  Doctor  Backus,  first  President  of 
Hamilton  College,  were,  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good- 
will toward  men."  Universal  peace : — Happy  the  day  when  every  war-horse 
Bhall  be  houghed,  when  every  spear  shall  become  a  pruuing-hook,  and  every  sword 
shall  be  made  to  till  the  soil  which  once  it  stained  with  blood  1  This  will  be  the 
last  triumph  of  Christ.  Before  death  itself  shall  be  dead,  death's  great  jackal, 
war,  must  die  also ;  and  then  there  shall  be  peace  on  earth,  and  the  angel  shall 
say,  •'  I  have  gone  up  and  down  through  the  earth,  and  the  earth  sitteth  still,  and 
is  at  rest :  I  heard  no  tumult  of  war  nor  noise  of  battle."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  song  of  the  angels  : — I.  The  scene.  It  was  a  fine  Eastern  night,  not  cold  like 
one  of  our  Decembers,  with  frosts  or  nipping  gales  freezing  through  blood  and 
marrow,  "  The  shepherds  were  abiding  in  the  fields,"  i.e.,  making  their  bivouac 
in  them.  The  evangelist's  style  seems  to  quiver  with  the  sudden  surprise  which 
came  upon  the  shepherds.  "And  lo,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  them,  and 
glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them  :  and  they  feared  with  sore  fear.  And 
that  angel  said  unto  them,  Fear  not :  for,  behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great 
joy,  as  being  that  which  shall  be  to  all  the  people  of  God."  His  message  declares 
four  things.  The  wondrous  Child  to  be  born  is  a  Saviour,  who  comes  in  pity  for  a 
fallen  race ;  Christ,  who,  as  the  Anointed  One,  has  so  long  been  expected ;  the 
Lord,  who  is  Divine  as  well  as  human ;  in  David's  city,  to  fulfil  literally  the  oracle 
of  Micah,  and  the  anticipations  which  might  have  been  awakened  by  the  Psalm 
that  speaks  of  a  great  Priest-king  in  connection  with  Bethlehem,  and  God's 
remembrance  of  David's  life  of  afiliction.  "  And  this  shall  be  a  sign  unto  you ;  " 
a  sign,  in  its  quiet  but  amazing  contrast  to  all  exhibitions  of  this  world's  royalty. 
*'  Ye  shall  find  a  babe,  wrapped  in  swaddling  clothes,  lying  in  a  manger  "  Among 
the  angels  of  heaven  there  was  silence  until  the  point  when  that  angel  visitant  to 
the  shepherds  had  touched  the  lowest  point  in  the  abyss  of  the  humiliation.  The 
armies  of  earth  raise  a  shout  or  song.  The  armies  of  heaven  (the  "  heavenly 
soldiers,"  as  it  is  grandly  rendered  in  the  old  English  version)  have  theirs — but  it 
is  a  song  of  peace.  Much  of  that  choral  ode  was,  probably,  unheard  by  mortal 
ears — lost  in  the  heights  above.  One  fragment  alone  of  the  song  is  preserved.  Iv\ 
is  a  triplet.  1.  ••  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  The  angels  speak  from  the  point 
of  view  of  this  earth.  We  may  understand  either  "  Let  it  be,"  or  "  It  is."  If  the 
former,  they  pray  that  from  the  bosom  of  humanity  glory  may  rise  to  God  in  the 
highest  heaven.  If  we  understand  the  latter,  they  affirm  that  it  does,  at  thai 
moment,  actually  ascend.     There  is  a  little  poem,  possibly  more  beautiful  in  ides 


4aur.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  vp 

than  in  execution,  •which  tells  of  a  child  dying  in  a  workhouse.  As  her  simple 
hymn,  "  Glory  to  Thee,  my  God,  this  night,"  ascends  from  the  pallet-bed,  it  floats 
np  and  up,  until  the  last  faint  ripple  touches  the  foot  of  the  throne  of  God.  Then, 
wakened  by  the  faint,  sweet  impulse,  a  new  strain  of  adoration  is  taken  up  by 
angels  and  archangels,  and  all  the  company  of  heaven — a  grander  and  a  fuller 
•'  glory."  Something  in  this  way,  in  this  passage,  the  angels  seem  to  view  the  best 
adorations  of  this  earth.  2.  "  On  earth  peace."  The  peace  spoken  of  in 
Scripture  as  effected  by  the  Incarnation,  is  fourfold — between  God  and  man ; 
between  man  and  angels;  between  man  and  man;  between  man  rnd  his  own 
oonsoience.  It  is,  of  course,  too  darkly  true,  that  as  regards  one  form  of  this 
peace — that  between  man  and  man — history  seems  a  long  cynical  satire  on 
the  angels'  words.  The  earth  is  soaking  with  blood  at  this  moment,  and 
families  are  in  mourning  for  the  slain  in  battle.  Still,  among  Christian  nations, 
and  in  the  case  of  Christian  soldiers,  there  are  soft  relentings,  sweet  gleams  of 
human — or  rather  superhuman — love.  Society,  too,  is  full  of  prejudice  and 
bitterness.  In  our  homes  there  are  tempers  which  drop  vitriolic  irritants  into 
every  little  wound.  It  was  a  wholesome  memory  of  the  angels'  song  which  led 
men  to  examine  their  souls  at  Christmas,  and  to  seek  for  reconciliation  with 
any  between  whose  souls  and  theirs  stood  the  veil  of  quarrel  or  ill-will.  But 
there  is  something  beyond  this.  It  means  enmity  done  away,  harmony  reirtored, 
not  only  with  one's  fellow-man,  but  with  oneself.  The  unholy  man  has  no  trua 
feeling  of  friendship,  no  friendly  relations  with  himself.  Worst  of  all,  man  may 
be  in  a  state  of  estrangement  from  God,  from  Christ,  from  His  Church,  from  hope 
— hostile  in  his  mind,  which  lies  immersed,  and  has  its  very  existence  in  those  evil 
works  of  his.  3.  {For,  understood)  "Among  men  is  good- will."  It  is  well  known 
from  Keble's  beautiful  lines,  and  his  note  upon  Pergolesi's  setting  of  the  Vulgate 
version,  that  some  manuscripts  read,  "  among  men  of  goodwill."  This  interpre- 
tation, though  it  may  please  the  fancy  at  first,  will  scarcely  be  accepted  by  the 
maturer  judgment.  (1)  It  is  not  very  concurrent  with  St.  Luke's  universal  aim, 
and  constant  setting  forth  of  the  bold  broad  sympathy  of  the  purpose  of  the 
Incarnation.  God's  love,  at  that  moment,  would  not  be  viewed  by  the  angels  as 
restricted  to  the  comparatively  righteous.  It  was  a  work  whose  result  was  to  be 
offered  to  all  our  fallen  race  through  Him  who  is  the  son  &f  Adam.  Men  of  good- 
will, according  to  the  Scripture  use  of  the  word,  might  be  too  high  an  attribute 
even  for  the  elect  people  of  God.  The  third  line  appears  to  give  the  cause  and 
foundation  of  the  two  which  precede  it.  The  "Babe  wrapped  in  swaddling 
clothes "  is  He  who  not  only  brings,  but  is  personally  the  Truth,  the  Peace,  the 
Righteousness,  the  Salvation,  the  Eedemption.  Just  as  He  is  the  personal  Peace, 
so  is  He  the  personal  incarnate  Good-will.  There  is  glory  to  God  in  the  highest. 
And  there  is  peace  upon  earth,  for  God's  goodwill  is  amongst  men.  It  is 
the  equivalent  of  Emmanuel — God  with  us.  U.  We  may  now  observk  where  ihe 
angels'  hymn  stands  in  the  bbfobmed  liturot.  In  the  Roman  missal  it  is  found 
at  the  beginning  of  the  office ;  with  us  it  is  taken  up  immediately  after  we 
communicate,  just  before  the  parting  blessing.  In  that  magnificent  burst  of 
praise,  the  "Angelic  Hymn,"  or  "Gloria  in  Excelsis,"  is  the  basis  of  all  that 
follows.  "  Glory  be  to  God  on  high,  and  on  earth  peace,  goodwill  towards  men." 
"  We  praise  Thee  "  for  Thy  greatness.  "  We  bless  Thee  "  for  Thy  goodness,  thus 
made  known  to  ua  by  the  voice  of  angels.  "  We  worship  Thee  "  in  our  hearts, 
with  beseeming  outward  reverence.  "  We  glorify  Thee,  we  give  thanks  to  Thee 
for  Thy  great  glory,  O  Lord  God,  heavenly  King,  God  the  Father  Almighty " 
— glorifying  and  giving  thanks  with  the  confession  of  the  mouth.  Then  we 
address  the  eaoritioed  Son,  the  Lamb,  who  is  also  our  God.  "  O  Lord,  the 
only  begotten  Son,  Jesus  Christ.  O  Lord  God,  Lamb  of  God,  Son  of  the  Father, 
that  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  have  mercy  upon  us."  It  is  thua 
indicated  that  He  is  the  subject  of  the  angelic  song,  that  to  Him  there  is  glory  in 
the  highest,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Thou  only,  O  Chrfsti 
with  the  Holy  Ghost,  art  most  high  in  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  We 
worship  with  angels — in  angels'  words.  We  worship  them  not.  Therefore  into 
the  texture  of  our  euoharistic  "  Gloria  in  Excelsis "  is  woven  a  golden  thread 
from  another  New  Testament  song — the  poem  of  victory  upon  the  sea  of  glass. 
A  psalmist  had  exclaimed,  "  They  shall  praise  Thy  name,  great  and  terrible ;  holy 
is  it.  Exalt  ye  Jehovah  our  God,  and  worship  at  the  mountain  of  His  holiness ; 
lor  holy  is  the  Lord  our  God."  The  writer  of  the  Apocalypse  hears  it  applied 
to  Jesus.     And  Hia  believing  Church  iaoorporates  this  into  her  goMen  com 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  a. 

mentary  of  praise  upon  the  "Gloria  in  Excelsis."  ♦•Thou  only  art  holy,  O 
Christ."  Only  He  is  holy  of  Himself :  of  His  holiness  we  have  aU  received.  To 
an  ignorant  and  superstitious  woman,  now  many  years  ago,  a  kindly  visitor  read 
the  Gospels,  with  little  but  the  most  simple  commentary,  and  without  a^  single 
word  of  controversy.  A  day  or  two  before  her  death,  the  poor  woman  mentioned  a 
dream  which  she  had,  valuable  only  because  it  appeared  to  be  the  reflection  of  her 
waking  thoughts.  She  seemed  to  be  in  a  vast  and  magnificent  church,  thronged 
with  thousands  upon  thousands.  High  in  the  distance  rose  a  glorious  altar,  with  a 
living  form  towering  above  it — the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain  ;  below,  down  to  the 
rails  which  separated  the  altar  from  the  body  of  the  church,  were  orders  of  angels. 
stoled  and  vested  priests,  the  Virgin-mother.  Moved  by  some  impulse,  one  after 
another  came  to  the  chancel-gate,  and  was  either  received  inside  with  a  burst  ol 
joy  that  filled  the  distance,  or  sorrowfully  sent  away.  At  last  the  dying  woman 
presented  herself  in  her  turn.  Sternly,  yet  not  without  a  tone  of  regret,  a  priest 
put  her  back,  and  said,  "You  cannot  pass."  Sweetly,  with  tender  sorrow,  an 
angel  whispered,  "Alasl  I  cannot  help  you."  With  trembling  voice,  the  mother 
of  Jesus  told  her  that  "her  prayers  could  not  open  those  gates,  nor  open  a  way  to 
the  eternal  presence  of  her  Son."  Then,  with  an  exceedingly  great  and  bitter  cry, 
the  woman  was  turning  away,  to  wander  she  knew  not  where,  when  suddenly  the 
form  above  the  altar — not  white,  and  wan,  and  stirless,  like  the  crucifix,  but  living 
and  glorious — stood  by  the  guarded  gate.  And  He  opened  it,  and  bade  her  come 
in  and  fear  not.  "  For,"  said  He,  '*  those  who  come  unto  Me  I  will  not  cast  out." 
And  a  glorious  music  arose  in  the  distance.  In  the  same  spirit,  in  this  hymn,  we 
pass  by  saints  and  angels,  and  raise  our  chant,  "  Thou  only  art  holy."  None 
holy,  and  therefore  none  tender  as  Christ.  In  thanksgiving  for  angels'  food 
we  borrow  angels'  words.  The  song  of  angels  is  our  communion  song.  May  it 
not  also  be  made  our  communicant's  manual  7  For  instance,  let  us  take  that 
single  Une,  "on  earth  peace."  That  man  who  did  something  to  insult  or  injure 
me — that,  perhaps,  very  wretched  woman,  with  her  bitter  tongue  and  cutting 
jeer — have  I  forgiven  her  for  Christ's  sake?  This  evil  peevish  temper,  which 
embitters  the  fountains  of  family  life,  have  I  set  about  sweetening  it?  Am  I 
trying  to  improve  it  ?  This  dark  hopelessness  of  God's  forgiveness,  this  despair 
of  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  to  help  and  sanctify,  this  unbelief  in  grace,  as  if  an 
apostle's  pen  had  never  written,  "  How  much  more  shall  the  blood  of  Christ  purge 
your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God?"  this  unbelief  in  the 
power  of  the  Cross,  this  faithlessness  which  turns  the  bread  of  the  sacrament 
into  a  stone  in  our  hands,  and  makes  us  too  deaf  to  hear  "  for  thee ! "  again  and 
again—  is  this  passing  away  ?  Am  I  ready  to  take  Him  at  His  own  word  t  If  not, 
I  cannot  really  join  in  the  "  Gloria  in  Excelsis."  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  one 
line,  at  least,  of  the  blessed  triplet — "  On  earth  peace  " — and  therefore  the  whole 
harmony  is  untuned  for  me.  The  first  "Gloria  in  Excelsis"  died  away  over 
Bethlehem.  What  then  ?  "  It  came  to  pass,  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  from 
them  into  heaven,  then  the  men,  even  the  shepherds,  said  one  to  another,  Let  xu 
now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem."  The  men,  the  "  shepherds "  (so  the  Evangehst 
seems  to  say),  represent  the  whole  race  of  men.  Even  so,  the  Church  keeps 
unending  Christmas,  keeps  a  new  Christmas  vrith  every  communion.  The 
shepherds  did  their  simple  work  of  announcement.  "  They  made  known  abroad 
the  saying  which  was  told  them  concerning  this  Child ;  "  while  Mary,  with  her 
deeper  and  more  reflective  nature,  "kept  all  these  things,  and  pondered  them 
in  her  heart."  Then  "the  shepherds  returned,  glorifying  God "  for  His  greatness, 
and  "  praising  Him  "  for  His  goodness,  laying  the  foundation  for  their  glorification 
and  praise  "  upon  all  the  things  which  they  had  heard  and  seen,  as  it  was 
told  unto  them."  The  glory  and  music  of  angels  did  not  tempt  them  from  their 
work,  but  made  them  do  it  more  gladly  upon  their  return.  There  was  more 
of  heaven  about  it.  So  will  it  ever  be  with  those  who  seek  Him  faithfully, 
and  join  truly  in  the  "  Gloria  in  Excelsis."  (Bishop  Win.  Alexander.)  I.  Glory 
to  God  in  the  highest.  This  glory  arises  from  three  sources — the  matter  of 
the  gospel,  the  manner  of  its  dissemination,  and  the  effects  it  has  produced  upon 
the  hearts  and  habits  of  men.  2.  Glory  to  God  arises  from  the  manner  and 
success  of  the  dissemination  of  the  Word  of  God,  as  well  as  from  its  matter  and 
contents.  3.  Glory  is  given  to  God  from  the  effects  which  this  gospel  produces 
among  men.  In  the  experience  of  many  it  already  begins  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth.  II.  "  On  earth  peace."  Let  us  first  ascertain  the  nature  of  this  peace, 
and  aecoudlj,  the  way  in  which  the  Word  of  God  promotes  it,  in  order  that 


OHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  17* 

vre  may  be  able  to  aeek  peace  also,  and  pursue  the  right  way  of  hastening  on 
its  reign.  There  is  the  peace  of  ignorance,  but  this  is  the  peace  of  delusion. 
There  is  peace  from  compromise,  but  this  is  the  peace  of  hell.  True  peace 
between  man  and  God,  or  between  man  and  man,  can  flourish  on  true  principle, 
and  on  nothing  else.  Let  us  briefly  glance  at  a  few  features  of  this  goodwill ; 
next,  at  the  way  in  which  God  exerts  it,  and  lastly,  infer  the  manner  in  which  we 
also  should  show  goodwill  toward  our  fellowmeo.  It  is  a  distinctive  goodwill. 
Why  did  God  pass  by  the  angels  that  fell,  and  throw  the  arms  of  love  around  the 
children  of  men  7  It  was  also  an  undeserved  goodwill.  Before  the  Saviour  came 
we  lifted  up  no  cry  for  the  interposition  of  the  mercy  of  God.  Such  is  God's 
goodwill,  and  such  His  way  of  showing  it.  God  will  show  His  goodwill  to  the 
sinner,  just  by  showing  him  his  sin  and  his  peril.  If  you  saw  a  brother  asleep, 
amid  the  darkness  of  night,  enjoying  the  most  delightful  dreams,  and  at  the 
same  hour  the  house  on  fire  around  him,  would  you  show  him  more  good- 
will by  leaving  him  undisturbed,  or  by  rousing  him  rudely  from  his  sleep, 
and  pointing  his  eye  to  the  danger  of  his  situation?  This  is  God's  way  of 
manifesting  His  goodwill  to  men.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  Angels'  acclamatiam  : — 
There  never  was  such  an  apparition  of  angels  as  at  this  time ;  and  there  was  great 
cause ;  for — 1.  There  was  never  such  a  ground  for  it,  whether  we  regard  the 
matter  itself,  the  incarnation  of  Christ.  2.  Or  whether  we  regard  the  benefit 
that  comes  to  us  thereby.  Christ  by  this  means  brings  God  and  man  together 
since  the  fall.  I  shall  especially  stand  upon  those  words ;  but  somewhat  is  to  be 
touched  concerning  the  apparition  of  these  angels.  1.  The  circumstances  of  their 
apparition.  They  appear  to  poor  seepherds.  God  respects  no  callings.  He  will 
confound  the  pride  of  men,  that  set  so  much  by  that  that  God  so  little  respects, 
and  to  comfort  men  in  aU  conditions.  2.  Again,  the  angels  appeared  to  them  in 
the  midst  of  their  business  and  callings ;  and  indeed  God's  people,  as  Moses  and 
others,  have  had  the  sweetest  intercourse  with  God  in  their  affairs ;  and  ofttimes  it 
is  the  fittest  way  to  hinder  Satan's  temptations,  and  to  take  him  off,  to  be  employed 
in  business,  rather  than  to  struggle  with  temptations.  3.  And  then  they  appeared 
to  them  in  the  night.  God  discovers  Himself  in  the  night  of  affliction.  Our 
sweetest  and  strongest  comforts  are  in  our  greatest  miseries.  God's  children  find 
light  in  darkness ;  nay,  God  brings  light  out  of  darkness  itself.  We  see  the  cir- 
oomstances  then  of  this  apparition.  He  calls  these  angels  "a  heavenly  host " 
in  divers  respects,  espeoiaUy  in  these :  (1)  An  host  for  number.  Here  are  a 
nnmber  set  down.  A  multitude  is  distinct  from  an  host ;  but  in  that  they  are  an 
host,  they  are  a  multitude ;  as  in  Dan.  vii.  10,  "  Ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
angels  attend  upon  God."  And  so,  Eev.  v.  11,  there  are  a  world  of  angels  about 
the  Church.  In  Heb.  xii.  22,  we  are  come  to  have  communion  with  an  "  innumer- 
able company  of  angels."  Worldly,  sottish  men  that  live  here  below,  they  think 
there  is  no  other  state  of  things  than  they  see.  There  is  another  manner  of  state 
and  frame  of  things,  if  they  had  spiritual  eyes  to  see  the  glory  of  God,  and  of 
Christ  our  Saviour,  and  their  attendants  there — an  host,  a  multitude  of  heavenly 
angels.  (2)  An  host  likewise  implies  order ;  or  else  it  is  a  rout,  not  an  host  or 
army.  *•  God  is  the  God  of  order,  not  of  confusion  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  If  you  would 
Bee  disorder,  go  to  hell.  (3)  Again,  here  is  consent ;  an  host  all  joining  together 
in  praising  God :  "  Glory  to  God  on  high."  Christ  commends  union  and  consent 
^Matt.  xviii.  20).  Agreement  in  good  is  a  notable  resemblance  of  that  glorious 
condition  we  shall  enjoy  in  heaven.  (4)  An  host  of  angels,  it  shows  likewise  their 
employment.  But  here  is  our  comfort ;  we  have  a  multitude,  an  host  of  angels, 
whose  office  is  to  defend  the  Church,  and  to  offend  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  as 
we  see  in  Scripture.  (5)  Again,  an  host  imphes  strength.  We  have  a  strong 
garrison  and  guard.  Angela  severally  are  strong  creatures.  We  see  one  of  them 
destroyed  all  the  first-bom  in  Egypt ;  one  of  them  destroyed  the  host  of  Senna- 
cherib the  Assyrian  in  one  night.  "  And  suddenly  there  was,"  &o.  "  Suddenly,'' 
in  an  unperoeivable  time,  yet  in  time ;  for  there  is  no  motion  in  a  moment,  no 
creature  moves  from  place  to  place  in  a  moment.  God  is  everywhere.  •'  Suddenly," 
it  not  only  shows  us — 1.  Somewhat  exemplary  from  the  quick  despatch  of  the 
angels  in  their  business — we  pray  to  God  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  "  Thy  will  be  done 
on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven ; "  that  is,  willingly,  "  suddenly,"  cheerfully ; — 2,  But 
also  it  serves  for  comfort.  If  we  be  in  any  sudden  danger,  God  can  despatch  an 
angel,  "  a  multitude  "  of  angels,  to  encamp  about  us  "  suddenly."  What  is  the 
use  and  end  of  this  glorious  apparition  ?  In  regard  of  the  poor  shepherds,  to  con- 
£rm  their  faith,  and  in  them  ours ;  for  if  one  or  two  witnesses  confirm  a  thing, 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

what  shall  a  maltitnde  do  ?  If  one  or  two  men  confirm  a  truth,  much  more  •■ 
host  of  heavenly  angels.  Therefore  it  is  base  infidelity  to  call  this  in  qnestion, 
that  is  confirmed  by  a  multitude  of  angels.  And  to  comfort  them  likewise  in  this 
apparition.  We  see  by  the  way  that  for  one  Christian  to  confirm  and  comfort 
one  another,  it  is  the  work  of  an  angel,  an  angelical  work ;  for  one  man  to 
discourage  another,  it  is  the  work  of  a  devil.  Thus  much  for  the  apparitioru 
2.  Now  the  celebration  is  "  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising  God,"  The 
word  signifies  "  singing  "  as  well  as  praise.  It  imphes  praise  expressed  in  that 
manner ;  and  indeed  "  praising  God,"  it  is  the  best  expression  of  the  affection  of 
joy.  The  angels  were  joyful  at  the  birth  of  Christ  their  Lord.  Joy  is  no  way 
better  expressed  than  in  "  praising  God  ; "  and  it  is  pity  that  such  a  sweet  affection 
as  joy  should  run  in  any  other  stream,  if  it  were  possible,  than  the  **  praising  of 
God."  God  hath  planted  this  affection  of  joy  in  the  creature,  and  it  is  fit  he 
should  reap  the  fruit  of  his  own  garden.  It  is  pity  a  clear  stream  should  run 
into  a  puddle,  it  should  rather  [run  into  a  garden  ;  and  so  sweet  and  excellent  an 
affection  as  joy,  it  is  pity  it  should  be  employed  otherwise  than  "  in  praising  God  " 
and  doing  good  to  men.  They  express  their  joy  in  a  suitable  expression — '« in 
praising  God."  The  sweetest  affection  in  man  should  have  the  sweetest  employ- 
ment. See  here  the  pure  nature  of  angels.  They  praise  God  for  us.  We  have 
more  good  by  the  incarnation  of  Christ  than  they  have ;  yet  notwithstanding,  such 
is  their  humility,  that  they  come  down  with  great  delight  from  heaven,  and  praise 
and  glorify  God  for  the  birth  of  Christ,  who  is  not  their,  but  our  Redeemer.  Some 
strength  they  have.  There  is  no  creature  but  hath  some  good  by  the  incarnation 
of  Christ ;  to  the  angels  themselves,  yet,  however,  they  have  some  strength  from 
Christ,  In  the  increase  of  the  number  of  the  Church  ;  yet  He  is  not  the  Eedeemer 
of  angels.  And  yet  see,  their  nature  is  so  pure  and  so  clear  from  envy  and  pride, 
that  they  even  glorify  God  for  the  goodness  showed  to  us — meaner  creatures  than 
themselves ;  and  they  envy  not  us,  though  we  be  advanced,  by  the  incarnation  of 
Christ,  to  ft  higher  place  than  they.  Let  as  labour  therefore  for  dispositiona 
angelical,  that  is,  such  as  may  delight  in  the  good  of  others,  and  the  good  of  other 
meaner  than  ourselves.  And  learn  this  also  from  them :  shall  they  glorify  God  for 
our  good  especially,  and  shall  we  be  dull  and  cold  in  praising  God  on  our  own 
behalf  ?  There  is  some  difference  in  the  readings.  Some  copies  have  it,  "  On  earth 
peace  to  men  of  goodwill,"  to  men  of  God's  goodwill ;  and  so  they  would  have  it 
two  branches,  not  three.  If  the  word  be  rightly  understood,  it  ia  no  great  matter. 
1.  First,  the  angels  begin  with  the  main  and  chief  end  of  all.  It  is  God's  end ;  it 
was  the  angels'  end,  and  it  should  be  ours  too,  *•  Glory  to  God  on  high,"  2.  Then 
they  wish  the  chief  good  of  all,  that  whereby  we  are  fitted  for  the  main  end, 
•'  peace."  God  cannot  be  glorified  on  earth  unless  there  be  peace  wrought.  3. 
Then,  thirdly,  here  is  the  ground  of  all  happiness  from  whence  this  peace  comes : 
from  God's  goodwill ;  from  his  good  pleasure  or  free  grace  "  to  men  of  God's  good- 
will." To  begin  with  the  first :  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  The  angels, 
those  blessed  and  holy  spirits,  they  begin  with  that  which  is  the  end  of  all.  It  18 
God's  end  in  all  things.  His  own  glory.  He  hath  none  above  Himself  whose  glory 
to  aim  at.  And  they  wish  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  heavens."  Indeed,  He 
is  more  glorified  there  than  anywhere  in  the  world.  It  is  the  place  where  Hia 
Majesty  most  appears  ;  and  the  truth  is,  we  cannot  perfectly  glorify  God  till  we  be 
in  heaven.  There  is  pure  glory  given  to  God  in  heaven.  There  is  no  corruption 
there  in  those  perfect  souls.  There  is  perfect  glory  given  to  God  in  heaven.  Hera 
npon  earth  God  is  not  glorified  at  all  by  many.  In  the  mean  time,  let  me  add  this  by 
the  way,  that  in  some  sort  we  may  glorify  God  more  on  earth  than  in  heaven.  Here 
upon  earth  we  glorify  God  in  the  midst  of  enemies  ;  He  hath  no  enemies  in  heaven; 
they  are  all  of  one  spirit.  In  this  respect,  let  us  be  encouraged  to  glorify  God, 
what  we  can  here :  for  if  we  begin  to  glorify  God  here,  it  is  a  sign  we  are  of  the 
number  that  He  intends  to  glorify  with  Him  for  ever.  The  verb  is  not  set  down 
here  ;  whether  it  should  be,  Glory  is  given  to  God  ;  or  whether,  by  way  of  wishing, 
"  Let  glory  be  given  to  God  ;  "  or  by  way  of  prediction  or  prophecy  for  the  time  to 
come,  "  Glory  shall  be  to  God,"  from  hence  to  the  end  of  the  world.  The  verb 
being  wanting,  all  have  a  truth.  "  Glory  to  God  on  high."  Glory  is  excellencv, 
greatness,  and  goodness,  with  the  eminency  of  it,  so  as  it  may  be  discovered. 
There  is  a  fundamental  glory  in  things  that  are  not  discovered  at  all  times.  God 
is  always  glorious,  but,  alas !  few  have  eyes  to  see  it.  In  the  former  part  of  the 
chapter  "  light  "  is  called  the"  glory  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  9).  Light  is  a  glorious 
ereature.    Nothing  expresseth  glory  so  much  as  light.    It  is  a  sweet  creature,  but 


«BAr.  n.]  ST.  LUKB,  ISI 

it  is  a  glorious  creatare.  It  carries  its  evidence  in  itself ;  it  discoyera  all  other 
things  and  itself  too.  So  excellency  and  eminency  will  discover  itself  to  those  that 
have  eyes  to  see  it ;  and  being  manifested,  and  withal  taken  notice  of,  is  glory.  In  that 
the  angels  begin  with  the  glory  of  God,  I  might  speak  of  this  doctrine,  that  the  glory 
of  God,  the  setting  forth  of  the  excellencies  and  eminencies  of  the  Lord,  should  be  the 
end  of  our  lives,  the  chief  thing  we  should  aim  at.  The  angels  here  begin  with  it, 
and  we  begin  with  it  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  "hallowed  be  Thy  name."  It  should  be 
our  main  employment  (Eom.  xi.  36).  Well  then,  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  together 
with  the  benefits  to  us  by  it,  that  is,  redemption,  adoption,  <fec.,  it  is  that  wherein 
God  will  show  His  glory  most  of  all.  That  is  the  doctrinal  truth.  The  glory  and 
excellency  of  God  doth  most  shine  in  His  love  and  mercy  in  Christ.  Every 
excellency  of  God  hath  its  proper  place  or  theatre  where  it  is  seen,  as  His  power  in 
the  creation,  his  wisdom  in  His  providence  and  ruling  of  the  world,  His  justice  in 
hell,  His  Majesty  in  heaven ;  but  His  mercy  and  kindness.  His  bowels  of  tender 
mercy,  do  most  appear  in  His  Church  among  His  people.  God  shows  the  excel- 
lency of  His  goodness  and  mercy  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  and  the  benefits  we 
have  by  it.  Many  attributes  and  excellencies  of  God  shine  in  Christ,  as — His 
truth  :  •'  All  the  promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ "  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  And 
then  His  wisdom,  that  he  could  reconcile  justice  and  mercy,  by  joining  two  natures 
together.  Likewise  here  is  justice,  justice  fully  satisfied  in  Cfhrist.  And  of  His 
holiness,  that  He  would  be  no  othei'wise  satisfied  for  sin.  Therefore  *'  glory  to  God 
in  the  highest  heavens,"  especially  for  His  free  grace  and  mercy  in  Christ.  Now 
that  you  may  understand  this  sweet  point,  which  is  very  comfortable,  and  indeed 
the  grand  comfort  to  a  Christian,  do  but  compare  the  glory  of  God,  that  is,  the 
excellency  and  eminency  of  God's  mercy,  and  goodness,  and  greatness  of  this  work 
of  redemption  by  Christ,  with  other  things.  1.  God  is  glorious  in  the  work  of 
creation.  •'  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,"  and  the  earth  manifests  the 
glory  of  God.  2.  Nay,  the  glory  of  God's  love  and  mercy  shined  not  to  us  so,  when 
we  were  in  Adam ;  not  in  Adam,  for  there  God  did  good  to  a  good  man;  He  created 
him  good,  and  showed  goodness  to  him.  That  was  not  so  much  wonder.  But  for 
God  to  show  mercy  to  an  enemy,  to  a  creature  that  was  in  opposition  to  Him,  that 
was  in  a  state  of  rebellion  against  Him,  it  is  a  greater  wonder  and  more  glory.  That 
which  I  shall  next  stand  upon,  shall  be  to  show  (1)  how  we  may  know  whether 
we  glorify  God  for  Christ  or  no ;  (2)  and  then  the  hindrances  that  keep  us  from 
glorifying  God  for  this  excellent  good ;  (3)  and  the  means  how  we  may  come  to 
glorify  God.  1.  For  the  first,  of  glorifying  God  in  general,  I  will  not  speak  much. 
It  would  be  large;  and  the  point  of  glorifying  God  is  most  sweetly  considered, 
as  invested  in  such  a  benefit  as  this,  when  we  think  of  it,  not  as  an  idea  only, 
but  think  of  it  in  Christ,  for  whom  we  have  cause  to  glorify  God,  and  for  all 
the  good  we  have  by  Him.  (1)  First,  then,  we  hold  tune  with  the  blessed  angels 
in  giving  glory  to  God,  when  we  exalt  God  in  our  souls  above  all  creatures  and 
things  in  the  world  ;  when  we  lift  Him  up  in  His  own  place,  and  let  Him  be  in  our 
Bouls,  as  He  is  in  Himself,  in  the  most  holy,  God  is  glorious,  especially  in  His 
mercy  and  goodness.  Let  Him  be  so  in  our  hearts,  in  these  sweet  attributes,  above 
all  our  unworthiness  and  sin.  For  God  hath  not  glory  from  us  till  we  give  Him 
the  highest  place  in  our  love  and  joy  and  delight,  and  all  those  affections  that  are 
set  upon  good,  when  they  are  set  upon  Him  as  the  chief  good ;  then  we  give  Pim 
His  due  place  in  our  souls,  we  ascribe  to  Him  that  divinity,  and  excellency,  and 
eminency  that  is  due  to  Him.  (2)  Then  again,  we  give  glory  to  God  for  Christ, 
when  we  take  all  the  favours  we  have  from  God  in  Christ,  when  we  see  Christ  in 
everything.  "All  things  are  ours  because  we  are  Christ's"  (1  Cor.  iii.  23).  (3)  Then 
again,  we  give  glory  to  God  when  we  stir  up  others.  All  the  angels  consent.  There 
was  no  discord  in  this  harmony  of  the  angels.  (4)  Again,  we  glorify  God  in  Christ, 
when  we  see  such  glory  and  mercy  of  Christ,  as  it  doth  transform  as  and  change 
ns,  and  from  an  inward  change  we  have  alway  a  blessed  disposition  to  glorify  God, 
BS  I  showed  out  of  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  Therefore  if  we  find  that  the  knowlege  of  God 
in  Christ  hath  changed  our  dispositions,  it  is  a  sign  then  we  give  glory  to  God 
indeed.  For  to  glorify  God  is  an  action  that  cannot  proceed  but  from  a  disposition 
of  nature  that  is  altered  and  changed.  The  instrument  must  be  set  in  tune  before 
it  can  yield  this  excellent  music,  to  glorify  God  as  the  angels  do  ;  that  is,  all  the 
powers  of  the  soul  must  be  set  in  order  with  grace  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  (5)  Again, 
we  glorify  God  when  we  take  to  heart  anything  that  may  hinder,  or  stop,  or  eclipse 
God'B  truth,  and  obscure  it ;  when  it  works  zeal  in  us  in  our  places  as  far  as  we 
can ;  when  it  affects  us  deeply  to  see  the  cause  of  religion  hindered  any  way,    I& 


189  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obap.  n, 

there  b«  any  desire  of  glorifying  God,  there  will  be  zeal.  (6)  Again,  if  we  apprehend 
this  glorious  mystery  of  Christ  in  the  gospel  aright,  it  will  work  in  as  a  glorioui 
joy;  for  joy  is  a  disposition  especially  that  fits  us  to  glorify  Ch>d.  2.  Thia 
being  so  excellent  a  duty,  to  which  we  are  stirred  by  the  angels,  "Glory  to 
God  on  high,"  &o.,  what  are  the  main  hindrances  of  it  that  we  give  not  God 
more  glory  ?  (1)  The  main  hindrances  are  a  double  veil  of  ignorance  and  nn- 
belief,  that  we  do  not  see  the  glorious  light  of  God  shining  in  JesuB  Christ; 
or  else  if  we  do  not  know  it,  we  do  not  believe  it;  and  thereupon,  instead  of 
that  blessed  disposition  that  should  be  in  the  soul,  there  comes  an  admiration 
of  carnal  excellencies,  a  delighting  in  base  things.  (2)  So  likewise  unbelief, 
when  we  hear  and  see  and  know  the  notion  of  mercy  and  of  Christ,  and 
can  dispute  of  these  things,  like  men  that  talk  of   that  they  never  tasted  oL 

5.  Now,  the  way  to  attain  to  this  glorious  duty,  to  glorify  God.  (1)  First,  there- 
fore, if  we  would  glorify  God,  we  must  redeem  some  time  to  think  of  these  things, 
and  bestow  the  strength  of  our  thoughts  this  way.  The  soul  being  the  most 
excellent  thing  in  the  world,  it  is  fit  it  should  be  set  on  the  excellentest  duty.  i2y 
Now,  to  help  this,  in  the  next  place,  beg  of  God  the  "  Spirit  of  revelation  "  to  dis- 
cover to  us  these  things  in  their  own  proper  light,  "  for  they  are  spiritually 
discerned. "  (3)  And  let  us  labour  daily  more  and  more  to  see  the  vanity  of  all 
things  in  the  world.  "Peace  on  earth."  The  same  holy  affection  in  the  angela 
that  moved  them  to  wish  God  to  have  his  due  of  glory  from  the  creature,  it  moves 
them  to  wish  peace  to  men  likewise ;  to  show  this,  by  the  way,  that  there  can  be  no 
true  zeal  of  God's  glory  but  with  love  to  mankind.  They  were  not  so  ravished 
with  the  glory  of  God  as  to  forget  poor  man  on  earth.  Oh  no  1  They  have  sweet, 
pure  affections  to  man,  a  poorer  creature  than  themselves.  Therefore  let  them 
that  are  injurious  and  violent  in  their  dispositions,  and  insolent  in  their  carriage, 
never  talk  of  glorifying  God,  when  they  despise  and  wrong  men.  There  are  some 
that  overthrow  all  peace  in  the  earth  for  their  own  glory,  but  he  that  seeks  God'ft 
glory  will  procure  peace  what  he  can  ;  for  they  go  both  together,  as  we  see  here, 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  peace  on  earth."  Now,  their  end  of  wishing  peace 
upon  earth,  it  is  that  men  might  thereby  glorify  God,  that  God  being  reconciled, 
and  peace  being  stablished  in  men's  consciences,  they  might  glorify  God.  Henoe 
observe  this  likewise,  that  we  cannot  glorify  God  till  we  have  some  knowledge  of 
our  peace  with  him  in  Christ.  The  reason  is,  peace  comes  from  righteousness.  Christ 
is  first  the  "King  of  righteousness,"  and  then  "  King  of  peace ; "  righteousness 
causeth  peace.  Now,  unless  the  soul  be  assured  of  righteousness  in  Christ,  it  can 
have  no  peace.  For  can  we  heartily  wish  for  the  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  him 
that  we  think  is  our  enemy,  and  him  that  we  have  no  interest  in  his  greatness  and 
goodness  ?  The  heart  of  man  will  never  do  it,  therefore  God  must  first  speak  peace  to 
the  soul — the  angels  knew  that  well  enough — and  then  we  are  fit  to  glorify  God. 
•*  Peace  on  earUi."  What  is  peace  ?  It  is  the  best  thing  that  man  can 
attain  unto,  to  have  peace  with  his  Maker  and  Creator.  Peace,  in  general, 
is  a  harmony  and  an  agreement  of  different  things.  1.  First,  there  is  a 
Bcattering  and  a  division  from  God,  the  fountain  of  good,  with  whom  we 
had  communion  in  our  first  creation,  and  His  delight  was  in  His  creature. 
2.  Then  there  is  a  separation  between  the  good  angels  and  us ;  for  they 
being  good  subjects,  take  part  with  their  prince,  and  therefore  join  against 
rebels,  as  we  are.  S.  Then  there  is  a  division  and  scattering  between  man  and 
man.  4.  And  then  there  is  a  division  and  separation  between  a  man  and  the 
creature,  which  is  ready  to  be  in  arms  against  any  man  that  is  in  the  state  of 
nature,  to  take  God's  quarrel,  as  we  see  in  the  plagues  of  Egypt  and  other  examples. 

6.  And  they  have  no  peace  with  themselves.  Then  if  we  be  at  peace  with  God,  all 
other  peace  will  follow  ;  for  good  subjects  will  be  at  peace  with  rebels,  when  thej 
ere  brought  in  subjection  to  their  king,  and  all  join  in  one  obedience.  Therefore 
the  angels  are  brought  to  God  again  by  Christ.  And  so  for  men,  there  is  a  spirit  of 
union  between  them.  The  same  Spirit  that  knits  us  to  God  by  faith,  knits  us  one 
to  another  by  love.  And  we  have  peace  with  the  creature,  for  when  God,  who  is 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  is  made  peaceful  to  us,  He  makes  all  other  things  peaceable. 
All  peace  with  God,  with  angels,  and  with  creatures  is  stablished  in  Christ.  And 
why  in  Christ  ?  Christ  is  every  way  fitted  for  it,  for  He  is  the  Mediator  between 
God  and  man  ;  therefore  by  office  He  is  fit  to  make  peace  between  God  and  man. 
He  is  Emmanuel,  Himself  God  and  man  in  one  nature  ;  therefore  His  office  is  to 
bring  God  and  man  together.  1.  It  is  fit  it  should  be  so  in  regard  of  God,  wha 
being  a  "  consuming  fire,"  wUl  no  peace  with  the  creature  without  a  mediator.    It 


CHA».  It]  8T.  LUKE.  18S 

stands  not  with  His  majesty,  neither  can  there  ever  be  peace  with  us  otherwise.  2, 
It  was  also  fit,  in  respect  of  as,  it  should  be  so.  Alas  1  "  who  can  dwell  with  ever- 
/asting  burnings  ?  "  (Isa.  zxziii.  14).  Who  can  have  communion  with  God,  who  is 
a  "  consuming  fire  T  "  No.  We  cannot  endure  the  sight  of  an  angel.  8.  If  wa 
look  to  Christ  Himself,  He  being  God's  Son,  and  the  Son  of  His  love,  for  Him  ta 
make  us  sons,  and  sons  of  God's  love.  Is  it  not  most  agreeable,  that  He  that  is 
the  image  of  God,  should  again  renew  the  image  of  God  that  we  lost  ?  "  Peace 
upon  earth."  Why  doth  He  say,  "  peace  on  earth  "  ?  Because  peace  was  here 
wrought  upon  earth  by  Christ  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  he  offered  Himself  "  a 
sacrifice  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  His  Father."  Because  here  in  earth  we  must 
be  partakers  of  it.  We  ofttimes  defer  to  make  oar  peace  with  God  from  time  to 
time,  and  think  there  will  be  peace  made  in  another  world.  Oh,  beloved,  our  peace 
must  'be  made  on  earth.  But  to  come  to  some  trials,  whether  we  have  this  peace 
made  or  no  ;  whether  we  can  say  in  spirit  and  truth,  there  is  a  peace  established 
between  God  and  as.  1.  For  a  ground  of  this,  that  may  lead  as  to  further  trial, 
know  that  Christ  hath  reconciled  God  and  as  together,  not  only  by  obtaining  peace, 
by  way  of  satisfaction,  but  by  way  of  application  also.  He  gives  a  spirit  of  appli- 
cation  to  improve  that  peace,  to  improve  "  Christ,  the  Prince  of  peace,"  as  their 
own.  To  come  to  some  more  familiar  evidences,  whether  we  be  at  peace  with  God, 
and  whether  we  have  the  comfort  of  this  peace,  established  by  Christ,  or  no.  2. 
Those  that  are  reconciled  one  to  another  have  common  friends  and  common 
enemies.  3.  Another  evidence  of  "  peace  "  made  in  Christ  between  God  and  us,  is 
a  boldness  of  spirit  and  acquaintance  with  God  (Job  xxii.  21).  4.  A  Christian  that 
hath  made  his  "  peace  "  with  God,  will  never  allow  himself  in  any  sin  against  con« 
science.  5.  Again,  where  there  is  a  true  peace  established,  there  is  a  high  esteem 
of  the  word  of  peace,  the  gospel  of  reconciliation,  as  St.  Paul  caUs  it  (2  Cor.  v.  18). 
6.  Lastly,  those  that  have  found  peace  are  peaceable.  In  the  next  place,  to  give  a 
(ew  directions  to  maintain  this  peace  actually  and  continually  every  day.  1.  To 
walk  with  God,  and  to  keep  our  daily  peace  with  God,  it  requires  a  great  deal  of 
watchfulness  over  our  thoughts, — for  He  is  a  Spirit,  over  our  words  and  actions. 
Watchfulness  is  the  preserver  of  peace.  2.  And  because  it  is  a  difficult  thing  to 
maintain  terms  of  peace  with  God,  in  regard  of  oar  indisposition,  we  fall  into 
breaches  with  God  daily  i  therefore  we  should  often  renew  our  covenants  and  pur- 
poses  every  day  3.  Again,  if  we  would  maintain  this  peace,  let  as  be  always  doing 
somewhat  that  is  good  and  pleasing  to  God.  In  the  same  chapter  (Philip,  iv.  8), 
"  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  Uiings  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just, 
whatsoever  things  are  pure,"  &o.,  *'  think  of  these  things.  Now,  to  stir  us  up  more 
and  more  to  search  the  grounds  of  our  peace,  I  beseech  you,  let  us  consider  the 
fearful  estate  of  a  man  that  hath  not  made  his  peace  with  God.  "  Goodwill 
towards  men."  Divers  copies  have  it  otherwise,  "  On  earth  peace  to  men  of  good- 
will." Some  have  it,  "  Goodwill  towards  men."  The  sense  is  not  much  different. 
Peace  on  earth,  "  To  men  of  God's  goodwill,  of  God's  good  pleasure."  That 
God  hath  a  pleasure  to  save,  or  "  goodwill  towards  men,"  of  God's  good  pleasure  ; 
*'  Peace   on  earth,"   to  men  of   God's   goodwill   and  pleasure ;    or  God's  good 

ftleasure  towards  men.  1.  God  shews  now  good  pleasure  towards  men.  The 
ove  that  God  bears  towards  man  hath  divers  terms,  from  divers  relations. 
Now  this  free  goodwill  and  grace,  it  is  towards  men,  towards  mankind.  He  saith 
not,  towards  angels.  And  learn  this  for  imitation,  to  love  mankind.  God  loved 
mankind  ;  and  surely  there  is  none  that  is  bom  of  God,  but  he  loves  the  nature  of 
man,  wheresoever  he  finds  it.  2.  This  ivSoKta,  "  goodwill  of  God,"  to  restore 
lapsed  man  by  the  sending  of  His  Son,  is  the  ground  of  all  good  to  man,  and  hath 
no  ground  but  itself.  I  come  to  the  last  point,  because  I  would  end  this  text  at  this 
time.  3.  This  free  love  and  grace  of  God  is  only  in  Christ.  (R.  Sibbes.)  The 
angels'  song  : — But  what  did  the  heavenly  choir  mean  ?  They  could  not  mean 
that,  at  that  moment,  there  was  "  Peace  on  the  earth"  ?  Was  it  a  prayer?  •'  May 
there  be  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  may  there  be  peace  on  earth,  and  may 
there  be  goodwill  toward  men  1 "  Or  was  it  prophecy  ?  Did  they  foresee  that  the 
time  would  come  that  this  would  be  the  blessed  condition  of  our  world  1 — a  time  not 
yet  arrived.  The  angel  who  led  the  band,  had  spoken  of  joy,  only  joy,  "great  joy," 
prophetic  joy,  "which  should  be  to  all  people,"  a  joy  prophetic  stUl.  But  the 
rushing  "  multitude  of  the  angel  host  "  carried  the  note  higher,  and  gave  no  limit 
of  time  ;  and  they  did  not  say  joy,  but  peace — "  Peace  on  earth,"  Is  it  that,  even 
to  an  angel's  mind,  peace  is  above  joy  ?  Or,  was  it  that  they  thought  and 
knew  that  this  was  what  our  world  most  wanted  1    They  had  been  accustomed  (e 


18*  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  n. 

look  npon  the  peace  of  heaven,  where  everything  has  found  its  resting-place,  ani 
•verything  is  calm :  where  there  is  not  a  sonnd  which  is  not  like  the  flow  of  waters : 
where  a  discordant  note  is  never  heard  :  where  all  hearts  are  in  one  eweet  concord  • 
where  all  is  dove-like  gentleness  !  No  wonder,  then,  that  they  drew  their  anthema 
from  the  sceniBS  they  lived  in.  We  have  to  do  now  only  with  peace.  And  the  stress  liet 
in  the  words,  "  On  tarth."  No  marvel  if  there  should  be  peace  in  heaven.  No 
«ngel  would  care  to  proclaim  a  thing  so  certain.  A  "  peace  "  that  has  sadly  left  us, 
since  that  day  when  sin  came  in  !  Observe  the  course  of  the  facts  of  our  world's 
history.  Adam  and  Eve  who,  till  that  moment,  were  as  one,  now  wrangled,  which  ia 
the  guiltiest  f  The  first  death  upon  this  earth  is  fratricide  ;  and  the  murdering 
brother,  in  his  callous  heart,  cares  nothing  I  The  whole  world  is  at  enmity  with 
<jrod  ;  and,  save  a  few  elect  of  every  kind,  every  creature  perishes  in  one  vast  en- 
gulphing  flood  !  The  earliest  building  upon  record  ends  in  a  confusion,  and  is 
stamped  a  Babel  I  Even  Abraham  and  Lot  have  to  part ;  and  Isaac  quarrels  with 
Ishmael ;  and  Jacob  with  Esau  ;  and  Joseph  has  no  peace  with  his  brethren. 
•'  Peace  on  earth  1 "  where  is  it  ?  Where  does  she  hide  herself  ?  Is  she  in  the 
valleys  ?  is  she  among  the  mountains  ?  Is  she  in  the  high  places  of  kings  ?  Is 
she  in  the  cottage  ?  Is  she  in  the  Church  ?  Is  she,  as  she  ou^ht  to  be,  in  any  one 
single  man  that  walks  this  earth  ?  But  what  is  "  peace  "  ?  The  after  creation — 
the  rest  of  the  soul — the  concord  of  hearts — the  reflection  of  heaven — the  image  ol 
God.  We  must  examine  it  more  closely.  It  is  human  peace  the  angels  sang : 
"  Peace  on  earth."  What  is  the  peace  of  a  man  ?  First,  there  must  be  peace  with 
God.  God  has  said  it  universally,  "  There  shall  be  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  tb« 
wicked."  But  peace  makes  peace.  Peace  with  God  in  the  soul,  makes  peace  in 
the  soul,  and  peace  in  the  soul  makes  peace  with  the  world.  (J.  Vaxighan,  M.A.) 
The  influence  of  Christianity  on  the  temporal  condition  of  mankind : — I.  On  national 
CHARACTEB.  II.  On  SOCIAL  iNTEKCOURSE,  1.  Christianity  imparts  to  social  inter- 
course a  principle  of  equity.  2.  A  character  of  mildness  to  the  intercourse  of  social 
life.  8.  A  principle  of  benevolence.  III.  On  the  domestic  scene.  IV.  On  thb 
iNDiviDUAii.  1.  It  secures  his  property.  2.  It  promotes  his  health.  3.  It  guards 
his  reputation.  {T.  Raffles,  D.D.)  National  peace: — And  indeed  national  feuda 
are  the  more  odious  and  unchristian,  by  how  much  Christ  hath  called  all 
people  to  the  sprinkling  of  the  same  water,  and  to  alike  participation  of  His 
body  and  blood  at  the  same  table.  And  it  was  well  apprehended  of  one,  that 
God  hath  given  unto  men  more  excellent  gifts  in  the  skill  of  navigation  since 
His  son  is  born,  than  ever  they  had  before ;  that  He  might  show  the  way  how 
all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  should  be  sociable  together :  for  Christ  hath  breathed 
His  peace  upon  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  (Bishop  Hacket.)  Christ  adverse 
to  some  kinds  of  peace: — Yet  very  true  that  none  is  a  greater  adversary  than 
our  Saviour  to  some  sorts  of  peace.  The  peace  of  Christ  breaks  the  confederacy 
which  sinners  have  in  evil ;  it  defies  the  devil  and  the  vain  pomp  of  the  world ; 
it  draws  the  sword  against  blasphemy  and  idolatry ;  it  will  not  let  a  man  be  at 
quiet  within  himself  when  he  is  fuU  of  vicious  concupiscence.  To  make  a 
covenant  with  hell,  as  the  prophet  speaks,  or  to  have  any  fellowship  with  the  worka 
of  darkness.  {Ibid.)  Peace  and  sanctity  not  incompatible : — The  very  name  of 
peace  is  sweet  and  lovely :  it  is  the  calm  of  the  world,  the  smile  of  nature,  the  har- 
mony of  things,  a  gentle  and  melodious  air  struck  from  well-tuned  affairs ;  a  bless* 
ing,  80  excellent  and  amiable,  that  in  this  world  there  is  but  one  preferable  before 
it,  and  that  is,  holiness.  And,  certainly,  great  glory  doth  dwell  in  that  land,  where 
these  two  sister-blessings,  righteousness  and  peace,  do  meet  and  kiss  each  other,  aa 
the  Psalmist  speaks  (Psa.  Ixxxv.  9,  10).  I  know,  that  there  are  hot  and  turbulent 
spirits  enough  abroad,  who  are  apt  to  suspect  whatsoever  is  spoken  on  the  behalf  ol 
peace,  to  be  to  the  disadvantage  of  holiness:  and,  perhaps,  some  men's  zeal  may 
be  such  a  touchy  and  froward  thing,  that,  though  an  angel  from  heaven,  yea  an 
innumerable  multitude  of  them,  proclaim  it ;  yet  they  cannot  believe  there  may  be 
glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  whilst  there  is  peace  on  earth.  Indeed,  if  peace  and 
Banctity  were  incompatible,  or  if  any  unhappy  circumstances  should  compel  us  to 
redeem  the  one  at  the  price  of  the  other ;  we  ought  rather  to  follow  righteousness 
through  thorns  and  briars,  than  peace  in  its  smoothest  way  strewed  with  roses. 
But  there  is  no  such  inconsistency  between  them :  for,  certainly,  that  God,  who  hath 
commanded  us  to  follow  both  peace  and  holiness  (Heb.  xii.  14),  supposeth  that  they 
themselves  may  well  go  together.  We  may  well  suspect  that  zeal  to  be  but  an  un- 
clean bird  of  prey,  that  delights  to  quarry  upon  the  dove ;  and  those  erratic  lights, 
wbicsh  make  the  vulgar  gaze  and  the  vrise  fear,  to  be  but  glaring  comets,  whose 


eHAT.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  182 

bloody  aspects  and  eecentrio  irregular  motions  threaten  nothing  but  wars,  ruin,  and 
desolations.  Bighteousness  doth  not  oblige  us,  so  soon  as  anything  is  passed  con- 
trary to  our  present  judgments  and  persuasions,  nay  suppose  it  be  contrary  to  the 
trnijli  also,  straight  to  furbish  our  weapons,  to  sound  an  alarm,  and  to  kill  others  in 
defence  of  that  cause  for  which  we  ourselves  rather  ought  to  die.  This  is  not  to 
part  with  peace  for  righteousness ;  bat  to  sacrifice  both  peace  and  righteousness,  to 
injustice  and  violence.  The  causa  of  God,  of  piety  and  religion,  may  frequently 
engage  us  to  forego  our  own  peace,  as  sufferers  and  martyrs ;  but  never  to  disturb 
the  pubho  peace  of  our  country,  as  fighters  and  warriors.    {E.  Hopkins,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Let  ns  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and  see. — Bethlehem's  leonder : — 
Every  year  the  Christian  heart  takes,  in  thought,  the  shepherd's  pilgrimage  to 
Bethlehem.  In  this  district  lay  the  fields  of  Boaz  in  which  Euth  gleaned.  Here 
the  son  of  Obed  was  born.  David  was  anointed  in  Bethlehem.  Best  of  all,  in 
Bethlehem  was  Christ  revealed.  It  was  not  without  significance  that  Bethlehem, 
"  The  House  of  Bread,"  should  be  the  birthplace  of  Him  who  had  come  down  from 
heaven  to  be  the  Bread  of  Life  for  men,  and  that  He,  who  was  in  after  years  to  be 
the  Friend  of  the  people  and  Saviour  of  the  world,  to  be  Himself  so  straitened 
as  often  to  have  nowhere  to  lay  His  head,  should  commence  His  earthly  pilgrimage 
within  the  precincts  of  a  stable.  Let  us  ask  what  it  was  that  the  Bethlehem 
manger  contained.  I.  A  virgin's  child.  II.  Israel's  Messiaji.  III.  The  world's 
Saviour.  IV.  God's  Son.  Transcendent  mystery  I  Thought  is  paralyzed  when  it 
attempts  to  conceive  how  the  Eternal  could  become  a  child  of  days,  how  the 
Infinite  could  be  reduced  to  dimensions,  how  the  Adorable  Creator  could 
become  one  with  His  own  creature.  Let  it  kindle  our  gratitude  that  we  can 
understand  something  of  the  purpose  of  this  sublime  mystery,  if  even  we  can 
learn  nothing  of  its  manner.  The  Son  of  God  became  incarnate,  that  He 
might  reveal  the  Father,  that  He  might  exemplify  human  virtue,  that  He 
might  take  away  our  sins,  and  that  He  might  be  able  thereby  to  make  ub 
partakers  of  His  own  Divine  nature.  (T.  W.)  The  first  pilgrims  to  the  stable  of 
Bethlehem: — 1.  Their  pilgrim  mind.  2.  Their  pilgrim  staff.  3.  Their  pilgrim 
hope.  4.  Their  pilgrim  joy.  5.  Their  pilgrim  thanksgiving.  {J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee, 
D.D.)  How  men  receive  the  good  news  of  God: — I. — 1.  In  order  that  man  may 
possess  the  blessings  which  are  brought  upon  earth  in  the  Person  of  the  Incarnate 
Word,  he  must  be  willing  to  obey  the  Divine  Voice  which  bids  him  seek  if  he  would 
find.  2.  The  shepherds  are  not  content  with  wondering  at  the  Divine  mystery 
vhich  has  been  made  known  to  them,  nor  yet  with  listening  to  the  angelic  song, 
but  they  hasten  to  Him  who  is  born  their  Saviour.  Being  thus  obedient  they  are 
filled  with  the  angelic  spirit,  and  they  are  also  able  to  glorify  God  for  that  which 
they  have  seen  and  heard.  Simple  faith  and  obedience  lift  up  the  humblest  to 
Bhare  in  the  work  of  the  angels  of  God.  3.  Yet  there  are  many,  who  hearing  these 
things,  regard  them  only  with  idle  and  fruitless  wonder  (ver.  18)  instead  of  pondering 
them  in  their  hearts  as  Mary  did.  II. — 1.  The  gospel  message  that  God  is  made 
man  is  for  ever  ringing  in  our  ears.  How  does  it  affect  us  ?  There  are  many  who 
are  ready  to  study  Christian  doctrine  as  an  interesting  phase  of  human  thought,  or 
as  a  bright  poetic  vision,  but  who  never  find  the  Child  of  Bethlehem  as  a  Saviour 
in  very  deed.  2.  If  we  have  thus  found  Him,  our  belief  will  show  itself,  either  (1) 
by  summoning  ns  to  enter  into  the  company  of  those  elect  few  who,  Hke  Mary,  are 
absorbed  in  meditation  on  the  Divine  mysteries,  or  (2)  by  giving  us  power  to  praise 
and  glorify  God  in  the  common  occupations  of  daily  life,  in  union  with  these  shep- 
herds who  returned  to  the  work  of  their  sheepfolds,  filled  with  a  new  life  from  on 
high.  3.  Let  us  pray,  at  any  rate,  we  be  not  among  those  to  whom  the  gospel  is  a 
mere  matter  of  curiosity  and  empty  wonder,  exercising  no  influence  on  their  lives, 
and  forgotten  in  the  excitement  of  some  new  incident  of  an  unusual  kind.  (Canon 
Vernon  Uutton,  M.A.)         The  faith  of  the  shepherds,  true  faith: — 1.  Its  foundation. 

(1)  God's  Word.  (2)  God's  deed.  2.  Its  properties.  (1)  Emotion  of  heart.  (2) 
Activity  of  life.    3.  Its  aim.  (1)  The  spreading  of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth. 

(2)  The  glory  of  God.  (Harlcss.)  The  shepherds  as  patterns  fm-  imitation: — 1. 
They  seek  the  Child  in  the  stable  and  the  manger.  2.  They  spread  the  gospel 
message  everywhere.  3.  They  praise  God  with  thankful  joy.  (Ahlfeld.)  The 
shepherds'  celebration  of  Christmas : — 1.  Their  going.  2.  Their  seeing.  3.  Their 
spreading  abroad  the  saying.  4.  Their  return  to  their  avocations.  (Arndt.)  A 
pilgrimage  to  BethUhem : — God  gives  men  information  to  put  them  upon  action. 
210  sooner  are  the  shepherds  informed  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  than  they  say,  "Let 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

as,  then,  go  and  see  Him."  It  will  be  well  for  us  to  imitate  them,  and  x&ke  a  pil- 
grimage to  Bethlehem.  I.  Let  us  go  to  Bethlehem,  and  see  Deity  displatkd.  It 
was  necessary  for  our  redemption  that  the  Saviour  of  men  should  be  a  man ;  for  the 
Bame  nature  that  sinned  must  bear  the  punishment  of  sin.  In  what  manner  the 
human  nature  was  united  to  the  Divine,  we  cannot  tell.  It  is  enough  for  na  to 
know  that  it  was  so  united  (Matt.  i.  23 ;  John  i.  1,  14 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  15,  16).  Jesua 
Christ  is  God  manifested  in  the  flesh.  Let  us  go  to  Bethlehem,  and  see  this  great 
sight.  Angels  desire  to  look  at  it.  Glorious  mystery  1  II.  Let  us  go  to  Bethlehem, 
and  behold  man  bedeemed.  The  redemption  of  fallen,  guilty,  helpless  man,  was 
the  grand  design  of  the  Saviour's  birth.  There  is  something  delightful  in  the  name 
"  Saviour."  Cicero,  the  Boman  orator,  said,  that  when  travelling  in  Greece,  he 
saw  a  pillar  inscribed  with  this  word — Saviour.  He  admired  the  fulness  of  the 
name,  but  he  knew  not  its  Christian  meaning.  How  much  more  may  the  redeemed 
sinner  admire  it  1  We  must  have  perished,  had  He  not  come  and  saved  us.  III. 
Let  us  take  another  turn  to  Bethlehem,  and  see  Satan  buined.  Ever  since,  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  he  seduced  our  first  parents,  Satan  has  ruled  the  children  of  dis- 
obedience,  and  led  men  captive  at  his  will.  At  the  birth  of  Christ  his  throne 
began  to  totter,  and  it  will  go  on  shaking  until  it  is  utterly  destroyed.  Christ  by 
His  death  has  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  and  by  His  rising  again 
has  delivered  all  who  were  held  in  bondage  by  Satan.  (George  Burder.)  Teaching 
from  Christ's  cradle : — You  all  feel  more  or  less  the  trials,  the  mystery  of  life,  itiB 
Bufferings  and  its  sins.  One  and  One  only  can  alleviate  for  you  those  trials,  can 
explain  that  mystery,  can  remove  that  suffering,  can  heal  those  sins.  Would  you 
understand  anything  either  of  this  life  or  of  the  life  beyond  ?  You  can  only  do  so 
by  watching  the  life  of  your  Saviour,  by  coming  to  Christ's  cradle,  by  standing 
behind  His  cross,  by  sitting  with  the  deathless  angel  in  His  forsaken  tomb.  Follow 
Him  with  the  eagle  eye  of  faith,  and  then  you  may  see  the  heavens  open  and  Jesus 
Christ  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  I  ask  you,  then,  for  a  moment  or  two 
to  stand  with  me  beside  the  cradle  of  your  Lord,  in  the  manger  at  Bethlehem,  and 
catch  something  of  what  we  there  may  learn.  1.  Some  of  you  are  poor.  How  glad 
for  you,  beyond  all  utterance,  should  be  the  meaning  of  Christmas  I  Your  Lord 
was,  as  you  are,  poor — as  poor  as  any  of  you.  The  lot  which  He  chose  for  His  own 
■»as  your  lot.  Look  at  your  own  little  children  with  love  and  reverence,  for  He,  too, 
was  the  child  of  the  poor.  Your  rooms,  in  garret  or  in  celler,  are  not  more  com- 
fortless than  that  manger  at  Bethlehem ;  nor  is  your  labour  humbler  than  His  in 
that  shop  of  the  village  carpenter  at  Nazareth.  It  was  to  the  poor,  to  the  humble, 
to  the  ignorant,  to  those  poor  shepherds  abiding  in  the  field,  keeping  watch  over 
their  flocks  by  night,  that  the  heavens  flashed  forth  with  angel  wings.  They  were 
the  first  to  see  in  that  cradle  the  Blessed  Child.  Cannot  you,  in  heart  or  mind,  go 
with  them.  Let  Christ's  cradle  teaoh  you  to  respect  yourselves,  to  reverence  with 
a  nobler  self-esteem  the  nature  which  He  gave  you  and  took  upon  Himself,  and 
which,  by  taking  upon  Himself,  He  redeemed.  2.  And  some  are  rich.  Oh !  come 
ye  also  to  the  manger-cradle  of  your  Lord,  for  rich  men  did  come  both  to  His  cradle 
and  to  His  tomb.  From  the  far  East  came  those  three  wise  men — the  "  three  kings 
of  the  East,"  as  they  are  called — they  came,  as  the  rich  should  come,  with  the  gifts, 
willing  and  humble  gifts,  not  doled  forth  with  murmurs  as  a  burden,  but  lavished 
as  a  privilege  with  delight.  First  of  all  they  gave,  as  we  all  may  and  must  give, 
themselves — the  gold  of  worthy  lives,  the  frankincense  of  holy  worship,  the  myrrh 
of  consecrated  sorrow.  They  might  have  kept  their  gold  and  their  treasures  for 
their  own  selfishness,  for  their  own  gratification,  for  the  enhancement  of  their  per- 
sonal luxury,  for  the  enrichment  of  their  sons  and  daughters.  They  might  have 
stamped  their  substance  with  a  vulgar  commonplace  possession ;  but  do  not  you 
think  it  was  happier  for  them  that  they  made  their  gifts  immortal  by  offering  them 
at  the  cradle  of  their  Lord  ?  You  may  do  the  very  same  thing  to-day.  You  maj 
give  your  gifts  at  the  cradle  of  your  Lord  to-day.  If  you  give  to  one  of  the  least  of 
these  your  brethren,  you  give  it  unto  Him.  3.  Many  of  you  are  sorrowful.  So  was 
He.  Whatever  be  the  form  of  your  sorrow,  and  it  may  be  very  varied — be  it  loneli- 
ness, or  agony  of  body,  or  anxiety  of  mind,  or  the  sorrows  inflicted  by  the  vulgarity 
or  baseness  of  other  men — He  bore  it  all,  even  to  the  cross.  That  soft  and  tender 
Child  by  whose  cradle  we  stand  to-day,  the  shadow  of  His  cross  falls  even  on  His 
sradle,  the  crimson  of  His  sunset  flushes  even  His  golden  dawn ;  and,  perfected  by 
Buffering,  He  would  teach  every  one  of  us  out  of  our  sorrows  to  make  springs  of 
tenderness  and  strength  and  beauty.  4.  All  of  you  are  sinners ;  and  to  you  the 
news  of  that  birth  is  indeed  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace  and 


.  II.]  ST.  LUKE.  187 

{goodwill  towards  men."  While  you  may  see  there  how  much  God  hates  the  sin, 
you  may  see  also  how  tenderly,  how  earnestly  He  loves  the  sinner.  Let  us  coma 
to  this  cradle :  let  the  lepers  come,  and  let  the  outcasts  come,  and  the  mourners 
with  their  tear-stained  cheeks,  and  the  sinners  with  their  broken  hearts,  and  the 
young  man  with  his  self  will  and  his  strong  unconquered  passions,  and  the  poor  with 
their  struggling  lives,  and  the  rich  with  their  many  temptations,  and  let  them  kneel 
and  drink  freely  of  the  waters  of  Siloam  which  flow  softly,  and  let  them  bathe  their 
flick  and  shivering  souls  in  the  golden  tide  of  heaven's  beatitude,  and  stand  in  the 
circle  of  heaven's  own  free  light,  undarkened  by  any  shadow  ;  let  them  escape  the 
errors  which  darken  the  mind,  the  lusts  which  destroy  the  body,  the  sins  which 
corrupt  the  soul ;  and  so  one  and  all  wish  one  another  a  happy  Christmas  time,  as 
I  do  from  my  heart  to  all  of  you  to-day.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  festival  of 
Chrittmas: — This,  "Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and  see  this  thing,"  Ac, 
was  the  resolution  of  the  shepherds  on  the  original  Christmas  Day.  May  it  be  our 
own  I  "Come  and  see,"  is  written  upon  the  gospel.  There  is  no  secrecy  and  no 
concealment  in  it.  It  challenges  inquiry.  I.  We  have  a  fact  BEroKE  us :  ••  Unto 
TOD  IS  BOBN  A  Savioub."  It  is  a  summary  of  revelation.  1.  It  presupposes  a  ruin. 
2.  It  assumes  that  salvation  must  come  from  without.  3.  It  declares  that  the  De- 
liverer, though  He  comes  from  without  the  creature,  must  enter  into  it  by  incorpora- 
tion. There  must  be  a  birth  to  bring  in  the  Saviour  into  the  Cosmos.  "  Unto  you 
is  bom  a  Saviour  " — Incarnation  makes  Him  such.  II.  When  we  try  to  obey  the 
summons  the  first  thing  which  we  notice  is,  that  Chkistmas  Day  is  the  festival  of 
REDEMPTION  AS  A  WHOLE.  It  presents  to  us,  not  so  much  one  part  or  one  element  of 
the  gospel,  but  rather  the  intervention  of  God  in  Christ  to  save  sinners  as  a  single 
end  complete  act,  containing  in  itself  all  that  was  necessary  to  give  it  validity  and 
efiBcacy.  III.  But  the  festival  of  Christmas,  though  its  foundation  lies  so  deep,  has 
a  tiiought  for  all  natures.  It  is  in  an  especial  sense  the  festival  of  the  bbighteb 
BiDK  of  Chbistianitt.  IV.  Christmas  is  by  common  consent  the  festival  of  the 
famelt  and  the  home.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem  t — 
And  what  shall  we  find  when  we  get  there  ?  I.  That  others  have  been  theee 
before  us.  1. — Here  are  the  shepherds.  Let  us  ask  them  to  tell  their  story.  They 
say  that  they  were  watching  their  flocks  on  the  hill- side,  with  no  sounds  to  break 
the  stillness  but  the  occasional  bleating  of  the  sheep,  when  suddenly  they  became 
aware  that  they  were  in  the  presence  of  a  glory  brighter  than  that  of  noonday.  An 
angel  stood  there,  and  as  they  shrank  in  affright  from  the  wondrous  vision,  the 
angel  spoke,  and  said,  '•  Fear  not,"  &c."  And  then  there  appeared  with  him  "  a 
maltitude  of  the  heavenly  host  praising  God,"  <&c.    And — 

When  sucL  music  sweet, 

Their  heart  and  ears  did  greet, 
As  never  was  by  mortal  fingers  strook, 

Divinely  warbled  voice 

Answering  the  stringed  noise. 
As  all  their  souls  in  blissful  rapture  took 

The  air  such  pleasure  loathe  to  lose. 
With  thousand  echoes  still  prolonged  each  heavenly  close* 

The  anthem  died  away.  The  light  faded  from  the  hills.  The  angelic  host  do- 
parted.  And  the  shepherds  leaving  their  flocks,  as  afterwards  the  woman  (John 
IV.  28)  left  her  waterpot,  set  out  to  see  the  new-born  Saviour  whom  the  angels  sang. 
They  found  what?  The  splendour  and  magnificence  befitting  His  birth  who  was 
heir  of  all  things,  and  King  of  kings?  No,  but  "Mary  and  Joseph,  and  the  babe 
lying  in  a  manger."  And  still,  though  that  was  what  they  saw,  they  returned 
glorifying  and  praising  God.  2.  But  not  only  the  shepherds — others  also,  and  men 
very  different  from  these,  have  been  to  Bethlehem  before  us.  They  are  not  shep- 
herds but  sages.  They  have  come  not  from  some  near  hill-side.  They  are  travel- 
stained  and  weary,  for  they  have  travelled  long  and  far.  They  tell  us  that  they 
have  seen  a  new  star,  blazing  and  flashing  in  the  sky,  and  that,  led  by  that  star, 
they  have  come  to  the  place  where  lay  the  young  Child  and  His  mother ;  have  wor- 
shipped Him,  and  presented  to  Him  precious  gifts.  And  now,  their  quest  ended 
and  rewarded,  and  the  star  having  paled  before  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  who  has 
arisen  with  healing  in  His  wings,  they  are  wending  their  way  home  by  another 
route,  with  a  new  hope  bom  in  their  hearts.  3.  And  not  only  shepherds  and  sages, 
but  a  countless  multitude  through  all  the  Christian  centuries,  have  been  heart-pil« 


188  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHi».  m 

grimB  to  Bethlehem  before  us,  and  have  declared  that  "  this  thing  which  had  coma 
to  pass  "  was  the  one  thing  needed  to  give  them  peace  here  below  and  the  hope  ol 
heaven  hereafter.    H,  But  what  went  thet  all  odt  to  see,  and  what  shall  wb 
SEE  IF,  LIKE  THEM,  WK  00  NOW  EVEN  UNTO  Bethlbhem  t    1.  The  reality  of  Christ's 
humanity.    2.  The  self-sacrificing  power  of  Divine  love.    Our  gladness  cost  Christ 
grief.     Our  salvation  His  humiliation.    3.  The  perfection  of  Christ's  example.     As 
we  stand  by  the  manger  and  know  that  that  cradle  means  the  cross,  let  ua  pray 
that  "  the  same  mind  may  be  in  us  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus."     {J.  R.  Bailey.) 
This  thing : — I.  Is  of  supreme  interest  as  an  event  in  the  world.      Outweighs  all 
other  great  events  of  history.    II.  Has  to  do  with  all  time  and  all  men.    III.  Should 
be  seriously  inquired  into  by  each  one  of  us  personally.    IV.  Should  receive  our 
serious  attention  without  delay.     1.  Because  you  are  losing  happiness  in  proportion 
to  your  neglect  of  Christ^     2.  Because  you  are  missing  the  Divine  method  of  spiri- 
tual life  and  heavenward  growth.     3.  Because  with  present  conduct  are  bound  up  th« 
solemn  issues  of  the  eternal  future.    {W.  Manning.)       The  visit  of  the  shepherds:— 
I.  How  came  they  to  make  this  visit  ?    They  were  directed  by  the  angel.    II.  There 
was  no  dday  in  the  visit :  "  Let  us  go  now."    That  is  the  secret  of  finding  Christ. 
Ill,  Why  did  they  go  away  rejoicing?     Because  they  found  everything  just  as 
God  had  said.     So  if  we  seek  and  find  Jesus  we  shall  go  joyfully  on  our  journey. 
(Sermons  for  Boys  and  Girh.)        Which  is  come  to  pass: — Every  Divine  prophecy 
has  its  counterpart  and  fulfilment  sooner  or  later   in  the  events  of    human 
history.    If  God  has  said,   ♦•  It  shall  come  to  pass,"  the  time  will  come  at 
■which  men  shall  say,  "  It  is  come  to  pass."     (J.  R.  Bailey.)         Which  the  Lord 
hath  made  known  to  us : — Mark  that.     When  there  is  anything  specially  impor- 
tant it  is  the  Lord  that  makes  it  known  to  us.     You  would  never  have  heard  a 
Byllable  of  this,  if  the  Lord  had  not  made  it  known  to  you.     {T.  Mortimer,  B.D.) 
The  adoration  of  the  shepherds : — I.  The  tbuth  investigated.    "  The  shepherds 
said  one  to  another,  Let  us  now  go  even  unto  Bethlehem,  and  see  this  thing 
which  is  come  to  pass,  which  the  Lord  hath  made  known  unto  us."     It  will  be  felt 
at  once  that  there  was  very  little  room  in  their  case  for  scepticism.     The  manner 
of  the  revelation  had  been  supernatural,  and  they  could  scarcely  doubt  the  correct- 
ness of  the  information  who  had  received  it  through  the  ministration  of  angels. 
The  inquiry  must  be  conducted  in  a  humble  and  teachable  spirit.    It  is  of  no  use 
coming  to  it  at  all  if  we  come  in  the  spirit  of  self-sufficiency.    Some  men  seem 
wonderfully  baffled  by  the  mysteries  there  are  in  grace.    And,  after  all,  it  is  no 
real  calamity  that  there  is  mj'stery  connected  with  all  the  departments  of  knowledge. 
Twilights  are  not  altogether  destitute  of  enjoyment:  even  the  indistinct  apprehen- 
sion of  truth  has  its  pleasures ;  and  these  experiences  do  but  herald  the  coming 
light.     The  objector  may  say,  "  Then  what  is  the  use  of  inquiring  ?    You  ask  us 
to  test  the  truth  concerning  Christ,  and  then  you  practically  check  our  inquiry  by 
telling  us  that  there  is  mystery  and  that  we  must  trust !  "     "  Not  so,"  we  reply. 
All  we  want  you  to  see  is  that  nature  and  revelation  are  alike  in  this  respect,  that 
in  each  department  there  are  profound  mysteries,  problems  you  cannot  solve  ;  and 
Just  as  you  accept  this  in  reference  to  the  former,  and  take  this  for  granted  in  all 
your  researches  into  her  domain,  so  we  ask  you  candidly  to  accept  this  in  relation 
to  the  latter  ;  and  further,  just  as  you  search  into  Nature,  and  form  your  own  con- 
clusions from  what  you  can  clearly  apprehend,  so  we  ask  you  in  the  same  spirit  to 
test  the  claims  of  Christ.    Be  assured  His  life  and  character,  and  His  influence  and 
power  over  human  hearts  will  bear  the  closest  scrutiny ;  and  if  the  investigation  is 
approached  in  the  right  spirit,  then,  despite  all  mysteries,  the  inquirer  shall  be 
led  to  Christ,  and  adoringly  shall  say  unto  Him  :  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God :  Thou 
art  the  King  of  Israel !  "    ♦'  Immanuel,  God  with  us."    II.  The  truth  peoclaimed. 
"  And  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary,  and  Joseph,  and  the  babe  lying  in  a 
manger.    And  when  they  had  seen  it  they  made  known  abroad  the  saying  which 
was  told  them  concerning  this  child."    Let  us  look  at  these  first  heralds  or  pro- 
claimers,  that  we  may  get  a  little  stimulus,  as  Christian  workers,  from  what  is 
recorded  respecting  them.     Clearly,  they  were  not   men  of  culture :    they  were 
humble,  unpretending  shepherds.     Yet,  for  all  this,  they  were  genuine  preachers  of 
the  truth  concerning  Christ.    The  lack  of  intellectual  endowments  or  of  educational 
advantages  must  not  be  pleaded  in  excuse  for  the  neglect  of  this  duty.     "  Go,  tell 
the  good  news  to  thy  neighbour."    "Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Cornel"    These 
men,  if  unlettered,  could  at  any  rate  speak  from  experience.     Tbey  had  heard  tho 
voice  from  heaven   and  had  seen  the  young  child.    And  it  was  this  personal 
•xperience  which  fitted  tlj  em  for  service  and  inspired  them  with  a  true  enthusiasm. 


tour,  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  189 

And  then,  their  hearts  were  full  of  love.  The  scene  they  had  witnessed  had 
touched  their  hearts  with  love  to  the  new-born  King,  and  the  sweet  songs  of  angels 
to  which  they  had  listened,  proclaiming  "  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  toward 
men,"  had  fired  their  souls  with  the  spirit  of  a  true  brotherhood.  Dr.  Tholuck 
relates  how  that  one  who  had  been  a  great  traveller  said  to  him  that  he  had 
scarcely  ever  fallen  into  company  with  fellow-travellers  without  speaking  to  then 
of  the  heavenly  journey.  Tholuck  almost  questioned  the  propriety  of  forcing  such 
conversation.  "  Ah,"  responded  his  friend,  "  I  endeavoured  never  to  speak  till  I 
was  certain  that  I  loved.  I  figured  to  myself  that  we  are  all  brothers  one  of 
another,  and  this  never  failed  to  soften  my  heart,  and  when  there  was  love  in  mine 
I  soon  found  a  bridge  into  that  of  the  stranger.  It  was  as  though  the  breath  of  God 
had  drawn  out  a  thread  from  the  one  and  had  fastened  it  to  the  other."  Nor  must 
we  overlook  the  fact  that  these  proclaimers  kept  to  the  one  theme,  Christ.  They 
made  known  "  the  saying "  concerning  Christ,  but  they  did  so  with  a  view  of 
leading  those  who  heard  them  to  Him.  III.  The  tkdth  exemplified.  "  And  the 
shepherds  returned  glorifying  and  praising  God  for  all  the  things  which  they  had 
heard  and  seen,  as  it  was  told  them."  They  not  only  tested  and  proclaimed  the 
truth  concerning  Christ,  but  they  exemplified  it  in  their  conduct  and  hfe.  Too 
many,  alas !  are  content  with  a  very  defective  Christian  life  and  character.  The 
eminent  Church  historian,  Neander,  in  speaking  of  the  Stoics,  remarks  that  there 
were  many  among  them  who  did  nothing  more  than  make  an  idle  parade  of  the 
lofty  maxims  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  embellishing  their  balls  with  their  busts, 
whilst  their  own  lives  were  abandoned  to  every  vice.  And  even  so  there  are  to  be 
found  among  the  professed  disciples  of  Jesus  those  who  are  very  unworthy  repre- 
sentatives of  Him,  and  who  by  their  failings  bring  dishonour  upon  His  cause.  (S. 
D.  HiUman,  B.A.)  Quiet  thoughts,  after  high  revelations : — I  pretend  not, 
brethren,  to  sum  up  in  these  few  words  what  such  aims  and  endeavours  should  be ; 
but  to  set  forth  the  spirit  of  them  is  enough.  1.  You  cannot,  for  example,  go  to 
seek  Him  "in  the  flesh,"  who  was  sought  of  old  time  in  the  stable  at  Bethlehem  ; 
but  there  are  other  humble  roofs,  and  uninviting  abodes,  where  you  may  seek,  and 
haply  find,  "  the  Lord  of  life  !  "  For  Christ  yet  abides  with  His  own  ;  and  very 
especially  among  tha  poorest  and  most  helpless  of  His  flock.  Go  to  tliem,  and  you 
go  to  Him.  Keep  up  a  kindly,  habitual  compassion  for  their  trials.  2.  So  again, 
you  have  no  heaven-sent  marvels  of  which  to  tell ;  you  cannot  report  to  others  of 
the  descent  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord;  nor  of  the  gathering  of  an  host  of  "minis- 
tering spirits  "  from  above,  chanting  their  adoration  '♦  to  God  and  the  Lamb  1  " 
But  you  can  tell,  perhaps,  of  the  peace  you  may  yourselves  have  read  beneath  the 
burning  stars  of  some  Christmas  night.  You  can  tell,  perhaps,  of  some  rough  way 
that  you  yourselves  have  trod,  and  found,  by  God's  grace,  consolation  and  "hope 
in  its  end."  3.  And  need  I  point  to  one  deeper  and  dearer  realization  of  our 
subject  yet?  It  stands  in  the  fact  that  this  sacred  season  has  many  opportunities 
for  Holy  Communion ;  for  that  best  and  most  privileged  way  in  which  we  can 
"  keep  the  Feast."  He  will  be  veiled  in  His  Sacrament,  as  aforetime  in  His  flesh  ; 
bnt  the  same  Immanuel,  "  God  with  you  I  "  And,  surely,  you  will  return  to  your 
own  paths  and  your  own  ways,  like  your  proto-types  of  Bethlehem,  praising  and 
glorifying  God  for  all  the  benefits  that  He  hath  done  unto  you  ;  having  received  the 
Cup  of  Salvation,  and  having  been  answered  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  1  {J.  Fuckle, 
M.A.)  The  significance  of  Christmas  : — I.  Here  is  a  lesson  of  doctrinal  theology. 
II.  A  lesson  of  intellectual  theology.  A  new  revelation  of  God  is  given  to  man  in 
the  incarnate  Christ.  III.  A  lesson  in  experimental  theology.  IV.  A  lesson  in 
emotional  theology.  It  is  a  theophany  of  love.  V.  A  lesson  of  practical  theology. 
The  shepherds  and  wise  men  came  in  the  spirit  of  earnest  consecration.  VI.  A 
lesson  of  consolation,  of  gladness,  of  rapture.  (C.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Faith 
outliving  its  special  occasions : — The  trial  of  men's  faith  comes  after  God's  awakening 
angels  have  gone  away.  To  us  God's  favouring  messengers  are  stripped  of  their 
miraculous  raiment.  They  take  the  shape  of  merciful  providences  to  relieve  and 
comfort  us,  of  Christian  ordinances  to  strengthen  us,  festivals  to  reawaken  our 
thanksgiving,  and  human  hearts  to  enrich  the  poverty  of  ours  with  their  affection. 
In  the  fresh  mercy  of  some  gracious  deliverance,  from  sadness  or  pain  or  accident 
or  threatened  sorrow,  men  cast  their  thank-offering  into  the  treasury  of  the  Church, 
and  wonder  that  they  should  ever  be  forgetful  of  God's  care.  In  the  stillness  of  a 
sanctuary,  when  all  the  harmonies  of  holy  times  and  places  seem  to  shut  out 
temptation,  to  set  open  the  windows  of  heaven,  and  fill  the  uplifted  spirit  with 
hearty  praise,  men  sav,  "  Would  to  God  all  days  and  places  were  like  this ;  for 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  n. 

then  faith,  and  zeal,  and  charity  never  would  grow  cold !  "  In  the  warmth  of  th« 
feast  it  is  easy  to  be  glad.  But  these  hours  pass  by.  The  angels  are  gone  away 
into  heaven.  The  festive  lights  are  put  out ;  the  temple-doors  are  shut ;  the 
winter  snow  lies  white  and  smooth  on  the  little  grave  in  the  burial-ground.  The 
world  comes  crowding,  beseeching,  flattering,  threatening,  almost  forcing  its  way 
back,  with  its  noise  and  its  guilt,  into  the  unguarded  and  yielding  heart.  Then 
comes  the  test  of  the  reahty,  the  sincerity,  the  power,  of  your  Christian  principles. 
When  the  song  ceased,  the  first  Christmas  Eve,  and  the  bright  host  vanished  from 
the  sky,  the  shepherds  did  not  fall  asleep  again,  and  bo  have  only  a  dream  to  tell 
the  next  morning.  They  verified  the  vision,  like  earnest  and  constant  men. 
Secondly :  Such  willingness  to  watch  and  seek  commonly  leads,  as  it  does  here,  to 
an  equal  readiness  to  believe  when  the  promise  is  fulfilled,  and  they  that  have 
sought  Christ  find  Him.  They  might  have  said — and  if  they  had  been  modem 
philosophers,  conceited  critics,  or  ambitious  naturalists,  they  would  have  been  very 
sure  to  say — to  each  other,  "  Beware  how  you  believe ;  these,  to  be  sure,  are  extra- 
ordinary phenomena ;  they  look  very  much  as  miracles  are  said  to  look — brilliant 
figures  plainly  seen  by  many  witnesses,  nay,  by  our  own  eyes,  and  articulate 
melodies  from  their  tongues  1 — but  possibly  electricity,  meteorology,  optics,  or 
acoustics  may  explain  them  all ; — light  or  sound."  They  say,  "  We  will  look  into 
our  books.  It  is  extremely  unhkely  that  nature  would  interrupt  her  order,  or  let 
in  new  light  by  a  new  channel.  Let  us  take  care  not  to  be  ridiculed  for  believing 
too  much."  Glories  of  heaven  and  earth,  grander  than  telescopes  ever  pierced 
among  the  stars,  or  hammers  ever  uncovered  in  the  rocks,  pass  by,  and  there  is  no 
vision  to  behold  them.  Spiritual  things  not  seen  for  want  of  spiritual  senses  I  God 
knew  whom  He  was  choosing  when  He  opened  Heaven  on  those  clear-hearted 
keepers  of  simple  flocks.  They  discredited  neither  messenger  nor  message. 
Thirdly :  When  faith  is  prompt,  honest,  and  manly,  like  this,  it  comes  out  as  it 
does  in  these  brave  men,  to  an  open  confession.  The  shepherds  said  what  they 
said  frankly,  "  one  to  another,"  and  with  one  consent.  So  they  did  not  hide  their 
purposes,  or  play  fast  and  loose  with  their  convictions.  Will  those  men  who  have 
resolved  to  go  to  Bethlehem  and  see,  really  arise  and  go  7  Many  a  Christian  life 
falters  and  fails  in  every  congregation  between  these  two.  Will  resolve  pass  on 
into  action,  and  a  good  faith  confirm  and  demonstrate  itself  in  good  works  ?  Yes, 
"  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  the  Babe  lying  in  a 
manger.  Visions  are  transient ;  the  festival  is  but  for  a  day ;  the  angels  go  away 
into  heaven.    But  the  indwelling  Christ  abides.    {F.  D.  Huntingdon,  D.D^ 

Vers.  16-18.  And  they  came  with  haste.  The  course  pursued  by  the  shepherds 
Is  vividly  typical  of  that  which  should  be  pursued  by  all  Christian  inquirers.  1.  A 
process  of  inquiry.  2.  The  joy  of  distinct  confirmation.  3.  A  bold  proclamation 
of  the  truth  which  has  been  realized.  The  gospel  is  self-propagating.  Wherever 
it  makes  a  convert  it  makes  a  preacher.  Have  we  made  known  abroad  what  we 
ourselves  have  experienced  of  the  power  and  love  of  Christ  ?  Would  that  all  the 
Lord's  people  were  prophets  1  We  want  more  than  the  formal  sermon.  We  need 
the  simple  personal  testimony  of  every  believing  heart.  In  the  case  of  Mary,  it  is 
plain  that  silence  must  not  always  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  indifference.  Her  joj 
and  her  wonder  were  too  great  for  speech.  She  had,  indeed,  had  her  period  ol 
exultation,  and  the  calmness  which  followed  was  but  the  natural  expression  of  a 
chastened  feeling.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Birthday  contrasts : — On  the  5th  of 
September,  1639,  in  the  faubourg  St.  Germain,  of  Paris,  then  a  little  village  sur- 
rounding the  palace  of  King  Louis  XIII.,  was  crowded  the  blue  blood  of  France. 
Around  that  royal  home  of  the  kings  of  France  had  gathered  all  that  was  noble, 
all  that  was  great  in  the  land,  in  honour  of  the  birth  of  a  child  to  the  king.  In  an 
antechamber  within  the  palace  the  bishops  of  the  Church  were  waiting  to  christen 
the  child  on  its  birth.  Soon  a  nurse  entered  the  room,  bearing  the  child  npon  a 
pillow,  and  kneeling,  she  said,  • '  Sire,  it  is  my  honour  to  bring  you  this  son  and 
heir."  The  proud  king  carried  the  babe  to  an  open  window,  and,  addressing  the 
waiting  multitudes,  exclaimed,  "  My  son,  gentlemen,  my  son  1 "  The  bells  rang, 
the  people  shouted,  and  for  a  week  France  was  wild  with  joy.  The  19th  of  March, 
1812,  173  years  later,  was  the  eve  of  another  great  birthday  in  France.  The  little 
Corsican,  the  man  of  destiny,  was  on  the  throne.  He  had  put  away  one  wife  and 
taken  another,  and  the  birth  of  a  child  was  expected.  Twenty-one  guns  were  to  be 
fired  if  a  daughter  was  born,  a  hundred  if  the  child  was  a  boy.  On  the  20th  of 
March,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning,  the  booming  of  cannon  was  heard.    All  Parit 


«HAP.  n.]  8T.  LUKE,  191 

waited  taxi  listened.  When  the  twenty-second  gun  was  heard  a  mighty  shout 
arose,  and  there  was  great  rejoicing  in  every  part  of  France.  The  dynasty  of  Bona- 
parte had  a  son  and  heir.  It  is  impossible,  men  and  brethren,  as  we  come  together 
this  morning  to  celebrate  the  anniversary  of  another  birth  that  the  contrast  between 
that  one  and  these  should  be  overlooked.  There  was  no  royalty  in  Bethlehem  ;  the 
palace  was  a  stable,  the  cradle  was  a  manger,  but  what  a  contrast  paid  to  Him 
born  at  that  time  by  a  whole  world  for  eighteen  centuries.  The  child  bom  in  St. 
Germain  was  Louis  XIV.,  the  Grand  King,  who  ruled  for  many  years,  who  first 
said,  "  I  am  the  State."  But  he  lived  to  see  that  the  sun  of  his  dynasty  was  setting. 
The  other  son  died  ere  he  had  reached  man's  estate,  obscure  and  neglected.  Five 
years  after  the  guns  had  fired  in  honour  of  his  birth  his  father  was  a  prisoner  of  war. 
Looking  back  to  that  manger  in  Bethlehem,  we  see  stepping  from  it  a  royalty  which 
has  governed  the  world.  What  a  conquest,  what  a  history  is  His  I  It  is  told  in 
one  of  the  apocryphal  books  that  when  Jesus  was  born  in  Bethlehem  the  earth 
stopped  on  its  axis,  and  movement  upon  it  suddenly  ceased.  A  great  light,  an 
ineffable  joy,  had  come  upon  the  world,  and  that  light,  that  joy,  eighteen 
crowded  busy  centuries  has  not  diminished.  (Bishop  U.  C.  Potter.)  The 
gospel  a  source  of  wonder : — Many  are  set  a-wondering  by  the  gospel.  They  are 
content  to  hear  it^  pleased  to  hear  it ;  if  not  in  itself  something  new,  yet  there  are 
new  ways  of  puttmg  it,  and  they  are  glad  to  be  refreshed  with  the  variety.  The 
preacher's  voice  is  unto  them  as  the  sound  of  one  that  giveth  a  goodly  tune  upon 
an  instrument.  They  are  glad  to  listen.  They  are  not  sceptics,  they  do  not  cavil, 
they  raise  no  difficulties  ;  they  just  say  to  themselves,  "  It  is  an  excellent  gospel, 
it  is  a  wonderful  plan  of  salvation.  Here  is  most  astonishing  love,  most  extra- 
ordinary condescension."  Sometimes  they  marvel  that  these  things  should  be  told 
them  by  shepherds ;  they  can  hardly  understand  how  unlearned  and  ignorant  men 
should  speak  of  these  things.  But  after  holding  up  their  hands  and  opening  their 
mouths  for  about  nine  days,  the  wonder  subsides,  and  they  go  their  way  and  think 
no  more  about  it.  There  are  many  of  you  who  are  set  a-wondering  whenever  you 
Bee  a  work  of  God  in  your  district.  You  hear  of  somebody  converted  who  was  a 
very  extraordinary  sinner,  and  you  say,  "  It  is  very  wonderful  1 "  There  is  a  re- 
vival ;  you  happen  to  be  present  at  one  of  the  meetings  when  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
working  gloriously  :  you  say,  "  Well,  this  is  a  singular  thing  1  very  astonishing  I  " 
Even  the  newspapers  can  afford  a  corner  at  times  for  very  great  and  extraordinary 
works  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but  there  all  emotion  ends  ;  it  is  all  wondering,  and 
nothing  more.  Now,  I  trust  it  will  not  be  so  with  any  of  us  ;  that  we  shall  not 
think  of  the  Saviour  and  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  which  He  came  to  preach 
simply  with  amazement  and  astonishment,  for  this  will  work  us  but  little  good. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  another  mode  of  wondering  which  is  akin  to  adoration, 
if  it  be  not  adoration.  Let  me  suggest  to  you  that  holy  wonder  at  what  God  has 
done  should  be  very  natural  to  you.  That  God  should  consider  His  fallen  creature, 
man,  and  instead  of  sweeping  him  away  with  the  besom  of  destruction,  should 
devise  a  wonderful  scheme  for  his  redemption,  and  that  he  should  Himself  under- 
take to  be  man's  Eedeemer,  and  to  pay  his  ransom  price,  is,  indeed,  marvellous  I 
Holy  wonder  will  lead  you  to  grateful  worship  ;  being  astonished  at  what  God  has 
done,  you  will  pour  out  your  soul  with  astonishment  at  the  foot  of  the  golden 
throne  with  the  song,  "  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  majesty,  and  power, 
lind  dominion,  and  might  be  unto  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne  and  doeth  the  le 
great  things  to  me."  Filled  with  this  wonder,  it  will  cause  you  a  godly  watchful- 
ness ;  you  will  be  afraid  to  sin  against  such  love  as  this.  You  will  be  moved  at  the 
same  time  to  a  glorious  hope.  If  Jesus  has  given  Himself  to  you,  if  He  has  done 
this  marvellous  thing  on  your  behalf,  you  will  feel  that  heaven  itself  is  not  too 
great  for  your  expectation,  and  that  the  rivers  of  pleasure  at  God's  right  hand  are 
not  too  sweet  or  too  deep  for  you  to  drink  thereof.  Who  can  be  astonished  at  any- 
thing when  he  has  once  been  astonished  at  the  manger  and  the  cross  ?  What  ia 
there  wonderful  left  after  one  has  seen  the  Saviour  ?  The  nine  wonders  of  the 
world  1  Why,  you  may  put  them  all  into  a  nutshell — machinery  and  modem  art 
can  excel  them  all ;  but  this  one  wonder  is  not  the  wonder  of  earth  only,  but  of 
heaven  and  earth,  and  even  hell  itself.  It  is  not  the  wonder  of  the  olden  time,  but 
the  wonder  of  all  time  and  the  wonder  of  eternity.  They  who  see  human  wonders 
a  few  times,  at  last  cease  to  be  astonished ;  the  noblest  pile  that  architect  ever 
raised,  at  last  fails  to  impress  the  onlooker ;  but  not;  so  this  marvellous  temple  of 
incarnate  Deity  ;  the  more  we  look  the  more  we  are  astonished,  the  more  we  become 
Bccustumed  to  it  the  more  have  we  a  sense  of  its  surpassing  sx^leadour  of  love  and 


19J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  a. 

grace.     There  is  more  of  God,  let  ns  say,  to  be  seen  in  the  manger  and  the  orosa,^ 

than  in  the  sparkling  stars  above,  the  rolling  deep  below,  the  towering  mountain, 
the  teeming  valleys,  the  abodes  of  life,  or  the  abyss  of  death.  Let  us  then  spend 
eome  choice  hours  of  this  festive  season  in  holy  wonder,  such  as  will  produce  grati< 
tude,  worship,  love,  and  confidence.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Holy  work  for  Christ' 
mas : — This  text  seems  to  indicate  four  ways  of  serving  God,  four  methods  of 
executing  holy  work  and  exercising  Christian  thought.  Each  of  the  verses  seta 
before  us  a  different  way  of  sacred  service.  I  know  not  which  of  these  four  did 
God  best  service,  but,  I  think,  if  we  could  combine  all  these  mental  emotions  and 
outward  exercises,  we  should  be  sure  to  praise  God  after  a  most  godly  and  accept- 
able fashion.  I.  Some  published  abroad  the  news.  1.  They  had  something  to 
rehearse  in  men's  ears  well  worth  the  telling.  They  had  found  out  the  answer  to 
the  perpetual  riddle.  2.  That  "  something  "  had  in  it  the  inimitable  blending 
which  is  the  secret  sign  and  royal  mark  of  Divine  authorship ;  a  peerless  marrying 
of  sublimity  and  simplicity ;  angels  singing ! — singing  to  shepherds  1  Heaven  bright 
with  glory  I — bright  at  midnight  I  God — a  Babe  1  The  Infinite — an  Infant  a  span 
long !  The  Ancient  of  Days — born  of  a  woman  1  What  more  simple  than  the 
inn,  the  manger,  a  carpenter,  a  carpenter's  wife,  a  child?  'What  more  sublime  than 
a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  waking  the  midnight  with  their  joyous  chorales, 
and  God  Himself  in  human  flesh  made  manifest  ?  3.  The  shepherds  needed  no 
excuse  for  publishing  their  news,  for  what  they  told  they  had  first  received  from 
heaven.  When  heaven  entrusts  a  man  with  a  merciful  revelation,  he  is  bound  ta 
dehver  the  good  tidings  to  others.  4.  They  spoke  of  what  they  had  seen  below. 
They  had,  by  observation,  made  those  truths  most  surely  their  own  which  had  first 
been  spoken  to  them  by  revelation.  No  man  can  speak  of  the  things  of  God  with 
any  success  until  the  doctrine  which  he  finds  in  the  Book  he  finds  also  in  his  heart. 
II.  Some  kept  CtiRiSTMAS  by  holt  wonder,  admiration,  and  adoration.     III.  Onb, 

AT  LEAST,  PONDERED,  MEDITATED,  THOUGHT    UPON   THESE    THINGa.        1.    An    exercise   ol 

memory.  2.  An  exercise  of  the  affections.  3.  An  exercise  of  the  intellect.  IV. 
Others  globified  God,  and  gave  Him  praise.  1.  They  praised  God  for  what  they 
had  heard.  2.  They  praised  God  for  what  they  had  seen.  3.  They  praised  God 
for  the  agreement  between  what  they  had  heard  and  what  they  had  seen.  (Ibid.) 
Many  ways  of  serving  God: — Some  people  get  the  notion  into  their  heads  that  the 
only  way  in  which  they  can  live  for  God  is  by  becoming  ministers,  missionaries,  or 
Bible  women.  Alas  !  how  many  of  us  would  be  shut  out  from  any  opportunity  of 
magnifying  the  Most  High  if  this  were  the  case.  The  shepherds  went  b*ck  to  th* 
sheep-pens  glorifying  and  praising  God.  Beloved,  it  is  not  office,  it  is  earnestness ; 
it  is  not  position,  it  is  grace  which  will  enable  us  to  glorify  God.  God  is  most  surely 
glorified  in  that  cobbler's  stall  where  the  godly  worker,  as  he  plies  the  awl,  sings  of 
the  Saviour's  love,  ay,  glorified  far  more  than  in  many  a  prebendal  stall  where 
ofiicial  religiousness  performs  its  scanty  duties.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  glorified  by 
yonder  carter  as  he  drives  his  horse  and  blesses  his  God,  or  speaks  to  his  feUow- 
labourer  by  the  roadside,  as  much  as  by  yonder  divine  who,  throughout  the  country 
like  Boanerges,  is  thundering  out  the  gospel.  God  is  glorified  by  our  abiding  in  our 
vocation.  Take  care  you  do  not  fall  out  of  the  path  of  duty  by  leaving  your  calhng, 
and  take  care  you  do  not  dishonour  your  profession  while  in  it;  think  not  much  of 
yourselves,  but  do  not  think  too  little  of  your  callings.  There  is  no  trade  which  is 
not  sanctified  by  the  gospel.  If  you  turn  to  the  Bible,  you  will  find  the  most  menial 
forms  of  labour  have  been  in  some  way  or  other  connected  either  with  the  most 
daring  deeds  of  faith,  or  else  with  persons  whose  Uves  have  been  otherwise  illuB< 
trious ;  keep  to  your  calling,  brother,  keep  to  your  calling  I  Whatever  God  hai 
made  thee,  when  He  calls  thee  abide  in  that,  unless  thou  art  quite  sure,  mind  that, 
unless  thou  art  quite  sure  that  He  calls  thee  to  something  else.  The  shepherds 
glorified  God  though  they  went  to  their  trade.  (Ibid.)  Christmas  work  : — Every 
season  has  its  own  proper  fruit :  apples  for  autumn,  holly  berries  for  Christmas. 
The  earth  brings  forth  according  to  the  period  of  the  year,  and  with  man  there  is  a 
time  for  every  purpose  under  heaven.  At  this  season  the  world  is  engaged  in  con- 
gratulating itself  and  in  expressing  its  complimentary  wishes  for  the  good  of  its 
citizens ;  let  me  suggest  extra  and  more  solid  work  for  Christians.  As  we  think 
to-day  of  the  birth  of  the  Saviour,  let  us  aspire  after  a  fresh  birth  of  the  Saviour  in 
our  hearts ;  that  as  He  is  already  "  formed  in  us  the  hope  of  glory,"  we  may  be 
"  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds ;  "  that  we  may  go  again  to  the  Bethlehem  of 
our  spiritual  nativity  and  do  our  first  works,  enjoy  our  first  loves,  and  feast  with 
JesuB  as  we  did  in  the  holy,  happy,  heavenly  days  of  our  espousals.    Let  as  go  t* 


«BAr.  n.J  57.  LUKE.  1S)3 

Jesus  with  something  of  that  youthful  freshness  and  excessive  delight  which  was  so 
loanifest  in  us  wh«n  we  looked  to  Him  at  the  first ;  let  Him  be  crowned  anew  by 
ns,  for  He  is  still  adorned  with  the  dew  of  His  youth,  and  remains  "  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  The  citizens  of  Durham,  though  they  dwell  not 
far  from  the  Scotch  border,  and  consequently  in  the  olden  times  were  frequently 
liable  to  be  attacked,  were  exempted  from  the  toils  of  war  because  there  was  a 
cathedral  within  their  walls,  and  they  were  set  aside  to  the  bishop's  service,  being 
called  in  the  olden  times  by  the  name  of  "  holy  work-folk."  Now,  we  citizens  of 
the  New  Jerusalem,  having  the  Lord  Jesus  in  our  midst,  may  well  excuse  ourselves 
from  the  ordinary  ways  of  celebrating  this  season ;  and,  considering  ourselves  to  be 
"holy  work-folk,"  we  may  keep  it  after  a  diiferent  sort  from  other  men,  in  holy 
contemplation  and  in  blessed  service  of  that  gracious  God  whose  unspeakable  gift 
the  new-born  King  is  to  us.  (Ibid.)  Second  Christmas  Daj/  : — And  what  can 
better  befit  us  than  to  do  as  these  shepherds  did  ?  I.  They  beceived  the  heavenly 
MANIFESTATION  WITH  BECOMING  BEVEKENCE  AND  AWE.  When  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  them,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them,  they  were 
Bore  afraid."  They  instantly  thought  of  God,  and  referred  the  whole  thing  to  its 
proper  Divine  source.  A  right  mind  and  a  right  learning  sees  God  in  everything, 
and  beholds  in  the  commonest  ongoings  of  the  universe  the  manifestations  of  eternal 
Power  and  Godhead,  as  energetic  in  character,  and  as  wonderful  in  results,  as  the 
Betting  up  of  the  stars  on  high,  or  the  calling  forth  of  the  world  from  its  nothing- 
ness. It  sees  in  every  light  that  shines  from  heaven  the  herald  of  present  Deity,  and 
is  ready  to  fall  down  in  holy  reverence  at  every  new  signal  from  the  sky,  as  verily 
the  forthcoming  of  the  Almighty  Creator  and  King  of  the  universe,  before  whom 
every  knee  should  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess,  with  trembling  adoration.  But 
we  need  especially  to  know  and  feel  that  it  is  the  same  dreadful  Majesty  that  ap- 
proaches us  in  the  proclamation  of  the  Christ.  For  where  the  gospel  speaks,  there 
God  and  His  angels  are.  II.  The  shephebds  believed  what  the  heavenly  mes- 
SENGEB  TOLD  THEM.  Their  ready  persuasion  in  this  respect  also  serves  to  show  how 
self -evidencing  the  true  gospel  is  to  minds  that  are  unprejudiced  and  really  open 
to  it.  Its  obstructions  are  ethical.  Its  absence  in  those  to  whom  the  gospel  is 
faithfully  preached  is  not  the  result  of  the  absence  of  sufficient  demonstration,  but 
of  the  absence  of  heart  and  will  to  be  convinced,  and  to  own  allegiance  to  the  truth. 
Men  have  intuition  enough  on  this  subject  to  do  away  with  dialectics.     III.  Thb 

BHEPHEBDS  DILIGENTLY  IMPBOVED  THE  LIGHT  THEY  BECEIVED.    They  Were  HOt  satisfied 

with  the  mere  hearing  of  the  new-born  Saviour,  but  must  needs  go  and  see  what 
had  occurred.  Faith  is  an  active  principle.  It  cannot  know  of  a  Saviour  and  not 
go  in  search  of  Him.  Let  the  impediments  be  what  they  may,  it  will  on.  There 
is  a  most  important  sense  in  which  He  is  still  here.  He  is  in  His  word,  in  His 
sacraments,  in  His  Church.  This  is  now  the  Bethlehem  to  which  we  must  go  to 
seek  Him.  IV.  The  shephebds  webe  amply  bewaeded  foe  theib  pains.  They 
found  the  Saviour  whom  the  angel  announced.  Earnestly  seeking,  they  also  joy- 
fully find.  V.  The  shephebds,  having  found  the  Cheist  themselves,  freely  con- 
ressED  Him  befobe  the  would.  "  When  they  had  seen,  they  made  known  abroad 
the  saying  which  was  told  them  concerning  this  child."  Christianity  deals  with 
men  as  individuals.  But  man  is  a  social  being,  and  social  results  must  necessarily 
follow  from  the  intense  impulses  which  faith  kindles  in  the  individual  soul.  And 
as  our  existence  must  needs  affect  others,  so  our  personal  experiences  also  have 
relations,  and  are  meant  to  have  effects,  beyond  our  individual  selves.  VI.  The 
shephebdb  betubned  to  theib  flocks  gloeifying  God.  True  religion  was  not 
meant  to  take  men  away  from  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life,  but  to  go  with  us  into 
them,  to  consecrate  them,  and  to  give  us  new  comforts  in  them.   (J.A.Seiss,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  And  pondered  them  in  her  heart. — Mary^s  musings  : — Great  things  were 
these  which  she  kept,  and  most  fit  for  earnest  pondering.  Great  were  they  to  all, 
greatest  to  her,  the  "  highly  favoured "  amongst  women.  Life  was  opening 
strangely  upon  her  ;  and  the  last  few  months  had  crowded  into  their  narrow 
compass  all  that  was  most  fit  to  stir  the  very  depths  of  her  spirit.  Brought  up  in 
the  comparative  seclusion  which  shut  in  Jewish  damsels,  the  angel  of  the  Most 
High  had  stood  suddenly  beside  her,  and  troubled  her  mind  by  the  strangeness  of 
his  salutation.  Then  had  followed  the  fears  and  hopes  which  the  promise  of  that 
angel-visitor  had  interwoven  with  her  very  being.  The  "  Desire  of  aU  nations  " 
was  at  last  to  come,  and  she  should  be  indeed  His  mother.  From  her  should 
spring  that  mighty  Redeemer,  to  give  birth  to  whom  had  been  the  earnest  longing 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  h, 

of  every  Jewish  mother.  What  hopes  and  wonder  mast  have  filled  her  seal  I  At 
length  the  m^onths  of  waiting  passed  away,  and  the  gracious  birth  was  come,  the 
promised  Child  was  bom,  the  Son  of  hope  was  given ;  and  still  how  much  was 
there  upon  which  to  muse  and  ponder  1  There  was  the  full  tide  of  a  mother's  iove 
for  the  Babe  which  slept  beside  her ;  there  was  the  awful  reverence  of  her  pious 
Boul  for  the  unknown  majesty  of  Him  who  of  her  had  taken  human  flesh.  Depths 
were  all  around  her,  into  which  her  spirit  searched,  in  which  it  could  find  no 
resting-place.  How  was  He,  this  infant  of  days,  the  Everlasting  Son?  How 
was  He  to  make  atonement  for  her  sins  and  the  sins  of  her  people?  When 
would  the  mystery  begin  to  unfold  itself?  As  yet  it  lay  upon  her  thick  and 
impenetrable ;  all  was  dark  around  her ;  mighty  promises  and  small  ful- 
filments seemed  to  strive  together  in  the  womb  of  time.  The  angel  had 
called  Him  Great,  the  Son  of  the  Highest;  but  He  lay  there  on  her  bosom 
weak  and  wailing  as  any  other  babe.  He  was  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David ; 
yet  He  was  cradled  in  a  manger.  Angels  broke  on  mortal  sight,  to  make  Hia 
birthplace  known:  yet  none  but  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem  had  heard  their 
message.  A  star  from  heaven  guided  eastern  magi  to  His  feet ;  but  they  made 
their  offerings  in  a  stable.  She  was  "  highly  favoured  "  who  had  borne  Him ;  yet  a 
Bword  should  pierce  through  her  own  soul.  Ail  was  full  of  contradictions ;  yet  amidst 
all  she  was  unmoved.  To  the  eye  of  a  passing  observer  she  might  have  seemed 
perhaps  insensible — such  a  quietness  there  was  about  her.  Did  she  know  her  own 
greatness?  Did  she  feel  the  strangeness  of  all  around  her?  Did  her  soul  yearn 
over  this  Babe,  and  reach  forth  to  comprehend  His  unknown  destiny  ?  or  was  she 
indeed  destitute  of  kindling  feelings  ?  No ;  "  she  kept  all  these  things  and 
pondered  them  in  her  heart "  ;  not  one  escaped  her ;  but  the  current  of  her  soul 
flowed  far  too  deeply  to  babble  forth  its  emotions.  The  ••  ornament  of  a  quiet 
spirit "  shrouded  the  mighty  swellings  of  her  heart.  She  was  in  Ood's  hands : 
this  one  thought  was  her  anchor.  "  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord  " :  this  waa 
her  talisman.  ...  So  that  this  is  the  lesson  taught  us  in  the  character  of  the 
"Virgin  Mary.  The  blessedness  of  cultivating  a  quiet,  trusting  spirit,  a  deep  inward 
piety,  a  calm,  waiting  soul,  by  musing  on  God's  dealings.  This  was  what  dis- 
tinguished her;  this  was  the  groundwork  of  that  strength  and  nobleness  of 
character  which  we  trace  in  her.  This,  therefore,  we  should  likewise  cultivate, 
who  would  share  her  blessedness.  For  this  will  be  to  ns  too,  of  God's  blessing,  a 
means  of  acquiring  that  pious  cheerfulness  of  temper  which  is  the  natural  mother 
of  high  and  noble  conduct.  It  is  not  in  a  loud  profession  or  an  obtrusive  exterior, 
hut  in  its  silent  inner  power  of  bowing  our  will  to  that  of  God,  of  filling  oar 
common  life  with  His  presence,  that  true  religion  shows  itself.  (Bishop  Samuel 
Wilberforce.)  Significant  silence  respecting  Mary: — How  small  a  space  doea 
Mary  hold  in  the  New  Testament !  how  vast  a  space  in  the  history  of  the 
Church  I  Observe  the  silence  of  the  record  respecting  her.  Shakespeare,  the 
highest  among  all  who  have  conceived  the  human  heart  or  portrayed  human  life,  is 
marked  above  aU  others,  as  the  New  Testament  is,  by  the  use  of  significant  silence 
in  representing  character — led  by  his  deep  instinct  to  know  that  whatever  ia 
peculiarly  fine  or  high  can  only  in  this  way  be  hinted  to  the  apprehension. 
The  highest  traits  of  his  highest  women  especially,  and  in  their  highest  momenta, 
are  indicated — how?  Just  by  a  few  words,  a  few  touches,  coming  in  between 
ailences  of  far  deeper  tone,  and  so  the  exquisite  oatline  of  those  wonderful 
diaracters  is  made  out.  I  find  the  same  in  the  New  Testament.  Nothing  in  it  is, 
to  me,  so  deep  and  bottomless  in  meaning  and  effect  as  the  silences  of  Christ — 
a  stroke  or  two,  a  few  lines,  giving  figure  and  expression  to  the  formless  deep  lying 
below.  And  the  same  as  to  Mary.  How  few  the  touches ! — only  just  enough  to 
mark  ont  and  give  character  to  the  deeps  of  silence,  as,  when  you  hear  a  strain  of 
music  at  night,  the  stillness  which  follows  it  is  made  richer  still  and  more  musical 
than  any  possibility  of  sound.  The  evangelists,  having  given  as  certain  facts  as  to 
Mary,  do  afterwards  almost  nothing  but  remain  quiet,  and  not  interfere  with  tha 
inferences  of  the  Christian  heart  as  to  the  beautiful  nature  and  wonderful  con- 
sciousness of  the  virgin  mother.  Nothing  is  said  as  to  her  feelings — (silence) — bat 
we  understand  from  a  general  sense  of  her  character,  how  meek  and  submlssiva 
that  silence  is.  In  things  which  are  above  her  thought,  and  which  seem  to  men 
impossible,  in  things  which  bring  glory  to  her,  or  in  things  which  bring  shame,  the 
charaoteristio  of  this  woman  is  deep,  meek,  silent  submission ;  and  this,  as  it  ia 
the  natural  top  of  true  womanhood,  so  also  is  it  of  true  Christianity.  What  ahe 
was,  her  aon  was  also  in  His  wider  and  grander  relations  to  God.  {A,  O.  lf«rc«r,  D.D.) 


OHAi'.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  198 

The  inwardness  of  Mary's  character  : — Observe  what  I  may  call  the  inwardness  ol 
Mary's  character.  On  several  occasions,  when  a  common  nature  would  have  ex- 
ulted, when  vanity  would  have  babbled,  or  when  common  wonder  and  doubt  would 
have  gone  asking  for  explanations,  it  is  said  of  her,  "  Mary  kept  all  these  things, 
and  pondered  them  in  her  heart."  Now  this  would  not  have  been  repeated  as  it  is, 
if  it  had  not  been  a  peculiarity  and  observable.  This  I  call  inwardness.  There 
was  a  hush  of  awe  about  it,  a  disposition  to  keep  a  sacred  thing  sacred  ;  to  hide 
the  depths  of  the  heart  away  from  common  talk,  and  to  keep  their  inexpressible- 
ness  hidden  to  God  ;  to  keep  all  doubts  and  demurs  submissively  for  His  solution ; 
to  "  judge  nothing  before  the  time  "  ;  to  draw  inward,  and  compose  and  hush  the 
entire  nature  at  the  footstool  of  God ;  in  short,  her  whole  heart  seems  to  have  been 
expressed  in  the  one  sentence,  "  Behold  the  handmaid  of  the  Lord ;  be  it  unto  me 
according  to  Thy  word."  {Ibid.)  Hearing  should  be  followed  by  meditation : — 
Musing  makes  the  fire  to  burn,  and  deep  and  constant  thoughts  are  operative,  not 
•  glance  or  a  slight  view.  The  hen  which  straggles  from  her  nest  when  she  sits  a 
brooding,  produces  nothing ;  it  is  a  constant  incubation  which  hatches  the  young. 
So  when  we  have  only  a  few  straggling  thoughts,  and  do  not  set  a-brooding  upon  a 
truth,  when  we  have  flashes  only,  like  a  little  glance  of  a  sunbeam  upon  a  wall,  it 
does  nothing  ;  but  serious  and  inculcative  thoughts  (through  the  Lord's  blessing) 
will  do  the  work.  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Value  of  meditation : — Any  benefit  to  be 
derived  from  hearing  the  Word  exceedingly  depends  on  meditation.  Before  we  hear 
the  Word,  meditation  is  like  a  plough,  which  opens  the  ground  to  receive  the  seed ; 
and  after  we  have  heard  the  Word,  it  is  like  the  harrow  which  covers  the  new-sown 
seed  in  the  earth,  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  may  not  pick  it  up  :  meditation  is  that 
which  makes  the  Word  full  of  life  and  energy  to  our  souls.  What  is  the  reason 
that  most  men  come  to  hear  the  Word,  as  the  beasts  did  in  Noah's  ark :  they  came 
in  unclean,  and  they  went  out  unclean?  The  reason  is,  because  they  do  not 
meditate  on  the  truths  they  hear  ;  it  is  but  just  like  putting  money  into  a  bag  with 
holes — presently  it  falls  out.  The  truths  they  hear  preached  are  put  into  shallow, 
neglected  memories,  and  they  do  not  draw  them  forth  by  meditation.  It  is  for  this 
reason,  that  hearing  is  so  ineffectual.  Hearing  the  Word  merely  is  like  indigestion, 
and  when  we  meditate  upon  the  Word,  that's  digestion :  and  this  digestion  of  the 
Word  by  meditation  produces  warm  affections,  zealous  resolutions,  and  holy 
actions;  and  therefore,  if  you  desire  to  profit  by  hearing  the  word,  meditate. 
(fl .  Q.  Salter.)  Comfort  by  meditation : — Meditation,  as  it  advances  the  graces 
of  the  soul,  so  the  comfort  of  the  soul.  God  conveys  comfort  to  us  in  a  rational 
way ;  and  although  He  is  able  to  rain  manna  in  the  wilderness,  and  to  cast  in 
comfort  to  our  souls  without  any  labour  of  ours,  yet  usually  He  dispenses  comfort 
according  to  the  standing  rule.  He  that  does  not  work  shall  not  eat — he  that  does 
not  labour  in  the  duties  of  religion  shall  not  taste  the  sweetness  of  religion.  Now, 
meditation  is  the  serious  and  active  performance  of  the  soul  to  which  God  has 
promised  comfort.  The  promises  of  the  gospel  do  not  convey  comfort  to  us  as 
they  are  recorded  in  the  Word  merely,  but  as  they  are  applied  by  meditation.  The 
grapes,  while  they  hang  upon  the  vine,  do  not  produce  that  wine  which  cheers  the 
heart  of  man :  but  when  they  are  squeezed  in  the  wine-press,  then  they  yield  forth 
their  liquor,  which  is  of  such  a  cheering  nature.  So  the  promises  which  are  in  the 
Word  barely,  do  not  send  forth  that  sovereign  juice  which  cheers  our  hearts ;  but 
when  we  ponder  them  in  our  souls,  and  press  them  by  meditation,  then  the  pro- 
mises convey  the  water  of  life  to  us.  Meditation  turns  the  promises  into  marrow 
(Psa.  liiii.  5,  6) ;  it  conveys  the  strength  of  them  to  our  souls.  (Ibid.)  Medita- 
tion nourislies  the  soul : — Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh ; 
and  our  best  abundance  of  the  heart  must  be  slowly  and  in  quietness  prepared. 
The  cattle,  when  they  rest,  are  yet  working  to  prepare  from  the  grass  that  sweetest 
and  most  wholesome  of  beverages — milk.  So  must  we  prepare  the  abundance  of 
the  heart.  If  the  milk  of  our  word  is  to  flow  from  us  nourishingly,  we  must  turn 
the  common  things  of  life — the  grass — by  slow  and  quiet  processes,  into  sweet 
wisdom.  In  retired,  meditative  hours,  the  digesting  and  secreting  powers  of  the 
spirit  aot ;  and  thus  ourselves  are  nourished,  and  we  store  nourishment  for  others. 
(T.  T.  Lynch.)  Meditation  must  be  experienced  to  be  appreciated : — The  advan* 
tage  of  meditation  is  rather  to  be  felt  than  read.  He  that  can  paint  spikenard,  or 
musk,  or  roses,  in  their  proper  colour,  cannot  with  all  his  art  draw  their  pleasant 
savour;  that  is  beyond  the  skill  of  his  pencil.  {T.  Sudnnock.)  The  Incarnation 
a  tubfeetfor  devout  study : — No  one  can  absolve  himself  from  the  duty  of  spiritual 
Ikooght.    The  words  which  I  have  chosen  for  a  text  presents  the  duty  to  us  with 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

almost  startling  force.    The  mother  of  the  Lord  had  received  that  direct,  personal, 
living  revelation  of  the  purpose  and  the  working  of  God  which  none  other  could 
have  ;  she  had  acknowledged  in  the  familiar  strain  of  the  Magnificat  the  salvation 
which  He  had  prepared  through  her  for  His  people ;  she  might  well  seem  to  have 
been  lifted  above  the  necessity  of    any  later  teaching ;   but  when  the   simple 
shepherds  told  their  story,  a  faint  echo  as  we  might  think  of  what  she  knew,  she 
"  kept  all  these  things,  &c.,"  if  haply  they  might  show  a  little  more  of  the  great 
mystery  of  which  she  was  the  minister :  she  kept  them  waiting  and  learning  during 
that  long  thirty  years  of  silence,  waiting  and  learning  during  that  brief  time  of 
open  labour,  from  the  first  words  at  the  marriage  feast  to  the  last  words  from  the 
cross.      And  shall  we,  with  our  restless,  distracted  lives,  with  our  feeble  and 
imperfect  grasp  on  Truth,  be  contented  to  repeat  with  indolent  assent  a  traditional 
confession  7     Can  we  suppose  that  the  highest  knowledge  and  the  highest  know- 
ledge alone  is  to  be  gained  vnthout  effort,  without  preparation,  without  discipline, 
and  by  a  simple  act  of  memory  ?    Is  it  credible  that  the  law  of  our  nature,  which 
adds  capacity  to  experience  and  joy  to  quest,  is  suddenly  suspended  when  we  reach 
the  loftiest  field  of  man's  activity?    1.  The  Spirit  of  our  study  of  the  Incarnation 
must  be  love  illuminated  by  faith,  attested  by  the  heart.    2.  It  follows  that  the 
AIM  of  our  study  vnll  be  vital  and  not  merely  intellectual   3.  If  we  have  felt  one  touch 
of  the  spirit  which  should  animate  our  contemplation  of  Christ  Born,  Crucified, 
Ascended,  for  us :  if  we  have  realized  one  fragment  of  the  end  to  which  our  work 
is  directed,  we  shall  know  what  the  blessing  is  :  know  what  it  is  to  see  with  faint 
and  trembling  eyes  depth  below  depth  opening  in  the  poor  and  dull  surface  of  the 
earth ;  to  see  flashes  of  great  hope  shoot  across  the  weary  trivialities  of  basinesa 
and  pleasure ;  to  see  active  about  ns,  in  the  face  of  every  scheme  of  selfish  ambi- 
tion, powers  of  the  age  to  come ;  to  see  over  all  the  inequalities  of  the  world,  its 
terrible  contrasts,  its  desolating  crimes,  its  pride,  its  lust,  its  cruelty,  one  over- 
arching sign  of  God's  purpose  of  redemption,  broad  as  the  sky  and  bright  as  the 
Bunshine ;  to  see  in  the  gospel  a  revelation  of  love  powerful  enough  to  give  a  fore- 
taste of  the  miity  of  creation,  powerful  hereafter  to  realize  it.     To  us  also  the 
Christ  has  been  given.    To  us  also  the  message  of  the  angels  has  been  made  known. 
To  us  also  the  sign  of  the  Saviour  has  been  fulfilled.     Happy  are  we — then  only 
liappy — if  «e  keep  all  these  things  and   ponder  them  in  onr  hearts.     (Canon 
Westcott.)         The  profoundest  mystery  yet  it  the  origin  of  child-life : — It  is  an 
unexplored  history.    The  sublimest  results  often  are  in  the  child,  and  yet  not  a 
step  can  we  trace  with  definiteness  backward  to  know  the  cause  of  which  this  is  the 
little  effect.    The  future  beams  with  revelations  in  its  behalf ;  but  of  the  particles 
which  go  to  make  it  up  who  can  guess  7  Who  knows  anything  about  it  ?  The  great 
Sphinx — standing  alone  in  Egypt  half-buried  in  the  sand — what  mind  conceived 
that?  what  hand  carved  it?  what  has  it  to  say  for  itself?  or  who  shall  speak  for 
it  7    Tet  every  cradle  has  a  sphinx  more  unreadable  and  mysterious  than  the  old 
Sphinx  of  the  desert.    It  is  chiefly  this  future  over  which  parents  brood.     A 
mother's  heart  is  a  miracle.    She  sees  what  is  not  there.     She  creates  what  she 
sees  and  recreates  it  when  a  breath  blows  it  all  away.    She  loves  what  has  no 
lovable  quahty.    The  child  is  a  mere  prophecy.    These  feet  shall  yet  walk,  but  not 
now.    These  eyes  shall  beam,  but  now  they  sleep.    These  hands  shall  work,  or 
caress,  or  carve,  or  carry  the  sword,  but  they  are  helpless  now.    ••  She  kept  all 
these  things  and  pondered  them  in  her  heart "  is  true  of  every  Mary,  and  of  every 
other  name  by  which  the  mother  is  known.    She  ponders  the  miracle  of  the  babe, 
and  is  herself  another  miracle  creating  the  life  which  is  to  come,  and  which  is 
purely  the  myth  of  her  imagination.    The  things  spoken  by  the  angels  and  the 
shepherds  of  the  Messiah,  the  mother  of  Jesus  pondered,  and  every  mother  is  a 
Mary,  and  ponders  the  little  traveller  knocking  at  the  door  of  life  or  sleeping  in 
the  hospitable  cradle.     The  unwritten  poetry  of  a  mother's  heart  would  gire  to  tb< 
vorld  a  litetatore  beyond  all  printed  words.    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

THE  YIRGIN  MAEY  TO  THE  CHILD  JESUa 

Sleep,  sleep,  mine  Holy  One ! 
My  flesh,  my  Lord  I  what  name  7  I  do  not  knew 
A  name  that  seemeth  not  too  high  or  low, 

Too  far  from  me  or  heaven. 
My  Jesus,  that  is  best  1  that  word  being  givcB ' 
By  the  majestic  angel  whose  command 


n,3  -Sr.  LUKE.  If 7 

Was  softly  as  a  man's  beseeching  said, 
When  I  and  all  the  earth  appeared  to  stand 

In  the  great  overflow. 
A  light  celestial  from  his  wings  and  head 

Sleep,  sleep,  my  saving  One. 

•  •  •  • 

The  slumber  of  His  lips  meseems  to  ran 
Ihtoagh  my  lips  to  mine  heart. 

•  •  •  • 

And  then  the  drear  sharp  tongue  of  prophecy 
With  the  dread  sense  of  things  which  shall  be  don«. 
Doth  smite  me  inly,  like  a  sword. 

(Mr$,  E.  B.  Browmng.) 

THE  MOTHER  MARY. 

Mary,  to  thee  the  heart  was  given. 

For  infant  hands  to  hold. 
Thus  clasping,  an  eternal  heaven. 

The  great  earth  in  its  fold. 

He  came,  all  helpless,  to  thy  power. 

For  warmth,  and  love,  and  birth ; 
In  thy  embraces,  every  hour 

He  grew  into  the  earth. 

And  thine  the  grief,  0  mother  high. 

Which  all  thy  sisters  share. 
Who  keep  the  gate  betwixt  the  siy 

And  this  our  lower  air. 

And  unshared  sorrows,  gathering  fdow; 

New  thoughts  within  thy  heart, 
Which  through  thee  like  a  sword  will  go, 

And  make  thee  mourn  apart. 

For,  if  a  woman  bore  a  son 

That  was  of  angel-brood, 
Who  lifted  wings  ere  day  was  done. 

And  soared  from  where  hn  stood ; 

Strange  grief  would  fill  each  mother-moan, 

Wild  longing,  dim  and  sore  ; 
•*  My  child  !  my  child  1  He  is  my  own, 
And  yet  is  mine  no  more." 

So  thou,  0  Mary,  years  on  years, 

From  child-birth  to  the  cross. 
Wast  filled  with  yearnings,  fiUed  with  feara, 

Eeen  sense  of  love  and  loss. 

(G.  MaeDonald.) 

STimngt  of  mothen  : — I  think  that  the  most  wonderful  book  that  could  be  written 
«juld  be  a  book  in  which  an  angel  should  write  all  the  thoughts  that  pass  through 
a  faithful  mother's  mind  from  the  time  that  she  first  hears  the  cry  of  her  child,  and 
knows  that  it  is  born  into  the  world,  and  rejoices  in  the  midst  of  her  griefs  ;  from 
the  moment  of  her  absorption,  or  annihilation,  pouring  herself  into  the  child.  Her 
wonderful  gladness  of  fatigue ;  her  unwillingness  to  divide  her  care  with  any ;  her 
heroic  sacrifice  of  all  that  is  brightest  and  best  in  life,  with  no  prospect  o| 
remuneration  except  the  satisfaction  which  she  feels  in  serving  that  little  mute  and 
helpless  child — these  are  past  description.     {H.  W.  Bcecher.) 


198  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 


Ver.  20.  And  the  shepliercls  returned. — Dignifying  common  life  : — And  then 
they  returned  to  their  fields,  to  their  flocks,  to  their  ordinary  life ;  giving  thus  a 
beautiful  example  of  pious  diligence  and  fidelity  in  their  vocation.  An  extra- 
ordinary privilege  has  been  granted  to  them.  They  are  not  lifted  up  by  it  into 
pride  and  pretension  and  self-sufficiency  and  idleness.  They  are  cheered  by  it 
in  their  common  toil.  This  is  all  the  gospel  that  some  of  them  would  hear  on 
earth.  They  would  die,  probably,  as  they  lived,  tending  their  sheep,  before  the 
Good  Shepherd  openly  appeared.  In  their  example,  they  sanctify,  they  glorify, 
what  we  call  common  life.  They  dignify  the  duty,  it  may  be  the  drudgery  of  the 
day.  But  what,  after  all,  is  common  life?  It  is  a  relative  phrase.  Common  life 
to  these  shepherds  is  the  keeping  of  the  sheep  on  those  very  fields  where  David 
was  shepherd-boy  before  them,  where  Kuth  gleaned  after  the  reapers.  Common 
life  to  the  angels  lies  in  the  heavenly  spheres,  serving  at  the  bidding  of  the 
King.  This  visit  to  the  earth,  on  such  an  errand,  is  a  remarkable  exception  to 
their  ordinary  experience.  It  is,  if  we  may  use  the  phrase,  a  point  of  high 
romance  in  their  history.  {Dr.  Raleigh.)  This  is  how  all  true-minded,  simple- 
hearted  inquirers  have  returned  from  their  Christian  investigations.  It  ia 
questionable  whether  any  man  has  ever  closed  the  Bible  in  a  mood  of  dissatisfac- 
tion who  opened  it  with  reverent  determination  to  know  how  far  it  was  a  testimony 
from  heaven.  Christian  investigation  is  not  finished  until  it  has  brought  into  the 
heart  a  joy  altogether  unprecedented.  The  mere  letter  never  brings  gladness. 
Critics  and  disputants  have  found  little  in  the  Bible  but  a  great  waste  of  words ; 
but  penitent  and  earnest  inquirers  have  returned  from  its  examination  with 
hearts  overflowing  with  a  new  and  imperishable  joy.  (<7.  Parker,  D.D.)  Shep- 
herds glorifying  God  for  the  birth  of  a  Saviour: — We  will  contemplate  the 
things  for  which,  and  the  manner  in  which,  they  glorified  God,  and  will  inter- 
mingle some  practical  reflections.  I.  We  will  consideb  the  matters  tor  whicb 
THET  GLORIFIED  AND  PRAISED  GoD.  Thesc  wcre  the  things,  which  they  had  heard  and 
seen.  1.  They  glorified  God  that  the  promised  Saviour  was  now  bom.  They 
seem  to  have  been  some  of  those  pious  people  who  looked  for  redemption  in 
Israel.  2.  They  rejoiced  that  this  Saviour  was  born  for  them.  The  angel  says, 
"  Unto  you  is  born  this  day  a  Saviour."  Conscious  of  their  impotence  and  un- 
worthiness,  they  felt  their  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  esteemed  it  a  matter  of  great 
joy  that  He  was  come  to  bring  salvation  to  them.  They  doubtless  admired  the. 
distinguishing  grace  of  God  in  visiting  them  first  of  all  with  the  glorious  tidings. 
3.  The  shepherds  rejoiced  that  the  Saviour  was  bom  for  others,  as  well  as  them- 
selves. "  I  bring  yon  good  tidings,"  says  the  angel,  "  which  shall  be  to  aU 
people."  4.  The  shepherds  glorified  God  for  what  they  had  seen,  as  well  as  what 
they  had  heard.  II.  Consider  the  manner  in  which  they  glorified  Him.  1.  They 
glorified  God  by  faith  in  the  Saviour,  whom  He  had  sent.  They  believed  the 
heavenly  message.  By  faith  in  the  Eedeemer  we  give  glory  to  God.  2.  They 
glorified  God  by  a  ready  obedience.  Being  informed  by  a  heavenly  messenger 
where  the  Saviour  lay,  they  came  to  Him  with  haste.  They  made  no  delay,  but 
immediately  obeyed  the  Divine  intimation.  Faith  operates  in  a  way  of  cheerful 
obedience.  3.  They  glorified  God  by  confessing  and  spreading  the  Saviour's 
name.  "  When  they  had  seen  Him,  they  made  known  abroad  what  had  been  told 
them  concerning  the  Child."  They  were  not  ashamed  to  own  Him  as  the 
Messiah,  even  in  His  infant  state.  You  see  that  true  faith  will  prompt  you  to 
honour  Christ  before  men.  4.  They  glorified  God  by  an  attendance  on  the  means 
of  faith.  The  angel  who  announced  the  Saviour's  birth  gave  them  a  token  by 
which  they  might  know  Him.  "  This  shall  be  a  sign  to  you.  Ye  shall  find  the 
babe  wrapt  in  swaddling  clothes,  lying  in  a  manger.  And  they  came  with  haste, 
and  found  as  he  had  told  them."  God  gave  them  a  particular  sign  for  the  con- 
firmation of  their  faith ;  and  He  has  appointed  standing  means  to  strengthen  and 
enliven  ours.  Jesus  Christ  is  exhibited  to  us  in  His  Word,  in  His  sanctuary,  and 
at  His  table.  Here  we  are  to  seek  Him,  and  converse  with  Him,  that  we  may 
increase  our  faith  and  warm  our  love.  5.  They  glorified  God  with  the  voice  of 
praise.  (J.  Lathrop,  D.D.)  The  changed  world  : — The  day  after  Christ's  birth 
was  a  new  day  in  the  world's  history.  The  old  era  had  passed,  the  new  had 
begun  ;  and  only  the  angels  knew  what  a  revolution  had  been  wrought  by  the  quiet 
power  of  God.  The  wonder  has  grown  with  the  years.  Christianity  has  been  an 
increasing  miracle  of  the  Lord's  presence  on  earth.  That  song,  which  a  few 
shepherds  heard,  has  sung  itself  into  the  thought  of  the  world,  and  is  the  keynote 
and  harmony  of  all  peace  and  goodwill  on  earth.    L  Thx  Chbistian  ohakob  ov 


ma.  n.]  ST.  LVKB  199 

THB  wobu>'b  hibtobt  IS  A  TACT.  The  influx  through  Christ  of  a  new  power  into 
the  life  of  humanity  is  a  known  fact  of  experience,  as  certain  as  the  battle  of 
Gettysburg,  or  the  dawn  of  day.  This  fact  of  the  new  power  in  the  world,  through 
the  birth  of  Christ,  belongs  to  a  series  of  facts.  The  religion  of  the  Bible  pre- 
sents a  continued  succession,  and  reveals  an  exalted  order  of  facts.  Christianity 
is  a  positive  religion  of  historical  facts  from  Moses  to  Christ,  from  Christ  to  the 
last  Church  organized  and  the  last  communion  table  spread.  II.  Thb  natubb 
AMD  BEAii  siQNiFiCANOE  OF  THIS  FACT.  1.  In  Christianity  we  breathe  a  different 
air.  Midway  down  the  Simplon  Pass  the  traveller  pauses  to  read  upon  a  stone  the 
single  word  "  Italia."  At  this  point  he  passes  a  boundary  line,  and  every  step 
makes  plainer  how  great  has  been  the  change  from  Switzerland  to  Italy.  The  air 
becomes  warm  and  fragrant,  and  vines  line  the  wayside,  and  below,  embosomed  in 
verdure.  Lake  Maggiore  expands  before  him.  As  that  traveller  rests  at  evening- 
time,  he  recognizes  that  the  entrance  into  a  new  world  was  marked  by  the  word 
"  Italia  "  upon  the  stone  on  the  pass.  Humanity  has  crossed  a  boundary  line  : 
up  to  Bethlehem,  bleak  and  cold — down  from  Bethlehem,  another  and  a  happier 
time.  2.  This  new  transforming  power  was,  to  the  disciples,  Jesus  Himself.  He 
made  all  things  new  to  them.  3.  Jesus  has  been  to  the  world  a  new  revelation  of 
God.  God  is  essentially  and  eternally  Christlike.  4.  Jesus  is  also  a  new  revela- 
tion  of  man.  Man  is  in  Christ  another  man.  You  pass  a  man  in  the  streets,  and 
you  used  to  feel  that  you  did  not  want  to  know  or  help  such  a  poor  creature — ^he 
lived  below  your  world,  and  his  name  was  not  found  in  your  book  of  Ufe.  Now  it 
is  different,  for  you  have  been  baptized  into  the  name  of  Christ,  in  whom  our 
whole  common  humanity  exists,  redeemed  and  capable  of  a  great  salvation.  Con- 
clusion :  We  close  by  asking  ourselves,  "  Am  I  living,  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God, 
in  this  changed  world  7  "  Is  it,  in  the  history  of  my  soul,  the  day  before,  or  the 
better  day  after,  Christmas.     {Newman  Smyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  For  the  circumcising  of  the  Child. — Circumcision  and  baptism : — The 
teaching  of  Jewish  circumcision  resembles  the  teaching  of  Christian  baptism.  Both 
exhibit  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh ;  the  first  by  a  wounding  of  the 
body  (which  aptly  recalls  the  severity  of  the  elder  dispensation) ;  the  second  by  an 
outward  washing.  This,  which  may  be  called  the  practical  bearing  of  the  present 
festival  (Circumcision  of  Christ,  1st  January),  is  brought  out  in  the  collect  for  the 
day,  wherein  we  beseech  God  to  grant  us  "the  true  circumcision  of  the  spirit." 
And  it  is  worth  observing  that  this  was  seen,  from  the  very  first,  to  be  ths' 
mystical  teaching  of  the  rite.  Thus  Moses,  in  the  book  of  Deuteronomy  (which 
abounds  in  the  loftier  class  of  doctrine),  speaks  plainly  (x.  16 ;  xxx.  6)  of  cir- 
cumcising the  heart ;  and  the  prophets  (Jer.  iv.  4)  use  the  same  expression.  St. 
Stephen's  language,  when  he  addressed  his  countrymen  for  the  last  time  ("  Ye 
Btiil-necked  and  uncircumcised  in  heart  and  ears,"  Acts  vii.  51),  seems  to  show 
that  this  continued  throughout  the  whole  history  of  the  Jewish  people  to  be  the 
well-understood  meaning  of  the  rite ;  while  St.  Paul's  witness  on  the  point  (Rom. 
ii.  28,  29)  is  express.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  how  closely  this  observance  was 
connected  with  holy  baptism,  besides  being  typical  of  the  Christian  sacrament,  and, 
indeed,  a  kind  of  anticipation  of  it:  a  rite  performed  in  infancy,  and  made  the 
occasion  of    bestowing  a  new  name.      {Dean  Burgon.)  Spiritual  nature  of 

circumcision : — Circumcision  was  the  seal  of  the  gospel  covenant  made  by  God  with 
Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  2,  4,  9) ;  which  the  law,  added — as  the  apostle  teaches  (Gal. 
iii.  17) — four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  could  not  disannul.  This  was  a 
covenant  of  faith,  quite  distinct  from  the  covenant  of  works  (Ex.  xxiv.  8)  made 
through  Moses  ;  it  was  an  evangelical,  not  a  legal,  covenant.  And  it  foreshadowed 
what  was  to  be  in  the  latter  days,  though  the  people  knew  it  not,  would  not  know 
it.  They  relied  on  being  naturally  descended  from  Abraham,  and  gave  no  heed  to 
our  Saviour's  declaration  that,  if  they  were  indeed  Abraham's  children,  they  would 
do  the  works  of  Abraham  (John  viii.  39) ;  in  other  words,  that  God's  promise  to 
the  patriarch's  seed  was  a  spiritual  promise,  fulfilled  to  as  many  as  showed  the  like 
feith  with  himself  (Gal.  iii.  7,  29).  While,  therefore,  our  Saviour's  submission  to 
be  circumcised — whereby,  in  one  respect.  He  fulfilled  all  righteousness — conveys  an 
obvious  lesson  of  obedience,  and  conformity  to  the  laws  of  the  Church,  to  which  we 
belong ;  the  gospel  fulfilment  which  Christ  gave  to  that  sacred  rite,  and  to  the 
eovenant  with  Abraham  of  which  it  was  the  seal  and  pledge,  brings  to  mind  the 
high  spiritual  teaching  of  all  His  other  ancient  laws,  the  design  of  which  was  to 
guide  man's  heart  to  the  future  Messiah.    God's  ancient  law  was  spiritual  through-^ 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHi*.  n 

out ;  no  dead  letter,  but  a  living  reality,  trying  the  very  heart  and  reins.  (Ibid.) 
The  circumcision  of  our  Lord : — There  is  no  part  of  our  Saviour's  life  uninteresting, 
«/r  that  will  not  yield  instruction.  We  ask,  then,  why  did  He  submit  to  oir. 
cumciaion  ?  1.  Christ  was  circumcised  in  order  to  fulfil  the  law.  By  His  perfect 
obedience  to  all  its  precepts.  He  abolished  its  force  and  condemning  power  over 
every  transgression.  For  us  He  was  circumcised  and  baptized ;  for  us  He  exhibited 
entire  legal  obedience,  that  He  might  bring  us  under  the  tender,  merciful, 
encouraging  covenant  of  the  gospel,  by  "  fuLfilSng  all  righteousness."  2.  Christ's 
circumcision  was  necessary  to  obtain  for  Him  a  hearing  among  His  own  people. 
The  Jews  looked  upon  every  uncircumcised  person  as  unclean.  Christ  could  have  had 
no  access  to  them  without  submitting  to  this  ceremony.  To  manifest  Himself  of 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  to  satisfy  in  this  respect  the  requisitions  of  His  nation,  to 
substantiate  His  pretentions  to  be  their  Messiah,  and  deprive  them  of  what  would 
have  been  an  unanswerable  plea  for  rejecting  Him,  He  graciously  condescended  to 
endure  this  painful  rite.  What  an  example  has  He  set  us  of  the  excellency  of  sub- 
mitting to  privations  and  pains  in  advancing  the  happiness  of  our  fellow-beings  I 
Did  Jesus  bear  the  marks  of  an  humbling  rite  in  His  own  precious  body,  that  His 
own  people,  when  He  came  to  them,  might  not  be  offended  in  Him  ;  and  shall  not 
we  yield  to  all  innocent  compliances  with  the  habits  and  feelings  of  others,  which 
may  facilitate  our  usefulness  to  them,  and  bear  with  contentment  the  labours  and 
crosses,  self-denials,  expenses,  and  cares,  which  may  be  necessary  in  promoting 
their  salvation  or  happiness  ?  3.  The  institution  of  this  ceremony,  and  Christ's 
compliance  with  it,  suggests  to  us  the  propriety  and  efficacy  of  visible  rites  and 
sacraments.  Here  was  a  seal  of  a  covenant  established  by  God.  It  was  to  be  a 
token  for  distinguishing  the  faithful,  a  sign  of  cleansing  from  pollution,  and  an 
assurance  of  blessing  from  Jehovah.  Without  some  visible  rite  it  is  hardly  con- 
ceivable how  this  or  any  Church  could  be  preserved  distinct.  Some  sacra- 
ment is  necessary,  and,  if  necessary,  obUgatory  upon  every  one  who  would  support 
the  Church,  for  which  it  is  hallowed,  and  enjoy  all  its  privileges.  Accordingly,  all 
systems  of  religion  have  had  their  rites,  mysteries,  symbols.  What  circumcision 
was  to  the  Jews,  baptism  is  to  Christians.  Both  of  Divine  appointment,  significant 
of  incorporation  into  the  Church  of  God,  requiring  faith,  representing  purification 
from  the  defilements  of  sin,  and  implying  consequent  self-denial,  holiness, 
obedience.  4.  In  the  circumcision  of  Christ  we  are  strikingly  taught  the  propriety 
of  submitting  to  all  the  precepts  and  institutions  of  the  revelation  under  which 
we  live.  Christ  was  made  under  the  law,  consequently  the  law  had  authority 
over  Him.  With  singular  truth,  He  might  have  asked,  "  Can  I  be  benefited  by 
this  rite,  and  by  these  simple  ceremonies?  "  With  peculiar  force  He  might  have 
inquired,  "  What  connection  can  there  be  between  these  outward  forms  and  My 
spirit ;  what  efficacy  can  they  have  upon  My  heart  ?  "  With  more  propriety  than 
any  mortal  He  might  have  said,  •'  I  can  be  safe  and  perfect  without  all  these." 
But  he  did  not  stop  to  scruple  their  utility;  He  did  not  find  fault  with  their  nature. 
They  were  ordaintd  by  the  Being  who  established  the  law  under  which  He  lived. 
This  was  sufficient  for  Him.  And  so  throughout  His  life.  He  kept  the  passover ; 
He  observed  the  Sabbath  ;  He  went  up  to  the  feasts ;  He  neglected  no  precept  of 
the  revelation  which  He  knew  came  from  God,  and  was  authoritative  till  super, 
eeded  by  His  new  and  better  dispensation.  In  this  conduct  of  His  life  our 
Saviour  has  set  an  example,  excellent  in  itself,  and  fit  for  His  disciples  to  revere. 
It  points  to  us  the  necessity  of  obeying  every  precept,  and  observing  every  rite  to 
which  the  gospel  gives  the  seal  of  Divine  authority.  To  neglect  baptism  or  holy 
communion  because,  as  men  think,  they  may  be  as  good  and  as  safe  without  them, 
or  because  they  cannot  see  their  efficacy,  is  taking  a  ground  which  the  all-perfect 
Son  of  God  was  too  modest  to  assume.  Whether  men  may  be  saved  without  these 
means,  how  they  effect  what  is  attributed  to  them,  whether  they  are  the  best 
which  might  have  been  selected,  are  points  with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do. 
The  questions  which  concern  us  are.  Whether  Christ  instituted  baptism  and  the 
euchariBt ;  and,  if  He  did,  whether  His  injunctions  are  binding  upon  us  or  not  ? 
On  this  plain  ground  every  man  may  easily  form  a  just  determination  concerning 
he  propriety  of  observing  all  the  precepts  and  institutions  of  the  revelation  under 
which  he  hves.  His  observance  of  them  should  be  a  simple  act  of  faith  and 
obedience,  by  which  he  should  testify  both  to  God  and  men.  (Bishop  Dehon.) 
Early  suffering : — Thus  early  did  Jesus  suffer  pain  for  our  sakes,  to  teach  us  the 
epiritual  circumcision,  the  circumcision  of  all  our  bodily  senses.  As  the  east 
catches  at  sunset  the  coloms  of  the  west,  so  Bethlehem  is  a  prelude  to  Calvary.^ 


CHAP.  n.  ST.  LUKE.  201 

and  even  the  Infant's  cradle  is  tinged  with  a  crimson  reflection  from  the  Re- 
deemer's cross.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  circumcision  of  Christ: — (Firsi 
Sunday  after  Christmas.)     I.  The  bite  of  cibctjmcision  which,  as  on  this  day, 

WAS    ADMINISTEEED    TO     THE     InFANT    JeSUS    HAD     A     TWOFOLD    SIQNIFICANOE.      1.   ItS 

existence  was  a  testimony  that  mankind  is  fallen  and  needs  purification.  2. 
Circumcision  was  not  only  an  act  of  humility,  it  was  also  an  act  of  obedience  to 
the  law  of  God.     II.   The   circumcision  of  Jesus   thus  reveals  to  us  the 

FOUNDATIONS  ON  WHICH   Hl3  HUMAN  LIFE   WAS  BUILT,  viz.,  HUMILITY  AND  OBEDIENCE. 

Can  there  be  truer  foundations  for  any  human  life  than  these  ?  Is  it  not  the  very 
ideal  of  Christian  childhood?  Humility,  which  is  the  expression  of  our  own 
insufficiency;  obedience,  which  is  the  recognition  of  our  dependence  upon  God. 
III.  It  has  been  well  pointed  out  by  many  devout  Christian  thinkers  that  the 

HUMAN   LIFE   WHICH   THE    SON   OF   GoD   LIVED   IN  THE   FLESH    IS    THE    VERY    SAME    AS 

THE  LIFE  WHICH  He  LIVES  IN  U3 ;  it  is  produced  in  the  same  manner,  and  pro- 
gresses according  to  the  same  law.  After  His  spiritual  birth  in  us  comes  our 
spiritual  circumcision  (Col.  ii.  11).  As  this  life  grows  within  as,  we  shall  find 
that  it  has  also  its  epiphany,  its  baptism,  its  temptation,  its  active  ministry,  its 
passion,  its  cross,  its  resurrection.  Enough  for  us  to-day  to  consider  its  circum- 
cision. Not  without  reason  do  we  pray  in  the  Litany,  "  By  Thy  holy  nativity  and 
eireumcision,  good  Lord  deliver  us."  IV.  The  circumcision  was  distinguished 
from  all  other  acts  of  our  Lord's  humiliation  in  that  it  was  without  any  compen- 
8ATINO  GLORY,  and  WES  accepted  by  Him  without  any  protest  from  God  or  man, 
declaring  that  He  needed  it  not  for  His  own  sake.  Yet  there  was  even  in 
His  circumcision  a  glory  bestowed  upon  Him  which  men  could  not  at  the  time 
recognize,  but  which  has  proved  to  be  the  greatest  of  all  the  honours  of  His 
incarnate  life.  It  was  then  that  there  was  bestowed  upon  Him  the  name  op 
Jesus,  God  our  Saviour.  The  name  thus  given  Him  in  His  humiliation  has 
become  the  name  in  which  He  has  triumphed  over  His  enemies,  the  name  which 
has  been  blessed  by  millions  of  penitent  sinners,  and  adored  in  rapture  by  ten 
thousands  of  His  saints.  V.  Trembling,  anxiously,  we  are  looking  forward  into 
the  uncertainty  of  a  new  yeab.  If  we  begin  the  year  in  the  spirit  of  Him  who 
began  His  earthly  life  in  humility  and  obedience,  we  may  know  that,  however 
galling  to  our  natural  unrenewed  will  may  be  the  humility  which  alone  becomes  us, 
however  difficult  may  be  the  obedience  which  God  demands  from  us,  there  is  yet 
to  be  manifested  a  glory  that  exalteth,  in  comparison  with  which  the  trials  of  this 
present  lif«  are  but  as  nothing.     (Canon  V.  Button,  M.A.) 

The  year  begins  with  Thee, 

And  Thou  beginn'st  with  woe^ 
To  let  the  world  of  sinners  see 

That  blood  for  sin  must  flow. 

Thine  Infant  cries,  0  Lord, 

Thy  tears  upon  the  breast, 
Are  not  enough — the  legal  sword 

Must  do  its  stern  behest. 

Like  sacrificial  wine 

Poured  on  a  victim's  head 
Are  those  few  precious  drops  of  Thin*, 

Now  first  to  offering  led. 

They  are  the  pledge  and  seal 

Of  Christ's  unswerving  faith 
Given  to  His  Sire,  our  souls  to  heal, 

Although  it  costs  His  death. 

"  Jesus,**  the  teatcTiword : — I.  Fob  the  Church  and  for  the  home.  II.  Fob  jot 
AKD  fob  sorrow.    III.  FoR  LIFE  AND  FOR  DEATH.      (Dr.    Gerok.)  The  circum- 

cision and  naming  of  the  Child : — Boys  were  circumcised  eight  days  after  their 
birth.  Tradition  said  that  this  day  was  chosen  because  the  mother  ceased  to  be 
nneiean  on  the  seventh  day  if  she  had  borne  a  boy.  He  who  circumcised  the 
child  used  the  following  words :  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  our  God,  who  has  sanctified 
as  by  Sis  precepts,  and  given  as  circumcision."    The  father  of  the  child  con- 


203  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  a, 

tinued  :  "  Who  has  sanctified  ns  by  His  precepts,  and  has  granted  as  to  introdaca 
our  child  into  the  covenant  of  Abraham  our  father."  The  child  was  named  the 
same  day,  because  it  was  said  that  God  changed  the  names  of  Abraham  and  Sarah 
when  He  gave  the  covenant  of  circumcision.  {E.  Stapfer,  D.D.)  The  circum' 
eision  of  Christ : — 1.  It  signifies  purification.  Christ  committed  no  sin,  but  stood  for 
sinful  man.  2.  It  signified  obedience  (Gen.  xvii.  12).  He  was  "  made  under  the  law  " 
(Gal.  iv.  4).  2.  It  signified  consecration.  This  ordinance  was  part  of  the  covenant  be- 
tween God  and  the  Jewish  nation,  whereby  they  were  to  be  counted  "  a  peculiar  trea> 
sure  "  unto  God  "above  all  people"  (Exod.  xix.  5).  (D.  Hughes,  M.A.)  New  Year'i 
Day : — I.  CracuMcisioN  was  a  rite  which  told  of  a  misimproved  past.  The  first 
account  of  it  occurs  in  the  history  of  Abraham,  in  whose  case  Paul  says  it  was  given 
as  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  righteousness  which  is  obtained  by  faith  (Rom.  iv.  11). 
The  state  of  uncircumcision  was  thus  a  state  of  unrighteousness.  Paul  also  tells 
the  Colossians,  that  they  had  been  dead  in  their  sins  and  the  uncircumcision  of 
tbeir  flesh  (Col.  ii.  13).  Circumcision,  therefore,  carried  with  it  the  remembrance 
and  acknowledgment  of  a  bad  and  unsatisfactory  past.  It  told  of  alienation  from 
God,  and  of  faithlessnesses  and  infidelities.  It  carried  with  it  a  retrospect  of 
failure  and  sin.  Even  the  circumcision  of  "  the  holy  child  Jesus,"  was  an 
acknowledgment  of  the  fallen  condition  of  the  race,  with  which  he  identified 
Himself,  in  its  humiliation,  that  He  might  become  its  perfect  Saviour.  IL 
Circumcision  was  a  sign  of  the  cutting  off  and  casting  away  of  bin.  The 
fleshly  incision  was  a  token  of  a  spiritual  one,  which  consisted  in  separation  from 
moral  impurity  and  evil  (Eom.  ii.  29).  III.  Bot  circumcision  set  apabt  to 
OBEDIENCE,  AS  WELL  AS  SEVERED  FROM  IMPURITY.  It  was  the  ceremouy  of  initia* 
tion  into  the  covenant,  and  pledged  the  subject  to  obey  it.  It  was  part  of  the 
redemption-work  of  Christ  to  obey  the  law.  IV.  Circumcision  conferred  and  fixso 
ON  Christ  His  true  descriptive  name.  V.  But,  for  the  encouragement  of  those 
who  feel  their  deficiencies  and  miseries,  there  is  still  one  other  particular  connected 
with  the  text.  He  whom  God  hath  appointed  to  be  our  Judge,  took  the  nauk 
of  Jesus.  He  is  a  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.  Hopefully  His  circumcision  day  so 
proclaims  Him  to  us.  Yea,  saith  the  apostle,  "  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the 
uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him  "  (Heb.  vii.  25).    (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22,  24.  The  days  of  her  puriflcatlon. — The  presentation  in  the  temple  : — 
I.  1.  Consider  the  inner  meaning  of  the  law  which  was  here  fulfilled  by  the  Infant 
Jesus.  Ever  since  the  day  that  Israel  had  been  delivered  from  bondage  by  the 
death  of  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians,  the  first-bom  had  been  considered 
especially  dedicated  to  the  service  of  God.  2.  Here  the  First-born,  not  of  Mary 
only,  but  of  all  creation,  is  presented  to  the  Father.  Is  He  not  the  Only-begotten 
Son,  begotten  before  all  worlds  ?  Now  that  He  has  come  in  the  substance  of  our 
flesh  He  is  the  true  Head  of  the  human  race,  the  First-born  of  a  restored  humanity. 
It  is  as  such  that  He  makes  His  first  visit  to  Jerusalem — type  of  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem — the  Church  of  the  First-bom  ;  and  His  first  entry  into  the  Temple,  the 
Home  of  God  upon  earth.  3.  "  Unto  us  a  Son  is  given ; "  as  the  Son  of  Man,  th« 
Hope  of  the  Human  Eace,  our  First-born,  He  is  presented  to  the  Father  as  our 
best  and  only  offering.  From  this  day  forward  He  is  "  in  the  presence  of  God  for 
us."  4.  Inasmuch  as  we  are  members  of  Christ,  we  too  are  presented  in  BUs 
presentation.  We  also  become  the  first-born,  joint-heirs  with  Him,  the  first-fruits 
of  creation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  chosen  nation.  II.  1.  Realize  that  we  are  ever 
being  presented  in  the  Temple  of  God  through  our  union  with  our  Head,  even  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  Realize  this  especially  in  the  Holy  Eucharist,  in  which  we  plead  before 
our  Father  the  one  perfect  and  sufficient  sacrifice  and  oblation  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world,  and  at  the  same  time,  sharing  in  His  life,  we  offer  and  present  our- 
selves a  reasonable,  holy,  and  lively  sacrifice.  8.  Realize  that  as  the  first-born  is 
especially  claimed  for  the  service  of  God,  this  sacrifice  of  ourselves  must  include 
the  offering  of  our  first-born,  our  best  energies,  our  truest  thoughts,  our  highest 
talents,  our  richest  possessions.  {Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  Dedication  to  God 
from  early  youth : — In  congratulating  Simeon  and  Anna  on  having  seen  the 
salvation  of  Israel,  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact,  that  by  long  preparation  and 
longing  they  made  themselves  worthy  of  embracing  the  Saviour.  If  you  desire  the 
same  happiness,  make  the  same  preparation  Do  not  defer  it  to  your  old  age,  but 
in  order  to  ensure  the  friendship  of  Jesus  then,  devote  yourself  to  Him  now  I. 
This  is  a  sacrifice  exceedingly  welcome  to  God,  1.  God  has  a  predilection  for 
jrouth,  and  selects  them  as  His  instruments  to  attain  His  designs.    Joseph,  DaTid* 


«HAP.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  203 

Daniel,  Stephen.  2.  The  young  are  eminently  fit  for  heaven  (Matt.  xiv.  14).  3. 
So  mnch  the  more  does  He  value  the  self-sacrifice  of  youth,  the  devotion  to  Him 
from  childhood  being  (1)  Firstlings  (Gen.  iv.  4).  He  who  dissipates  hit  youth,  and 
in  old  age  turns  to  God,  offers  fruits  of  which  the  sweetest  have  been  tasted  by  the 
devil ;  and  ears,  the  best  grain  of  which  has  been  taken  by  him.  (2)  A  sacrifice  free 
from  selfishness.  (3)  A  stainless  offering  (Mai.  i.  8).  (4)  An  example  to  others. 
IL  Vbbt  fbofitable  fob  oneself.  1.  Because  you  are  led  to  perfection,  which  is 
the  true  beauty  and  riches  of  man.  (1)  Virtue  is  a  tree  that  strikes  deeper  roots 
in  young  hearts.  Greater  susceptibility — fewer  storms  internal  and  external.  The 
coldness  and  miseries  of  life  are  not  so  much  felt.  The  soul  is  not  yet  enervated 
by  passions,  nor  petrified  by  custom  and  stupidity.  (2)  The  stem  of  this  tree  is 
harder  and  more  solid.  Virtue,  like  vice,  is  hardened  into  habit  and  passion.  The 
conversion  of  old  age  is  often  unstable.  (3)  This  tree  bears  more  delicious  fruits, 
and  in  greater  measure.  The  wine  first  taken  from  the  press  is  the  most  delicious. 
Virtue  is  an  art  acquired  by  exercise.  2.  Because  you  will  gain  happiness  here  on 
earth.  (1)  Inner  peace — the  consciousness  of  being  God's  friend.  (2)  The  prospect 
of  proximate,  abundant,  eternal  reward.  (3)  The  love  and  esteem  of  all  who  are 
of  good  will.  8.  Happiness  in  the  next  world.  (Q.  Rossi.)  Consequences  of 
good  education  : — Mary  is  the  happiest  mother,  because  she  carried  in  her  arms  the 
best  Child.  Where  is  there  a  father  or  mother  who  would  not  desire  to  have  good 
children  ?  The  attainment  of  this  wish  is  often  frustrated  by  parents  themselves. 
Yet  they  would  find  urgent  motives  to  realize  it,  if  they  would  consider  the  happy 
results  of  giving  a  wise  and  religious  education  to  their  children.  I.  Consequences 
ID  THB  PABBNTS.  Children  well  educated  are — 1.  An  honour  to  their  parents. 
Their  good  name  reflects  on  those  who  brought  them  up.  2.  Their  joy,  consolation, 
and  help,  in  every  condition  of  life.  3.  Their  eternal  crown.  II.  Consequences 
TO  THE  OHHiDBEN.  Parents  wish  nothing  more  than  to  see  their  children  happy. 
Now  it  is  on  good  education  that — 1.  Their  temporal  happiness  depends.  2.  Their 
eternal  weal.  You  have  planted  for  heaven,  and  in  heaven,  therefore,  yoo  will 
reap  your  reward.  No  dowry  equals  this.  IH.  Consequences  to  postebity.  1. 
In  regard  to  the  family  (Psa.  iii.  2, 3).  2.  In  regard  to  civil  society.  Good  and 
bad  morals  are  rapidly  spread  and  are  kept  up  for  a  long  time.  {Tirintis  )  The 
purification  : — The  question  meets  us,  If  the  blessed  Virgin  conceived  the  Son  by 
the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  if  He  Himself  were  absolutely  and  entirely 
pure,  then  what  need  of  purification  ?  What  defilement  was  there,  from  which  the 
Virgin  Mother  could  be  purified  ?  And  an  answer  is  ready  to  hand  which  seems 
abundantly  sufficient,  namely,  that  as  Jesus  was  circumcised,  so  Mary  was 
purified ;  in  each  case  there  was  submission  to  the  letter  of  a  Divine  law,  and  there 
was  no  desire  and  no  attempt  to  establish  an  exception.  Our  Lord  was  a  Jewish 
boy,  and  was  treated  as  Jewish  boys  were  treated  ;  Mary  was  a  Jewish  mother,  and 
acted  as  Jewish  mothers  were  wont  to  act.  Our  English  version  speaks  of  the 
days  of  her  purification,  and  this  is  what  we  might  have  expected,  but  it  should 
Dot  be  concealed  that  the  best  copies  of  the  original  Scriptures  give,  some 
of  them  His,  some  of  them  their  purification;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  this  last  form  of  the  sentence  is  the  correct  one  (so  Bevised  Version). 
It  would  seem  to  indicate  that,  in  the  popular  belief  and  feeling  of  the  Jews  the 
sacrifice  which  was  instituted  for  the  purification  of  the  mother  (Levit.  xii.)  did  in 
reality  also  apply  to  the  child ;  and  this  being  so,  St.  Luke  appears  not  to  have 
hesitated  to  use  a  phrase,  which,  hterally  interpreted,  would  imply  the  need  of 
purification  on  the  part  of  our  blessed  Lord  Himself.  This  is  only  another 
instance  of  the  complete  and  anreserved  manner  in  which  the  Head  of  our  race  is 
identified  with  ourselves.  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  point  in  these  verses  is  the 
incidental  testimony  to  the  poverty  of  the  Holy  Family.  The  offering  might  be  a 
lamp  and  a  turtle-dove  if  the  parents  were  rich,  and  two  doves  or  two  pigeons  if  they 
were  poor.  Hence  the  mention  of  the  "  pair  of  turtle-doves  or  two  young  pigeons  " 
xaarks  the  worldly  condition  of  the  Blessed  Virgin  and  Joseph  ;  they  came  with  the 
poor  man's  and  poor  woman's  offering ;  and  thus  again  the  poverty  of  our  Lord  was 
declared  in  the  most  striking  manner  daring  His  infancy.  (Bishop  Goodwin.)  The 
days  of  purification : — When  the  fixed  time  of  purification  was  passed  (seven  days  for 
a  boy  and  fourteen  for  a  girl),  the  mother  still  remained  at  home  thirty- three  days  for 
a  boy  and  sixty-six  for  a  girl.  Then  she  went  up  to  the  Temple.  {E.  Stapfer,  D.D.} 
Her  forty  days  were  no  sooner  out  than  Mary  comes  up  to  the  Holy  City.  She 
comes  with  sacrifices,  whereof  one  is  for  a  burnt-offering,  the  other  for  a  ein- 
•ffering ;  the  one  for  thanksgiTing,  the  other  lor  expiation ;  for  expiation  of  m 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  il 

double  sin — of  the  mother  that  conceived,  of  the  Child  that  was  conceived.  We  are 
all  bom  sinners,  and  it  is  a  just  question  whether  we  do  more  infect  the  world,  or 
the  world  us.  They  are  gross  flatterers  of  nature  that  tell  her  she  ia  clean.  But, 
0  the  unspeakable  mercy  of  our  God  1  we  provide  the  sin,  He  provides  the  remedy. 
Every  poor  mother  was  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb  for  her  offering  ;  there  was  none 
so  poor  but  might  procure  a  pair  of  turtles  or  pigeons.  God  looks  for  somewhat 
of  every  one,  not  of  every  one  alike.  Since  it  is  He  that  makes  differences  of 
abilities  (to  whom  it  were  as  easy  to  make  all  rich),  His  mercy  will  make  no 
difference  in  the  acceptation.  The  truth  and  heartiness  of  obedience  is  that  which 
He  will  crown  in  His  meanest  servants.  A  mite,  from  the  poor  widow,  is  more 
worth  to  Him  than  the  talents  of  the  wealthy.  The  blessed  Virgin  had  more 
business  in  the  temple  than  her  own.  She  came,  as  to  purify  herself,  go  to  present 
her  Son,  Every  male  that  first  opened  the  womb  was  holy  unto  the  Lonl.  He 
that  was  the  Son  of  God  by  eternal  generation  before  time,  was  also,  by  common 
course  of  nature,  consecrated  unto  God.  It  is  fit  the  Holy  Mother  should  present 
God  with  His  own.  Her  first-born  was  the  first-bom  of  all  creatures.  It  was  He 
whose  temple  it  was  that  He  was  presented  in,  to  whom  all  the  first-born  of  all 
creatures  were  consecrated,  by  whom  they  were  accepted  ;  and  now  is  He  brought 
in  His  mother's  arms  to  His  own  house,  and,  as  man,  is  presented  to  Himself  as 
God.  Under  the  gospel  we  are  all  first-born,  all  heirs ;  every  soul  is  to  be  holy 
unto  the  Lord  ;  we  are  a  royal  generation,  an  holy  priesthood.  Our  baptism,  as  it 
is  our  circumcision,  and  our  sacrifice  of  purification,  so  is  it  also  our  presentatioa 
unto  God.  Nothing  can  become  us  but  holiness.  0  God !  to  whom  we  are  devoted, 
serve  Thyself  of  us,  glorify  Thyself  by  us,  till  we  shall  by  Thee  be  glorified  with  Thee. 
(Bishop  Hall.)  No  myth : — A  mythus  generally  endeavours  to  ennoble  its  subject, 
and  to  adapt  the  story  to  the  idea.  If,  then,  the  gospel  narrative  were  mythical, 
would  it  have  invented,  or  even  suffered  to  remain,  a  circumstance  so  foreign  to  the 
idea  of  the  myth,  and  so  little  calculated  to  dignify  it  as  the  above.  A  mytbns 
would  have  introduced  an  angel,  or,  at  least,  a  vision,  to  hinder  Mary  from 
submitting  the  child  to  a  ceremony  so  unworthy  of  its  dignity ;  or  the  priests  would 
have  received  an  intimation  from  heaven  to  bow  before  the  infant,  and  prevent  its 
being  reduced  to  the  level  of  ordinary  children.  {A.  Neander.)  Early  dedication 
to  the  Lord : — The  old  Eomans  used  to  hold  the  face  of  all  their  new-born  infants 
towards  the  sky,  to  denote  that  they  must  look  above  the  world  to  celestial  glories. 
We  solemnly  and  prayerfully  dedicate  our  children  to  God  in  baptism,  &c.  And, 
remembering  their  immortality  and  the  uncertainty  of  their  life,  should  we  not  also 
constantly  devote  them  to  God,  and  train  them  for  Him  and  for  heaven  1  My  dear 
mother's  prayers  with  and  for  me  influenced  me  more  to  what  is  good  than  any 
earthly  thing  besides  ever  did.  Kichard  Cecil  spoke  of  his  mother  as  one  that  had 
great  nearness  to  God  in  prayer,  and  he  says  she  was  to  him  as  an  angel  of  God  in 
her  counsels  and  prayers,  which  most  deeply  impressed  him.  At  a  college  were 
one  hundred  and  twenty  young  men  were  studying  for  the  ministry,  it  was  found, 
as  the  result  of  special  inquiry,  that  more  than  a  hundred  of  them  had  been  con- 
verted mainly  through  a  mother's  prayers  and  labours.  But  Sunday-schoolteachers, 
ministers,  church  members,  young  people  themselves,  and  everybody  should  join 
in  loving,  prayerful  efforts  to  present  young  people  and  others  to  the  Lord.  And 
if  God's  grace  be  obtained  for  them,  will  they  not  be  restrained  from  evil,  and  also 
led  to  good  ?  Then  children  themselves  should  humbly,  earnestly,  lovingly,  and 
through  faith  in  Christ,  present  themselves  to  the  Lord.  A  dear  boy,  who  was 
soon  after  killed  in  a  moment,  prayed,  "Lord,  make  me  quite,  quite  ready, 
in  case  Jesus  comes  for  me  in  a  hurry."  {Henry  E.  Burton.)  Early  piety 
a  safeguard: — In  one  of  the  public  enclosures  of  Philadelphia  the  fountain 
was  recently  left  to  play  all  night.  During  the  hours  of  darkness  a  sharp  frost 
set  in ;  and  those  who  passed  by  next  morning  found  the  water,  still  playing 
indeed,  but  playing  over  a  mass  of  gleaming  icicles.  But  that  was  not  all.  The 
wind  had  been  blowing  steadily  in  one  direction  through  all  these  hours,  and  the 
spray  had  been  carried  on  airy  wings  to  the  grass  which  fringed  the  pool  in  which 
the  fountain  stood.  On  each  blade  of  grass  the  spray  had  fallen  so  gently  as  hardly 
to  bend  it,  descending  softly  and  silently  the  whole  night  long.  By  slow  and  almost 
imperceptible  processes  each  blade  became  coated  with  a  thin  layer  of  ice  ;  by  the 
same  noiseless  processes  each  layer  grew  thicker,  until  in  the  morning  what  before 
had  been  a  little  patch  of  swaying  grass  was  a  miniature  battle-ground  of  upright, 
crystal  spears,  each  holding  within  it,  as  its  nucleus,  a  single  blade  of  grass,  now 
cold,  rigid,  and  dead.    In  human  life,  in  like  manner,  it  may  seem  a  light  thing  t« 


OHAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  305 

leave  a  yoang  heart  outside  of  Christ's  fold,  and  exposed  to  the  "  cold  winds  of  the 
world's  great  unbelief."  There  is  no  violent  transformation  of  the  character  in 
such  a  case.  Yet  silently  and  surely  the  world's  frost  settles  upon  the  flowers  of 
the  heart,  covering  them  with  the  chill  spray  of  doubt,  binding  them  with  soft 
bonds  which  harden  into  chains  of  ice,  encasing  them  in  a  coat  of  crystal  mail, 
pohshed,  cold,  and  impenetrable.  You  have  met  persons  in  whose  heart  this 
freezing  process  has  been  accomplished.  You  have  seen  beneath  the  icy  surface 
the  nucleus  of  good  which  might  have  grown  to  so  fair  a  harvest,  just  as  you  have 
seen  the  dead  blade  of  grass  preserved  at  the  core  of  the  icicle.  You  can  do  little 
now  for  either  the  person  or  the  plant :  nothing  but  heaven's  sunshine  can  melt  tha 
ice  which  holds  them  in  its  deadly  thrall.  But  you  can  take  care  that  none  of  those 
for  whom  you  are  responsible  will  be  left  out  in  the  world's  cold,  to  suffer  so  deadly 
a  change.  You  can  bring  them  within  the  warm  influences  of  Christian  life,  where 
no  frost  will  gather  upon  them,  and  where  the  soul's  highest  powers  will  be  gently 
wooed  to  their  best  growth.  Training  children  for  the  Lord: — An  aged  Christian, 
a  widow  of  fourscore  years,  relates  the  following  experience  of  her  early  days. 
When  she  first  entered  upon  her  married  life,  she  and  her  husband  could  lock  their 
cottage  door,  and  go  together,  forenoon  and  afternoon,  to  the  house  of  God.  After 
the  birth  of  their  flrst  son  they  had  to  enjoy  this  privilege  in  turn  ;  one  going  in 
the  forenoon,  and  the  other  in  the  afternoon.  But  the  sickness  or  fretfulness  of 
the  child  not  unfrequently  detained  the  mother  at  home  during  the  whole  of  the 
Sabbath.  This  she  felt  to  be  a  great  privation.  On  one  such  occasion  a  neigh- 
bour, coming  in  to  inquire  about  her  weUare,  found  her  in  tears.  The  dejected 
young  mother  was  a  Chiistian ;  she  had  early  been  brought  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  she  was  a  lover  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  of  the  Lord's 
day ;  she  trusted  in  Jesus  as  her  Saviour ;  but  she  had  not  yet  learned  lovingly  to 
accept  all  His  discipline.  There  were  things  connected  with  it  "  too  painful  for 
her."  She  did  not  know  what  was  to  compensate  her  for  the  want  of  the  days  in 
the  oonrts  of  the  Lord  ;  and  so  she  told  her  neighbour  the  cause  of  her  dejection. 
"Woman,"  rephed  her  neighbour,  in  the  broad  dialect  of  that  land,  "  d'ye  no  mind 
the  word  that  says, '  Take  this  child,  and  nurse  him  for  Me  ;  and  I  will  give  thee 
thy  wages '  f  "  It  was  a  word  in  season  ;  and,  with  greater  or  less  power,  it  sus- 
tained and  comforted  that  mother  during  the  whole  of  her  subsequent  nursing  of 
ten  children.  Her  home  in  the  valley  of  the  Tweed  was  long  ago  exchanged  for 
one  on  the  banks  of  the  Mohawk.  But  the  God  whose  Word  thus  comforted  her 
in  early  womanhood  is  with  her  still  when  she  is  old  and  greyheaded  ;  and  she  can 
gratefully  speak  of  her  eleven  children,  nursed  for  Him,  as  all  walking  in  the  ways 
of  God  on  earth,  or  taken  away  to  another  home,  into  which  sickness  and  death 
ean  never  come.      {Mothers^  Treasury. )  Holy  education  of  children : — ♦  Good 

laws  will  not  reform  us,  if  reformation  begin  not  at  home.  This  is  the  cause  of 
all  car  misdeeds  in  Church  and  State,  even  the  want  of  a  holy  education  of  chil- 
dren.' (iJ.  Baxter.)  Permanence  of  early  impressions : — The  late  Eev.  Bichard 
Enill,  a  most  devoted  and  useful  missionary  in  Bussia,  returned  home  to  his 
native  village.  It  so  happened  that  he  slept  in  the  chamber  where  he  had  slept  as 
a  boy.  All  night  long  he  lay  awake  thinking  of  the  mercy  and  goodness  of  God  to 
him  through  Ufe.  Early  in  the  morning  he  looked  out  of  a  window,  and  saw  a 
tree  in  the  garden  beneath  which  his  mother  had  prayed  with  him  forty  years 
before.  He  went  out,  and  on  the  same  spot  knelt  down  and  thanked  God  for  a 
praying  mother.  Here  was  the  reward  of  a  mother  who  trained  her  children  in 
the  way  to  heaven. 

Vers.  25-35.  Whose  name  was  Simeon. — Readiness  for  Ood'$  will : — "  Some 
years  ago,"  says  a  lady,  "I  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  old  peasant  in  a  little 
German  village,  where  I  for  some  time  resided.  He  was  called  Gottheb,  a  name 
which  has  the  very  beautiful  signification,  '  The  love  of  God.'  The  old  man  was  well 
worthy  of  it,  for  if  ever  heart  was  filled  with  love  to  God  and  to  all  God's  creatures 
it  was  his.  Once  when  walking  I  came  upon  him  as  he  was  stooping  to  pick  up  a 
fallen  apple.  •  Don't  you  weary,  Gottlieb,'  I  asked,  '  stooping  so  often,  and  then 
lying  all  alone  by  the  roadside  ?  '  *  No,  no,  miss,'  he  answered,  smiling,  and  offer- 
ing me  a  handful  of  ripe  pears, 'I  don't  weary;  I'm  just  waiting — waiting.  I 
think  I'm  about  ripe  now,  and  I  must  soon  fall  to  the  ground;  and  then,  just 
think,  the  Lord  will  pick  me  up  1  O  miss,  you  are  young  yet,  and  perhaps  just  in 
blossom  ;  tiu-n  well  round  to  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  that  you  may  ripen  sweet 
for  His  service.'"     (New  Cyclopcedia  of  Anecdote.)        Waiting  for  the  Lord:-^ 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  a. 

Everybody  knows  and  loves  the  story  of  the  dog  Argus,  who  just  lives  through  th» 
term  of  his  master's  absence,  and  sees  him  return  to  bis  home,  and  recognizes  him, 
and  rejoicing  in  the  sight,  dies.  Beautiful,  too,  as  the  story  is  in  itself,  it  has  a 
BtiU  deeper  allegorical  interest.  For  how  many  Arguses  have  there  been,  how 
many  will  there  be  hereafter,  the  course  of  whose  years  has  been  so  ordered  that 
they  will  have  just  lived  to  see  their  Lord  come  and  take  possession  of  His  home,  and 
in  their  joy  at  the  blissful  sight,  have  departed !  How  many  such  spirits,  like 
Simeon's,  wUl  swell  the  praises  of  Him  who  spared  them  that  He  might  save  them. 
{Augustus  Hare.)  Waiting  for  the  chariot : — Mrs.  Cartwright,  wife  of  the  famous 
American  preacber,  was,  after  her  husband's  death,  attending  a  meeting  at  Bethel 
Chapel,  a  mile  from  her  house.  She  was  called  upon  to  give  her  testimony,  which 
she  did  with  much  feeling,  concluding  with  the  words :  •'  The  past  three  weeks  have 
been  the  happiest  of  all  my  life ;  I  am  waiting  for  the  chariot."  When  the  meet- 
ing broke  up  she  did  not  rise  with  the  rest.  The  minister  solemnly  said,  "  The 
chariot  has  arrived."  Simeon's  blessed  hope  : — I.  Simeon's  expectation.  He 
was  "  waiting."  He  did  not  wish  that  the  tabernacle  of  his  body  might  be  dis- 
solved  ;  but  he  did  hope  that,  through  the  chinks  of  that  old  battered  tabernacle  of 
his,  he  might  be  able  to  see  the  Lord.  II.  The  fclfilment  of  this  expectation. 
He  had  the  consolation  for  which  he  waited,  and  all  the  people  of  God  now  have  it, 
in  Jesus.  But  a  little  while  ago  I  heard  of  an  ungodly  man  who  had  a  pious  wife. 
They  had  but  one  daughter,  a  fair  and  lovely  thing ;  she  was  laid  on  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness :  the  father  and  mother  stood  beside  the  bed  ;  the  solemn  moment  came  when 
she  must  die  ;  the  father  leaned  over,  and  put  his  arm  round  her,  and  wept  hot  tears 
apon  his  child's  white  brow ;  the  mother  stood  there  too,  weeping  her  very  soul 
away.  The  moment  that  child  was  dead,  the  father  began  to  tear  his  hair,  and 
corse  himself  in  his  despair ;  misery  had  got  hold  upon  him ;  but  as  he  looked 
towards  the  foot  of  the  bed,  there  stood  his  wife  ;  she  was  not  raving,  she  was  not 
cursing ;  she  wiped  her  eyes,  and  said,  "  I  shall  go  to  her,  but  she  shall  not  return 
to  me."  The  unbeliever's  heart  for  a  moment  rose  in  anger,  for  he  imagined  that 
she  was  a  stoic.  But  the  tears  flowed  down  her  cheeks  too.  He  saw  that  though 
she  was  a  weak  and  feeble  woman,  she  could  bear  sorrow  better  than  he  could,  and 
he  threw  his  arms  round  her  neck,  and  said,  "  Ah  I  wife,  I  have  often  laughed  at 
your  religion ;  I  will  do  so  no  more.  There  ismuch  blessedness  in  this  resignation. 
Would  God  that  I  had  it  too  1 "  "  Yes,"  she  might  have  answered,  *'  I  have  the 
consolation  of  Israel."  There  is — hear  it,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and  perish  I — 
there  is  consolation  in  Israel.  Ah  I  it  is  sweet  to  see  a  Christian  die ;  it  is  the 
noblest  thing  on  earth — the  dismissal  of  a  saint  from  his  labour  to  his  reward,  from 
his  conflicts  to  his  triumphs.  The  georgeons  pageantry  of  princes  is  as  nothing.  The 
glory  of  the  setting  sun  is  not  to  be  compared  with  the  heavenly  coruscations  which 
illumine  the  soul  as  it  fades  from  the  organs  of  bodily  sense,  to  be  ushered  into  the 
august  presence  of  the  Lord.  When  dear  Haliburton  died,  he  said,  "  I  am  afraid  I 
shall  not  be  able  to  bear  another  testimony  to  my  Master,  but  in  order  to  show  yoa 
that  I  am  peaceful,  and  stiU  resting  on  Glurist,  I  wUl  hold  my  hands  up ;  "  and  just 
before  he  died,  he  held  both  his  hands  up,  and  clapped  them  together,  though  he 
could  not  speai.  Have  you  ever  read  of  the  death-bed  of  Paysonf  I  cannot 
describe  it  to  yon ;  it  was  like  the  flight  of  a  seraph.  John  Knox,  that  brave  old 
f^ow,  when  he  came  to  die,  sat  up  in  his  bed,  and  said,  "  Now  the  hour  of  my 
dissolution  is  come ;  I  have  longed  for  it  many  a-day ;  but  I  shall  be  with  my  Lord 
in  a  few  moments."  Then  he  fell  back  on  his  bed  and  died.  III.  The  bxplana- 
TiON  or  this  fact.  1.  There  is  consolation  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible.  What 
sayest  thou,  worldling,  if  thou  couldst  know  thyself  elect  of  God  the  Father,  if  thou 
couldst  believe  thyself  redeemed  by  His  only-begotten  Son,  if  thou  knewest  that  for 
thy  sins  there  was  a  complete  ransom  paid,  would  not  that  be  a  consolation  to 
you  ?  Perhaps  yon  answer,  ••  No."  That  is  because  you  are  a  natural  man,  and  do 
not  discern  spiritual  things.  The  spiritual  man  will  reply,  "  Consolation  ?  ay, 
sweet  as  honey  to  these  lips ;  yea,  sweeter  than  the  honeycomb  to  my  heart  are 
those  precious  doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God."  2.  There  is  consolation  in  the 
promises  of  the  Bible.  Oh  I  how  sweet  to  the  soul  in  distress  are  the  promises  of 
Jesus  1  For  every  condition  there  is  a  promise ;  for  every  sorrow  there  is  a  cordial; 
for  every  wound  there  is  a  balm  ;  for  every  disease  there  is  a  medicine.  If  we  torn 
io  the  Bible,  there  are  promises  for  all  cases.  3.  Not  only  have  we  consolatory 
promises,  and  consolatory  doctrines,  bat  we  have  consolatory  inflnences  in  tM 
ministry  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Scripture biographyqt Simeon :— 
What  a  biognphj^  of  a  num  7     How  &ort,  and  yet  how  complete  f    We  hmy 


mr.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  807 

biographies  so  prolix,  that  full  one  half  is  nonsense,  and  mnch  of  the  other  half  too 
vapid  to  be  worth  reading.  We  have  seen  large  volumes  spun  out  of  men's  letters. 
Writing  desks  have  been  broken  open,  and  private  diaries  exposed  to  the  world. 
Now-a-days,  if  a  man  is  a  little  celebrated,  his  signature,  the  house  in  which  he  was 
bom,  the  place  where  he  dines,  and  everything  else,  is  thought  worthy  of  publio 
notice.  So  soon  as  he  ib  departed  this  life,  he  is  embalmed  in  huge  folios,  the 
profit  of  which  reats  mainly,  I  believe,  with  the  publishers,  and  not  with  the 
readers.  Short  biographies  are  the  best,  which  give  a  concise  and  exact  account  of 
the  whole  man.  What  do  we  care  about  what  Simeon  did — where  he  was  born, 
where  he  was  married,  what  street  he  used  to  walk  through,  or  what  coloured  coat 
he  wore  T  We  have  a  very  concise  account  of  his  history,  and  that  is  enough.  His 
"  name  was  Simeon  ; "  he  lived  "  in  Jerusalem;"  "the  same  man  was  just  and 
devout,  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him. " 
Beloved,  that  is  enough  of  a  biography  for  any  one  of  us.  If,  when  we  die,  so  much 
as  this  can  be  said  of  us — our  name — our  business,  "  waiting  for  the  consolation  of 
Israel  "—our  character,  "  just  and  devout  " — our  compauionship,  having  the  Holy 
Ghost  upon  us — that  will  be  sufficient  to  hand  us  down  not  to  time,  but  to  eternity, 
memorable  amongst  the  just,  and  estimable  amongst  all  them  that  are  sanctified. 
Pause  awhile,  I  beseech  you,  and  contemplate  Simeon's  character.  The  Holy  Ghost 
thought  it  worthy  of  notice,  since  he  has  put  a  "  behold  "  in  the  sentence.  "  Be- 
hold, there  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem,  whose  name  was  Simeon."  He  doth  not  say, 
"  Behold,  there  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem,  whose  name  was  King  Herod  ;  "  he  doth 
not  say,  "  Behold,  there  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem,  who  was  high  priest ;  "  but 
"  Behold  I  " — turn  aside  here,  for  the  sight  is  so  rare,  you  may  never  see  such  a 
thing  again  so  long  as  you  live  ;  here  is  a  perfect  marvel  ;  "  Behold,"  there  was 
one  man  in  Jerusalem  who  was  "just  and  devout,  waiting  for  the  consolation  of 
Israel ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him."  His  olmracter  is  summed  up  in  two 
words — "just  and  devout."  "Just" — that  is  his  character  before  men.  "De- 
vout " — that  is  his  character  before  God.  He  was  "just."  Was  he  a  father?  He 
did  not  provoke  his  children  to  anger,  lest  they  should  be  discouraged.  Was  he  a 
master?  He  gave  unto  his  servants  that  which  was  just  and  equal,  knowing  that 
he  also  had  his  Master  in  heaven.  Was  he  a  citizen  ?  He  rendered  obedience  unto 
the  powers  that  then  were,  submitting  himself  to  the  ordinances  of  man  for  the 
Lord's  sake.  Was  he  a  merchant  ?  He  overreached  in  no  transaction,  but  pro- 
vidmg  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  he  honoured  God  in  his  common 
business  habits.  Was  he  a  servant  ?  Then  he  did  not  render  eye-service,  as  a 
man-pleaser,  but  in  singleness  of  heart  he  served  the  Lord.  If,  as  is  very  probable, 
he  was  one  of  the  teachers  of  the  Jews,  then  he  was  faithful ;  he  spoke  what  he 
knew  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  although  it  might  not  be  for  his  gain,  and  would  not, 
like  the  other  shepherds,  turn  aside  to  speak  error,  for  the  sake  of  filthy  lucre. 
Before  men  he  was  just.  But  that  is  only  half  a  good  man's  character.  There  are 
many  who  say,  "  I  am  just  and  upright;  I  never  robbed  a  man  in  my  life ;  I  pay 
twenty  shillings  in  the  pound ;  and  if  anybody  can  find  fault  with  my  character, 
let  him  speak.  Am  I  not  just  ?  But  as  for  your  religion,"  such  a  one  will  say,  "  I 
do  not  care  about  it ;  I  think  it  cant."  Sir,  you  have  only  one  feature  of  a  good 
man,  and  that  the  smallest.  You  do  good  towards  man,  but  not  towards  God ; 
you  do  not  rob  your  fellow,  but  you  rob  your  Maker.  Simeon  had  both  features  of 
a  Ohristian.  He  was  a  "  just  man,"  and  he  was  also  "  devout."  He  valued  the 
"outward  and  visible  sign,"  and  he  possessed  also  the  "inward  and  spiritual 
grace,  {nid.)  The  waiting  Church  : — All  the  saints  have  waited  for  Jesus.  Our 
mother  Eve  waited  for  the  coming  of  Christ ;  when  her  first  son  was  born,  she  said, 
"  I  have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord."  True  she  was  mistaken  in  what  she  said: 
it  was  Gain,  and  not  Jesus.  But  by  her  mistake  we  see  that  she  cherished  the 
blessed  hope.  That  Hebrew  patriarch,  who  took  his  son,  his  only  son,  to  offer  him 
for  a  burnt  offering,  expected  the  Messiah,  and  well  did  he  express  his  faith  when 
he  said,  "  My  son,  God  will  provide  Himself  a  lamb."  He  who  once  had  a  stone 
lor  his  pillow,  the  trees  for  his  curtains,  the  heaven  for  his  canopy,  and  the  cold 
ground  for  his  bed,  expected  the  coming  of  Jesus,  for  he  said  on  his  death-bed — 
"Until  Shiloh  come."  The  law-giver  of  Israel,  who  was  "king  in  Jeshurun," 
spake  of  Him,  for  Moses  said,  "  A  prophet  shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto 
you,  of  your  brethren,  like  unto  me  :  Him  shall  ye  hear."  David  celebrated  Him  in 
many  a  prophetic  song — the  Anointed  of  God,  the  King  of  Israel ;  Him  to  whom 
all  kings  shall  bow,  and  all  nations  call  Him  blessed.  How  frequently  does  he  in 
his  FsalniB  sing  about  "  my  Lord  "  1    "  The  LOBD  said  onto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  sX 


209  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

my  right  hand,  nntil  I  make  thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  But  need  we  stop  to 
tell  you  of  Isaiah,  who  spake  of  His  passion,  and  "  saw  His  glory  "  t  of  Jeremiah, 
of  Ezekiel,  of  Daniel,  of  Micah,  of  Malachi,  and  of  all  the  rest  of  the  prophets,  who 
stood  with  their  eyes  strained,  looking  through  the  dim  mists  of  futurity,  until  the 
weeks  of  prophecy  should  be  fulfilled — until  the  sacred  day  should  arrive,  when 
Jeeus  Christ  should  come  in  the  flesh  ?  They  were  all  waiting  for  the  consolation 
of  Israel.  And,  now,  good  old  Simeon,  standing  on  the  verge  of  the  period  when 
Christ  would  come,  with  expectant  eyes  looked  out  for  Him.  Every  morning  he 
went  up  to  the  temple,  saying  to  himself,  "  Perhaps  He  will  come  to-day."  Each 
night  when  he  went  home  he  bent  his  knee,  and  said,  •*OLord,  come  quickly; 
even  so,  come  quickly."  And  yet,  peradventure,  that  morning  he  went  to  the 
temple,  little  thinking,  perhaps,  the  hour  was  at  hand  when  he  should  see  his  Lord 
there ;  but  there  He  was,  brought  in  the  arms  of  His  mother,  a  little  babe  ;  and 
Simeon  knew  Him.  *•  Lord,"  said  he,  "  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in 
peace,  according  to  Thy  word  :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  "  Oh,'' 
cries  one,  "  but  we  cannot  wait  for  the  Saviour  now  1 "  No,  beloved,  in  one  sense 
we  cannot,  for  He  has  come  already.  The  poor  Jews  are  waiting  for  Him.  They 
will  wait  in  vain  now  for  His  first  coming,  that  having  passed  already.  Waiting  for  the 
Messiah  was  a  virtue  in  Simeon's  day ;  it  is  the  infidelity  of  the  Jews  now,  since 
the  Messiah  is  come.  Still  there  is  a  high  sense  in  which  the  Christian  ought  to 
be  every  day  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  I  am  very  pleased  to  see  that 
the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ  is  gaining  ground  everywhere.  I  find 
that  the  most  spiritual  men  in  every  place  are  "  looking  for,"  as  well  as  "  hastening 
unto,"  the  coming  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  I  marvel  that  the  belief  is  not  uni- 
versal,  for  it  is  so  perfectly  scriptural.  We  are,  we  trust,  some  of  us,  in  the  same 
posture  as  Simeon.  We  have  climbed  the  staircase  of  the  Christian  virtues,  from 
whence  we  look  for  that  blessed  hope,  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Ibid.) 
The  consolation  of  Israel : — Piscator  observeth  that  "  the  consolation  of  Israel "  ia 
the  periphrasis  of  Jesus  Christ ;  because  all  the  consolation  of  a  true  Israelite,  as 
Jacob's  in  Benjamin,  is  bound  up  in  Christ.  If  He  be  gone,  the  soul  goeth  down 
to  the  grave  vrith  sorrow.  As  all  the  candles  in  a  country  cannot  make  a  day — no, 
it  must  be  the  rising  of  the  sun  that  must  do  it,  the  greatest  confluence  of  comforts 
that  the  whole  creation  aSordeth,  cannot  make  a  day  of  light  and  gladness  in  the 
heart  of  a  believer ;  no,  it  must  be  the  rising  of  this  Sun  of  Righteousness.  (O. 
Swinnock.)  Waiting  is  good  but  hard  service  : — Waiting  is  often  the  best  kind  ot 
service  a  man  can  render.  Indeed  we  call  a  good  servant  a  waiter.  But  it  is  com- 
monly harder  to  wait  than  to  work.  It  was  hard  for  the  children,  the  night  before 
Christmas,  to  wait  until  morning  before  they  knew  what  presents  they  were  to  have. 
Yet  there  was  nothing  for  them  to  do  but  to  wait.  And  if  they  only  would  wait, 
the  morning  would  come — and  with  it  all  that  had  been  promised  to  them  for  the 
morning.  How  hard  it  is  to  wait  for  the  fever  to  turn,  when  we  are  watching  by  a 
loved  one's  bedside,  and  our  only  hope  is  in  waiting.  It  is  hard  to  wait  from  seed. 
time  to  harvest,  from  the  beginning  of  the  voyage  to  its  end,  from  the  sad  parting 
to  the  joyous  meeting  again,  from  the  sending  of  a  letter  until  its  answer  can 
come  back  to  us.  How  much  easier  it  would  be  to  do  something  to  hasten  a 
desired  event,  instead  of  patiently,  passively  waiting  for  its  coming.  It  is  so  much 
easier  to  ask  in  faith  than  to  wait  in  faith.  The  minutes  drag  while  the  response 
tarries.  (H.  C.  Trumbull.)  Waiting  is  harder  than  doing : — Waiting  is  a  harder 
duty  than  doing.  In  illustration  of  this  compare  Milton's  beautiful  sonnet  on  hia 
blindness,  and  that  part  of  "  The  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  which  tells  of  Passion  and 
Patience.  Jesus  Himself  had  to  wait  patiently  for  thirty  long  years  before  He 
entered  upon  His  mission.  In  a  certain  battle  a  detachment  of  cavalry  was  kept 
inactive.  It  was  hard  for  the  men  to  do  nothing  but  wait,  while  the  fight  was 
going  on  before  them.  At  last,  in  the  crisis  of  the  battle,  the  command  was  given 
them  to  charge,  and  that  body  of  fresh  men,  sweeping  down  like  a  torrent,  turned 
the  tide  of  battle.  So,  in  the  battle  of  life,  waiting  is  often  the  surest  means  to 
victory.  And  it  is  comforting  to  know  that  where  we  see  only  the  unsightly  bud, 
God  sees  the  perfect  flower ;  where  we  see  the  rough  pebble,  He  sees  the  flashing 
diamond.  (Sunday  School  Times.)  Patient  waiting  : — Those  who  have  read  the 
story  of  Agamemnon  will  remember  the  glorious  beauty  of  its  opening.  A  sentinel 
is  placed  to  watch,  year  after  year,  for  the  beacon-blaze,  the  appointed  signal  to 
announce  the  taking  of  Troy.  At  last  it  is  lighted  up ;  on  many  a  hiU  the  withered 
heath  flares  up  to  pass  on  the  tidings  being  given ;  from  many  a  promontory  the 
fire  rises  in  a  pillar,  and  is  reflected  tremulously  on  the  ridged  waves,  till  at  last  it 


OTAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  SOS 

is  lighted  upon  the  moantains,  and  recognized  as  the  genuine  offspring  of  the  Idean 
flame.  And  then  the  sentinel  may  be  relieved.  Even  so  it  is  with  Simeon.  He  is 
s  sentinel  whom  God  had  set  to  watch  for  the  Light.  He  has  seen  it,  and  he 
feels  now  that  his  hfe-work  is  over.  {Bishop  Wm.  Alexander.)  Simeon  and  the 
child  Jesus: — 1.  It  is  saying  much  for  Simeon  that  he  was  both  a  just  and  a 
devout  man.  These  two  features  of  Christian  character  are  needful  the  one  to 
the  other.  A  just  man  may  be  rigidly  and  legally  righteous,  yet  his  character  may 
be  hard  and  cold ;  but  a  devout  man  is  one  of  a  warmer,  gentler  spirit,  who  is 
not  only  good,  but  makes  goodness  attractive.  Simeon's  devout  spirit  adorned  his 
justice,  and  his  just  spirit  strengthened  his  devotion.  2.  No  Christian  grace  is 
finer  than  the  grace  that  waits  for  the  consolation  of  Israel.  Waiting  higher  than 
working.  The  passive  virtues  of  the  Christian  require  and  display  a  greater  faith 
and  a  profounder  humility  than  the  active.  To  those  who  wait  in  faith,  submis- 
sion, and  holy  living,  the  consolation  of  Israel  will  always  come.  3.  All  Christians 
may  not  depart  in  raptures,  but  they  may  at  least  expect  to  "depart  in  peace." 
Many  good  people  are  greatly  concerned  lest  they  should  not  be  ready  to  die.  If 
we  are  ready  to  live  we  may  leave  d>ing  to  the  Lord.  Simeon's  life  had  been 
passed  in  peace  with  God.  In  the  same  peace  he  was  ready  to  die.  4.  The  salva- 
tion of  Christ  is  no  meagre  and  limited  scheme.  It  is  for  all  peoples.  Christ  is  both 
"alight  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,"  and  "the  glory  of  God's  Israel."  Before  His 
throne  will  be  gathered  at  last  "  a  great  multitude  whom  no  man  can  number." 
"  He  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  His  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied."  But  what  will 
satisfy  His  infinite  heart,  if  the  kingdom  of  Satan  at  last  outnumbers  His  owii  ? 
5.  Christ  has  always  been  "  spoken  against,"  but  Christianity  lives,  and  is  going 
on  in  the  world  "  conquering  and  to  conquer. "  (E.D.  Rogers,  D.D.)  Simeon ;  saint, 
singer,  and  seer  : — Simeon's  song  was  the  first  human  Advent  hymn  with  which  the 
Saviour  was  greeted,  and  it  has  been  sung  constantly  in  the  Church  ever  since. 
L  Contemplate  a  saintly  chabacteb.  II.  See  further  the  saint's  anticipation, 
resting  upon  (1)  the  word  of  prophecy;  (2)  a  definite  personal  promise  (ver.  26). 
III.  Now  think  of  the  saintly  satisfaction.  Simeon  saw  Christ.  The  promise 
was  fulfilled.  The  vision  was  enough  to  satisfy  the  soul.  IV.  Let  us  listen  to  the 
saint's  song.  How  honourable  was  the  position  which  Simeon  occupied  in  uttering 
this  song  !  A  long  chain  of  saints,  stretching  through  the  ages,  was  completed  in 
him.  They  expected,  he  realized.  They  had  all  died,  not  having  received  the  pro- 
mise, he  received.  They  had  only  foreseen,  he  actually  touched  Christ.  He 
struck  the  first  chords  of  that  song  which  has  been  taken  up  already  by  the  ages, 
and  will  go  on  vibrating  and  increasing  in  volume  so  long  as  earth  stands  or 
heaven  endures.  V.  The  saintly  prophecy  of  Simeon  must  not  be  unnoticed. 
If  there  is  to  be  glory,  there  must  also  be  suffering.  He  gives  a  hint  of  Gethsemane 
and  of  Calvary.  A  sword  was  to  pass  through  Mary's  heart.  Here  is  the  "  first 
foreshadowing  of  the  Passion  found  in  the  New  Testament."  It  should  save  us 
from  surprise  that  Christianity  has  had  to  pass  through  such  vicissitudes.  The 
Saviour  came  to  His  throne  by  way  of  the  cross,  and  His  truth  will  come  to  be  the 
one  power  among  men  by  way  of  frequent  dispute  and  temporary  rejection,  VI. 
The  saint's  preparation  for  death  is  suggested  in  his  own  words.  There  is  a 
tradition  that  this  was  his  "  swan-song  " — that  he  passed  into  the  other  world 
when  he  had  finished  it.  More  fitting  words  with  which  to  die  could  not  easily  be 
found.  What  a  contrast  the  dying  words  of  such  a  saint  present  to  the  words  of 
the  worldling  !  It  is  said  that  Mirabeau  cried  out  frantically  for  music  to  soothe 
his  last  moments  ;  that  Hobbes,  the  deist,  said,  as  he  gasped  his  last  breath,  "I 
am  taking  a  fearful  leap  into  the  dark  " ;  that  Cardinal  Beaufort  said,  "What  I  is 
there  no  bribing  death  ?  "  Men  with  the  Christian  light  have  met  death  in  another 
way.  When  Melancthon  was  asked  if  there  was  anything  he  desired,  hesaid,  "  No, 
Luther,  nothing  but  heaven."  Dr.  John  Owen  said  at  last,  "I  am  going  to  Him 
whom  my  soul  loveth,  or  rather,  who  has  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love."  John 
Brown  of  Haddington  could  say,  "I  am  weak,  but  it  is  delightful  to  feel  one's 
self  in  the  everlasting  arms."  George  Washington  could  say,  "It  is  all  well." 
Walter  Scott,  as  he  sank  in  the  slumber  of  death,  "  Now  I  shall  be  myself  again." 
Beethoven,  as  he  could  almost  catch  the  melody  of  the  mystic  world,  "  Nowl  shall 
hear."  Wesley  could  cheerily  meet  death  with  the  words,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God 
is  with  us."  Locke,  the  Christian  philosopher,  exclaimed  at  dying,  "Oh,  the 
depth  of  the  riches  of  the  goodness  and  knowledge  of  God  1  "  Stephen  said, 
"  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit "  :  Paul,  "  having  a  desire  to  depart "  ;  and,  „  to  die 
is  gain."    All  such  utterances  accord  with  the  last  words  of  Simeon.     Inquiry  as 

14 


JIO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CfHlP. 


to  the  character  of  the  individual  life,  hope,  and  preparation  for  the  future  shotild 
be  the  outcome  of  these  thoughts.  Useful  and  important  lessons  all  may  learn  aa 
they  contemplate  the  character  of  the  venerable  Simeon — saint,  singer,  and  seer. 
(F.  Hastings.)  Simeon :  a  sermon  for  Christmas  : — Simeon,  we  are  told,  waited  for 
the  Consolation  of  Israel.  In  that  short  but  striking  word  we  discover  a  thought 
unknown  to  the  ancient  world,  and  one  which  gives  the  Jewish  nation  incomparable 
grandeur.  Israel  is  a  people  that  waits.  Whilst  the  other  nations  grow  great, 
conquer,  and  extend  here  below;  whilst  they  think  only  of  their  power  and  visible 
prosperity,  Israel  waits.  This  little  people  has  an  immense,  a  strange  ambition ; 
they  expect  the  reign  of  God  on  earth.  Much  that  was  carnal  and  selfish  mixed 
up  with  that  ambition.  But  the  truly  pious  understood  in  a  different  way  the  con- 
solation of  Israel.  In  their  case,  the  question  was,  before  everything  else,  spiritual 
deliverance,  pardon,  salvation.  Yet  how  few  they  were  who  were  not  tired  of  waiting ! 
Tor  more  than  four  hundred  years  no  prophet  had  appeared  to  revive  their  hope. 
The  stranger  reigned  in  Jerusalem.  Eeligious  formahsm  covered  with  a  winding 
sheet  of  lead  the  whole  nation.  The  scoffers  asked  where  the  promise  of  Messiah's 
coming  was.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  that  icy  indifference,  Simeon  still  waits.  Con- 
sider  I.  The  fibmness  of  his  hope.     II.  The  greatness  of  his  faith.     In  a 

poor  child  brought  by  poor  people  to  the  temple  he  discovers  Him  who  is  to  be  the 
glory  of  Israel,  and— something  more  wonderful  still,  and  wholly  foreign  to  the 
spirit  of  a  Jew — Him  who  is  to  enlighten  the  Gentiles.     It  is  the  whole  of  man- 
kind that  Simeon  gives  as  a  retinue  to  the  child  which  he  bears  in  his  arms. 
Never  did  a  bolder  faith  launch  out  into  the  infinite,  basing  all  its  calculations  on 
the  Word  of  God.     III.  The  feelings  awakened  in  his  soul  by  the  ceexaintt 
WITH  WHICH  FAITH  FILLS  HIM.     All  thcsc  feelings  summed  up  in  one — joy ;_ the  joy 
of  a  soul  overwhelmed  with  the  goodness  of  God,  joy  which  is  breathed  out  in  song. 
What  is  the  principle  of  that  joy  ?   It  is  a  Divine  peace.   "  Now  lettest  Thou  Thy  ser- 
vant depart  in  peace."   And  on  what  does  that  peace  rest?   On  the  certainty  of  sal- 
vation.   "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation,"  You  who  know  this  joy,  keep  it  not 
to  yourselves  1     {E.  Bersier,  D.D.)        A  representative  man : — Sometimes  one  man 
seems  to  stand  as  the  representative  of  the  whole  human  family.    It  was  so  in  this 
instance.     All  the  expectations,  desire,  hope,  and  assurance  of  better  things  which 
have  moved  the  heart  of  man,  seem  to  have  been  embodied  in  the  waiting  Simeon. 
His  occupation  is  appropriately  described  by  the  word  waiting.     He  had  probably 
seen  a  long  lifetime  of  varied  spiritual  service,  and  had  passed  through  his  full 
share  of  human  suffering ;  and  now,  with  all  this  discipline  behind  him,  he  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  wait  for  the  disclosure  of  the  supreme  mercy  of  heaven.     At 
his  age  he  could  not  be  long,  in  the  usual  order  of  things,  before  he  saw  death  ; 
and  yet,  between  him  and  that  grim  sight  there  lay  the  promised  revelation  of  the 
very  beauty  of  the  Father's  image.    The  coming  of    Simeon  into  the  Temple, 
though  an  ordinary  act,  was  invested  with  extraordinary  feeling  and  significance. 
Sometimes  the  habitude  of  a  whole  life  will  suddenly  disclose  new  meanings  and 
adaptations,  and  the  most  beaten  ground  of  our  routine  will  have  springing  up  on  it 
unexpected  and  precious  flowers.  Persist  in  going  to  the  house  of  God,  for  the  very 
next  time  you  go  you  may  be  gladdened  by  rare  revelations  1    A  beautiful  picture 
is  this  taking  of  the  child  into  the  arms  of  Simeon,  this  lifting  up  of  the  old  man's 
face,  and  this  utterance  of  the  saint's  prayer  1    Let  imagination  linger  uponihe 
pathetic  scene.     It  is  thus  that  God  closes  the  ages  and  opens  the  coming  time. 
The  old  man  and  the  little  child,  whenever  they  come  together,  seem  to  repeat  in 
some  degree  the  interest  of  this  exciting  scene.    Every  child  brought  into  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  should  be  in  his  own  degree  a  teacher  and  a  deliverer  of  the 
people ;  and  every  venerable  saint  should  regard  him  as  such,  and  bless  God  for 
the  promise  of  his  manhood.    It  is  amazing  at  how  many  points  we  may  touch 
the  Saviour.      There  is  Simeon  with  the  little  child  in  his  arms,  and  in  that  httle 
Ufe  he  sees  the  whole  power  of  God,  and  the  light  that  is  to  spread  its  glory  over 
Israel  and  the  Gentiles.     Simeon  might  have  given  his  prayer  another  turn  ;  he 
might  have  said,  "  Lord,  let  me  tarry  awhile,  that  I  may  see  the  growth  of  this 
child.     I  am  unwilling  to  go  just  yet,  as  great  things  are  about  to  happen,  such  as 
never  happened  upon  the  earth  before ;  I  pray  Thee  let  me  abide  until  I  see  at 
least  His  first  victory,  and  then  call  me  to  Thy  rest."    This  would  have  been  a 
natural  desire,  and  yet  the  old  man  was  content  to  have  seen  and  touched  the  pro- 
mised child;  and  he  who  might  have  died  in  the  night  of  Judaism,  passed  upward 
in  the  earliest  dawn  of  Christianity.     Simeon  saw  the  salvation  of  God  in  the 
little  child.     Others  have  seen  that  salvation  is  the  wondrousness  and  benefioeno* 


«BAP.  n,]  ST.  LUKE.  211 

exemplified  in  the  full  manhood  of  Christ.  Some  have  been  saved  by  a  simple  act 
of  faith ;  others  have  passed  into  spiritual  rest  through  doubt,  suffering,  and 
manifold  agony.  Some  have  gone  "  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God " ;  and 
others  have  found  Him  in  the  pages  of  revelation,  in  bold  prophecy,  in  tender 
promise,  in  profound  legislation,  in  gracious  and  healing  sympathy.  Thus  there 
are  many  points  at  which  we  touch  the  great  saving  facts  of  the  universe ;  the 
question  is  not  so  much  at  what  point  we  come  into  contact  with  God  as  to  be  sure 
that  our  progress  is  vital  and  progressive.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Aged  evangelists : — 
The  first  evangeUsts  were  old  people.  When  the  King  of  kings  put  off  the  glory 
of  His  heavenly  state,  and  came  into  this  world,  no  person  pronounced  His  name, 
or  even  recognized  His  face  on  the  day  of  His  first  public  appearance,  but  one  old 
man  and  one  old  woman.  I.  The  first  man  in  this  world  who  was  honoured 
TO  BE  AN  EVANGELIST  WAS  AN  AGED  MAN.  An  old  father  named  Simeon.  His- 
torically, we  know  nothing  about  him,  not  even  that  he  was  old  ;  but  all  tradition 
Baya  that  he  was  so,  and  it  is  the  fair,  inevitable  inference  from  the  spirit  of  the 
story  that  he  had  reached  a  stage  when,  in  all  human  probability,  be  would  net 
have  to  live  much  longer.  I  think  that  he  began  to  walk  up  to  the  temple  with  short 
breath  and  slow  step,  and  that  age  had  set  a  seal  upon  him,  which,  like  the  red 
erosB  upon  a  tree  marked  by  the  steward  to  come  down,  told  that  he  was  soon  to 
die.  Yet  he  had  in  cypher  a  secret  message  from  heaven,  by  which  he  knew 
that  he  was  safe  to  live  a  little  longer.  It  looks  as  if  he  had  belonged  to 
the  predicted  few  who  spake  often  one  to  another  in  the  dark  hour  just  before  the 
Sun  of  Eighteousness  rose,  and  that  in  answer  to  a  great  longing  to  see  the 
Saviour  "it  was  revealed  to  Him  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he  should  not  see  death 
until  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ."  We  are  not  told  when  this  revelation  was 
made.  If  in  his  early  manhood,  it  must  have  been  a  strange,  charmed  hfe  that  he 
led  ever  after.  At  last  the  long-looked-for  express  came.  Did  he  hear  in  the  air 
or  did  the  voice  whisper  in  his  soul  words  like  these :  "  Go  to  the  temple  ;  the  Lord 
whom  you  seek  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  temple  this  day  "  ?  We  only  know  that 
*'  he  came  by  the  Spirit  into  the  temple."  No  particular  stir  in  the  street  that 
morning,  as  the  old  man  hurried  along,  to  mark  anything  out  of  the  common  way. 
No  one  knows  what  kind  of  being  Simeon  expected  to  see,  but  we  know  that  his 
faith  was  not  shaken  by  the  sight  of  His  King  coming  as  a  mere  child.  All  his 
Boul  flamed  up.  The  old  face  shone  like  a  lamp  suddenly  lighted  ;  then  to  the 
delight  of  the  mother  and  to  the  amazement  of  the  officiating  priests,  who  almost 
thought  him  out  of  his  mind,  this  servant  of  the  Master  in  heaven  took  the  child 
in  his  arms  and  spoke  like  the  prophet  Isaiah.  Let  no  believer  be  afraid  to  die. 
When  the  time  comes,  you  will  find  that,  little  by  little,  He  has  cleared  out  all  the 
impediments  that  now  seem  to  you  so  great ;  you  will  be  as  ready  to  go  as  Simeon 
was  ;  and  if  you  look  for  Him  as  he  did,  you  will  find  that  Jesus  clasped  close  to 
you  is  still  "  the  antidote  to  death."    II.  The  first  woman  in  this  world  who  was 

HONOURED    TO    BE    AN    EVANGELIST    WAS   AN   AGED  WOMAN.      Let  US  take  short    HOteS    of 

what  is  said  about  her.  1.  The  fact  of  her  great  age  is  stated.  The  style  of  the 
statement  is  obscure,  but  the  meaning  seems  to  be  that  she  was  a  widow  about 
eighty-fov.f  years  of  age ;  that  seven  years  out  of  the  eighty-four  she  had  been  a 
wife,  and  that  she  was  quite  a  young  girl  when  she  married.  Then  she  had  lived 
long  enough,  like  Noah,  to  see  an  old  world  die,  and  a  new  world  born.  2.  She 
■was  a  prophetesi.  God  had  said  by  an  ancient  seer,  "On  My  servants  and  on  My 
handmaidens  I  will  pour  out  in  these  days  of  My  Spirit."  As  the  sun  sends  out 
shoots  of  glory  and  tinges  of  forerunning  radiance  to  tell  that  he  is  coining,  so, 
before  the  Day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,  we  have  foretokens  of  it  in  the 
prophetic  flashes  that  shone  out  from  the  souls  of  Simeon  and  Anna.  3.  She  was 
of  the  tribe  of  Asher.  Not  an  illustrious  tribe.  No  star  in  the  long  story  of  its 
darkness  until  now.  It  had,  however,  one  honourable  distinction.  To  it  had  been 
left  a  peculiar  promise,  the  richest  gem  in  the  old  family  treasure :  "  And  of 
Asher  he  said.  ...  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  The  old  prophetess 
could  say  of  this  promise,  "  I  am  its  lawful  heiress.  Long  have  I  known  it,  and 
always  have  I  found  it  true.  In  my  young  days,  in  my  days  of  happy  wifehood,  in 
my  days  of  lonely  widowhood,  in  my  days  of  weary  age  ;  as  my  days,  my  strength 
has  been."  4.  "She  departed  not  from  the  temple,  but  served  God,"  <fec.  (ver. 
37).  Looking  and  listening  for  the  Lord  of  the  temple,  she  thought  that  His  foot 
on  the  stair  might  be  heard  at  any  moment,  and  she  would  not  be  out  of  the  way 
when  He  came.  When  the  temple  shafts,  crowned  with  lily-work,  flashed  back  the 
crimson  sunrise,  she  was  there  ;  when  the  evening  lamps  were  lighted,  she  was 


J12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [ana.  u. 

there ;  when  the  courts  were  crowded,  she  was  there ;  when  the  last  echoes  of  the 
congregation  died  away,  still  she  was  there;  her  spirit  said,  "  One  thing  have  I 
desired  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (Psa.  xxvii.  4).  5.  She  took  part  in  making  known  the 
joyful  tidings.  Simeon  was  in  the  act  of  speaking,  "  and  she,  coming  in  that 
instant,  gave  thanks  likewise  unto  the  Lord,  and  spake  of  Him,"  &c.  (ver.  38). 
We  try  in  vain  to  picture  her  delight.  It  had  been  her  habit  to  speak  about  the 
glory  of  which  her  heart  was  full  to  the  people  who  came  at  the  hour  of  prayer ; 
and  DOW,  at  this  most  sacred  hour,  we  are  sure  that  in  her  holy  rapture  she  would 
stop  this  person,  put  her  hand  on  that,  and  say  in  spirit,  whatever  her  words  may 
have  been  :  "  Look  there  on  that  little  child  ;  He  is  all  that  we  have  been  looking  for  ; 
folded  up  in  that  lovely  little  life  is  all  our  redemption  ;  that  bud  will  burst  into 
wondrous  flower  some  day.  Whoever  lives  to  see  it,  mark  my  words,  that  child 
will  grow  up  to  be  the  Redeemer  of  Israel."  First  things  are  significant  things, 
especially  at  the  opening  of  a  new  dispensation.  When,  therefore,  we  find  in  the 
gospel-story  that  the  first  evangelists  were  old  people,  both  old  and  young  should 
take  the  hint.  Old  Christians  must  never  tell  us  any  more  that  they  are  past 
service.  God  has  no  such  word  as  "  superannuated  "  written  against  any  name  in 
His  book.  The  young  Christian,  joyful  with  a  soul  that  colours  all  things  with  the 
freshness  and  glory  of  its  own  morning,  can  never  say  of  the  old  Christian,  "  I 
have  no  need  of  thee."  No  hand  can  turn  back  the  shadow  on  the  dial  of  time ;  no 
spell  can  change  the  grey  hair  into  its  first  bright  abundant  beauty;  no  science 
can  discover  the  fountain  of  youth  told  about  in  Spanish  tales  of  old  romance ; 
but  the  grace  of  God  can  do  infinitely  more  than  that.  It  can  keep  the  heart 
fresh ;  it  can  make  the  soul  young  when  the  limbs  are  old.  When  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness  ;  when  many  years  have  run  their  course  ;  when  we  are 
obliged  to  char.ge  the  tense  in  speech  about  your  labours,  as  Paul  did  when  he 
said,  "  Salute  the  beloved  Persis,  who  laboured  much  in  the  Lord,"  but  feel  all  the 
while  that  you  are  more  "beloved"  than  ever;  when,  "coming  in,"  you  "give 
thanks  to  the  Lord  "  ;  when  your  inmost  life  can  say,  "  My  hand  begins  to  tremble, 
but  I  can  still  take  hold  of  the  everlasting  covenaut ;  my  foot  fails,  but  it  is  not 
far  from  the  throne  of  grace ;  my  sight  fails,  but  I  can  see  Jesus ;  my  appetite 
fails,  but  I  have  meat  to  eat  that  the  world  knows  not  of ;  my  ears  are  dull,  but  I 
hear  Him,  and  He  hears  me ;  my  memory  is  treacherous,  but  I  remember  the  years 
of  the  right  hand  of  tue  Most  High,  and  delight  to  talk  of  His  doings  "  ;  when  you 
can  thus  preach  Jesus,  be  assured  that  few  evangelists  do  more  for  the  gospel.  No 
sermon  moves  us  more  deeply  than  that  of  an  old,  happy.  Christian  life,  and  no 
service  more  confirms  our  faith.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Simeon  and  Anna : — 
Simeon  had  come  up  by  special  revelation  ;  Anna  needed  no  such  token.  Surely 
her  leading  was  the  best.  Simeon  needed  the  message,  but  if  Christ  had  come  as 
a  thief  at  first,  as  He  will  at  last,  Anna  would  have  been  there.  [A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 
The  same  man  was  just  and  devout : — To  be  devout  means  to  live  always  with  the 
consciouv^ness  of  God's  presence ;  to  walk  with  Him,  as  the  old  Scriptures  put  it, 
so  that  all  thoughts  and  acts  are  thought  and  done  before  Him,  and  ordered  so  as 
to  be  in  tune  with  His  character.  It  means  to  live  in  worship  of  Him,  so  that 
honour  is  paid  in  everything  to  that  which  is  God,  to  truth  and  mercy,  justice  and 
purity.  But  to  be  devout  without  being  just  is  almost  useless.  For  this 
kind  of  devotion  is  liable  to  extravagances  of  feeling  which  dim  the  clear 
sight  of  things.  There  is  nothing  more  common  than  the  prophecies  of  pious 
men  who  map  out  the  future  and  run  into  the  wildest  follies.  The  prophet 
musi  be  a  just  man,  and  that  means  not  only  the  habit  of  right  doing  which 
devoutness  almost  secures,  but  the  habit  of  right  thinking.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke.) 
It  is  hard  to  ^cait,  and  few  can  do  it  well : — But  God  was  with  Simeon,  and 
high  hopes,  and  faith.  God  with  him  ;  he  had  no  lonely  hours,  and  it  is  the 
loneliness  of  the  heart  that  makes  waiting  so  bitter.  He  had  that  ineffable  Pre- 
sence with  hitri,  consciousness  of  whom  would  make  life  Divine,  could  we  but 
possess  it  ;  and  the  glory  of  God's  life  and  thought  had  filled  his  heart  with  song. 
To  wait,  then,  was  not  hard ;  for  every  hour  biought  peaceful  joy,  and  every  joy  was 
a  new  pledge  of  the  last  and  most  glorious  joy.  But  along  with  this  life  with  God,  and 
flowing  from  it  as  a  source,  were  those  high  hopes  and  faiths  which  were  his  com- 
panions in  this  abiding  old  age.  Waiting  was  no  hardship  to  one  so  companied. 
(Ibid.)  The  expectant  Simeon  : — We  here  see  three  different  periods  in  the  career 
of  a  believer.  I.  Waiting.  1.  For  what  ?  Consolation.  The  heart  requires  this 
(Heb.  vi.  18).  Eedemption,  No  consolation  except  tiirough  redemption.  God's 
salvation.     The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  the  sum  and  substance  of  it  all;  for  when  ha 


n.]  ST.  LUKE.  «U 

saw  Him  he  was  satisfied.  2.  Belying  on  what  ?  God's  Word.  3.  Where  ?  In 
the  Temple.  Perhaps  because  he  looked  for  a  special  blessing  in  the  house  of  God 
(Isa.  Ivi.  7).  Perhaps  because  of  prophecy  (Mai.  iii.  1).  Learn  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  never  supersedes  Scripture,  but  leads  men  to  trust  it,  and  wait  in  faith  foi 
the  promised  blessings.  Observe  also  that  He  leads  men  to  the  sanctuary  of  God ; 
not  to  neglect  church,  but  to  look  for  a  blessing  in  it.  JI.  Finding.  We  do  not 
know  how  long  he  waited.  Perhaps  years.  At  length  a  very  insignificant  party 
entered  the  Temple.  A  man  with  a  young  woman  and  Child.  Poor  people.  Proved 
by  turtle  doves  (Lev.  xii.  8).  1.  He  recognizes  the  sacred  character  of  the  Child. 
The  believer  recognizes  Christ  as  his  Saviour,  though  men  in  general  may  think 
nothing  of  Him.  2.  He  receives  Him  into  his  arms  (Heb.  xi.  13).  3.  He  blesses 
God.  HI.  Having  found.  1.  He  is  at  peace.  2.  He  is  ready  to  die.  3.  He  is  sure 
of  the  Divine  salvation.  {Canon  Hoare.)  The  Consolation  of  Israel : — I.  The 
CHAEACTEB,  UNDER  WHICH  THEY  EXPECTED  THEIR  Messiah,  is  beautifully  expressed  in 
these  words  of  Simeon — the  Consolation  oi"  Israel,  II.  Having  shown  you  under 
what  character  the  Messiah  was  expected  by  Simeon  and  his  friends,  I  proceed 
now,  in  the  second  place,  to  consider  the  state  of  mind  in  which  they  awaited  his 
areivaIi.  1.  Simeon  waited  in  full  confidence  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel.  He 
had  received  the  promises  of  God  concerniug  the  coming  of  that  Just  One,  and  by 
faith  he  was  persuaded  of  them,  and  embraced  them.  He  entertained  no  doubts 
of  their  being  fulfilled  in  their  season.  2.  Simeon  waited  for  the  Consolation  of 
Israel  vnth  ardent  desire.  The  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  was  not  merely  an 
event  of  whose  certainty  this  excellent  man  was  assured :  he  regarded  it  as  an 
event  most  desirable,  most  happy  for  himself.  3.  Ouce  more ;  the  state  in  which 
Simeon  awaited  the  birth  of  the  Messiah,  was  a  state  of  holy  preparation.  For 
the  same  man  was  just  and  devout ;  and  both  he  and  his  friends  appear  to  have  been 
very  constant  in  their  attendance  on  the  public  worship  at  the  Temple.  (J.  Jowett, 
M.A.)  Christ  our  Consolation: — I.  Let  us  ask  ourselves  what  it  is  that  is  here 
described  by  the  words  "the  Consolation  of  Israel."  Israel  was  God's  own  people. 
For  all  the  duties,  for  aU  the  trials,  for  all  the  sufferings  of  life,  what  had  the  Greek, 
what  had  the  Eoman,  to  furnish  him,  as  compared  with  the  poorest  peasant  in  Israel, 
with  one  who  could  go  forth  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  make  mention 
of  His  righteousness  only ;  who  could  stay  himself  on  his  God  in  trial,  and  in  suffer- 
ing could  say,  •'  It  is  Jehovah,  my  covenant  God :  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  ffim 
good  "  ?  Which  of  them  could  ever  cry  out,  as  death  drew  on,  '♦  I  have  waited  for 
Thy  salvation,  0  Lord  ?  "  Of  which  of  them  could  it  ever  be  said,  amidst  all  the 
void  and  unsatisfied  yearnings  of  this  hfe,  "  When  I  awake  up  after  Thy  likeness  I 
shall  be  satisfied  "  ?  So  that,  as  compared  with  the  nations  round,  Israel's  Con- 
solation was  already  abundant.  Still,  Israel  had,  and  looked  for,  a  Consolation  to 
come.  God's  people  differed  in  this  also  from  every  people  on  earth.  When,  then, 
we  use  the  words  *'  the  Consolation  of  Israel,"  we  mean  Christ  in  the  fulness  of  Hia 
constituted  Person  and  Office  as  the  Comforter  of  His  people.  And  when  we  say 
"  waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel,"  we  imply  that  attitude  of  expectation, 
anxious  looking  for,  hearty  desire  of,  this  Consolation,  which  comes  from,  and  is 
in  fact,  Christ  Himself.  First,  then,  Christ  is  the  Consolation  of  His  people, 
inasmuch  as  He  delivers  them  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  But,  again,  Christ 
consoles  His  people  not  only  from  guilt,  but  in  borrow.  It  is  His  especial  ofiice, 
as  we  saw,  •'  to  bind  up  the  broken  heart ;  to  give  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the 
garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."    {H..  Alford,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  And  It  was  revealed  unto  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost. — The  leading  of  ih* 
Spirit : — Observe  that  Simeon  found  Christ  in  the  temple,  being  conducted  thither 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  There  was  an  ancient  promise,  "  The  Lord  whom  ye  seek 
shall  suddenly  come  to  His  Temple,"  and  this  probably  drew  the  holy  man  to  the 
courts  of  the  Lord.  But  the  Lord  might  have  come,  and  Simeon  might  not  have 
been  there,  or  the  good  old  man  might  have  been  occupied  in  some  other  court  of 
the  holy  place  ;  but  being  led  of  the  Spirit  he  came  to  the  appointed  spot  at  the 
very  time  when  the  mother  of  Christ  was  bringing  the  Babe  in  her  arms  to  do  for 
Him  according  to  the  law.  In  this  Simeon  is  an  instance  of  the  truth  that  they 
find  Christ  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  and  they  alone.  No  man  ever  comes  to  Christ 
by  his  own  wit  and  wisdom,  nor  by  his  own  unprompted  will :  he  alone  who  ia 
drawn  of  the  Spirit  comes  to  Christ.  We  must  submit  ourselves  to  Divine  teaching 
and  Divine  drawing,  or  else  Christ  may  come  to  His  temple,  but  we  shall  not  perceive 
film.     (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)        Simeon's  felicity : — How  highly  fayoured  was  Simeon  I 


tl4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  m 

A  glorious  anticipation  truly  for  a  pious  Israelite  to  entertain  1  A  stupendous 
assurance  to  carry  about  with  him  !  How  must  it  have  stirred  his  inmost  soul  at 
times  to  think  upon  it !  At  one  time,  joy — at  another,  alarm — must  have  filled 
his  heart ;  joy  at  the  thought  that  God  was  about  to  visit  and  redeem  His  people  ; 
alarm,  for  who  might  abide  the  day  of  His  coming,  and  who  should  stand  when  He 
appeared  ?  Every  rumour  which  reached  him  must  have  made  his  pulse  throb  and 
his  heart  beat ;  for  he  knew  that  he  was  destined  to  look  upon  Him  to  whom  aU 
type  and  all  prophecy  for  four  thousand  years  had  been  steadily  pointing.  .  .  .  His 
wo^rds  of  recognition,  the  inspired  hymn  which  bears  his  name,  must  doubtless 
have  flowed  from  his  burning  lips  like  words  of  fire.  His  embrace  must  surely  have 
been  an  act  of  unspeakable  gratitude,  wonder,  and  joy  1  {Dean  Burgon.)  Blessed- 
ness  found  in  the  path  of  duty  : — Let  us  put  ourselves  in  his  position  from  the  day 
that  he  received  the  promise,  and  consider,  as  far  as  may  be,  not  merely  what  we 
should  have  felt,  but  how  we  should  have  acted,  had  we  been  in  his  place.  It  may 
be  thought  that  we  should  have  adopted  one  of  the  most  probable  opinions  as  to 
the  manner  in  which  Messiah  would  appear,  and  have  anxiously  expected  His 
manifestation.  We  might  perhaps  have  gone  out  of  our  way  in  this  pursuit ;  and 
when  the  time  grew  long,  we  might  have  fancied  that  we  were  called  upon  to  take 
some  step  in  order  to  meet  the  Divine  condescension  half  way.  But  what  was  the 
course  adopted  by  devout  Simeon  ?  We  find  him  frequenting  the  Temple  faithfully, 
as  aforetime  ;  until,  on  a  certain  day,  which  was  like  every  other  day  except  in  its 
results  to  him,  the  desire  of  his  soul  was  gratified.  A  humble  pair  enter,  and  the 
mother  bears  in  her  arms  a  little  Babe.  There  is  nothing  to  distinguish  that  group 
from  ordinary  worshippers.  Nay,  their  attire  and  their  offering  bespeak  great 
poverty.  Simeon  is  made  aware  by  a  sudden  revelation  of  the  Spirit,  that  in  that 
helpless  Child  he  beholds  the  Lord's  Christ:  whereupon  he  takes  Him  up  in  hia 
arms,  and  blesses  God,  and  pours  out  his  soul  in  solemn  thankfulness.  Surely  the 
lesson  to  be  derived  from  this  incident  is  the  same  which  is  taught  us  by  many  a 
page  of  Holy  Scripture  besides  ;  namely,  that  blessedness  is  to  be  found  in  the  path 
of  duty.  This  lesson  we  dare  not  overlook,  or  neglect.  Every  one  is  apt  to  think 
that  there  is  something  in  his  own  position,  peculiarly  uncongenial  to  holiness ; 
that  his  own  path  of  life  is  peculiarly  difficult  and  embarrassing.  Especially  are 
men  prone  to  think  that  the  common  round  of  daily  duties  affords  but  little  time* 
and  presents  yet  fewer  opportunities,  for  the  service  of  God.  The  daily  task  is  so 
humble,  or  so  uncongenial ;  so  simply  worldly,  or  so  extremely  private,  that  many 
who  desire  a  closer  walk  with  God  are  apt  to  wish  that  they  were  not  exactly  what 
and  where  they  are  ;  but,  indeed,  almost  anything  besides.  It  is  our  own  infirmity, 
if  we  thus  think.  God  requires  at  our  hand  good  things,  not  great  things.  He  can 
do  without  us ;  and  it  is  He  who  does  in  us  all  that  we  ever  seem  to  do  well. 
Moreover,  if  He  does  but  find  in  us  a  perfect  willingness  to  serve  Him,  let  us  be 
well  assured  that  He  will  minister  to  us  occasions  of  holiness  ;  or  rather,  that  we 
shall  find  ample  room  for  the  execution  of  our  best  designs  and  desires,  in  those 
same  daily  duties,  that  same  lowly  round  of  perhaps  distasteful  task,  which  we  hall 
dislike  and  half  despise.  (Ibid.)  Sivieon's  character : — 1.  The  Holy  Ghost,  hia 
Leader.  2.  Faith,  his  consolation.  3.  Piety,  his  life.  4.  The  Saviour,  his  joy* 
5.  To  depart  for  heaven,  his  desire.     {Van  Dor  en.) 

•«  In  the  huge  Temple,  deck'd  by  Herod's  pride, 
Who  fain  would  bribe  a  God  he  ne'er  believed, 
Kneels  a  meek  woman,  that  hath  once  conoeivfldt 
Tho'  she  was  never  like  an  earthly  bride. 
And  yet  the  stainless  would  be  purified, 
And  wash  away  the  stain  that  yet  was  nont| 
And  for  the  birth  of  her  immaculate  Son, 
With  the  stern  rigour  of  the  law  complied : 
The  duty  paid  received  its  due  reward 
When  Simeon  bless'd  the  Baby  in  her  arm ; 
And  though  he  plainly  told  her  that  a  sword 
Must  pierce  her  soul,  she  felt  no  weak  alarm, 
For  that  for  which  a  prophet  thanked  the  Lord 
Once  to  have  seen,  could  never  end  in  harm."    {Hartley  Coleridge.) 

The  fear  of  death  destroyed  by  a  sight  of  Christ: — Our  text  is  a  joyful  exclamation 
of  a  venerable  old  saint  upon  seeing  the  Lord's  Christ.  It  seems  that  when  his 
eyes  once  looked  upon  Jesus,  he  never  wished  them  to  gaze  on  aaght  more  oa 


OHAF.  n.]  ST.  LVKE.  %U 

earth.  Hence  he  exclaimed,  "  Now,  Lord,  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in 
peace."  We  remark — I.  That  God  always  honodbs  pee-eminently  devoted  men, 
"  Them  that  honour  Me,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  will  I  honour."  Undevout  minds  are 
too  worldly,  too  apathetic,  too  dull  to  hear  the  secret  whispering  of  heaven.  'Tis 
the  spiritual  ear  alone  that  can  hear  the  still  small  voice  that  comes  across  the 
universe  from  the  spirit- world ;  'tis  the  spiritual  eye  alone  that  reads  the  secrets  of 
eternity,  that  sees  passing  in  review  before  it  the  realities  of  the  hidden  state.  Some 
simple-hearted  Christians  were  once  returning  from  chapel ;  they  had  been  to  hear 
the  holy  Bramwell  preach.  One  of  them  said  to  the  other,  '•  How  is  it  that  Mr. 
Bramwell  has  always  something  new  to  tell  us  ?  "  "  Ah  I "  said  the  other,  "  I  can 
tell  you  how  it  is ;  he  lives  very  much  nearer  the  gates  of  heaven  than  many  of  us, 
and  God  tells  him  things  He  does  not  tell  other  people."  And  so  it  was  with  Simeon. 
He  lived  very  much  nearer  the  gates  of  heaven  than  many  of  his  day  ;  and  God 
honoured  him  by  telling  him  this  great  fact.  It  was  revealed  unto  Simeon  that  he 
should  not  see  death  till  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ.  II.  Simeon  was  a  man  ov 
pbb-eminbnt  devotedness  to  God.  "  And,  behold,"  say  the  Scriptures,  "  there 
was  a  man  in  Jerusalem  whose  name  was  Simeon."  Observes  an  eminent  divine, 
"  No  doubt  there  were  many  persons  in  Jerusalem  named  Simeon  besides  this  man, 
bat  there  was  none  of  the  name  who  merited  the  attention  of  God  so  much  as  he  in 
the  text."  There  are  four  things  said  about  him  in  the  text,  every  one  of  which  is 
an  evidence  of  his  great  devotedness.  It  is  said  of  him  that  he  was  just,  devout, 
that  he  waited  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him. 
Tou  cannot  dispense  with  one  of  these  elements  from  eminent  piety,  reconciliation, 
devoutness,  a  waiting  upon  God,  and  the  possession  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  virtuous 
man  said,  a  philosopher  is  the  noblest  work  of  God ;  but  we  would  rather  say  a 
Christian,  a  devout  man,  is  the  noblest  work  of  God.  Such  a  man  is  God's  jewel. 
His  friend ;  'tis  with  him  God  delights  to  dwell ;  'tis  to  him  God  wiU  tell  His 
secrets ;  on  him  confer  His  richest  honours.  Simeon  was  such  a  man ;  God 
honoured  him  by  telling  him  the  great  fact,  that  before  death  should  close  his  eyes, 
he  should  see  the  Lord's  Christ.    III.  That  though  Simeon  was  an  eminently 

DEVOTED   MAN,  HE   HAD   GREAT  DISCOURAGEMENT   IN  OBTAINDJO   A   SIGHT  OF   THE   OBJECT 

HB  BO  EXTREMELY  DESIRED.  What  SimeoH  Wanted  was  to  see  the  Lord's  Christ. 
Unbehef  would  suggest  to  him,  "  Simeon,  you  are  an  old  man,  your  day  is  almost 
ended,  the  snow  of  age  is  upon  your  head,  your  eyes  are  growing  dim,  your  brow  ia 
wrinkled,  your  limbs  totter,  and  death  cannot  be  at  a  great  distance ;  and  where 
are  the  signs  of  His  coming?  You  are  resting,  Simeon,  on  a  phantom  of  the 
imagination — it  is  all  a  delusion."  "  No,"  replies  Simeon,  "  I  shall  not  see  death 
till  I  have  seen  the  Lord's  Christ.  Yes,  I  shall  see  Him  before  I  die."  But  unbelief 
would  again  suggest,  "But  remember,  Simeon,  many  holy  men  have  desired  to  see 
the  Lord's  Christ,  but  have  died  without  the  sight."  "Yes,"  says  Simeon,  "  I  shall 
see  the  Lord's  Christ."  I  imagine  I  see  Simeon  walking  out  on  a  fine  morning 
along  one  of  the  lovely  vales  of  Palestine,  meditating  on  the  great  subject  that 
filled  his  mind.  He  is  met  by  one  of  his  friends — "  Peace  be  with  you :  have  you 
heard  the  strange  news  ?  "  "  What  news  ?  "  replied  Simeon.  "  Do  you  not  know 
Zacharias,  the  priest?"  "Yes,  well."  "According  to  the  custom  of  the  priest's 
office,  his  lot  was  to  burn  incense  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  the  whole 
multitude  of  the  people  were  praying  without.  It  was  the  time  of  incense, 
and  there  appeared  unto  him  an  angel  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the 
altar  of  incense,  and  told  him  that  he  should  have  a  son,  whose  name  should 
be  called  John:  one  who  should  be  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  who 
should  neither  drink  wine  nor  strong  drink,  and  he  should  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  from  his  infancy,  and  that  he  should  go  before  the  Messiah  in  the 
spirit  and  power  of  Elias,  to  turn  many  of  the  people  of  Israel  to  the  Lord,  and 
make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the  Lord.  The  angel  was  Gabriel,  that  stands  in 
the  presence  of  God,  and  because  he  believed  not  the  angel,  he  was  struck  dumb." 
"  Ah  1 "  says  Simeon,  "  that  is  an  exact  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  of  Malachi 
iv.  6,  6.  This  is  the  messenger  of  the  Lord,  to  prepare  the  way  ;  this  is  the  fore- 
runner ;  this  is  the  morning  star ;  the  day  dawn  is  not  far  off ;  the  great  Messiah 
is  on  His  way — is  nigh  at  hand.  I  shall  not  see  death  till  I  have  seen  the  Lord's 
Christ.  Hallelujah  1  the  Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to  His  Temple."  Simeon 
ponders  these  things  in  his  heart,  and  time  rolls  on.  I  imagine  I  see  Simeon  agaio 
on  his  morning  meditative  walk.  He  is  again  accosted  by  one  of  his  neighbours  : 
"  Well,  Simeon,  have  you  heard  the  news  ?  "  "  What  news  ?  "  "  Why,  there's  a 
very  singular  story  almost  in  everybody's  mouth.    A  company  of  shepherds  on  the 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [otap.  n, 

plains  of  Bethlehem  were  watching  their  flocks ;  it  was  the  still  hotir  of  night,  and 
the  mantle  of  darkness  covered  the  world ;  a  bright  light  shone  around  the 
shepherds,  a  light  above  the  brightness  of  the  midday  sun ;  they  looked  up,  and 
just  above  them  appeared  an  angel  glowing  in  all  the  lovely  hues  of  heaven;  the 
shepherds  became  greatly  terrified,  and  the  angel  said  to  them,  '  Fear  not,  behold  I 
bring  you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people. ' "  "  This  is  the  Lord's 
Christ.  I  shall  not  see  death  till  I  have  seen  the  Lord's  Christ."  Simeon  said  to 
himself,  «•  They  will  bring  Him  to  the  Temple  to  circumcise  Him."  Away  went 
Simeon,  morning  after  morning,  to  see  if  he  could  get  a  glimpse  of  Jesus. 
Perhaps  unbehef  suggested  to  Simeon,  "You  had  better  stop  at  home  thia 
wet  morning;  you  have  been  so  many  mornings  and  have  not  seen  Him, 
you  may  venture  to  be  absent  this  once."  "  No,"  says  the  Spirit,  "  yon 
must  go  to  the  Temple."  Away  went  Simeon  to  the  Temple.  He  would  nc 
doubt  select  a  good  post  of  observation.  Look  at  him  there,  leaning  his  back 
against  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Temple ;  how  intently  he  watches  the  door  I 
He  sees  one  mother  after  another  bringing  her  infant  to  the  Temple  to  be  circum- 
cised ;  he  surveys  the  face  of  every  child.  "  No,"  says  he,  as  has  eye  scans  the 
countenance,  "  that  is  not  He,  and  that  is  not  "  ;  but  at  length  he  sees  the  Virgin 
appear,  and  the  Spirit  told  him  that  that  was  the  long-expected  Saviour.  He 
grasped  the  Child  in  his  arms,  and  pressed  Him  to  his  heart,  and  exclaimed,  "  Now, 
Lord,  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word,  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  Between  Simeon  and  an  awakened  sinner  there  is 
one  point  of  agreement :  they  both  desire  to  see  one  object — the  Lord's  Christ. 
"  What  must  I  do  ?  I  want  help  :  to  whom  must  I  look  ?  "  Behold,  a  ray  of  light 
breaks  in  upon  him — one  single,  but  bright  ray ;  it  keeps  him  from  utter  despair, 
it  gives  him  a  faint  hope,  it  enables  him  tremblingly  to  say,  "  Before  I  see  death,  I 
shall  see  the  Lord's  Christ."  1.  Unbelief  suggests,  "  How  do  you  suppose  that  you 
will  be  permitted  to  see  the  Lord's  Christ  ?  Do  you  think  the  great  Jehovah,  whose 
majesty  almost  confounds  the  cherubim  and  seraphim — at  least  compels  them  to 
cover  over  their  bright  faces  with  their  wings,  and  fall  before  His  throne  in  deep 
adoration — whose  temple  is  all  space,  whose  arm  is  around  all  worlds,  who  inhabits 
eternity,  at  whose  bidding  the  sun  lights  up  his  fire,  whose  empire  is  so  vast  that 
were  an  angel,  with  the  lightning's  swiftness,  to  fly  in  a  direct  line  from  the  centre, 
he  would  not  in  millions  of  years  sweep  the  outskirts  of  His  creation,  •  who  sits 
upon  the  highest  heavens,  and  sees  worlds  infinite  dance  beneath  Him  as  atoms  in 
the  sunbeam,  you  an  atom,  a  shade,  a  moth,  a  worm,  a  flower  of  the  field  to-day, 
and  not  to-morrow,  in  the  morning,  and  not  to-night,  not  master  of  a  moment, 
not  a  match  for  a  breeze,  a  dream,  a  vapour,  a  shadow,'  a  sinner  born  to  die — how 
do  you  suppose  He  will  show  you  the  Lord's  Christ  ?  "  Replies  the  awakened 
sinner,  "  One  thing  I  know :  I  dare  not  die  till  I  have  seen  the  Lord's  Christ. 
He  cares  for  my  body :  will  He  be  less  concerned  about  my  soul  ?  Will  He 
arrange  all  nature  to  minister  to  my  bodily  wants,  and  leave  my  soul  to  perish  ? 
No ;  that  is  unlike  Him."  2,  Unbehef  again  suggests :  "  Are  not  your  sins  too 
great  in  magnitude  and  multitude  to  be  forgiven  ?"  3.  But  unbelief  again  suggests, 
"  Do  you  suppose  that  the  sins  of  an  age  can  be  pardoned  in  a  moment  of  time — 
sins  that  have  spread  over  years  of  your  life  ?  "  When  we  have  seen  Christ,  the 
sting  of  death  is  gone.  Simeon  pressed  the  Lord's  Christ  to  his  heart,  and  then  he 
never  wished  his  eyes  to  gaze  on  aught  more  of  earth ;  and  when  the  believing 
penitent  has  Christ  in  his  heart,  the  hope  of  glory, then  he  is  not  afraid  of  death.  A 
fact  wiU  bear  out  this  statement.  Some  time  since,  a  minister  of  the  gospel  was 
called  upon  to  visit  a  dying  woman.  He  ascended  a  flight  of  stairs  that  led  into  a 
miserable-looking  garret ;  for,  though  clean  and  neat,  there  was  scarcely  an  article 
of  furniture  to  give  an  air  of  comfort  to  the  chamber  of  death.  In  one  corner  of 
the  room  there  was  a  bed — a  bed  of  straw  1  On  it  lay  a  dying  female,  pale,  and 
worn  to  a  skeleton  ;  she  was  near  the  verge,  the  trembling  verge,  of  eternity.  The 
minister  drew  nigh  and  said  to  her,  *'  Well,  my  friend,  how  do  you  feel  ?  What 
are  your  prospects  for  the  eternity  which  is  just  about  to  open  upon  you  ?  "  She 
looked  up  in  the  minister's  face  with  a  countenance  bright  with  heavenly  radiance, 
and  beaming  with  a  brightness  she  had  caught  gazing  on  the  visions  of  God,  and 
said,  "  Oh  1  sir, 

•  'Tis  Jesus,  the  first  and  the  last. 

Whose  Spirit  shall  guide  me  safe  home  | 
I'll  praise  Him  for  all  that  is  past. 

And  trust  Him  for  what  is  to  come.'  *' 


CHAP,  n.]  8T.  LUKE,  il7 

Christianity  can  make  a  bed  of  straw  into  a  bed  of  down — can  convert  a  gloomy 
sick  chamber  into  the  vestibule  of  heaven,  a  chamber  where  the  soul  unrobes  and 
plumes  herself  for  her  flight.     (J.  Caughey.) 

Ver.  27.  Brought  in  the  Child  Jesus. — Dedicating  children  to  the  Lord : — ^When 
the  Duke  of  Kent  was  dying,  he  desired  that  the  little  princess  Victoria  should  be 
placed  beside  him,  and  then  he  offered  a  very  affecting  prayer  that  "  if  ever  she 
became  the  Queen  of  England,  she  might  rule  in  the  fear  of  God."  How  many  of 
our  noble  Queen's  virtues  and  good  deeds  have  resulted  doubtless  from  her  godly 
training  I  In  my  first  Circuit  I  knew  the  excellent  family  of  the  late  eminent  Rev. 
Benj&min  Field.  At  his  birth  his  very  godly  father  solemnly  dedicated  him  to  God. 
He  began  to  preach  in  his  seventeenth  year,  and  by  his  ministry  and  by  his  very 
good  "  Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines,"  he  has  been  useful  to  thousands.  Holy 
children  generally  live  to  be  "  great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  and,  if  faithful,  with 
God's  blessings,  eminently  useful.  (H.  E.  Burton.)  Singleness  of  aim : — 
Parents  should  have  one  single  object  before  them  regarding  their  children,  and 
that  is,  to  bring  them  up  for  the  Lord.  To  that  everything  else  should  give  way. 
The  natural  tendency  is  to  bring  them  up  very  genteelly,  very  respectably,  to 
educate  them  for  some  station  where  they  can  make  a  great  deal  of  money.  This 
is  the  natural  tendency  on  the  part  of  parents.  Well,  they  may  obtain  the  desire 
of  their  hearts,  but  to  the  injury  of  the  souls  of  their  children.  How  I  would  press 
this  on  the  hearts  of  my  brethren  !  Of  course  I  do  not  at  all  mean  they  should  not 
have  the  best  of  education,  and  such  an  education  as  will  be  suitable  to  their 
station  in  life.  But  everything  should  give  way  to  this  point :  my  son,  my  daughter, 
are  to  be  brought  up  for  the  Lord.  My  son,  my  daughter,  are  to  become  heirs  of 
the  kingdom  that  fadeth  not  away.  Everything  ought  to  give  way  to  this  one 
point.  If  we  do  not  keep  this  before  us,  we  shall  constantly  take  wrong  steps. 
Let  me  give  an  illustration.  A  Christian  gentleman  of  good  position  in  life  articled 
his  son  to  a  very  wicked  lawyer,  notoriously  wicked.  This  son  used  to  come  home 
on  the  Saturday  afternoons  to  spend  the  Lord's  day  with  his  family.  There  he 
attended  family  prayers.  He  used  to  say  strong  things  about  his  father's  petitions, 
such  as,  "  My  father  prays  for  me  that  God  would  preserve  me  in  the  midst  of 
temptation  ;  he  puts  me  in  the  Uon's  mouth,  and  then  asks  God  to  preserve  me  1 " 
(George  Miiller.) 

Vers.  29,  31.  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  In  peace. — Nunc 
Dimittis  : — I.  Let  us  start  with  this  great  general  principle  which  is  full  of  comfort, 

that  ETEBT  BELIEVEB  MAY  BE  ASSURED  OF  ULTIMATELY  DEPAKTING  IN  PEACE.     This  is  UO 

privilege  peculiar  to  Simeon,  it  is  common  to  all  the  saints,  since  the  grounds  upon 
which  this  privilege  rests  are  not  monopolised  by  Simeon,  but  belong  to  us  all. 
1.  All  the  saints  have  seen  God's  salvation,  therefore  should  they  all  depart  in 
peace.  It  is  true,  we  cannot  take  up  the  infant  Christ  into  our  arms,  but  He  is 
•*  formed  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory."  It  is  true,  we  cannot  look  upon  Him  with  these 
mortal  eyes,  but  we  have  seen  Him  with  those  eyes  immortal  which  death  caimot 
dim — the  eyes  of  our  own  spirit  which  have  been  opened  by  God's  Holy  Spirit.  A 
eight  of  Christ  with  the  natural  eye  is  not  saving,  for  thousands  saw  Him  and  then 
cried,  "  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him."  2.  Believers  already  enjoy  peace  as  much  as 
ever  Simeon  did.  No  man  can  depart  in  peace  who  has  not  lived  in  peace ;  but  he 
who  has  attained  peace  in  life  shall  possess  peace  in  death,  and  an  eternity  of  peace 
after  death.  3.  We  may  rest  assured  of  the  same  peace  as  that  which  Simeon 
possessed,  since  we  are,  if  true  believers,  equally  God's  servants.  The  same  position 
towards  God,  the  same  reward  from  God.  4.  Another  reflection  which  strengthens 
this  conviction  is,  that  up  till  now  all  things  in  their  experience  have  been  according 
to  God's  Word.  The  promises  of  God,  which  are  "  Yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus," 
are  sure  to  all  the  seed :  not  to  some  of  the  children  is  the  promise  made,  but  all  the 
grace-bom  are  heirs.  If,  then,  Simeon,  as  a  believer  in  the  Lord,  had  a  promise 
that  he  should  depart  in  peace,  I  have  also  a  like  promise  if  I  am  in  Christ.  5.  The 
departure  of  the  child  of  God  is  appointed  of  the  Lord.  "  Now  lettest  Thou,"  &c. 
The  servant  must  not  depart  from  his  labour  without  his  Master's  permission,  else 
would  he  be  a  runaway,  dishonest  to  his  position.  6.  The  believer's  departure  is 
attended  with  a  renewal  of  the  Divine  benediction.  "  Depart  in  peace,"  saith  God. 
It  is  a  farewell,  such  as  we  give  to  a  friend  :  it  is  a  benediction,  such  as  Aaron,  the 
priest  of  God,  might  pronounce  over  a  suppliant  whose  sacrifice  was  accepted.  Eli 
■aid  unto  Hannah,  "Go  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thee  thy  petition  that 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  H. 

thon  hast  asked  of  Him."  Around  the  sinner's  death-bed  the  tempest  thickens,  and 
he  hears  the  rumblings  of  the  eternal  storm :  his  soul  is  driven  away,  either  amid  the 
thunderings  of  curses  loud  and  deep,  or  else  in  the  dread  calm  which  evermore 
forebodes  the  hurricane.  II.  Some  believebs  abb  conscious  of  a  special  beadi- 
KBSS  TO  DEPART  IN  PEACE.  When  do  they  feel  this?  Answer:  1.  When  their 
graces  are  vigorous.  2.  When  their  assurance  is  clear.  3.  When  their  communion 
■with  Christ  is  near  and  sweet.  4.  Saints  have  drawn  their  anchor  up  and  spread 
their  sails,  when  they  have  been  made  to  hold  loose  by  all  there  is  in  this  world  ; 
and  that  is  generally  when  they  hold  fastest  by  the  world  to  come.  5.  Saints  are 
willing  to  depart  when  their  work  is  almost  done.  Ah,  Christian  people,  you  will 
never  be  wUling  to  go  if  you  are  idle.  You  lazy  lie-a-beds,  who  do  Uttle  or  nothing 
for  Christ,  you  sluggish  servants,  whose  garden  is  overgrown  with  weeds,  no  wonder 
that  you  do  not  want  to  see  ycur  master  1  6.  One  other  matter,  I  think,  helps  to 
make  saints  willing  to  go,  and  that  is  when  they  see  or  foresee  the  prosperity  of  the 
Church  of  God.  Good  old  Simeon  saw  that  Christ  was  to  be  a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles,  and  to  be  the  glory  of  His  people  Israel;  and  therefore  he  said,  "Lord,  now 
lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  It  must  have  reconciled  John  Knox  to 
die  when  he  had  seen  the  reformation  safely  planted  throughout  all  Scotland.  It 
made  dear  old  Latimer,  as  he  stood  on  the  fagot,  feel  happy  when  he  could  say, 
"  Courage,  brother,  we  shall  this  day  light  such  a  candle  in  England  as  shall  never 
be  blown  out."  III.  Thebe  aee  woeds  to  encoueage  us  to  the  like  beadiness 
TO  DEPABT  (See  Psa.  xxiii.  4 ;  xxxvii.  37 ;  cxvi.  15 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  2  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  22 ; 
XV.  64  ;  Rev.  xiv.  13).  These  promises  belong  to  all  believers  ;  each  of  them  is  a 
sure  word  from  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Nunc  Dimittit : — It  seems  singular 
to  see  these  two  faces  resting  so  closely  together.  Infancy  and  old  age  are  met ; 
second  childhood  holds  first  childhood  by  the  hand  while  it  sings  a  wonderful  song. 
.The  first  thing  that  strikes  our  notice  here  is  the  sinqulab  illustbation  offebed 
OP  the  pabadox  of  Cheistian  lifi.  How  extraordinary  is  the  disparity  between 
these  two  persons,  and  yet  how  absolutely  the  one  seems  to  rest  in  the  other  I 
Jesus  lies  safely  in  Simeon's  arms ;  Simeon  reposes  his  life  for  all  the  untold  future 
in  Jesus'  Messiahship.  Simeon's  soul  is  held  up  for  ever  by  the  Little  Child  whose 
body  he  now  holds  in  his  hands  1  We  can  explain  nothing  in  this  strange  scene 
without  considering  that  Jesus  was  the  true  Messiah,  and  the  Messiah  was  the 
incarnate  God.  II.  So  this  presents  another  lesson :  here  is  a  batisfactoby  style 
OF  piety  fob  an  unwaveeing  dependence.  There  are  faiths  and  religions,  there 
are  rituals  and  creeds,  there  are  persuasions  and  experiences,  enough  almost  to  fill 
the  world.  Only  some  of  them  do  not  meet  the  end  for  which  they  have  been 
commended.  Many  a  man  has  what  he  calls  his  religion ;  and  it  does  very  well  when 
shielded  and  sheltered,  but  it  goes  out  ignobly  in  darkness  and  betrayal  under  the 
wild  rush  of  discipline,  or  the  hurricane  gusts  of  tempestuous  passion.  It  is  evident 
that  here  in  Simeon's  case  we  find  a  perfectly  settled  rest  for  any  human  souL 
His  full  content  with  it  is  edifying  and  unmistakable.  He  was  willing  to  take  his 
eternal  life  on  Christ's  own  terms,  and  so  he  was  perfectly  satisfied.  It  mattered 
nothing  to  him  that  he  was  an  old  man,  and  this  was  a  Babe,  nor  that  he  was  a 
wise  man,  and  this  was  only  a  peasant  Infant  forty  days  old;  he  expressed  his  entire 
contentment  with  the  plan  which  infinite  wisdom  had  devised  for  human  reliance. 
Men  may  as  well  start  with  this ;  they  must  begin  by  accepting  terms  already 
made,  and  cease  trying  to  make  new  ones.  Felix  Neff  once  told  even  a  minister 
this  :  "  There  is  much  truth  in  your  sermon,  but  it  lacks  one  important  thing  :  you 
still  wish  men  to  go  to  Jesus  with  lace  sleeves,  instead  of  going  to  Him  in  rags  as 
they  are."  III.  We  find  here  an  intelligent  and  exemplary  appreciation  of  the 
exact  purpose  of  the  gospel.  It  will  be  well  to  put  alongside  of  mis  song 
Simeon's  prophecy,  which  comes  just  after  it.  This  good  old  man  tells  that  young 
mother  precisely  what  her  Child  was  "  set  "  for.  Christ  was  appointed  to  prostrate 
men  from  self-dependence,  and  raise  them  again  into  full  union  with  Himself. 
His  heart  would  be  pierced  in  suffering,  and  so  would  Mary's,  before  the  history 
should  be  finished.  But  Christ's  sufferings  would  work  out  an  atonement,  by  which 
sinners  might  be  saved.  IV.  A  lesson  of  trust  for  New  •  Testament  Christians 
from  an  Old  Testament  believer.  Picture  just  that  instant  in  which  this  old 
man  stands  gazing  down  upon  the  face  of  the  Infant  for  the  first  time.  Was  this 
all  to  which  mighty  generations  had  been  looking  during  those  thousands  of  years 
that  were  gone  ?  Was  it  just  this  weak  little  peasant  Babe  that  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  had  seen  afar  off,  and  been  glad  to  see  ?  Was  He  what  the  ancient 
prophets  had  descried  in  the  distance,  as  they  stood  peering  off  from  the  wa1«h- 


.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  S19 

towers  of  a  militant  Z/on,  the  flashing  seer-light  in  their  eyes  as  they  sang  ?  Was 
this  the  King,  whom  King  David  had  so  celebrated  in  his  Psalms?  Alas  for  the  poor 
show  the  new  Monarch  now  made  !  Yet  Simeon  accepts  Him  I  Just  remember 
that  it  was  everything  or  nothing  to  this  old  man  to  make  his  decision.  No  half- 
way allegiance  would  do.  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  or  nothing.  Surrender  to  Him 
would  carry  time  and  eternity  with  it,  and  he  surrendered.  V.  A  beautiful 
PICTURE  OF  BEADINE88  FOB  DEATH.  Note  the  language  carefully.  Simeon  does  not 
nse  a  prayer ;  he  makes  a  declaration.  He  does  not  say — now  let  me  depart ;  he 
Bays — now  Thou  dost  let  me  depart.  We  feel  certain  that  this  man  has  been  waiting 
«  good  while.  Such  unusual  preparedness  for  departure  was  the  general  growth  of 
years.  It  was  no  sudden  explosion  of  experience,  but  must  have  had  its  increments  of 
spiritual  increase  as  many  and  as  various  as  the  rings  of  fibre  in  the  trunk  of  a  palm- 
tree.  There  is  an  old  age  full  of  querulous  complaint  and  peevishness,  under  every 
on-coming  of  infirmity.  It  wears  itself  out  in  discontent ;  it  often  vanishes  at  the 
last,  and  makes  no  sign.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  an  old  age  like  this  of  the 
illustrious  Simeon.  The  soul  has  leaned  its  all  on  God,  and  is  perfectly  satisfied 
because  it  knows  it  is  perfectly  safe.  Not  even  severe  trial  can  alter  the  permanence 
of  such  trust.  For  heaven  seems  the  only  true  thing  in  the  universe,  and  death  is 
nothing  but  a  kind  of  rough  way  of  going  to  it.  Eemember  the  beautiful  inscrip- 
tion upon  Dean  Alford's  tombstone ;  how  it  describes  a  grave :  "  The  inn  of  a 
traveller  on  the  way  to  Jerusalem !  "  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Simeon's  Canticle  : — 
The  "  Nunc  Dimittis  "  may  supply  us  with  useful  lessons.  1.  Its  position  in  the 
service  of  our  Keformed  Church  is  an  indication  of  honour  paid  to  the  written 
Word.  The  New  Testament  is  exalted  by  the  appointment  of  the  Song  of  Simeon 
to  be  used  after  the  second  lesson  from  Scripture  at  evening  service.  The  New 
Testament  is  full  of  Jesus.  The  Church  has  been  rent  with  disputes  about  the 
nature  of  His  presence  in  the  sacrament  of  His  love.  Every  Christian  knows  that 
there  is  a  presence  also  in  the  Word  of  His  truth.  More  especially,  the  thought, 
the  breath,  the  very  heart  of  Christ  may  be  felt  in  the  Gospels.  When  we  read  or 
hear  them,  we  embrace  Him  as  Simeon  did.  We  cease  to  be  critics  when,  with  the 
eged  saint,  we  hoid  Him  in  our  arms.  2.  More  broadly,  the  "Nunc  Dimittis  "  is 
also  a  Missionary  strain.  It  is  fittingly  recorded  by  St.  Luke,  the  Pauline  Evan- 
gelist, who  was  as  truly  the  Evangelist,  as  St.  Paul  was  the  Apostle,  of  the  Gentiles. 
In  Simeon's  Song  we  have  the  history  of  the  ages  in  one  short  sentence,  in  three 
pregnant  clauses,  at  once  original,  concise,  and  oracular.  To  the  Gentiles,  Messiah 
is  ever  giving  "  light  " ;  to  the  Jews,  He  is  ever  bringing  "  glory."  3.  This  canticle 
has  a  tone  which  is  peculiarly  suitable  to  the  evening,  and  may  profitably  be  applied 
in  this  spirit  by  believers  of  every  Church.  It  is  a  soothdng  voice  which  sings  for 
those  who  have  had  a  long  day's  work.  It  fits  into  the  golden  melancholy  of  the 
sunset  time,  or  the  later  hours,  when  the  lamps  are  lighted  in  the  sanctuary.  It  is 
as  a  prayer  with  which  a  mother  taught  us  to  lie  down  in  our  beds.  4.  The  "  Nunc 
Dimittis  "  has  always  seemed  suitable  as  a  prayer  for  a  holy  death.  In  some  of 
the  old  services  there  was  a  touching  way  of  referring  Simeon's  song  to  our 
departure,  and  to  the  thought  of  those  who  rest  in  peace.  When  it  was  sung  in 
"Holy  Week,"  just  at  its  close  the  choir  burst  out  into  the  funeral  anthem — "  In 
the  midst  of  hfe  we  are  in  death."  The  Song  of  Simeon,  thought  over  with  prayer, 
may  lead  us  to  exclaim  with  Paul,  "  I  desire  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ." 
Simeon's  holy  soul  can  find  no  home  and  rest  on  the  water-floods  of  life  ;  it  desires 
to  return  into  the  ark  with  the  ohve-branch  of  peace.  And  if  any  wish  to  depart 
in  peace  like  Simeon,  let  him  come  in  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Temple. 
Let  him  expect  Christ.  Let  him  receive  his  Saviour  into  his  arms  of  faith,  and  cradle 
Him  upon  a  heart  of  love.  The  Old  Testament  often  takes  a  dark  view  of  death. 
The  writer  shudders  as  he  writes.  The  last  words  of  the  great  Italian  poet,  Leopardi, 
were,  *'  I  cannot  see  you  any  longer,"  with  a  deep  sigh.  The  last  words  of  the 
sceptical  Hamlet  are — "  the  rest  is  silence."  The  only  Psalm  which,  in  a  like 
spirit,  ends  as  it  began,  with  gloom,  is  the  88th — 

Lover  and  friend  hast  Thou  removed  from  me ; 
My  intimates  are — Darkness. 

In  Bnoh  passages  as  these  death  is  viewed  as  it  is  for  us  all,  naturally.  But 
Simeon  seems  to  stand  for  a  gentle  picture  of  the  Law — wearied  with  life-long 
efl'ort,  worn  out  with  age,  ready  to  embrace  the  gospel,  and  so  "  depart  in  peace." 
It  is  of  profound  and  soothing  significance  that  one,  who  may  be  almost  termed 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBAr.  n, 

"  the  last  Old  Testament  saint,"  finds  death  sweet.    For  him  the  promiM  of  tht 
Psahnist  is  fulfilled — 

This  God  is  onr  God  for  ever  and  ever ; 

He  is  our  guide,  gently  leading  us  over  death. 

For  narrrow  though  the  bridge  seems  to  be  that  spans  the  chasm,  it  ifl  yet  broad 
and  strong  for  those  who  are  thus  guided.  That  bridge  is  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
{Bp.  Wm.  Alexander.)  Nunc  Dimittis  : — This  is  a  beautiful  hymn  of  sunset — tho 
sunset  of  the  life  of  a  good  man  which  may  also  be  called  a  hymn  of  sunrise,  for 
there  may  be  seen  in  it  both  the  closing  of  a  life  and  the  beginning  of  a  new  one. 
Death  is  referred  to  in  it,  not  as  the  flowing  of  twilight  into  darkness,  but  as  a 
departure.  The  hymn  is  a  thanskgiving  for  spiritual  blessings,  for  a  Divine  light 
which  had  been  planted  by  God  in  the  soul,  come  to  its  meridian  after  much  pa- 
tience and  long  waiting.  Beautiful  thoughts,  bearing  fruit  in  beautiful  words,  rise  in 
the  midst  of  this  noontide.  God  had  sown  this  thought  or  impression  in  Simeon, 
in  his  old  age,  when  he  had  begun  to  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow.  We 
know  by  experience  how  some  favourite  thought  or  idea  in  us  may  become  like  a 
living  companion,  go  with  us  in  our  walks,  and  be  with  us  in  our  occupations,  even 
in  our  sleep.  So  was  the  Divine  impression  with  Simeon.  God  ia  continually 
giving  His  children  hallowed  thoughts  and  impressions.  Simeon's  case  may  say  this 
to  us :  "  Hold  the  good  thoughts  which  come  to  you  through  prayer  and  other 
means  of  grace."  If  we  do  this  they  will  certainly  bring  us  peace  and  consolation. 
(E.  6.  Charlesworth.)  Our  last  days  should  be  our  best  days  : — Orators,  though  in 
every  part  of  their  speech  they  use  great  care  and  diligence,  yet  in  the  close  of  all 
they  set  forth  the  best  of  their  art  and  skill,  to  stir  up  the  affections  and  passions 
of  their  hearers,  that  then  they  may  leave  at  the  last  the  deepest  impression  of 
those  things  which  they  would  persuade.  Thus  ought  all  of  us  to  do,  our  whole 
life  being  nothing  else  but  a  continued  and  persuasive  oration  unto  our  God,  to  be 
admitted  into  His  heavenly  kingdom ;  but,  when  we  come  to  the  last  act  and 
epilogue  of  our  age,  then  it  is  that  we  must  especially  strive  to  show  forth  all  our 
art  and  skill,  and  that  our  last  words  may  be  our  best  words,  our  last  thoughts  our 
best  thoughts,  our  last  deeds  our  best  deeds;  whereby  stirring  up,  as  it  were,  all  the 
affections  of  God,  and  even  the  bowels  of  compassion,  unto  us.  We  may  then,  as  the 
sun,  though  always  glorious,  yet  especially  at  its  setting,  be  most  resplendent  when 
we  draw  near  unto  our  western  home,  the  house  appointed  for  aU  living.  (Udall.) 
The  last  scene : — The  evening  praises  the  day,  the  last  scene  oonmiends  the 
act.  The  rivers,  the  nearer  they  draw  to  the  sea,  the  sooner  they  are  met  by 
the  tide.  Though  to  guide  a  vessel  safely  along  in  the  ocean  argues  much  skill, 
and  such  a  pilot  is  worthy  of  praise ;  yet  at  the  very  entrance  into  the  haven, 
then  to  avoid  the  rocks,  and  to  cast  anchor  in  a  safe  road,  argues  most 
skill,  and  deserves  most  praise.  Musicians  reserve  the  sweetest  strain  for  the 
close  of  the  lesson.  {G.  Swinnock.)  Sweet  when  fading : — As  the  perfume  of 
May  boughs  is  sweetest  when  they  are  about  to  fade,  so,  like  them,  I  endeavour 
to  make  the  close  of  my  life  sweet  and  fragrant  by  a  worthy  deportment  and 
an  honourable  name.  (Scriver.)  Some  hearts,  like  evening  primroses,  open 
most  beautifully  in  the  shadows  of  life.  Simeon's  Canticle : — These  words  are  a 
sweet  canticle,  or  swan-like  song,  of  old  Simeon,  a  little  before  his  dissolution.  He 
had  seen  the  Messiah  before  by  faith,  now  by  sight,  and  wishes  to  have  his  eyes 
closed,  that  he  may  see  nothing  after  this  desirable  sight.  It  is  said  of  some 
Turks,  that  after  they  have  seen  Mahomet's  tomb,  they  put  out  their  eyes,  that  they 
may  never  defile  them  after  they  have  seen  so  glorious  an  object.  Thus  did  old 
Simeon  desire  to  see  no  more  of  this  world,  after  he  had  seen  Christ  the  Saviour, 
but  sues  for  his  dismissal.  Note  here — 1.  That  a  good  man  having  served  his  gene- 
ration, and  God  in  his  generation,  faithfully,  is  weary  of  the  world,  and  willing  to 
be  dismissed  from  it.  2.  That  the  death  of  a  good  man  is  nothing  else  but  a  quiet 
and  peaceable  departure ;  it  is  a  departure  "  in  peace "  to  the  God  of  peace. 
3.  That  it  is  only  a  spiritual  sight  of  Christ  by  faith  that  can  welcome  the  approach 
of  death,  and  render  it  an  object  desirable  to  the  Christian's  choice.  4.  Holy 
Simeon,  having  declared  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  himself  in  the  gift  of  Christ, 
next  celebrates  the  mercy  of  God  in  bestowing  this  invaluable  gift  of  a  Saviour 
upon  the  whole  world.  The  world  consists  of  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  Christ  is  "  a 
light "  to  the  one,  and  "  the  glory  "  of  the  other.  A  light  to  the  blind  and  dark 
Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  the  renowned  Church  of  the  Jews  ;  the  Messiah  beinj 


OHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  221 

promised  to  them,  born  and  bred  up  with  them,  living  amongst  them,  preaching 
His  doctrine  to  them,  and  working  His  miracles  before  them  ;  and  thus  was 
Christ  "the  glory  of  His  people  Israel."  (W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Simeon'a  Song : — 
The  swan-like  song  of  old  Simeon.  He  speaks  like  a  merchant  who  has  got 
all  his  goods  on  shipboard,  and  now  desires  the  master  of  the  ship  to  hoist 
sail  and  be  gone  homewards.  Indeed,  what  should  a  Christian,  who  is  but  a 
foreigner  here,  desire  to  stay  any  longer  for  in  the  world,  but  to  get  this  full  lading 
in  for  heaven  ?  (IF.  Gurnall.)  Death  tests  : — "  Charles,  our  people  die  well," 
eaid  John  Wesley  to  his  brother.  Why  is  not  that  a  proper  test  ?  We  take 
death-bed  words  without  an  oath  in  a  court  of  justice  ;  a  man  is  honest,  if 
ever,  in  the  moment  when  the  great  shadow  is  coming.  Think  of  the  martyr 
Eidley,  the  night  before  he  was  burned  alive  at  the  stake.  One  of  his  pitiful 
friends  offered  to  sit  up  with  him  in  the  prison.  "Ob,  no  I "  said  the  good 
man,  "what  would  you  do  with  yourself?  I  mean  to  go  to  bed,  and  sleep  as 
quietly  as  ever  I  did  in  my  life.  My  breakfast  to-morrow  will  be  sharp  and  painful ; 
but  I  am  sure  my  supper  will  be  right  pleasant  and  sweet !  "  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Death  wdcome  with  Jesus  near : — When  his  end  was  near,  I)r.  Grierson  of  Errol, 
after  various  Psalms  and  portions  of  Scripture  had  been  read  to  him,  asked  his 
children  to  conclude  by  singing  the  hymn,  "  Safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus."  After 
they  had  sung  it,  he  said,  "  I  feel  I  am  safe  there.  Death  has  no  power  nor  fear 
for  me  at  all  now."  And  when  told  that  it  was  drawing  near  the  morning,  he 
exclaimed,  "  Oh,  let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh !  I  feel  Jesus  very  near  by 
me.  Dear  Lord,  let  me  go  I  "  Light  in  death  : — The  day  before  he  died,  John 
Holland,  turning  with  his  own  hand  to  the  eight  chapter  of  the  Romans,  bade  Mr, 
Legh  read  it :  at  the  end  of  every  verse  he  paused  and  gave  the  sense  to  his  own 
comfort,  but  more  to  the  joy  and  wonder  of  his  friends.  An  hour  or  two  after,  on 
a  sudden,  he  said,  "  Oh,  stay  your  reading  I  What  brightness  is  this  I  see  ?  Have 
you  lighted  any  candles  ?  "  No,  it  was  replied  ;  it  is  the  sunshine.  "  Sunshine  1  " 
he  said;  "nay,  it  is  my  Saviour's  shine.  Farewell,  world:  welcome,  heaven!" 
Heady  to  start : — A  saintly  man,  when  nearing  his  end,  once  remarked  :  "  I  am  just 
like  a  package  that  is  all  ready  to  go  by  train ;  packed,  cordetl,  labelled,  paid  for — 
waiting  for  the  express  to  take  me  to  glory  I  "  Release  from  school : — Dr.  Judson 
once  said,  "  I  am  not  tired  of  my  work,  neither  am  I  tired  of  the  world ;  yet,  when 
Christ  calls  me,  I  shall  go  with  the  gladness  of  a  boy  bounding  away  from  school. 
Death  will  never  take  me  by  surprise :  do  not  be  afraid  of  that ;  I  feel  so  strong  in 
Christ."  Simeon's  Song  : — His  Song  may  give  us  a  glimpse  of  the  man  himself ,  for 
in  it  bis  habitiial  beliefs,  convictions,  and  hopes  rise  to  their  highest  and  frankest 
expression.  I.  In  Simeon's  Song  we  have  a  noble  conception  of  life.  "  Now 
art  Thou  relieving,  or  setting  free,  thy  slave,  0  Master  (literally,  "  0  Despot "), 
according  to  Thy  word,  in  peace."  Simeon  regards  himself  as  a  sentinel  whom,  by 
His  word  or  promise,  the  Great  Master,  or  Captain,  had  ordered  to  an  elevated  and 
dangerous  post,  and  charged  to  look  for  and  announce  the  advent  of  a  great  light 
of  hope,  a  light  which  was  to  convey  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  To  him  life,  or  at 
least  his  own  life,  shaped  itself  as  the  task  of  a  watchman,  or  a  sentinel  on  duty — 
who  has  to  face  rough  weather  and  smooth  as  he  paces  his  weary  beat,  to  confront 
the  fears  and  hidden  perils  of  the  darkness,  in  order  that  the  camp  he  guards  may 
be  secure ;  but  who  is  sustained,  under  the  burden  of  anxiety  and  weariness,  by  the 
hope  of  receiving  a  signal,  of  seeing  a  light  arise  in  the  darkness,  which  will  not 
only  release  him  from  his  post,  but  will  also  bring  the  tidings,  or  the  prediction,  of 
a  great  and  final  victory.  A  very  noble,  though  by  no  means  a  perfect  conception  of 
human  life,  which  is  too  large  and  complex  to  be  rendered  by  any  one  image.  A 
conception,  moreover,  which  may  be  very  helpful  to  us  in  many  of  the  conditions 
in  which  we  are  placed.  When  life  grows  as  weary  and  monotonous  to  us,  through 
the  prolonged  pressure  of  samely  duties,  as  to  the  watchman  fixed  to  Agamemnon'g 
roof  or  to  a  dog  chained  to  a  post ;  or  when  the  zest  of  youth  has  passed  and  the 
infirmities  and  disabilities  of  age,  or  disease,  accumulate  upon  us  ;  or  when  we  are 
weighed  down  with  a  burden  of  cares,  anxieties,  and  fears,  many  of  which  are  gross  and 
palpable  enough,  but  to  some  of  which  we  can  hardly  give  a  name ;  when  flesh,  or  heart, 
fail  us,  or  both  fail  us,  it  surely  would  sustain  and  comfort  us  were  we  to  remember 
that  our  post  has  been  appointed  us  by  the  Great  Captain  who  makes  no  mistake ; 
that  the  duties  and  the  burdens  allotted  to  us  have  an  end  of  discipline  and  love, 
and  are  intended  to  make  us  stronger,  wiser,  better ;  and  that,  however  long  it  may 
delay  its  coming,  a  great  Light  is  to  arise  upon  us  ;  that  it  is  this  for  which  we  are 
watching  and  serving  :  and  that  it  will  bring  with  it  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  for  all 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oiu».  & 

people  as  well  as  for  us.  11.  In  Simeon's  Song  we  hare  a  nobls  oonoxption  or 
DEATH.  In  his  view,  the  sentinel  was  also  the  slave,  and  the  discharge  of  the 
sentinel  was  also  the  manumission  of  the  slave.  Belief  from  toil,  relief  from 
danger,  relief  from  bondage — c»n  any  conception  of  death  be  more  welcome  and 
attractive  to  weary,  world- worn,  sinfid  men?  Only  one  thing  could  render  it  more 
attractive  and  complete,  and  this  we,  who  have  the  mind  of  Christ,  are  bound  to 
supply:  viz.,  that  our  relief  from  toil  will  not  be  an  exemption  from  work,  but  an 
added  capacity  for  labour  which  wiU  take  all  toil  and  weariness  out  of  it ;  that  our 
relief  from  danger  will  not  release  us  from  that  strife  against  evil  in  which  even 
the  holy  angels  are  engaged,  but  will  bring  us  an  immortal  strength  and  serenity  in 
virtue  of  which  we  shall  carry  on  the  conflict  without  fear,  and  cherish  the  sure 
and  certain  hope  that  evil  must  in  the  end  be  overcome  of  good ;  and  that  our 
relief  from  bondage  wiU  not  be  a  discharge  from  service,  but  will  bring  us  a  vigour 
and  a  grace  which  will  make  our  service  a  delight,  since  henceforth  we  shall  serve 
as  sons  and  not  as  slaves.  III.  We  have  a  noblb  conception  of  saijVation. 
Simeon  does  but  show  the  true  prophetic,  i.e.,  the  true  catholic,  spirit  when  he 
conceives  of  the  salvation  of  God  as  extending  to  the  Gentile  as  well  as  the  Jew, 
and  delights  in  a  mercy  as  wide  as  the  world.  And  we  fall  short  of  that  spirit,  we 
sin  against  the  revelation  of  the  Old  Testament  no  less  than  that  of  the  New,  so 
often  as  we  affect  any  special  personal  interest  in  the  fatherly  love  and  compassion 
of  God,  or  even  when  we  conceive  of  His  salvation  as  confined  to  the  Church.  The 
Church  has  been  elected,  as  the  Jewish  race  was  elected,  solely  for  the  sake  of  the 
world,  solely  that  it  may  carry  the  news  and  the  power  of  salvation  to  those  who 
are  outside  its  pale.  If  we  have  seen  the  Light,  it  is  that  we  may  bear  witness  to 
the  Light ;  that  we  may  announce  its  rising,  reflect  its  splendour,  and  believe  that  it 
will  shine  on  till  the  darkness  is  past  and  every  shadow  has  fled  away.  If  we  are 
sentinels,  it  is  that  we  may  guard  and  save  the  whole  camp,  and  not  simply  our 
own  company  or  our  own  regiment.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  glory  and  work  of 
old  age: — The  greatness  of  man  is  chiefly  in  this,  that  he  can  say  to  pain,  I 
will  endure ;  and  to  death,  I  will  conquer  its  fear ;  and  to  old  age,  I  will  not 
be  querulous.  The  glory  of  man  is  chiefly  in  this,  that  Christ  enables  him  to  go 
beyond  the  Stoic,  and  to  say  to  pain,  I  will  not  only  endure,  but  I  will  make  suffer- 
ing a  step  towards  progress ;  and  to  death,  I  wiU  not  only  conquer  its  fear,  but  open 
it  as  the  portal  of  ampler  life  ;  and  to  old  age,  I  will  not  only  not  be  querulous,  but 
will,  therein  and  thereby,  finish  my  inner  development  before  I  go.  To  crystallise 
into  finished  perfection  was  the  aim  and  the  ideal  of  the  Stoio,  To  grow  for  ever 
is  the  aim  and  the  ideal  of  the  Christian.  Death  ended  the  effort  and  the  pain  of  the 
Stoic.  Death  continues  the  effort,  without  the  pain,  of  the  Christian.  What  were 
the  gains  which  blessed  Simeon's  age  ?  I'.  Prophetic  poweb.  He  saw  the  Child 
and  he  knew  that  It  was  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  This  is  the  glory  of  a  Christian's 
old  age — vividness  of  spiritual  vision.  II.  Another  remarkable  gain  blessed  the 
old  age  of  Simeon,  the  possession  of  a  liberal  beliqious  view.  We  find  the  old 
man  set  free  from  the  exclusiveness  and  bigotry  of  his  time  and  of  his  youth. 
Those  were  strange  words  upon  the  lips  of  a  Jew — "  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  1 " 
They  had  been  said  before.  But  it  was  not  a  common  thought,  nor  a  national 
thought,  at  the  time  of  Christ's  coming.  Those  who  heard  Simeon  would  be  likely 
to  call  him  a  dangerous  Liberal.  Tolerance  and  a  wide  religious  view  are  natural 
to  old  age,  and  it  is  very  pitiable  when  we  find  it  without  them.  Ill,  Simeon  wins 
the  crowning  blessing  of  old  age — deep  peace.  We  cannot  win  that  quiet  till  just 
before  the  close.  IV.  But  what  is  the  special  work  of  old  age  ?  It  is  partly 
outward,  partly  inward.  Its  outward  work  is  the  spreading  of  charity;  the  using  of 
experience  for  the  help  of  others.  Its  inward  work  is,  however,  the  most  im- 
portant— the  edifying  of  the  heart  in  noble  religion  by  consideration  of  the  past ; 
the  rounding  of  tlae  soul  into  as  great  perfection  as  possible,  in  filling  up  the  broken 
edges  of  the  sphere  of  life,  in  consolidating  the  world  of  our  ideas.  In  wonder, 
and  in  joy  that  he  has  been  so  cared  for,  and  so  led  into  maturity,  all  thought  of 
self  passes  from  the  old  man's  life,  and  he  throws  his  whole  being  in  gratitude  at 
the  feet  of  his  Saviour  and  his  God.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  first  touch,  even  before 
death,  of  the  pure  and  perfect  life,  the  first  faint  throb  of  the  exquisite  existence 
into  which  he  is  going  to  enter,  the  half-realization  on  the  borders  of  the  world  of 
light,  while  yet  within  the  glimmering  shadow,  of  what  communion  with  God  may 
mean.  Then,  indeed,  he  feels  what  Simeon  felt  when  the  long-repressed  cry  rose  to 
his  lips,  for  he  sees  the  very  Christ :  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant,"  Ac 
{Stopford  A.  Brooke.)        Simeon  felt  that  little  hand  that  lay  hidden  in  his  bosom 


CBBAP.  11.]  ST.  LUKE,  223 

as  if  it  was  fast  loosening  the  silver  cord.  He  speaks  less  like  a  living  man  than 
as  a  kind  of  Iiazarua,  alive  indeed,  but  bound.  "Lord,  loose  me,"  he  prays. 
Younger  men  must  work  with  the  Messiah — his  day  was  done.  (A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 
Death  viewed  without  terror  : — The  Bible  seldom  speaks  of  death  by  its  own  ugly 
name.  It  rather  chooses  to  use  expressions  which  veil  its  pain  and  its  terror  ;  and 
so  does  conxmon  speech.  But  the  reasou  in  the  two  cases  is  exactly  opposite.  The 
Bible  will  not  call  death  "  death,"  because  it  is  not  a  bit  afraid  of  it ;  the  world 
wiU  not,  because  it  is  so  much  afraid  of  it.  The  Christian  view  has  robbed  death 
of  all  its  pain  and  terror.  It  has  limited  its  power  to  the  mere  outside  of  the  man, 
and  the  conviction  that  death  can  no  more  touch  me  than  a  sword  can  hack  a 
Burbeam,  reduces  it  to  insignificance.  Death  is  a  Liberator  in  the  profoundest 
sense.  It  is  the  angel  who  comes  in  the  night  to  God's  prisoned  servant,  striking 
the  fetters  from  his  limbs,  and  leading  him  through  the  iron  gate  into  the  city. 
Death  is  a  departure  whiah  is  an  emancipation.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Death  is 
reUau  .*— > 

If  one  had  watch'd  a  prisoner  many  a  year, 
Standing  behind  a  barred  window-pane, 
Fettered  with  heavy  handcuff  and  with  chain, 
And  gazing  on  the  blue  sky  far  and  clear ; 
And  suddenly  some  morning  he  should  hear 
The  man  had  in  the  night  contrived  to  gain 
His  freedom,  and  was  safe,  would  this  bring  pain? 
Ah  1  would  it  not  to  dullest  heart  appear 
Good  tidings  t 

{Helen  Htmt.) 

To  sift  therefore  the  agreeableness  of  those  two  parts,  attend  to  these  particulars : 
1.  Here  is  a  supplicant  the  servant  of  the  Lord — "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy 
servant."    2.  The  petition  of  his  soul — "  to  depart."     3.  The  time  which  he  sets — 

♦•  Now,  Lord,  now ."     4,  He  pleads  that  he  was  well  prepared  to  depart,  for 

his  heart  was  in  peace,  "Lord  now ."     5.  The  assurance  in  which  he  trusted 

that  God  would  grant  him  his  desire,  for  it  was  according  to  His  word.  6.  And 
principally :  Here  is  the  reason  upon  which  he  framed  his  desire  why  he  would 
depart,  he  had  seen  that  which  his  soul  waited  for  before  it  flitted  away,  "  For 
mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  (Bishop  Hacket.)  Servant  of  God  : — It  is 
great  humility  to  confess  one's  self  a  servant,  but  it  is  no  little  dignity  to  profess 
one's  self  such  a  servant,  to  be  the  servant  of  God,  and  not  the  servant  of  men  by 
vile  obsequiousness,  nor  the  servant  of  a  man's  own  passions  by  lust  and  sensuality, 
nor  the  servant  of  sin  by  giving  place  unto  the  devil,  this  is  a  freedom  that  excels 
all  other  liberty.  (Ibid. )  Simeon  knew  the  instant  of  his  dissolution  was  at 
hand,  and  yet  he  sang  away  the  remainder  of  his  life  with  joy  ;  as  who  should  say, 
fly  away  my  soul,  fly  away  like  a  dove  and  take  thy  rest,  for  now  I  see  that  the 
promises  of  grace  and  mercy  are  true ;  here  is  Christ  thy  Savioiu*  in  thy  hands, 
thine  eyes  do  see,  thine  arms  do  support  thy  salvation ;  though  thou  departest  thou 
ahalt  not  go  from  Him,  for  He  is  man  on  earth  to  comfort  thee,  and  God  in  heaven 
to  glorify  thee.  {Ibid.)  Satisfied  .-—As  who  should  say,  if  I  had  been  summoned 
to  leave  my  station  before  this  day  came,  my  soul  had  been  in  bitterness,  and  I  had 
been  gathered  to  my  fathers  in  sorrow,  but  now  my  pilgrimage  hath  been  pro- 
longed till  I  am  full  of  happiness,  now  I  am  fledged  with  all  my  feathers  to  fly 
away,  for  what  will  satisfy  him  upon  earth  whom  the  sight  of  a  Saviour  will  not 
satisfy?  He  was  far  stricken  in  years,  and  yet  not  mellow  enough  to  drop  off  from 
the  tree  till  the  nativity  of  Jesus  was  fulfilled,  and  he  a  witness  of  it.  He  looked 
many  a  long  look  befoi-e  he  beheld  his  Saviour.  And  this  is  the  nature  of  God's 
promises,  they  are  seldom  accomplished  till  his  faith  hath  been  thoroughly  tried  to 
whom  they  are  made,  and  that  he  doth  even  languish  with  expectation.  Some 
will  say  perhaps,  0,  I  have  waited  long,  this  will  never  fall  out  as  God  hath 
promised.  (Ibid.)  The  best  sight : — Again,  reason  good  he  should  ask  of  Goi 
to  close  his  eyes,  for  they  could  never  do  him  such  good  service  any  more,  as  they 
did  at  that  instant,  when  they  saw  that  mighty  God  in  the  visible  f-rm  of  a  little 
Infant.  The  superstition  and  the  barbarisms  of  the  Turks  being  so  well  known,  I 
do  assent  to  some  stoiies  reported  of  them,  which  may  seem  inereiHble  to  civil 
nations.  I  instance  in  this  particular,  that  when  some  of  their  zealots  have,  made 
a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca  to  do  their  adorations  to  the  tomb  of   Mahomet,  tbcj 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA».  n. 

presently  draw  hot  burning  steel  before  their  eyes  to  put  them  out,  that  they  may 
never  see  any  other  spectacle,  after  they  have  been  honoured  to  see  that  monument 
of  tbeir  prophet.  Far  better  a  great  deal,  and  without  superstition,  might  Simeon 
say,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation,  0  Jehovah,  now  draw  their  curtains 
before  them,  that  they  may  never  hereafter  see  the  iniquities  of  men."  {Ibid.) 
Death  better  than  degeneration  : — 0  let  me  not  survive  to  see  the  infidelity  of  mine 
own  nation :  0  let  me  not  live  to  see  Him  crowned  with  thorns.  (Ibid.)  Ex- 
eessive  spiritual  joy : — The  Redeemer  is  come,  let  my  fetters  therefore  be  broken 
off  ;  my  joy  is  excessive  and  superlative,  this  frail  flesh  cannot  contain  it :  The  new 
wine  is  poured  in,  0  let  the  old  bottles  break.  Thou  hast  granted  me  more  than 
ever  Thou  didst  grant  to  any  prophet  upon  earth ;  therefore  exalt  me  to  Thy  saiBts 
in  heaven.  (Ibid.)  Seeing  the  invisible: — Blessed  were  the  eyes  both  of  his 
soul  and  body :  his  bodily  eyes  did  see  the  happiest  sight  in  heaven  and  earth,  but 
the  eyes  of  his  soul  did  respect  that  which  is  invisible.  (Ibid.)  Christ  embraced  :— 
He  comes  with  much  impotency  and  weakness,  to  be  presented  in  the  Temple, 
and  to  be  redeemed  after  the  custom  of  the  law,  with  five  shekels  of  silver,  but  Ho 
will  redeem  us  both  from  the  bondage  of  the  law,  and  from  the  bondage  of  sin, 
with  the  five  wounds  of  His  body.  If  such  salvation  as  this  were  only  to  be 
glanced  upon  perfunctorily,  this  sage  Israelite  would  have  been  contented  to  have 
seen  Him,  and  rested  there ;  but  forasmuch  as  we  must  incorporate  our  Saviour  in 
our  souls,  and  endeavour  that  there  be  a  real  union  'twixt  Christ  and  us:  therefore 
in  the  verse  before  my  text,  Simeon  took  up  our  Saviour  into  his  arms,  and  St. 
John  makes  that  a  great  mystery  of  his  own,  and  his  brethren's  happiness,  that 
their  hands  had  handled  the  Word  of  Life.  This  doth  not  only  betoken  faith,  but 
exceeding  love ;  we  hug  them  in  our  arms  whom  we  have  in  dear  estimation,  we 
catch  them  in  our  arms,  as  if  we  would  grow  together :  so  if  we  love  the  Lord 
sincerely,  we  are  one  with  Him,  and  He  with  us ;  we  dwell  in  Him,  and  He  in  us. 
(Ibid.)  Old  age: — If  any  are  entitled  to  a  peaceful  departure,  it  is  those  who, 
Uke  the  aged  Simeon,  have  passed  through  not  only  the  springtime  and  summer  of 
life,  but  also  through  its  autumn  and  winter.  To  few  is  it  given  to  do  this.  For 
most  of  us,  life  closes  before  old  age  brings  its  burdens,  its  sorrows,  or  its  triumphs. 
Stern,  indeed,  is  the  task  which  old  age  imposes  upon  those  who  enter  her  service. 
The  departure  of  one  friend  after  another,  till  all  the  companions  of  earlier  and 
later  years  have  disappeared,  and  one  belongs  to  a  generation  not  his  own ;  the 
gradual  failure  of  the  faculties  in  which  have  lain  the  joy  and  pride  of  life ;  the 
conscious  enfeebling  of  mind  and  body  alike  ;  the  defeat,  and  often  the  entire 
reversal,  of  all  one's  dreams  for  the  progress  and  happiness  of  the  race;  and  the 
adoption  by  the  world  of  manners  and  fashions  repugnant  to  every  instinct  in 
which  one  has  been  reared, — what  trial  has  youth  or  manhood  to  compare  with 
these  f  All  the  more  beautiful  is  it,  then,  when  the  approach  of  old  age,  far  from 
chilling  heart  or  soul,  touches  life  with  a  more  radiant  light  than  had  belonged  to 
it  before,  and  brings  the  powers  to  a  certain  dignified  maturity  ;  reminding  one  of 
the  lingering  days  of  Indian  summer,  when,  just  as  we  have  ceased  to  look  for 
sunny  skies,  and  are  prepared  for  November's  chilly  air,  and  have  bade  farewell  to 
the  last  of  the  roadside  flowers,  a  soft  and  dreamy  haze  falls  upon  the  landscape, 
coming  as  if  from  another  clime,  and  bringing  with  it  a  loveliness  with  which 
spring  and  summer  can  hardly  vie.  Sometimes,  old  age  seems  to  lose  its  withering 
touch  entirely,  and,  instead  of  blighting,  to  bring  the  intellectual  powers  to  their 
highest  vigour.  The  wisdom  of  experience,  the  deepening  insight  into  truth,  and 
stronger  habits  of  independent  judgment  come  to  aid  the  mind  or  will  and  make 
them  capable  of  their  best  work.  It  brings  often  a  beautiful  spirit  of  tolerance. 
Through  mai^y  years  of  waiting  and  watching,  they  have  learned  the  lesson,  not  of 
despair,  but  of  hope.  They  have  discovered  that  human  systems  are  transient,  the 
eternal  truth  and  right  abiding.  The  activity  of  younger  minds,  instead  of 
awakening  jealousy  or  discontent,  moves  their  admiration,  as  the  poor  cripple  or 
worn  invalid  looks  admiringly  upon  the  agile  movements  of  children  at  their  play, 
and  marvels  with  longing,  yet  with  pride,  at  his  companion's  prodigal  activity. 
The  years,  as  they  have  passed,  have  taught  them  charity  of  judgment  and  con- 
fidence in  men's  nobler  motives.  Youth,  as  we  know,  is  almost  of  necessity 
one-sided  and  limited  in  its  judgments,  and  liable  to  bitter  prejudices.  Again,  old 
age  brings  not  only  tolerance  and  breadth :  it  brings  also,  at  times,  in  its  rarer 
manifestations,  a  vivid  and  living  interest  in  passing  events,  which  more  than 
makes  up  for  the  forced  inactivity  which  age  imposes.  If  they  cannot  themselves 
share  in  the  world's  activity,  they  rejoice  that  others  should.    Removed  from  the 


OHA*.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  825 

toil  and  scenes  they  love,  they  find  their  compensation  in  living  in  the  efforts  and 
experiences  of  younger  souls,  whose  life  is  still  before  them.  No  hearts  so  young, 
no  hopes  so  immature,  but  their  sympathies  are  enlisted  for  them.  Men  marvel  at 
their  cheerfulness  and  unfailing  animation,  little  knowing  that  they  have  learned 
the  secret  of  perpetual  youth.  Where  the  affections  are  fresh  and  the  sympathies 
warm  and  comprehensive,  old  age  may  touch  the  head  with  frost  and  leave  furrows 
npon  the  brow,  but  it  cannot  reach  the  heart.  Again,  age  seems  to  bring  to  those 
Vfho  know  how  to  meet  it  a  more  serene  and  undisturbed  happiness  than  belongs  to 
any  other  period  of  life.  Happy  old  age,  I  suppose,  is  that  which  has  accumulated 
resources  during  its  active  years  sufficient  for  its  years  of  inaction.  It  has  a  full 
mind.  It  has  thronging  memories  of  a  busy  past.  It  has  the  remembrance  of 
eager  and  serious  effort  while  effort  was  possible.  It  has  mental  as  well  as  physical 
faculties  which  bear  witness  of  thorough  use,  and  which  have  earned  for  themselves 
the  right  to  repose.  It  has  vital  sympathies  enlisted  so  long  in  great  interests  as 
to  feel  still  the  glow  of  their  old  enthusiasms.  Then  come  the  composure,  the 
peace,  the  dignity,  which  often  make  old  age  so  winning  and  attractive.  The  din 
of  life  is  far  away.  Its  rancours  and  enmities  have  lost  their  sting.  What  dignity 
and  grace  it  lends  to  the  home !  How  much  more,  even  in  its  infirmities,  it  adds 
to  the  life  around  it  than  it  can  possibly  receive  from  it;  not  simply  through 
whatever  is  venerable  in  its  aspect  or  demeanour,  but  rather  through  the  gentle 
bearing  and  tender  sentiment  which  it  calls  into  being,  and  without  which  our  lives 
would  be  bare  and  rude  indeed  1  What  can  be  a  better  training  for  childhood  than 
to  grow  up  by  the  side  of  venerable  forms,  whom  all  are  treating  with  honour  and  re- 
Bpect  ?  What  more  refining  influence,  as  one  advances  in  years,  than  the  tender  solici- 
tude, the  loving  care,  the  gentle  deference,  which  it  is  the  privilege  of  youth  to  offer 
to  age  ?  If  age  would  be  weary  and  solitary  without  youth  at  its  side,  youth  would 
certainly  be  raw  and  uncouth  without  the  softening  presence  of  age.  (jB.  H.  Hall.) 
A  martyr's  death-song :  —  These  words  have  been  the  triumphant  death-song 
of  true  martyrs.  One  of  them,  in  the  fourteenth  century,  Maximilian  Hostialick, 
told  the  officer  on  the  Bcaffold  that  he  would  repeat  the  song  of  Simeon, 
and  then  the  executioner  might  do  his  duty.  He  accordingly  lifted  up  his  voice  : 
*•  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word  ;  for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation  " ;  and  then  fell  the  blow  that  severed  his  head 
from  the  body.  (A.  C.  Thompson,  D.D.)  Peace  of  a  dying  Christian: — Joseph 
Addison,  the  renowned  author  and  linguist,  after  enduring  much  physical  suffering 
with  fortitude,  sent  for  the  young  but  dissipated  Lord  Warwick.  He  came  and 
Baid,  "  Dear  sir,  you  sent  for  me.  I  believe  and  hope  you  have  some  commands. 
I  shall  hold  them  most  dear."  "See,"  said  the  dying  saint,  "in  what  peace  a 
Christian  can  die  I "  and  breathed  his  life  out  like  a  sleeping  infant.  Christ 
immediately  known  and  embraced  : — Simeon  knew  Christ  as  soon  as  he  saw  Him, 
and  embraced  Him  as  soon  as  he  knew  Him,  and  enjoyed  Him  as  soon  as  he 
embraced  Him.  So  some  know  the  Word  of  God  as  soon  as  they  hear  it,  and 
believe  it  as  soon  as  they  know  it,  and  feel  the  comfort  of  it  as  soon  as  they 
believe  it ;  but  others  hear  it  as  though  they  heard  it  not,  like  deaf  adders,  that 
stop  their  ears  at  the  voice  of  the  charmer.  {H.  Smith.)  Prepared : — For  there 
was  nothing  which  had  not  a  tongue  to  speak  for  God.  Everything  was  prepared 
for  Him  before  He  came  to  be  revealed.  He  came  not  in  the  beginning  nor  in  the 
ending.  He  came  not  in  the  ending,  that  we  which  come  after  Him,  might  long 
for  His  second  coming.  He  came  not  in  the  beginning,  because  that  such  a  Prince 
as  He  should  have  many  banners  and  triumphs  before  Him.  He  came  not  in  the 
beginning,  because  the  eyes  of  faith  should  not  be  dazzled  in  Him,  and  lest  they 
which  should  live  in  the  latter  times  should  forget  Him  and  His  coming,  which  was 
BO  long  before ;  even  as  you  forget  that  which  I  have  said  as  soon  as  you  are  gone 
hence.  He  came  not  in  the  beginning,  because  if  He  had  come  before  man  had 
Binned,  man  would  have  acknowledged  no  need  of  a  physician  ;  but  He  came  when 
man  had  sinned,  and  had  felt  the  smart  of  sin.  For  when  they  were  cast  out  of 
Paradise,  they  ran  unto  Christ,  as  the  Israelites  did  to  the  serpent.  He  came  not 
in  the  beginning,  but  in  the  perfect  age  of  the  world,  to  show  that  He  brought  with 
Him  perfection,  perfect  joy,  perfect  peace,  perfect  wisdom,  perfect  righteousness, 
perfect  justice,  perfect  truth  ;  signifying  thereby,  that  notwithstanding  He 
came  in  the  perfect  age  thereof,  yet  He  found  al  things  imperfect.  (Ibid.) 
The  waiting  of  Simeon:  —  Simeon  also  waited  or  the  consolation  of  Israel, 
nntil  he  had  embraced  in  his  arms  Him  whom  he  so  long  longed  to  see  and 
feeL      How  many  waiters    be    there  in  the  world  1    yet    few    wait    as    Simeon 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [oha».  A 

did;  bat  some  wait  for  honoar,  some  for  riches,  some  for  pleasores,  soma 
for  ease,  some  for  rewards,  some  for  money,  some  for  a  dear  year,  and  some  for  a 
golden  day,  as  they  call  it ;  but  Simeon  waited,  and  expected  with  many  a  long 
look,  until  he  had  seen  and  embraced  Christ  Jesus,  the  light  of  the  Gentiles,  the 
glory  of  Israel,  the  salvation  of  all  that  with  a  faithful  and  zealous  affection  and 
love  do  wait  for  His  coming,  to  the  comfort  of  the  afiSicted,  and  to  the  terrifying  of 
the  wicked  and  the  ungodly,  which  have  not  already  waited,  neither  embraced  Him, 
as  Simeon  did.  (Ibid.)  Desiring  death : — May  not  any  man  desire  death  f 
May  not  the  fastened  ship  in  a  strange  land  desire  to  be  loosed,  to  hasten  to  his 
longed-for  port  at  home  ?  May  not  a  man  imprisoned  amongst  bitter  enemies 
desire  to  be  set  at  liberty,  to  return  to  his  own  country,  in  freedom  to  live  amongst 
his  sweet  friends  ?  Are  we  not  strangers  here,  and  by  unpeaceable,  most  deadly 
enemies,  our  own  flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  held  prisoners  in  the  chains  of 
sin  and  manifold  infirmities  ?  and  is  not  our  home  heaven,  and  the  saints  and 
angels  our  most  dear  friends?  No  marvel,  then,  that  Simeon  here  desireth  to  be 
loosed,  or  let  depart.  (Ibid.)  Spiritiuil  intimations: — "And  it  had  been 
revealed  unto  him  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  tiiat  he  should  not  see  death,  before  he  had 
seen  the  Lord's  Christ."  This  pre-intimation,  be  it  observed,  was  not  a  mere  pre- 
sentiment ;  it  was  a  direct  revelation  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Yet,  if  Simeon  had  been 
questioned  about  it  any  time  before  this  memorable  day  in  the  Temple,  I  doubt 
whether  he  would  have  af^rmed  that  he  was  conscious  of  having  received  any 
distinctively  supernatural  communication.  He  probably  would  have  answered: 
"  I  have  a  strong  conviction  that  I  shall  not  die  until  I  behold  the  Consolation  of 
Israel."  However  this  may  have  been,  I  believe  that  something  like  this  has  often 
occurred  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  may  often  occur  again.  Although  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  a  supernatural  being,  yet,  generally  speaking,  He  acts  so  naturally 
on  our  feelings  and  expectations  that  we  are  not  distinctly  conscious  of  being  nnder 
His  influence.  Who  shall  venture  to  affirm  that  those  strong  presentiments  which 
we  sometimes  have — for  example,  concerning  the  conversion  of  children  or  kindred, 
or  the  restoration  to  health  and  home  of  far  distant  sick  friends — may  not  be  inti- 
matious  to  us  by  that  Holy  One  who  is  emphatically  the  comforter  and  teacher  and 
guide  and  helper  and  inspirer  of  His  people  ?  If  the  Holy  Spirit  can  act  on  us  in 
respect  to  duty,  as  we  believe  He  does,  why  cannot  He  act  on  us  in  respect  to  desire 
and  foresight  ?  But  let  us  not  imagine  that  every  presentiment  is  His  impulse. 
How  often  are  our  saintliest  and  intensest  expectations  disappointed  I  Blessed  are 
we  if,  like  the  patriarchs,  we  die  as  well  as  hve  in  faith,  although  we  have  not  re« 
ceived  the  promised  blessings,  but  only  seen  them,  and  greeted  them  from  afar.  In 
all  events,  no  one  who  has  ever  heard  the  glad  tidings  need  die  before  he  has  in  the 
truest  sense  seen  the  Lord's  Christ.  (G.  D.  Boardman.)  Coincidences  : — "  And 
He  came  in  the  Spirit  into  the  Temple."  The  Holy  Spirit  then  not  only  revealed 
to  Simeon  that  he  would  not  die  before  he  had  seen  Jehovah's  Anointed :  the  Holy 
Spirit  also  prompted  Simeon  to  visit  the  Temple  the  precise  hour  the  Divine  Babe 
was  to  be  brought  in.  Ah,  little  do  we  imagine  how  many  of  the  blessed  coinci- 
aences  of  life  are  really  arranged  by  that  Holy  One  under  whose  administration  we 
are  living.  Little  did  Simeon,  although  looking  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel, 
imagine  that  he  would  see  the  Lord's  Christ  that  day  in  His  Temple.  Little  did 
Joseph  and  Mary  imagine  that  on  that  day  the  Divine  Babe  would  receive  such 
reverential  salutation.  Little  did  Cornelius  in  Csesarea  and  Peter  in  Joppa  imagine 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  arranging  for  them  an  interview  momentous  in  conse- 
quences. Little  did  Philip  and  the  treasurer  of  Ethiopia  imagine  that  they  would 
meet  each  other  on  the  desert  way  between  Jerusalem  and  Gaza.  Little  do  we 
imagine  that  many  of  the  so-called  accidental  conjunctions  of  hfe  are  really  the 
gracious  arrangements  by  One  who,  hidden  behind  earth's  thrones  and  nature's 
Iftws,  is  administering  the  affairs  of  the  universe  in  the  interest  of  Christ  and 
Christ's  Church.  When  wUl  the  world  and  the  Church  learn  that  Almighty  God  is 
Euler  as  well  as  Maker  ?  The  character  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  universal,  infallible 
prober.  The  same  lancet  which  lays  bare  the  healthy  nerve,  lays  bare  the  diseased. 
The  same  glad  tidings  which  disclosed  and  saved  a  Simon  Peter,  disclosed  and 
doomed  a  Judas  Iscariot.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  touch-stone  of  human  hearts.  And, 
first,  we  cannot  but  be  impressed  by  the  universal  welcome  which  greeted  the 
infant  Jesus.  Toil  welcomed  Him  in  the  adoration  of  the  shepherds.  Intellect 
welcomed  Him  in  the  adoration  of  the  wise  men.  Infancy  welcomed  Him  in  the 
adoration  of  the  unborn  son  of  Elisabeth.  Old  age  welcomed  Him  in  the  adoration 
of  Simeon  and  Anna.     And  well  might  all  classes  thus  welcome  Him ;  for  He  ia 


tmAt.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  227 

the  Son  of  man,  and  bo  the  Christ  for  all  men.  Secondly,  nothing  is  more  bean- 
tiful  than  a  Christian  old  age.  For  it  brings,  as  it  did  to  Simeon,  three  beautiful 
things.  First,  it  brings  depth  of  spiritual  insight :  Simeon  took  the  Child  into  his 
arms,  and  blessed  God,  saying,  "Lord,  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation." 
Secondly,  it  brings  catholicity  of  spirit :  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation, 
which  Thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of  all ;  a  light  for  revelation  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel."  Thirdly,  it  brings  peace  in  view  of 
death :  "  0  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  The  truth  is, 
age  does  not  depend  on  years.  Some  are  old  at  twenty,  others  are  young  at  ninety. 
As  the  poet  sings : 

"  We  live  in  deeds,  not  words ;  in  thoughts,  not  breaths ; 
In  feelings,  not  in  figures  on  a  dial : 
We  should  count  time  by  heart-throbs. 

He  most  lives 
Who  thinks  most,  feels  the  noblest,  acts  the  best." 

Age  is  far  more  a  matter  of  indolence,  and  nselessness,  and  ennui,  than  of 
chronology.  And  a  Christian  old  age  is  ever  youthful.  (Ibid.)  Character 
and  privilege  of  Simeon: — I.  His  personal  piety.  Who  is  the  devout  man? 
The  answer  is  brief.  It  is  the  man  who,  in  consequence  of  inward,  spiritual 
illnmination,  entertains  correct  views  of  God — of  God's  nature,  character,  govern- 
ment, worship,  and  grace;  and  who  habitually  feels,  acts,  and  lives  under  the 
living  influence  of  these  views.  It  is  the  man  who  has  respect  to  God  in  all  things  ; 
it  is  he  who  inherits  and  exhibits  the  moral  glories  of  the  great  Father,  walks  in 
serene  fellowship  with  Him  in  a  world  of  storms,  and  lives  and  moves  in  Hia 
everlasting  love.  The  devout  man  prays  to  his  God  in  secret,  makes  His  Book  the 
reason  and  rule  of  duty,  leans  upon  His  kind  arm  when  sorrows  darken  his  path, 
and  endeavours  everywhere  and  always  to  glorify  His  holy  name.  But  Simeon  was 
not  only  devout,  but  also  just.  And  who  is  the  just  man  ?  The  scriptural  idea  of 
him  is  vast  and  comprehensive.  A  just  man  is  one  who  is  universally  right — right 
as  to  his  condition,  and  right  as  to  his  character.  His  faith,  his  principles,  hia 
practice,  are  all  right.  Having  accepted  the  Divine  method  of  salvation,  he  ia 
treated  as  though  he  were  just;  the  Lord  imputeth  no  iniquity  to  him.  Having 
received  the  Divine  Spirit,  he  is  become  actively  just  towards  himself,  his  race,  and 
his  God.  In  law  he  is  righteous  :  in  life  he  is  righteous.  Such  is  the  general  idea 
the  Bible  gives  of  a  just  man.  But,  in  the  text,  the  phrase  has  evidently  a  limited 
signification.  It  denotes  social  rectitude.  To  be  just  to  our  fellow-men  is  to 
recognize,  and,  as  far  as  we  can,  to  protect  their  rights,  civil,  mental,  religious. 
Now,  between  these  distinct  virtues  there  is  an  essential  connection.  They  never 
do,  they  never  can,  exist  separately.  Strictly  speaking,  they  are  only  two  mani- 
festations of  the  same  thing.  It  is  human  holiness  embracing  at  once  the  finite 
and  the  infinite  as  the  spheres  of  its  action.  Men  would  sever  devotion  and 
morality ;  but  the  thing  is  impossible.  Facts  as  well  as  philosophy  prove  it  so. 
How  can  a  truly  devout  man  be  unjust?  And  how  can  a  just  man  be  yet  so  unjust 
as  to  neglect  his  God  ?  The  two  virtues  we  speak  of,  then,  necessarily  co-exist. 
But  although  these  two  qualities  never  exist  independently  of  each  other,  yet  it  ia 
a  matter  of  fact,  that  in  many  a  good  man  they  are  far  from  being  equally  deve- 
loped. One  man  is  very  devotional  as  to  the  current  of  his  thoughts,  associations, 
feelings,  hopes,  and  desires,  and  yet  very  defective,  to  say  the  least,  in  the  discharge 
of  his  social  obligations.  Another  man  is  remarkably  exact,  punctual,  and  con- 
scientious in  all  his  relative  duties,  who  nevertheless  is,  or  appears  to  be,  very 
careless  and  cold  in  the  offices  of  devotion  and  in  the  higher  exercises  of  religion. 
How  is  this?  In  the  history  of  practical  godliness  are  four  things  which  it  would 
be  well  to  remember  :  that  different  men  excel  in  different  virtues  ;  that  the  same 
men  excel  in  different  virtues  at  different  periods  of  their  history  :  that  in  no  man 
do  all  the  virtues  shine  with  equal  radiance  ;  and,  finally,  that  the  best  of  men  are 
far  from  perfection  here.  Thus  we  have  glanced  at  the  virtues  of  Simeon  ;  their 
nature,  development,  and  mutual  relation.  In  him  they  shone  beautifully  and 
harmoniously.  His  love  to  God  produced  universal  propriety  of  conduct  towards 
men  ;  and  that  is  what  I  would  call  true  religion.  II.  I  now  proceed  to  notice  the 
PUBLIC  SPIRIT  OF  SiMEON.  That  is  beautifully  expressed  in  these  words — "  Wait- 
ing for  the  Consolation  of  Israel."  He  was  not  only  a  just  and  devout  man,  but  he 
vas  also  waiting  for  Him  who  was  to  be  Israel's  consolation  and  glory  and  th« 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  M. 

Oentiles'  light.  Simeon  was  not  a  man  of  a  narrow,  contracted,  selfish  mind. 
Oh  1  no.  His  thoughts,  desires,  solicitudes,  and  hopes  were  not  limited  to  himself, 
nor  to  his  own  nation  ;  his  heart  burned  for  the  public  good ;  h  ;  was  an  obserrei 
and  interpreter  of  public  events.  Through  the  Divine  medium  of  prophecy  he 
surveyed  the  far-spread  scenes  of  futurity.  He  had  long  waited  for  the  day  of  the 
Lord  :  at  last  it  sweetly  dawned  upon  his  hopes.  Faith  and  prayer  ever  wait  for 
those  eras  of  light  and  renewal,  by  a  succession  of  which  God  has  promised  to 
draw  humanity  nearer  and  still  nearer  to  Himself.  Simeon  waited  for  the  coming 
of  Messiah :  expectation  was  the  habitual  attitude  of  his  spirit ;  it  was  the  theme 
of  his  conversation ;  the  breath  of  his  prayers ;  the  bright  beam  that  ever  cheered 
the  long  path  of  his  pilgrimage.  In  the  teachings  of  the  synagogue,  in  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  Temple,  in  the  changes  which  were  passing  over  the  institutions  of  his 
people,  the  devout  patriarch  saw  the  prophetic  signs  of  the  Son  of  man.  His 
constant  waiting  for  Christ  kept  his  affections  in  a  state  of  healthy  excitement, 
spiritualized  his  piety,  shed  an  unearthly  lustre  around  his  general  chara'jter,  and 
raised  him  far  above  the  men  of  his  age.  Simeon  gives  three  distinct  views  of 
Jesus.  He  refers  to  Him  as  the  object  of  human  hostility ;  as  the  cause  of  great 
moral  revolutions ;  and,  finally,  as  the  source,  the  Divine  source,  of  spiritual 
blessings.  1.  The  text  refers  to  Christ  as  an  object  of  human  enmity,  as  a  sufferer. 
He  was  to  be  a  "  sign  to  be  spoken  against " — the  mark  of  evil  men  and  evil 
spirits.  2.  Simeon  pointed  to  Jesus  as  the  cause  of  great  moral  revolutions.  He 
was  to  be  "  for  the  fall  and  the  rising  of  many  in  Israel  " — "  the  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  were  to  be  revealed."  Here  two  great  effects  are  attributed  to  the  presence 
of  Jesus  on  earth ;  a  revelation  of  human  thoughts,  and  a  revolution  in  human 
affairs.  One  of  the  mighty  works  which  Jesus  came  to  accomplish  was  to  set  men 
to  think — to  think  with  freedom,  earnestness,  and  force;  and  this  He  actually  did 
to  an  extent  before  unknown.  His  aim  was  not  to  affect  the  mere  surface  of  our 
nature,  to  alter  only  its  moral  forms  and  fashions ;  but  to  send  His  influence  down 
to  its  very  centre.  He  set  mind  in  motion ;  He  touched  the  mysterious  springs  of 
its  power :  and  this  He  did  by  the  conjoined  influence  of  two  things — His  truth 
and  His  character.  Both  these  were  original,  perfect,  Divine.  The  impulse  which 
He  thus  imparted  to  our  nature  has  been  deepening  and  widening  ever  since.  He 
originated  a  succession  of  improving  changes  which  can  no  more  be  stopped  than 
the  course  of  the  stars.  The  living  power  of  the  gospel,  by  rousing  humanity  to 
action,  elicited  its  true  character :  opposing  elements  were  set  in  commotion  ;  the 
good  and  the  evil  rose  to  the  surface ;  and  thus  "  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  were 
revealed."  Simeon  foresaw  also  that  the  Holy  Child  would  be  for  the  fall  and  rising 
of  many.  Htre,  again,  we  meet  another  wonderful  principle — we  say  principle — 
for  risings  and  fallings  in  our  world  are  not  mere  accidents  or  chances,  but  events 
regulated  by  a  fixed  law ;  and  that  law  is  administered  by  the  Divine  Mediator. 
We  fancy  we  can  see  emblems  of  these  moral  changes — these  risings  and  fallings — 
even  in  the  material  world.  The  motions  of  the  heavens — the  processes  of  matter 
everywhere  around  us — the  revolutions  of  the  seasons — continually  remind  us  of 
them.  This  revolutionary  principle  seems  to  be  in  constant  operation  in  the 
government  of  our  disordered  race.  It  pervades  the  internal  and  the  external  history 
of  humanity  ;  it  presides  over  all  the  alterations  which  take  place  in  the  ideas,  the 
characters,  and  the  institutions  of  men.  How  very  remarkably  was  its  energy 
displayed  during  the  first  age  of  Christianity.  Then  truth  rose  higher  than  it  had 
ever  done  before :  then  error  and  ignorance  began  to  fall ;  and,  blessed  be  God ! 
they  have  been  falling  and  falling  and  falling  ever  since.  Then  the  old  schools  of 
religious  teachers  fell ;  and  a  new  one  rose  under  the  inspirations  of  Jesus,  which 
is  one  day  to  fill  the  world  with  its  doctrine.  Then  the  first  covenant  disappeared, 
to  give  place  to  a  better  one.  Then,  in  a  word,  the  ancient  Church  fell,  and  the 
new  rose  into  being ;  and  the  rise  of  this  new  society  was  one  of  the  grandest 
results  of  Christ's  descent  to  our  earth ;  it  was,  if  we  may  be  allowed  the  expression, 
the  incarnation  of  one  of  the  sublimest  ideas  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  Simeon  speaks 
still  more  definitely  of  the  Saviour.  He  represents  Him  as  the  source  of  all 
spiritual  blessings.  Three  precious  gifts,  he  predicted,  would  flow  from  this  Divine 
Fountain  ;  light,  consolation,  and  glory.  He  is  the  light  of  men.  We  have  already 
spoken  of  Christ  as  the  quickener  of  mind  :  we  must  not  forget,  however,  that  the 
great  instrument  He  employs  is  truth.  Having  thus  meditated  a  little  on  the 
personal  holiness  of  Simeon,  and  on  his  enlarged  view  of  Jesus  as  the  Saviour  of 
the  world,  let  us  for  a  few  minutes  look  on  the  glory  that  was  shed  on  his  latter 
end.     I.  He  was  permitted  to  embrace  tJie  Holy  Infant.    He  had  been  studying  the 


OBtr.  n.}  ST.  LUKE.  229 

predictions  and  types  of  the  law ;  he  had  been  long  waiting  for  the  Wonderful  One, 
to  whom  they  pointed  ;  and  now  he  was  blessed  with  His  presence.  "  Then  took 
he  Him  up  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  God."  As  he  took  the  Incarnate  One  into  hia 
arms,  the  sunshine  of  heaven  broke  upon  his  soul :  as  he  pressed  Him  to  his  heart, 
ideas,  emotions,  and  beatitudes  unutterable  at  once  overwhelmed  it  like  a  flood  ; 
and  before  he  uttered  a  word  of  gratulation  to  the  blessed  mother,  he  turned  to 
God,  and  breathed  his  praises  there  :  he  blessed  God.  Oh  !  there  are  hours  when 
the  heart  is  too  full  to  speak  to  any  but  its  God.  What  a  dreadful  thing 
it  is  to  see  death  before  we  see  Christ  I  See  death  we  all  must  —  we  all 
shall,  and  that  soon ;  perhaps  unexpectedly.  But  have  we  seen  Christ  ? 
Have  we  embraced  Christ  ?  Have  we,  by  faith,  seen  the  Divine  grandeur  of  His 
person,  the  transcendent  excellence  of  His  character,  and  the  preciousness  of  His 
cross,  as  the  medium  of  pardon  and  the  means  of  perfection  ?  II.  Simeon  was 
willing — I  may  say  more — he  was  desirous  to  die.  "  Lord,"  said  the  happy  man, 
"  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy  word :  for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation."  This  is  a  comprehensive  sentence,  and 
admits  of  a  copious  interpretation.  First,  with  what  calmness  he  viewed  death. 
To  him,  it  was  only  the  letting  him  go — the  departing  from  one  place  for  another, 
and  a  better.  I  have  seen,  he  said,  all  that  is  worth  seeing  in  this  narrow  shadowy 
sphere  ;  I  have  seen  what  I  was  most  anxious  to  see  ;  now  let  me  be  loosed,  that  I 
may  soar  to  the  world  of  the  blessed.  Again :  he  viewed  his  death  as  being  entirely 
under  the  control  of  God.  How  soothing  and  sustaining  this  idea  of  death.  The 
time,  the  place,  the  circumstances  of  our  departure,  are  all  pre-ordained  by  our 
Father's  love.  III.  Finally,  he  viewed  the  last  scene  as  overspread  with  peace. 
"  Now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace."  The  departure  of  the  just  ia 
peaceful.  He  has  peace  with  heaven,  with  earth,  and  with  his  own  nature.  {Caleb 
Morris.)  The  Song  of  Simeon  : — I.  Let  us  notice  the  occasion  of  these  words. 
It  is  an  affecting  circumstance,  that  although  our  Lord  came  to  abolish  the  whole 
ceremonial  law.  He  himself  submitted  to  it  all.  The  object  of  this  visit  to  the 
Temple  was  twofold.  It  was,  in  the  first  instance,  for  Mary's  purification.  Won- 
derfully, brethren,  amidst  all  His  mercies  to  us,  does  a  holy  God  keep  up  the 
remembrance  ol  our  sinfulness,  and  command  us  also  to  keep  it  up.  We  cannot 
even  show  our  gratitude,  lay  a  thank-offering  upon  His  altar,  without  approaching 
His  altar  in  the  character  of  sinners.  A  grateful  heart  and  a  contrite  heart  must 
go  together.  Another  object  was  accomplished  by  this  visit.  To  keep  up  the  re- 
membrance of  His  mercy  in  sparing  the  sons  of  the  Israelites  when  those  of  tha 
Egyptians  were  destroyed,  it  was  the  command  of  God,  that  in  all  succeeding 
generations,  the  first-born  of  Israel,  both  of  man  and  beast,  should  be  considered  as 
His  property.  '*  Sanctify  to  Me,"  he  says,  "  all  the  first-bom,  it  is  Mine."  Tha 
child  was  to  be  brought  to  the  Temple  as  an  acknowledgment  of  God's  right  to  him, 
and  then,  after  the  appointed  sum  was  paid  and  certain  ceremonies  gone  through, 
he  became  free.  And  this  is  the  ground  on  which  we  rest  the  honour  that  we  pay 
to  our  Christian  sacraments.  They  are  no  more  in  themselves  than  the  long  abolished 
ceremonies  of  the  Jewish  Temple,  but,  like  those  ceremonies,  they  are  of  Divine 
appointment,  and,  according  to  the  example  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  we  will  revere 
them.  We  may  now  place  before  us  the  scene  connected  with  the  text.  We  must 
conceive  of  Mary,  her  own  purification  over,  as  standing  in  the  Temple  with  tha 
ministering  priests  before  her  and  a  company  of  other  worshippers  around  her. 
And  then  we  most  imagine  an  aged  man  approaching,  gazing  for  a  moment  at  the 
heavenly  Babe  in  her  arms,  then  taking  it  into  his,  and,  with  a  look  upwards, 
bursting  forth  in  the  hearing  of  them  all  into  this  happy  song.  II.  Let  us  consider 
THE  HAPPINESS  HE  EXPRESSES  IN  IT.  We  feel  at  op.ce  that  it  is  happiness  he  ex- 
presses, not  that  overflowing  of  delight  and  joy  which  we  see  in  Mary  at  Elisabeth's 
door,  but  a  calm,  subdued  happiness ;  the  happiness  of  one  who  has  been  long 
accustomed  to  strong  emotions,  and  knows  how  to  govern  and  restrain  as  well  as 
indulge  them.  We  are  not  told  that  Simeon  was  an  old  man,  but  it  is  probable 
from  the  narrative  that  he  was  so,  and  his  happiness  seems  to  be  the  happiness  of 
old  age,  less  lively  and  exuberant  than  that  of  youth,  but  as  heart-felt  and  deep  or 
deeper,  and,  like  deep  waters,  quiet  and  serene.  But  in  what  did  Simeon's  happi- 
ness consist  7  1.  In  praise  for  a  blessing  given.  "  He  took  Him  up  in  his  arms, 
and" — what?  gave  utterance  at  once  to  the  joy  that  thrilled  within  him  I  When 
some  of  ns  have  a  mercy  sent  us,  we  must  welcome  it,  we  say  ;  have  a  little  time 
allowed  is  to  feel  that  it  is  ours,  to  examine  it,  and  delight  ourselves  in  it.  Then 
eomes  late  and  slow  the  thought,  that  we  owe  this  mercy  to  a  gracious  God,  aad 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  a. 

must  thank  Him  for  it.  But  this  is  because  our  joy  in  our  mercies  is  not  holy  joy. 
Holy  joy  is  like  the  joy  of  heaven — its  natural  language  is  praise,  and  its  happiest 
language  is  praise.  Blessings  become  sweeter  to  us  when  they  draw  forth  our 
praise.  And  it  is  this  looking  on  Christ  as  a  Saviour  provided  for  us  by  the  ever- 
lasting Jehovah,  that  leads  the  soul  to  feel  so  thankful  for  Him  and  rejoice  so 
much  in  Him.  2.  A  hope  realized  was  another  part  of  Simeon's  happiness  at  thia 
time.  The  history  represents  Simeon  to  us  at  first  as  under  the  influence  of  hope. 
3.  There  was  yet  something  more  in  this  man's  happiness — delight  in  a  glorious 
prospect  opened  to  him.  Let  God  give  the  real  Christian  what  spiritual  blessing 
ne  may,  he  immediately  longs  for  more.  The  blessing  he  has  received  seems  to 
bring  into  his  view  other  blessings,  and  to  kindle  his  desires  for  them.  With  him, 
therefore,  hope  realized  is  a  new  impulse  given  to  hope.  IH.  Let  us  now  endea- 
vour to  dxaw  from  his  happiness  some  useful  instruction  fob  oubselves.  And 
in  doing  so,  we  must  regard  ourselves,  brethren,  as  dying  men.  Simeon  speaks 
here  as  a  dying  man.  Job,  Elijah,  Jonah,  all  cried  out,  "Let  me  die,"  but  they 
were  some  of  the  very  worst  words  these  men  ever  uttered.  They  were  tired  of 
God's  dealings  with  them,  weary  of  the  discipline  or  the  work  He  had  allotted 
them,  and  they  wanted  to  get  away  from  them.  Bring  your  desire  for  death  then, 
just  as  you  would  bring  any  other  feeling,  to  the  standard  of  God's  Word.  It  tells 
you  that  if  it  is  a  holy  desire,  it  is  the  desire,  not  of  a  wretched,  but  of  a  happy  hoar. 
It  is  the  strongest  when  the  soul's  happiness  is  the  greatest.  It  springs  no  more 
from  the  ills  than  from  the  joys  of  life.  It  tells  you  that  Simeon's  happiness  in 
the  prospect  of  death  was  happiness  in  a  Saviour.  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy 
salvation,"  explains  it  all.  And  you  must  understand  this,  and  fully  understand 
it,  before  you  can  participate  in  Simeon's  peaceful  feelings.  Sin  is  the  sting  of 
death.  It  is  guilt  on  the  conscience  that  makes  death  so  terrible  to  man.  And 
then,  brethren,  how  shall  we  look  on  death  T  Prospects  will  open  before  as, 
feelings  will  arise  within  us,  so  elevating,  that  we  shall  care  no  more  for  it,  than 
the  eagle  cares  for  the  fog  or  the  cloud  through  which  it  is  piercing  to  get  to  the 
sun.  I  am  going  to  my  Saviour,  we  shall  say,  and  what  matters  to  me  the  dark- 
ness, or  roughness,  or  loneliness,  of  the  road  which  leads  me  to  Him  ?  Once  with 
Him,  I  shall  never  feel  lonely  again.  (C  Bradley,  M.A.)  In  entering  upon  our 
subject  this  morning,  we  shall  notice  in  the  first  place,  the  character  of  Simeon ; 
secondly,  his  proclamation  ;  thirdly,  his  desire.  I.  The  ohaeacteb  op  Simeon. 
This  is  set  forth  in  the  first  verse  of  our  text — "And  behold  there  was  a  man  in 
Jerusalem,  whose  name  was  Simeon ;  and  the  same  man  was  just  and  devout, 
waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him."  First, 
as  to  his  justice.  The  former  of  these  expressions,  "  and  the  same  man  was  just," 
has  reference  to  his  conduct  towards  men  ;  the  latter  stating  that  he  was  "  a  devout 
man,"  has  direct  reference  to  the  feelings  of  his  mind  towards  his  God.  Again, 
there  is  reference  to  his  faith.  "  He  was  waiting  for  the  Consolation  of  Israel." 
This  was  a  name  given  to  the  Messiah  by  those  Jews  who  expected  and  most 
anxiously  looked  for  His  approach.  Again,  there  is  a  reference  to  his  gifts — "  The 
Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him."  This  is  not  intended  merely  to  imply  that  he  was  a 
partaker  of  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  perform  morally  a  renovation 
of  the  mind ;  but  that  he  was  also  the  subject  of  that  sacred  revelation  which  we 
find  spoken  of  in  the  twenty-sixth  verse — "  And  it  was  revealed  unto  Him  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  he  should  not  see  death  before  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ." 
This  holy  man  of  God  was  the  partaker  of  the  same  mighty  agency  which 
characterized  the  ancient  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  seers.  II.  But  we  pass  on  to 
notice  in  the  second  place,  his  proclamation.  Simeon  was  uuder  the  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  mentioned  in  the  twenty- sixth  verse ;  and  we  find  it  was  at  the 
very  moment,  when  the  infant  Saviour  was  brought  into  the  Temple  to  receive 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  law,  that  he  came  also  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
Temple.  His  inspiration  now  assumed  a  character  of  sublimity  not  to  be  sur- 
passed ;  and  he  makes  dignified  proclamation  of  the  incarnation  of  man's  only 
salvation;  he  calls  Him  "a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Thy 
people  Israel."  We  shall  consider  under  this  part  of  our  subject — 1.  The  nature 
of  the  work  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  ordained  to  accomplish.  2.  Again, 
we  notice,  that  the  salvation  of  man,  as  a  salvation  from  the  guilt  and  punishment 
of  sin,  is  a  position  to  ba  maintained — that  this  salvation  has  been  accomplished 
by  the  atonement  of  the  Cross,  is  a  principle  firmly  to  be  upheld — and  that  the 
denial  of  this  is  unbelief,  shutting  out  all  heavenly  mercy,  and  exposing  the  soul, 
without  any  nfuge,  to  a  feaiful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  iudigaatioa 


CHAT,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  2SI 

8.  We  notice  again,  not  only  the  nature  of  the  work  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came 
to  accomplish,  but  also  the  extent  to  which  it  is  to  be  carried.  "  Which  thou  hast 
prepared  before  all  people."  We  pass  on  from  the  character  of  Simeon,  and  his 
proclamation,  to  consider,  thirdly,  his  desibe.  "  And  He  came  by  the  Spirit  into 
the  Temple,  and  when  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  to  do  for  Him  after 
the  custom  of  the  law,  then  took  he  Him  up  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  God,  and 
Bald,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  servant  depart  in  peace  according  to  Thy  word, 
for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation ;  which  Thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face 
of  all  people,  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel." 
First.  He  had  no  other  object  left  to  wish  to  live  for  on  earth.  It  must  have  been 
an  interesting  sight,  for  those  who  were  living  under  the  Jewish  economy,  to  see 
the  Messiah  in  person  ;  and  then  no  doubt  many  of  them,  having  seen  Him  who 
was  to  be  the  end  of  their  law  for  righteousness  unto  them,  wished  to  see  nothing 
more  in  the  world.  Hear  the  tradesman,  when  he  has  made  a  provision  for  his 
family,  has  set  them  forward  comfortably  in  life,  and  has  gained  all  the  advantages 
he  could  desire  from  commerce,  then  he  thinks  he  can  die  in  peace.  Hear  the 
philosopher,  when  he  has  made  grand  discoveries  in  philosophy,  and  has  succeeded 
in  tracing  the  dependence  and  fixing  the  boundaries  of  what  was  considered  in- 
comprehensible aiBnities — when  he  can  define  unknown  properties,  and  has  fully 
developed  the  relations  of  cause  and  effect,  he  thinks  he  has  nothing  more  on  earth 
to  accomplish,  and  he  can  die  in  peace.  Hear  the  statesman,  when  he  has 
brought  certain  principles  of  government  to  work  harmoniously  together — when  by 
his  eloquence  and  energies  he  has  placed  his  favourite  political  tenets  in  a  com- 
manding situation,  and  has  effected  his  long-wished-for  purposes,  he  thinks  he  haa 
nothing  more  to  do  on  earth,  he  now  can  depart  in  peace.  Hear  the  warrior,  if  he 
can  gain  the  victory  over  the  enemy — if  he  can  entwine  around  his  martial  brow 
the  wreath  of  undying  laurel — if  he  can  emblazon  his  name  on  the  records  of  fame, 
and  achieve  for  himself  a  corruscation  of  splendour  and  military  renown  that  wiU 
light  up  his  monument  in  future  ages,  he  thinks  he  can  die  in  peace.  So  you  may 
well  imagine  that  Simeon,  who  had  been  waiting  anxiously  for  the  appearance  ol 
the  Messiah,  whose  mind  had  been  goaded,  as  it  were,  with  many  an  anxious 
desire  for  His  manifestation,  when  he  now  beheld  Him  who  was  the  joy  and 
consolation  of  Israel,  should  have  nothing  more  to  live  for  below,  but  should 
wish  to  depart  in  peace.  Secondly.  It  will  be  seen  that  now  there  was  the 
dismissal  of  all  his  doubts  and  fears,  and  the  completion  of  all  his  hopes 
for  eternity.  There  was  in  Simeon  great  faith ;  but  now  faith  was  consum- 
mated in  the  possession  of  the  thing  hoped  for.  (J.  Parsons.)  Men 
generally  unready  to  die : — He  says.  Now  let  me  depart ;  he  desires  no  delay. 
Many  would  rather  say  with  the  Psalmist,  0  spare  me  a  little,  that  I  may  recover 
my  strength  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no  more  seen.  Grant  me  leisure  to  settle 
my  affairs,  to  provide  for  my  family,  to  examine  my  conscience,  and  to  put  my- 
self in  a  condition  to  appear  before  Thee.  But  Simeon  was  not  like  others,  who 
usually  want  to  put  off  that  evil  day.  If  they  could  have  their  choice,  there  would 
be  no  period  of  life  in  which  they  would  not  have  some  plea  to  defer  the  pay- 
ment of  this  debt  to  nature,  and  say  to  death,  as  the  evil  spirits  said  to  Christ, 
Why  art  thou  come  to  torment  us  before  the  time  ?  How  many  of  those  pleas  can 
the  hopes  and  fears  of  vain  men  invent  and  set  forth  to  the  best  advantage  ?  Some 
would  remonstrate  that  they  are  young,  and  that  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  be  taken  off  in 
the  flower  of  their  age;  others,  that  they  have  children,  and  could  wish  to  see 
them  settled,  and  in  a  fair  way  of  prospering ;  others,  that  they  are  engaged  in 
undertakings  useful  to  themselves  and  their  families  ;  others,  that  they  hope  to  do 
considerable  service  to  religion  or  to  civil  society,  to  the  Church  or  to  the  State- 
Simeon  is  moved  by  none  of  these  considerations  :  he  desires  not  a  respite  and  a 
reprieve  to  a  distant  day,  not  even  to  the  morrow.  Now,  says  he,  let  Thy  servant 
receive  his  dismission.  (J.  Jortin.)  James  Hervey : — James  Hervey,  the  English 
divine,  died  on  Christmas,  1758.  Having  thanked  his  physician  for  his  kind 
attentions,  he  exclaimed,  with  holy  exultation,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  Thou  Thy  ser- 
vant depart  in  peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  Balvation  !  "  He  added,  "  Here, 
doctor,  is  my  cordial.  What  are  all  the  cordials  given  to  support  the  dying  in 
comparison  with  this  hope  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  "  So  saying  he  closed  his  eyes,  and 
Bang  his  Christmas  carol  in  paradise.  We  shall  bless  God's  holy  name  as  we 
make  our  Christmas  communion  to-day,  for  all  His  servants  who  have  departed 
this  life  in  His  faith  and  fear.  May  He  give  us  grace  to  follow  the  good  examples 
thus  set  before  as  1        Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation.— Go(Z'j>-  salvation  .--> 


MS  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHl*.  n. 

I.  God's  ealvation,  as  the  object  of  view  of  which  Simeon  speaks  —  "  Mine  eyei 
have  seen  Thy  salvation."  What  is  it  ?  God's  salvation.  Then  it  must  be  worthy 
of  Himself.  Is  it  God's  salvation  ?  Then  it  is  adapted  to  man's  ruin.  Is  it  God's 
salvation  ?  Then  it  secures  a  whole  revenue  of  praise  and  glory  to  His  great  name. 
Is  it  God's  salvation?  Then  man  has  no  hand  in  it.  Is  it  God's  salvation? 
Then  it  is  like  the  altar  which  God  commanded  Moses  to  build — "  If  thou  lift  up 
a  tool  upon  it,  thou  hast  polluted  it."  Is  it  God's  salvation  ?  Then  it  originates 
with  Him ;  it  is  accomplished  by  Him ;  it  is  imparted  by  Him ;  it  redounds  to 
His  own  glory ;  in  the  experience  and  eternal  blessedness  of  those  whom 
He  saves.  II.  Let  us  pass  on,  in  the  second  place,  to  notice  the  nature 
of  the  sight.  "Mine  eyes  have  seen"  it.  There  are  men  now  in  the  pro- 
fessing Church  who  see  clearly  with  the  mental  vision,  but  without  faith.  I 
was  once  told  by  an  avowed  infidel,  who  had  read  the  Bible  a  great  deal,  but 
whose  eyes  the  god  of  this  world  had  blinded,  •*  Well,  sir,  I  am  brought  to  the 
full  conviction,  that  if  the  Bible  be  true,  your  view  of  it  is  the  right  one."  Now, 
he  "  saw  "  it.  I  merely  name  this  to  show  you  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  see- 
ing it  without  its  being  a  saving  sight.  I  wish  my  hearers  to  come  to  an  inves- 
tigation of  this.  'When  Simeon  said,  •'  Mine  eyes  have  seen,"  it  was  not  a 
desultory,  nominal  statement  of  things,  as  if  his  eyes  had  seen  a  babe  only.  He 
saw  beyond  that.  You  may  have  seen  some  volumes  of  theology  very  clearly 
written,  and  setting  forth  the  salvation  of  Christ  Jesus  with  scriptural  accuracy ; 
you  may  say  that  its  arguments  are  quite  irresistible,  and  be  brought  to  see  that 
they  are  so ;  but  that  is  quite  a  different  thing  from  the  sight  intended  in  my 
text — "  Mine  eyes  have  seen."  This  is  the  view  which  faith  takes  of  Christ.  And 
the  view  that  faith  takes  of  Christ  implies  that  faith  exists.  Moreover,  faith 
views  in  the  oflScial  character  and  work  of  Christ  the  relationship  that  renders 
the  Head  and  the  members  one.  Moreover,  while  faith  views  this  precious, 
glorious  Christ  in  the  dignity  of  His  Godhead,  in  the  perfection  of  His  manhood, 
and  in  His  official  character,  it  goes  on  to  gaze,  saying,  "  Since  mine  eyes  have 
seen — I  may  see  much  more,"  and  examines  minutely  into  the  mystery  of  godli- 
ness. Again,  it  is  not  only  the  view  which  faith  thus  takes,  but  this  view  is  by 
attraction.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me."  And  whenever 
faith  is  indulged  with  a  vision  of  Christ  so  as  to  behold  in  Him  all  that  the 
poor  sinner  needs  for  time  and  eternity,  there  is  a  drawing,  a  mighty  attraction, 
a  desire  to  come  closer  to  Him,  just  as  in  nature,  when  we  are  attracted  by  an 
object  at  a  distance  which  appears  very  beautiful,  but  scarcely  discernible,  we 
desire  to  approach  nearer,  and  the  more  clearly  we  see  the  object,  and  the 
more  beautiful  it  appears,  the  more  vigilantly  we  draw  near  to  have  clearer  and 
clearer  views  of  it.  Pass  on  to  mark  that  the  teachings  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
are  essential  to  this.  Hence  our  beloved  Lord  said,  "  The  Spirit  of  truth  shall 
take  of  Mine,  and  shall  show  it  unto  you ;  "  and  "  He  shall  testify  of  Me."  HI. 
The  effects  which  follow.  I  am  sure  that  every  poor  sinner  who  gets  a  glimpse  of 
Christ  will  wonder ;  wonder  at  the  provision  and  gift  of  such  a  Saviour  ;  wonder 
at  the  very  name  He  bears ;  for  His  name  is  "  Wonderful."  Mark  also,  that  when 
this  sight  of  Christ  is  realized,  objects  terrene  are  thrown  quite  into  the  shade, 
trampled  upon  and  entirely  lost  sight  of.  One  thought  more,  and  I  will  draw  to  a 
close.  When  all  objects  beside  are  thrown  into  the  shade,  and  everything  terrene 
is  lost  sight  of  for  the  time  being ;  when  faith  has  full  scope,  it  seems  as  if  they 
were  all  for  awhile  removed,  and  our  heavenly  felicity  begun  upon  earth.  {J. 
Irons.)  "  Thy  salvation  " : — As  soon  as  a  truly-awakened  soul  sees  Jesus,  though 
it  be  but  the  beginnings  of  Him,  it  recognizes  Him  ;  it  recognizes  the  hem  of  His 
garment,  and  the  print  of  His  feet.  Though  the  Lord  be  seen  only  as  an  Infant, 
and  the  heart's  idea  of  Him  is  very  incomplete,  yet  He  is  perceived  to  be  the 
Incomparable  One,  and  the  soul  cries  out,  "  He  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my 
desire."  I.  We  learn  from  Simeon  that  Christ  is  Salvation.  Not  only  a 
Saviour,  but  Salvation  itself.  And  the  only  Salvation.  And  God's  Salvation. 
You  have  salvation  in  every  aspect  of  it,  and  every  form  of  it,  as  soon  as  you  have 
obtained  Christ.  You  must  trnst  Him  in  eveiything  and  for  everytlung.  11. 
Chbist  is  to  be  taken  up  into  oub  arms  and  to  be  looked  at.  1.  A  grasp  of 
faith.  2.  A  grasp  of  love.  HI.  When  Christ  is  taken  up  into  the  arms  and 
looked  upon  He  has  a  wondebtxjl  effect.  1.  Waiting  is  ended.  2.  Simeon 
was  excited  to  praise  the  Lord.  3.  Now  that  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ,  he 
desired  to  close  his  eyes  upon  all  else.  I  have  heard  of  some  who  have  looked  on 
the  sun  unadvisedly,  till  they  could  not  see  anything  else ;  but  this  I  know,  that 


CHAP.  11.]  ST.  LUKE.  233 

he  who  looks  on  Christ  becomes  blind  to  all  rival  attractions.  If  these  eyes  have 
once  seen  the  salvation  of  God,  it  looks  like  sacrilege  to  set  them  upon  the 
base  things  of  time  and  sense.  Let  the  gate  be  closed  through  which  Jesus  has 
entered ;  it  seems  profane  to  allow  a  single  object  belonging  to  this  traitorous 
world  to  enter  our  mind  by  eye-gate  any  more.  Having  eaten  the  white  bread  of 
heaven,  we  want  no  more  of  the  husks  of  earth ;  having  had  a  glimpse  of  the 
Incarnate  God,  what  is  there  more  to  see?  4.  He  was  now  prepared  to  look  on 
death.  5.  Eeady  to  behold  the  glory  of  God.  We  must  first  look  at  Christ,  and 
when  our  eyes  have  been  brightened  and  strengthened  by  the  mild  splendours  of 
Incarnate  Deity,  they  will  be  fitted  to  behold  the  Eing  Himself  as  He  sits  upon 
the  throne.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  32.  A  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles. — The  light  of  the  Gentiles : — I.  Explain 
THE  IMPOBT  OF  THE  TEXT.  1.  The  character  of  Jesus  is  exhibited  under  the  image 
of  light — the  most  glorious  of  all  the  creatures  of  God.  (1)  Among  the  properties 
of  light  are  penetration  and  universality.  Light  would  have  been  an  inappropriate 
image,  in  reference  to  Christ,  had  He  not  intended  to  illuminate  the  world.  Not  to 
a  district,  not  to  an  empire,  not  to  one  quarter  of  the  globe,  does  that  glorious  boon 
— light — confine  its  infiuences.  It  visits  all  in  their  turn.  It  burns  within  the 
torrid  zone,  it  reaches  the  dark  and  distant  poles  ;  it  proceeds  with  a  gradual,  yet 
inconceivable  speed,  in  its  restless  career,  till  it  has  enlightened  the  whole.  (2) 
Light  is  a  source  of  comfort  (Eccl.  xi.  7).  (3)  Another  quality  of  light  is  purity. 
It  is  this  which  renders  it  a  fit  emblem  of  Deity  (1  John  i.  5).  2.  The  subjects  of 
His  influences — "  The  Gentiles  " — i.e.,  all  nations  that  have  not  yet  heard  the 
tidings  of  the  gospel  in  Him.  3.  The  result  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  the 
world  will  be  universal  illumination.  He  rises  upon  the  nations  to  "lighten" 
them.  II.  Applt  its  testimony  to  missionary  exertions.  1.  Examine  the  prin- 
ciples on  which  they  are  founded.  (1)  They  are  founded  in  nature.  The  same 
cause  should  produce  the  same  effects.  Whoever  sincerely  loves  the  Saviour  will 
feel  a  proportionate  attachment  to  His  laws,  His  people,  His  interests.  He  cannot 
sit  down  indifferent  to  the  last,  any  more  than  he  can  consent  to  break  the  first. 
(2)  They  are  founded  on  the  purest  principles  of  reason.  Missionary  effort  must 
be  used  as  a  means,  to  bring  about  the  end  in  view — the  spread  of  the  gospel.  God 
employs  in  the  meantime  human  instruments  for  the  carrying  out  of  His  Divine 
purposes.  (3)  They  are  founded  on  the  purest  principles  of  humanity.  The  gospel 
is  the  only  effectual  remedy  of  all  this  world's  evil  and  misery.  (4)  They  are  founded 
on  the  purest  principles  of  patriotism.  Keligious  lethargy  precedes  national  ruin  ; 
patriotism,  therefore,  calls  for  the  support  of  religious  zeal.  (5)  They  are  founded 
on  the  purest  principles  of  religion.  2.  The  considerations  by  which  we  are  en- 
couraged. (1)  Eevelation.  (2)  Experience.  (3)  Existing  circumstances.  Is  there 
not  crying  need  throughout  the  world  of  those  consolations  which  the  gospel  alone 
can  bring,  and  of  the  Saviour  whom  the  gospel  alone  proclaims  ?  (IF.  B.  Collyer, 
D.D.)  Christ  the  light  of  all  nations: — He  gives  the  light  of  truth,  of  spiritual 
eight,  of  knowledge,  of  holiness,  of  joy,  of  heaven.  The  natives  of  arctic  regions 
put  on  their  holiday  attire,  and  enthusiastically  welcome  the  returning  sun, 
when  after  months  of  absence,  he  again  revisits  them  with  his  rays.  How  much 
more  should  we  rejoice  in  the  light  of  "the  Sun  of  Eighteousness ? "  There 
was  a  light  once  on  or  near  the  Goodwin  Sands,  called  "  The  light  of  all 
nations,"  because  it  was  supposed  that  some  of  all  nations  would  see  it.  The 
"light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  will 
one  day  "  cover  the  earth."  When  Christ  gives  us  light,  we  must  reflect  it  (see 
Matt.  V.  14-16).  The  lighthouse,  when  its  lights  burn  truly,  will  warn  the 
mariner  against  danger,  and  enable  him  to  pursue  the  right  and  safe  way.  So 
we  may  each  guide  some  from  the  darkness  and  danger  of  sin,  to  the  light  and 
safety  of  God's_  mercy  in  Christ.  (Henry  E.  Burton.)  Light  an  emblem  of 
Christ  : — There  is  no  figure  more  common  nor  more  beautiful  in  the  Scriptures, 
than  that  by  which  Christ  is  compared  to  "  light."  Incomprehensible  in  its  nature, 
itself  first  visible,  and  that  by  which  all  else  is  so ;  "  light "  represents  to  us  Christ, 
whose  generation  none  can  declare,  but  who  must  shine  on  us  ere  we  can  know 
aught  aright  whether  of  things  Divine  or  human.  Pure,  uncontaminated,  though 
visiting  the  lowest  parts  of  the  earth,  and  penetrating  the  most  noisome  recesses  ; 
what  is  "  hght "  an  image  of,  if  not  of  that  Divine  Mediator,  who  contracted  no 
stain,  though  born  of  a  woman,  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  ?  Instrumental  in  all 
the  i/J^oceases  of  vegetation,  so  that,  without  its  vivifying  power,  the  earth  could  not 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

yield  its  kindly  fruits,  nor  expose  its  verdant  hues,  what  is  "  light "  but  the  emblem 
of  that  source  of  illumination,  of  whom  the  Evangelist  declares  that  "  He  was  the 
Light  and  Life  of  men  "  ?  And  without  searching  too  narrowly  into  the  particular 
sources  by  which  this  resemblance  might  be  proved,  we  may  say  that  Christ  is  to 
the  material  world  what  the  sun  is  to  the  natural  ;  and  wherever  the  gospel  has 
been  published  and  received  as  a  communication  from  God,  the  darkness  has  fled, 
as  night  flies  before  the  day  ;  and  we  know,  that  wherever  the  revelation  made 
through  Christ  has  been  dispersed,  wherever  it  has  vouchsafed  its  cheering  rays, 
the  clouds  of  ignorance,  and  superstition,  and  irreligion  have  vanished,  and  holiness 
purity,  and  morality  have  illumined  the  horizon.  It  has  done  more.  It  has  hung 
the  very  grave  with  bright  lamps,  and  re-kindlpd  the  blazings  of  an  almost  quenched 
immortality.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  And  the  glory  of  Thy  people  IsraeL — Christ 
the  glory  of  His  people : — We  shall  now  employ  the  natural  Israel  as  a  type  of  the 
Lord's  elect  ones,  and  surely  there  is  no  straining  of  the  text,  when  we  say  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  glory  of  the  spiritual  seed,  the  redeemed  people.  And  why,  with 
evident  propriety,  may  the  saints  of  God  be  compared  to  Israel  ?  1.  Surely  becausa 
God  has  made  a  covenant  with  them  as  He  did  with  Jacob.  2.  We  may  be  com- 
pared with  Israel,  again,  because  if  we  be  the  children  of  God  we  have  learned  to 
wrestle  with  the  angel  and  prevail.  3.  It  may  be  that  you  have  another  likeness  to 
Israel  in  the  fact  that  you  are  much  tried.  Faith  must  be  tried.  God  had  one  Son 
without  sin,  but  He  never  had  a  Son  without  the  rod.  4.  The  true  Israel,  which 
are  spiritually  the  Church  of  Christ,  are  said,  according  to  the  text,  to  be  the  Lord's 
people.  (1)  By  His  eternal  choice.  (2)  By  redemption.  (3)  By  voluntary  dedica» 
tion  of  yourselves  to  Him.  I.  When  we  say  that  Christ  is  our  glory,  we  mean  that 
WE  GET  ALL  THE  GLOBT  WE  HAVE  THKOUGH  HiM.  Some  men  go  to  the  schools  for 
glory,  others  to  the  camps  of  war.  In  all  kinds  of  places  men  have  sought  after 
honour,  but  the  believer  saith  that  Christ  is  the  mine  in  which  he  digs  for  this  gold, 
Christ  is  the  sea  in  which  he  fishes  for  this  pearl  ;  he  gives  up  all  other  searchings 
and  looks  for  glory  in  Jesus,  and  nowhere  else.  1.  The  glory  of  election.  2.  The 
glory  of  redemption.  3.  The  glory  of  adoption.  4.  The  glory  of  justification.  5. 
The  glory  of  sanctification.  Thus  I  might  continue  showing  you  that  there  is  not 
a  single  treasure  which  a  Christian  possesses  which  does  not  come  to  him  through 
Christ.  He  has  nothing  in  which  he  can  glory  but  what  he  is  sweetly  compelled  to 
say  of  it,  "I  gained  this  in  the  market  of  Calvary  ;  I  found  this  in  the  mines  of  a 
Saviour's  suffering  ;  all  this  came  to  me  through  my  bleeding,  buried,  risen,  coming 
Lord,  and  He  shall  have  the  glory  of  it  as  long  as  I  live."  II.  We  see  a  glokt  in 
Christ  which  swallows  up  all  other  glories,  as  the  sun's  light  conceals  the  light  of 
the  stars.  1.  In  Christ's  person.  2.  In  Christ's  sufferings.  3.  In  Christ's  resur- 
rection. 4.  In  Christ's  ascension.  5.  In  Christ's  intercession.  6.  In  Christ's 
second  advent.  III.  The  text  is  true  in  the  sense  that  we  give  glory  to  Him. 
There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One.  There  is  life  in  simple  confidence  in 
Him,  but  there  is  life  nowhere  else.  God  send  to  His  Church  an  undying  passion 
to  promote  the  Saviour's  glory,  an  invincible,  unconquerable  pang  of  desire,  and 
longing  that  by  any  means  King  Jesus  may  have  His  own,  and  may  reign  through- 
oat  these  realms  1  In  this  sense,  then,  Jesus  is  and  must  be  the  glory  of  Hia 
people.  IV.  But  there  is  another  sense — namely,  from  Jesos  is  reflected  all  the 
GLORY  WHICH  13  PUT  UPON  His  PEOPLE.  Whatever  glory  they  have,  and  they  have 
much  in  the  eyes  of  angels,  and  much  honour  in  the  eyes  of  discerning 
men,  it  is  always  the  reflection  of  the  Saviour's  glory.  I  know  some  holy 
men  and  women  for  whom  I  cannot  but  feel  the  deepest  and  intensest  respect,  but 
the  reason  is  because  they  have  so  much  of  my  Master  about  them.  I  think  I  would 
travel  many  miles  to  talk  with  some  of  them,  because  their  speech  is  always  so  full 
of  Him,  and  they  live  so  near  to  Him.  V.  The  text  may  be  read  in  this  sense  : 
Christ  is  the  glory  of  His  people,  that  is  to  say,  they  expect  glory  when  He  comes. 
Our  glory  is  laid  up.  When  you  follow  Jesus  in  resurrection,  what  glory  1  But  we 
must  not  begin  to  speak  of  that,  for  we  should  never  leave  off  at  all  if  we  began  to 
talk  about  that  glory — the  glory  of  perfection,  the  glory  of  being  delivered  from  sin, 
the  glory  of  conquest,  having  trodden  Satan  under  our  feet  ;  the  glory  of  eternal 
rest,  the  glory  of  infinite  security,  the  glory  of  being  like  Christ,  the  glory  of  being 
in  the  light  and  brightness  of  God,  standing,  like  Milton's  angel,  in  the  very  sun  it- 
self. If  you  want  to  know  what  heaven  is,  you  can  spell  it  in  five  letters,  and  when 
you  put  the  five  letters  together  they  sound  like  this  :  Jesus.  That  is  heaven.  It 
is  all  the  heaven  the  angels  round  the  throne  desire  to  know.  They  want  nothing 
better  than  this,  to  see  His  face,  to  behold  His  glory,  and  to  dwell  in  it  world  with- 


eiAP.  II.]  ST.  LUKE.  S35 

OTit  end.  VI.  The  practicaij  dkitt  op  the  subject.  1.  We  would  give  a  word  of 
'warning  to  those  of  you  who  seek  your  glory  anywhere  else,  because  as  surely  as 
you  do  so,  even  if  you  meet  with  honour  for  a  time,  you  will  have  to  lose  it.  It  is 
always  ill  to  put  your  treasure  where  it  will  be  stolen  from  you.  Now,  suppose  you 
«eek  your  glory  in  your  learning.  Well,  well,  well  1  Let  the  sexton  take  up  your 
skull  after  you  have  been  dead  a  little  while,  and  what  learning  will  there  be  in  it, 
what  show  of  wisdom  will  be  found  in  it  when  it  is  resolved  into  a  little  impalpable 
brown  powder  ?  What  will  your  science,  and  your  mathematics,  and  your  classics 
doforyou  in  death  and  judgment?  Suppose  you  seek  your  glory  in  fame,  and  become 
the  favourite  of  the  nation  as  a  great  soldier.  When  the  grave-digger  rattles  your 
old  bones  about,  what  will  that  signify  ?  You  will  have  great  fame,  you  say,  and 
men  will  talk  about  you.  But  he  who  hath  his  glory  in  Christ,  when  he  openeth 
his  eyes  in  the  next  world  will  see  Christ,  and  so  behold  his  glory  safe,  and  firmly 
entailed  upon  him.  2.  Another  word,  and  that  is  a  word  of  rebuke.  There  are 
some  preachers  we  know  of,  and  I  suppose  there  will  always  be  some  of  the  genus, 
who  preach,  preach,  preach,  but  they  never  preach  what  is  Israel's  glory.  They 
talk  of  anything  but  Christ.  3.  There  are  some  of  you  to  whom  I  have  a  last  word 
to  say,  and  that  is,  some  of  you  love  Jesus  Christ,  but  you  are  ashamed  to  say  so. 
Now,  since  He  is  the  glory  of  His  people  Israel,  I  shall  be  afraid  of  you  and  for  yoc 
if  you  do  not  make  Him  your  glory.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  the  glory  O) 
Israel: — Christ  was  the  glory  of  Israel.  1.  Because  He  was  a  Jew  by  birth.  2 
Because  His  history  has  vindicated  all  that  was  peculiar  in  the  Jewish  polity.  3, 
Because  He  confined  His  personal  ministry  to  the  Jews.  4.  Because  He  has  stamped 
the  impress  of  Jewish  thought  on  the  mind  of  man.  5.  Because  He  has  invested 
the  condition  and  prospects  of  the  Jews  with  universal  interest.  {G.  Brooks.) 
The  glory  of  Israel : — There  was  salvation  in  this  sight :  there  was  light  in  it ;  and 
there  was  glory  in  it  also.  He  will  be — said  Simeon — "  the  glory  of  Thy  people 
IsraeL"  The  prophet  Isaiah  was  speaking  of  this  same  Saviour,  when  he  said — 
*•  They  shall  hang  on  Him  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house  "  (Isa.  xxii.  24). 
The  chief  glory  that  a  nation  has  is  made  up  of  the  wise,  and  good,  and  great,  and 
nseful  men  who  have  belonged  to  it.  We  speak  of  Washington  as  the  glory  of 
America.  We  feel  it  an  honour  to  belong  to  the  nation  which  could  claim  Washing- 
ton as  one  of  its  people.  In  Holland  they  call  William,  Prince  of  Orange,  the  glory 
of  their  nation.  England,  our  grand  old  mother  country,  has  had  so  many  wise, 
and  good,  and  great  men,  tbat  it  is  hard  to  tell  which  to  speak  of  as  the  best  and 
greatest.  They  all  help  to  make  up  the  glory  of  the  people  of  England.  And  any 
one  who  was  born  in  England  may  feel  it  an  honour  to  belong  to  a  country  which  has 
produced  so  many  good  and  great  men.  And  in  the  same  way  it  is  the  glory  of  the 
Jewish  nation,  or  of  Israel,  as  a  people,  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world,  belonged  to  their  nation.  Jesus  was  a  Jew.  And  the  Jewish 
people  may  well  feel  it  an  honour  to  belong  to  the  nation  among  whom  He  was  born. 
It  is  true  in  this  sense  that  He  is  "the  glory  of  His  people  Israel."     (Dr.  Newton.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  Behold,  this  Child  Is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising:  again  of  many. — 
Simeon's  prediction : — This  prediction  has  a  very  gloomy  aspect,  and  speaks  with  a 
tone  of  sad  foreboding  in  strange  contrast  to  the  riant  tone  of  the  song  of  thanks- 
giving which  immediately  precedes  it.  But  was  it  too  gloomy  for  the  facts  ?  Was 
not  every  jot  and  tittle  of  it  fulfilled  within  three  and  thirty  years  of  its  utterance  ? 
Is  it  not  still  finding  a  wide  and  large  fulfilment  ?  1.  When  the  word  of  Christ 
comes  home  to  you,  whether  it  come  to  quicken  you  to  a  new  life,  or  to  convince  you 
of  some  truth  which  you  had  not  recognized  before,  or  had  not  reduced  to  practice, 
do  not  be  amazed  and  discouraged  if  you  stumble  at  it,  if  it  awaken  doubt  and  con- 
tradiction in  your  hearts,  if  you  find  it  hard  to  believe,  and  still  harder  to  live  by. 
It  is  no  strange  thing  which  is  happening  to  you,  but  the  common  and  normal 
experience  of  all  who  believe  in  Him.  The  advent  of  Christ  in  the  heart.  His 
coming  in  power,  must  resemble  His  advent  into  the  world,  must  create  a  strife 
between  the  good  and  the  evil  in  your  nature,  must  disclose  so  much  that  is  evil  in 
yon  as  to  make  you  fear  goodness  to  be  bej  ond  your  reach.  How,  but  by  the  con- 
viction of  sin,  can  you  be  made  penitent,  and  driven  to  lay  hold  on  the  salvation 
which  takes  away  sin  ?  And  the  oftener  Christ  comes,  the  nearer  He  draws  to  you, 
the  more  fuUy  He  enters  into  your  life — the  deeper  will  be  your  conviction  of  sin^^f 
a  tainted  and  imperfect  nature;  till,  at  times,  you  will  fear  as  if  a  sword  had  bee^ 
thrust  into  your  very  soul.  This,  indeed,  is  what  He  comes  to  you  for  ;  to  separate 
between  the  evil  and  the  good,  to  make  you  conscious  of  evils  you  did  not  suspect^ 


23«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAF.  O, 

80  conscious  that  you  hate  and  long  to  be  delivered  from  them.  2.  Bat  this  is  not 
the  only  comfort  or  encouragement  which  the  prediction  of  Simeon  suggests.  If 
he  had  not  foreseen  the  nearer  and  immediate  results  of  Christ's  advent,  we  might 
have  distrusted  him  when  he  spake  of  its  distant  and  ultimate  results.  It  he  had 
not  told  us  of  the  conflict  and  sorrow,  the  self-exposure  and  self-contempt  to  which 
a  faithful  reception  of  Christ  subjects  us,  we  could  hardly  have  believed  him  when 
he  speaks  of  Christ  as  the  Consolation  for  all  sorrow,  and  the  Light  which  is  to 
glorify  the  whole  dark  world.  But  when  we  find  all  that  he  said  of  the  nearer 
results  of  Christ's  coming  to  be  true,  we  can  hardly  help  believing  him  when  he 
speaks  to  us  of  its  happy  ultimate  results.  Simeon  has  approved  himself  a  faithful 
witness ;  we  have  found  in  our  own  experience  that  Christ  is  a  Eock  of  stumbling 
and  offence,  a  Signal  which  calls  out  all  the  opposition  of  an  imperfect  nature,  a 
Sword  which  pierces  the  very  soul  and  divides  the  evil  in  us  from  the  good,  a 
Touchstone  which  reveals  our  most  secret  thoughts  and  bents ;  let  us  also  believe 
that  He  will  be  our  Consolation,  our  Light,  our  Glory.  3.  We  may  well  believe  it. 
Per  angusta  ad  augusta,  through  a  narrow  way  to  a  large  place,  through  much 
struggle  with  many  difificulties  to  a  glorious  end,  through  conflict  to  victory,  seems 
the  very  motto  of  the  Christian  life.  And  this  thought  also  is  contained  in  Simeon's 
prediction,  which  is  so  framed  as  to  imply  that  it  was  by  a  Divine  intention,  and  in 
order  to  realize  a  gracious  Divine  end,  that  Christ  was  to  bring  strife  on  the  earth, 
to  kindle  an  inward  war,  to  disclose  the  lurking  evils  of  the  human  heart.  He 
was  set,  "  in  order  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  should  be  revealed  " — set  by 
God  for  this  very  purpose.  So  that  when  our  thoughts  are  exposed,  when  we  have 
to  endure  the  inward  conflict  between  evil  and  good,  when  the  word  of  Christ 
pierces  and  rends  our  hearts,  all  is  according  to  a  Divine  order,  a  Divine  intention ; 
aU  is  intended  to  prepare  and  conduct  us  to  that  Divine  end,  the  salvation  of  cor 
souls.  It  is  all  meant  to  prepare  us  for  a  time  in  which  our  souls  shall  be  so 
flooded  and  suffused  with  the  Divine  Light  that  there  shall  be  no  more  darkness  in 
us,  so  penetrated  with  the  Divine  Glory  that  sin  and  sorrow  and  shame  shall  for 
ever  flee  away.  And  if  this  be  God's  intention,  if  this  is  the  end  to  which  He  is 
conducting  us,  who  will  not  bear  the  strife  and  pain  and  self-contempt  of  this 
present  imperfect  life  with  patience,  nay,  with  courage  and  with  hope  ?  {S.  Cox, 
D.D.)  Christ  the  rising  and  fall  of  many  : — This  however  cannot  be  all  that  is 
meant  by  Christ's  being  set  for  the  fall  of  many.  They  who  remain  just  as  they 
were,  and  where  they  were,  cannot  be  said  to  fall.  Falling  implies  some  change : 
and  they  who  have  fallen  must  be  in  a  worse  state  than  before  they  fell.  Now  this 
is  dismally  true.  They  who,  having  heard  of  Christ,  have  not  believed  in  Him,  and 
do  not  believe  in  Him — they  who  do  not  believe  in  Him  in  the  scriptural  sense  of 
beUeving,  that  is,  with  the  heart  and  soul,  as  well  as  with  the  understanding — 
they  who  have  not  a  living  faith  in  Him,  and  do  not  show  it  by  hving  a  life  of  faith 
— they  who,  having  heard  of  Christ,  do  not  believe  in  Him  in  this  sense,  are  indeed 
in  a  worse  state  than  they  would  have  been  in,  had  Christ  never  come  into  the 
world.  They  are  in  a  worse  state,  because  they  are  in  a  more  hopeless  state.  The 
last  chance  of  salvation  has  been  tried  on  them ;  but  in  vain.  Everything  that 
could  be  done  has  been  done  for  them,  but  in  vain.  God  has  poured  forth  all  the 
riches  of  His  grace  and  mercy  and  love  on  them ;  but  in  vain.  Their  hearts  con- 
tinue as  hard  as  the  naked  rock,  as  dry  as  the  sandy  desert.  Nothing,  it  has  been 
proved,  can  soften  them ;  nothing  can  refresh  them  ;  nothing  can  make  them  bear 
fruit.  The  Comforter  has  been  sent  to  us.  If  we  refuse  His  comfort,  if  we  reject 
His  salvation,  we  must  continue  uncomforted  and  unsaved  for  ever.  Yet  this  is 
not  all.  The  state  of  those,  who,  having  heard  of  Christ,  have  no  living  faith  in 
Him,  but  continue  in  their  sins,  is  not  only  worse  than  if  they  had  never  heard  of 
Christ,  because  it  is  more  hopeless  ;  it  is  also  worse,  because  it  is  more  sinful.  For 
the  sinfulness  of  any  action  is  to  be  measured,  not  by  the  nature  of  the  action 
itself,  but  by  the  character  and  condition  of  the  doer.  It  is  in  him,  not  in  the 
action,  that  the  sin  lies  ;  and  its  sinfulness  will  always  vary,  in  proportion  as  he 
knows  it  to  be  sinful,  and  as  he  has  had  stronger  motives  and  helps  for  struggling 
against  it.  Moreover  we  all  feel  that  for  a  child  to  behave  iU  to  a  kind  and  loving 
father  is  far  worse,  far  more  inexcusable,  than  if  its  father  had  been  harsh  and 
neglectful.  These,  then,  are  the  two  qualities  which  deepen  the  sinfulness  of  sin. 
When  it  is  a  sin  against  knowledge,  it  becomes  doubly  sinful ;  and  its  sinfulness 
increases  in  proportion  as  that  knowledge  is  clear  and  certain.  And  when  it  is  also 
a  sin  against  love,  it  then  becomes  tenfold  sinful ;  its  sinfulness  still  growing  worse 
and  worse,  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  motives  whereby  our  love  has  been 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  237 

appealed  to.  These  are  the  rules  we  are  wont  to  make  use  of  in  judging  one 
another.  It  is  our  own  rule  too,  in  our  dealings  with  each  other,  as  well  as  the  rule 
of  the  gospel,  that  to  whom  much  is  given,  of  him  much  shall  be  required.  They 
who,  with  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  live  like  heathens,  we  have  already  seen,  are  far 
more  sinful  than  the  heathens :  and  thus  to  them  the  coming  of  Christ  has  been 
the  occasion  of  falling.  They  have  fallen,  because  they  have  not  risen;  and 
because,  by  remaining  where  they  were,  they  are  so  much  further  below  what  they 
ought  to  be.  But  the  coming  of  Christ  has  also  given  us  new  duties.  We  have 
higher  motives,  a  higher  mark  set  before  us.  We  are  bound  to  strive  after  more 
heavenly  aims.  We  are  bound  to  seek  after  a  more  heavenly  purity.  So  that  the 
gift  of  the  gospel  is  accompanied  with  a  twofold  danger.  If  we  abide  in  our  former 
ways,  it  renders  those  ways  more  sinful :  and  it  imposes  higher  duties  upon  us,  the 
neglect  of  which  covers  us  with  fresh  guilt.  For  in  this  way  also  has  the  coming 
of  Christ  been  a  dismal  occasion  of  falling  to  many.  Many  have  hated  the  light, 
because  their  deeds  were  dark,  and  have  either  tried  to  quench  the  light,  or  finding 
their  efforts  to  do  so  were  vain,  have  wrapt  themselves  up  in  still  thicker  darkness. 
Thus  was  it  with  the  Jews.  To  them  the  coming  of  Christ  was  an  occasion  of 
falling.  Through  Christ's  coming  they  were  no  longer  the  chosen  people  of  God. 
They  forfeited  their  rank  among  nations,  and  became  wanderers  on  the  face  of  the 
earth,  wanderers  still  more  forlorn  than  when  they  wandered  under  Moses  in  the 
wilderness.  So,  too,  was  the  coming  of  Christ  an  occasion  of  falling  even  to  the 
heathens.  For  although,  having  gods  many,  and  lords  many,  they  had  been  ready 
to  receive  any  new  idol,  that  the  folly  or  wickedness  of  man  enthroned  in  the 
heavens,  yet,  when  the  true  God,  as  revealed  in  the  person  of  His  Only-begotten 
Son,  was  made  known  to  them,  they  too  tried  to  quench  His  light  with  blood.  And 
even  now  there  are  still  found  those  who  openly  hate  and  blaspheme  God  and  His 
Christ,  and  thus  have  fallen  into  deeper  sinfulness  through  Christ's  coming.  Alas, 
it  is  a  fearful  and  ghastly  thought,  how  many  millions  on  millions  of  souls  vsdll 
have  received  no  benefit  by  Christ's  atonement,  how  many  millions  on  miUions 
of  souls  may  perhaps  be  among  those  for  whose  fall  that  blessed  Child  was  set. 
This  must  surely  have  been  the  worst  part  of  the  agony  by  which  Christ's  spirit 
was  rent  on  that  awful  night  in  the  garden,  the  thought  of  the  millions  of  souls  to 
whom  He  should  only  be  an  occasion  of  falling.  It  is  a  thought  the  sting  of  which 
nothing  can  take  away,  except  when  the  soul  is  rapt  in  adoration  of  the  perfect 
holiness,  and  perfect  justice,  and  perfect  love  of  God.  (J.  C.  Hare.)  Christ's 
mission  .-—Simeon  makes  this  de;claration  emphatically  in  reference  to  Israel ;  but 
he  makes  it  prophetically  in  reference  to  the  Gentile  world,  and  to  the  multitudes 
which  to  the  end  of  time  shall  come  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel.    I.  We  propose  to 

ILLUSTRATE    THIS   REPRESENTATION  OF   OUB    SaVIOUR's    MISSION.      lUustrationS    XnSiJ  be 

borrowed  from  almost  every  circumstance  in  His  work,  and  from  every  perfection  in 
His  personal  ministration.  1.  His  very  appearance  in  the  first  instance  illustrated 
forcibly,  and  in  some  cases  painfully,  the  truth  of  this  declaration,  that,  on  Hia 
entrance  into  our  world,  and  on  His  revealing  Himself  by  the  ministry  of  His  word. 
He  should  have  been  for  the  falling  and  for  the  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel. 
But  when  Christ  came,  and  His  appearance  was  so  contrary  to  all  their  expectations 
had  led  them  to  look  for,  they  were  prepared,  not  to  receive  Him,  but  positively  to 
reject  and  dishonour  Him.  And  so  the  appearance  of  Christ  in  the  world  is  a 
Btumbling-block  to  the  present  day.  On  the  other  hand,  in  reference  to  the  appear- 
ance of  Christ,  He  is  set  for  the  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel.  This  was  true  of 
His  temporal  appearance  among  the  people  of  Israel.  While  the  princes  and  the 
rulers  of  that  period  passed  Him  by  with  scorn,  and  refused  to  hsten  toHis  Divine 
instruction,  it  is  beautifully  said  that  '*  the  common  people  heard  Him  gladly." 
There  was  something  in  the  very  humility  of  His  circumstances,  in  the  poverty  of 
His  life,  in  the  lowliness  of  His  outward  walk  and  conversation,  which  brought 
Him  near  to  them,  and  them  near  to  Him.  2.  We  receive  a  second  illustration  of  the 
truth  of  this  declaration  from  the  mystery  of  the  Redeemer's  person.  _  This  repre- 
sentation of  our  Saviour's  character  was  in  His  own  time,  has  been_  in  every  suc- 
ceeding age,  and  is  in  our  time,  the  occasion  of  the  falling  and  the  rising  again  of 
many.  There  were  many  in  His  day  who  made  it  a  stumbling-stone  and  a  rock  of 
offence.  There  was  nothing  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish  people  which  gave  them 
such  sore  offence,  and  excited  such  bitter  hatred  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  His 
announcing  Himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  claiming  equahty  with  the  Father.  It 
was  on  this  very  ground  that  they  persecuted  Him  through  life  ;  and  it  is  very 
remarkable  that  on  this  very  ground  they  at  last  put  Him  to  death  on  the  cross. 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [emir,  xt. 

Now,  on  the  other  hand,  this  very  representation  of  our  Saviour's  person  is  lif« 
from  the  dead. to  those  who  believe  in  His  name.   3.  The  ministry  of  Jesus  Christ  ia 
also  another  method  of  illustrating  the  truth  of  this  declaration :  "  This  child  is 
set  for  the  fall  and  the  rising  again  of  many  in  Israel."     Our  Lord's  ministry  on 
earth  was  remarkable  for  the  effect  it  had  on  those  to  whom  it  was  directed.    What 
was  the  falling  away  of  the  Jews  in  this  instance  was  the  gathering  of  the  Gentiles. 
i.  This  declaration  is  still  further  illustrated  if  we  consider  the  death  which  Jesus 
died.     Those  who  disbelieve,  and  disbelieve  Him  as  a  dying  Saviour  making  atone- 
ment for  sin,  disbelieve  the  only  remedy  for  sin,  and  fall  fearfully  from  His  presence. 
But  on  the  contrary,  where  shall  we  find  any  representation  of  the  Eedeemer  like 
the  representation  of  the  Eedeemer  crucified  and  dying,  and  rising  again  as  the 
means  of  renewing  our  spirits,  confirming  our  confidence,  and  elevating  our  hope. 
He  died,  but  it  is  for  the  rising  again  of  many.   5.  Then,  finally,  it  may  be  illustrated 
in  the  dispensation  and  economy  of  the  gospel.     But  while  it  is  for  the  rising  again 
of  many,  it  is  also  for  the  fall  of  many.  The  gospel  dispensation  has  brought  every- 
thing to  an  extreme ;  there  is  the  extreme  of  mercy,  and  there  is  the  extreme  of 
j  udgment ;  God  has  discovered  to  us  His  grace,  as  we  have  never  seen  it ;  and  God 
is  discovering  to  us  also  His  righteousness  and  His  justice  as  was  never  shown 
before.     "  Behold,"  for  it  is  remarkable,  "  this  Child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  the 
rising  again  of  many  in  Israel."    1.  It  is  remarkable  if  we  consider  the  great  intention 
of  Christ  in  coming  into  our  world.     Nothing  can  be  more  explicit  than  the  inten- 
tion of  our  Saviour  and  of  the  gospel  in  their  appearance  amongst  us.    2.  It  is  the 
more  remarkable,  in  the  second  place,  because  the  evil  arising  to  us  from  the  testi- 
mony of  Christ  is  to  be  found  in  ourselves,  and  not  in  the  Saviour.     If  it  is  said 
that  Christ  in  His  appearance  shall  be  for  the  fall  and  rising  again,  for  the  condem- 
nation as  well  as  the  salvation,  of  many,  it  is  not  so  much  descriptive  of  the  inten- 
tion of  His  coming  as  of  the  effect  of  His  coming.     But  "behold" — let  it  be 
considered  remarkable,  fix  your  attention  on  it,  that  this  ari-5es  from  their  own 
perversity,  their  own  unbelief,  their  own  sin.     We  are  exhorted  thus  to  behold  and 
improve  it  because  we  have  a  serious  concern  in  it.     (A.  Reed.)        The  exhibition 
of  Christ  tries  the  human  heart : — This  subject  naturally  divides  itself  into  two 
branches,  which  require  a  distinct  consideration.    I.  Let  us  consider,  that  God 
EXHIBITS  Christ  before  the  minds  of  men,  in  oedee  to  tbt  theib  heabts.     1.  The 
truth  of  this  observation  appears  from  what  the  prophets  foretold  concerning  the 
feelings  and  conduct  of  men  towards  the  Messiah,  when  He  should  make  His  appear- 
ance in  the  flesh,  and  perform  His  mediatorial  work  among  them.     David  predicted 
that  He  would  alarm  the  fears,  and  awaken  the  enmity  and  opposition  of  the  world 
against  Him.     "  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing? 
The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against 
the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed,  saying,  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and 
cast  away  their  cords  from  us."     2.  It  appears  from  the  history  of  Christ,  that  He 
fulfilled  the  predictions  which  went  before  concerning  Him,  and  tried  the  hearts  of 
all,  who  either  heard  Him  preach,  or  saw  His  miracles,  or  were  any  way  acquainted 
with  Him.     He  was  a  sign  universally  spoken  against.     Some  heard  Him  gladly ; 
but  others  heard  Him  with  disgust  and  indignation.     Some  admired  His  miracles  ; 
but  others  despised  and  blasphemed  them.     3.  The  exhibition  of  Christ  after  His 
death,  through  the  medium  of  the  gospel,  tried  the  hearts  of  the  whole  Jewish 
nation.     4.  Ever  since  the  days  of  the  apostles,  the  character  of  Christ,  displayed  in 
the  gospel,  has  tried  the  hearts  of  the  whole  Christian  world.     6.  It  appears  from 
the  very  character  of  Christ,  that  He  cannot  be  exhibited  to  the  minds  of  men  with- 
out trying  their  hearts.    His  character,  above  all  others,  is  adapted  to  draw  forth 
the  feelings  of  the  human  heart.     Wherever  He  is  exhibited  in  all  His  excellences, 
offices,  and  designs,  He  must  necessarily  try  the  hearts  of  men  in  some  very  impor- 
tant respects.     And,  first,  in  regard  to  God.     God,  therefore,  by  exhibiting  Christ 
in  the  gospel,  tries  the  hearts  of  men  in  respect  to  Himself.     He  certainly  made  it 
appear  that  the  Jews  were  His  enemies,  by  the  instrumentality  of  Christ.    In  the 
second  place,  the  exhibition  of  Christ  necessarily  discovers  the  secrets  of  men's 
hearts  towards  themselves,  as  well  as  towards  God.     Christ,  in  the  course  of  His 
life,  and  more  especially  at  His  death,  laid  open  the  guilt  and  ill  desert  of  sinners. 
Besides,  thirdly,  the  exhibition  of  Christ  as  a  Mediator,  discovers  men's  feelings  in 
regard  to  the  terms  of  salvation.     The  next  thing  proposed  is— II.  To  show  that 
God  tries  the  hearts  of  men  through  the  medium  of  Christ,  in  obdeb  to  fix  theib 
FUTURE  AND  FINAL  STATE.    "  Behold,  this  Child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of 
many."     God  intends  to  make  men  happy  or  miserable  for  ever,  according  to  the 


CBAT.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  23» 

£eelings  of  their  hearts  towards  the  Son  of  His  love.    And  there  appears  to  be  a 
propriety  in  God's  treating  men  according  to  their  love,  or  hatred  of  Christ,  because 
their  feelings  towards  Cbrist  afford  a  proper  criterion  of  their  true  characters.     If 
they  love  Christ,  tbey  love  God  ;  but  if  they  hate  Christ,  they  hate  God.     If  they 
love  Christ,  tbey  love  the  good  of  the  universe  ;  but  if  they  bate  Christ,  tliey  are 
enemies  to  all  good.    The  character  of  Christ  is  the  most  infallible  test  of  all  human 
characters.  Improvement :  I.  Since  it  is  God's  design  in  exhibiting  Christ  before  men, 
to  try  their  hearts  and  prepare  them  for  their  final  state,  it  becomes  the  ministers  of 
the  gospel  to  make  Christ  the  main  subject  of  their  preaching.    2.  If  God  means  to 
try  the  hearts  of  men,  and  prepare  them  for  their  final  state  through  the  medium 
of  the  gospel,  then  He  has  an  important  purpose  to  answer,  by  sending  it  where  He 
knows  it  will  be  rejected.    3.  If  the  exhibition  of  Christ  be  designed  to  form  men 
for  their  future  and  eternal  state,  then  they  are  in  a  very  solemn  situation  while 
they  are  hearing  the  gospel.    4.  If  the  gospel   tries   the  hearts  and  forms  the 
characters  of  those  who  hear  it,  then  sinners  may  easily  and  insensibly  fit  them- 
selves for  destruction.    6.  We  learn  from  what  has  been  said  in  this  discourse,  that 
all  who  hear  the  gospel  may  know,  before  they  leave  the  world,  what  will  be  their 
future  and  final  state.     (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)         Christianity  the  test  of  character  : — 
We  shall  briefly  consider  in  what  respects  Christianity  proves  itself  the  grand  test 
of  men's  dispositions.     1.  It  puts  to  the  proof  whether  or  not  men  love  truth.    2. 
The  gospel  is  a  test  of  men's  hearts  as  affected  with  regard  to  God.    3.  In  respect 
to  humility,  the  gospel  tries  and  ascertains  the  state  of  the  heart.    4.  A  fourth 
respect  in  which  the  gospel  is  a  test  of  your  character  is  whether  you  are  true,  or 
not,  to  your  own  interest ;  whether  you  have  wisdom  to  choose  the  right  relief  for 
your  misery,  the  proper  supply  for  your  wants.     5.  Lastly,  Christianity  is  a  test  of 
our  obedience  or  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God.     "  If  God  is  a  Master,  where  is 
His  fear  ?    If  God  is  a  Father,  where  is  His  honour  ?  "     A  few  words  of  improve- 
ment may  appropriately  conclude  this  important  subject.     1.  Wherever  the  gospel 
is  propounded,  it  is  a  test  of  character  to  each  individual  who  hears  it :  and  who- 
ever does  not  receive  it  will  hereafter  stand  confessed  to  God  as  having  "loved 
darkness  rather  than  light,  because  his  deeds  were  evil."      2.  The  rejection  of 
Christianity  is  entirely  voluntary :  it  arises  from  the  spirit  of  pride,  the  preference 
of  falsehood,  the  love  of  sin  :  but  where  shall  we  look  for  criminality,  if  not  in  an 
evil  mind?     3.  The  trial  of  character  here  is  only  preparatory  to  the  last  trial 
hereafter.     (E.  Hall,  M.A.)        Christ's  knowledge  of  man : — "  That  the  thoughts  of 
many  hearts  may  be  revealed."     I.  Yes,  that  is  the  claim  which  Chkist  has  upon 
DS — that  He  knows  us.    As  it  is  said,  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man  ;"  and  He  does 
not  merely  know  our  faces  and  our  forms,  but  our  true  selves.    You  know  nothing 
of  any  science  or  thing  until  you  know  its  hidden  inner  secret.     How  different  it  is 
to  know  about  a  thing  and  to  know  what  is  within  a  thing.     Superficial  knowledge 
U  that  of  the  surface,  of  the  skin ;  and  profound  knowledge  is  that  which  is  organic 
and  descends  to  the  foundation.    You  know  every  man  has  within  him  an  amazing 
secret  realm  of  thought  and  emotion ;  I  may  go  a  step  further  and  say,  it  is  un- 
known to  himself,  and  most  men  never  have  more  than  very  occasional  glimpses 
into  the  "  within  the  veil  "  of  their  own  minds  ;  most  men  are  not  at  home  within 
themselves  ;  they  do  not  dwell  there.    Even  those  men  who  do  suppose  that  they 
are  well  acquainted  with  their  own  minds,  often  deceive  themselves.     II.  Man  has 

A  GREAT  HIDDEN  NATUKE,  WAITING  FOE  BEVEALMENT  AND  DEVELOPMENT.      But  hoW  SCCret. 

This  it  is  which  makes  the  relationship  of  the  pastor  and  the  teacher  frequently  so 
sacred ;  it  is  felt  that  he  can  fathom  the  great  deep  of  the  human  soul.  You  may 
illustrate  it  from  so  poor  a  piece  of  machinery  as  a  watch  ;  a  watchmaker  descends 
into  the  mystery  ;  he  knows  it ;  and  if  he  professes  to  know  and  does  not,  great 
mischiefs  and  mistakes  result.  Or,  look  at  the  human  body  and  its  diseases.  _  I  had 
a  friend  who  was  ill ;  he  had  three  doctors  who  attended  him  ;  they  gave  him  up  ; 
they  looked  at  symptoms  and  phenomena ;  they  were  ignorant  of  the  law  ;  another 
came,  touched  the  mainspring  and  restored  him  to  health.  Look  !  and  here  the 
image  is  more  pertinent ;  look  at  the  schoolmaster  and  educator,  the  teacher,  the 
boy.  I  knew  a  minister  in  his  early  childhood ;  he  was  a  very  wild,  a  strong-willed 
boy ;  his  parents  punished  him  severely,  again  and  again — they  were  pious  people ; 
at  last  they  tried  another  method,  they  took  him  downstairs,  after  they  had  ch)sed 
the  shop  at  night,  and  they  knelt  down  on  either  side  of  him,  and  they  prayed, 
they  both  prayed  for  bim,  and  they  wept.  "  Oh  !  "  said  he  to  me,  "  I  could  not; 
■tand  that,  I  tried,  and  I  prayed,  and  they  conquered."  He  is  an  eminent  minister 
now.     They  had  touched  the  mamspring  ;  there  is  a  mainspring  in  all  of  us,  and 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

yie  bless  the  man  who  reveals  it  to  ns ;  he  who  can  touch  it,  rules  ns — be  h< 
general,  poet,  statesman,  or  preacher.  III.  Yes ;  this  is  Christ's  claim  upon  as ; 
He  knows  us ;  Ha  is  the  tbue  eevealeb  op  the  hibden  natubb  of  man.  "  He  there- 
fore taught  as  one  having  authority,  and  not  as  the  Scribes."  And  hence  the  word 
of  the  prophecy  of  Simeon,  which  I  have  read  as  a  text,  is  to  be  taken  by  the  side 
of  His  precious  word.  Christ  is  "a  light" — "  a  light,"  says  Simeon,  "to  lighten 
the  Gentiles,  and  to  be  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel."  *•  That  was  the  trae  light, 
which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  What  do  we  mean  by 
light,  but  that  which  makes  manifest  the  interior  chambers  of  our  nature  ?  Tes  I 
to  know  man  is  the  great  indispensable  of  all  teaching.  Bare  knowledge  and 
wonderful  1  IV.  Yes,  and  knowledge  op  human  natuee  is  essential  to  all  teaching. 
You  see  the  painter !  he  will  tell  you  that  knowledge  of  anatomy  is  essential  to 
success ;  he  needs  the  knowledge  of  muscular  action,  to  give  life  to  his  picture — a 
knowledge  of  internal  action  to  external  development.  Thus  you  see  in  Christ 
knowledge  of  humanity.  His  whole  teaching  reveals  adaptation,  fitness  to  com- 
plete imperfect  man  1  Hence,  because  of  Christ's  transcendental  knowledge,  Chris* 
tianity  cannot  be  realized  on  earth.  It  is  always  over  and  beyond  man.  But  a 
terrible  thing  it  is  to  be  with  one  who  entirely  knows  us,  and  reads  us  through  and 
through  like  a  book — by  observation,  like  Foster — ^by  intuition,  hke  Shakespeare; 
but  to  many  it  is  only  moral  anatomy  or  surgery.  The  greatest  knowledge  of  man 
is  by  sympathy.  And  Christ  knew  the  World  of  the  Human  Heart  by  sympathy. 
Have  you  not  noticed  that  scarcely  any  mind  can  cross  the  broad  disc  of  our  Lord's 
even  temporary  association,  without  revealing,  as  it  passes,  its  state  ?  It  seems  as 
if  any  mind  coming  into  the  neighbourhood  of  His  Divine  character  is  compelled 
to  yield  itself  up,  not  only  to  His  perfect  knowledge — but,  in  the  memorable  eventa 
of  His  life,  is  illustrated  how  that  which  is  done  in  secret  is  proclaimed  on  the 
house-tops.  Amazing  would  seem  the  attraction  of  our  Lord's  character,  by  which 
He  drew  to  Him  most  opposite  beings.  He  held  them  by  their  affection  to  Him. 
He  held  them  by  their  hostility  to  Him.  He  revealed  their  love,  their  hatred,  and 
their  fear.  Christ's  character  was  like  that  ancient  mirror  which,  if  held  up  before 
the  face,  did  not  reveal  the  face,  but  the  thought.  V.  The  teaching  op  cub  Lord 
had  the  same  influence  as  His  peksonal  chakactee|;  it  revealed  the  thoughts  of  the 
heart.  All  His  parables  removed  the  abstract  ideas  of  the  human  soul  into  the 
region  of  home  life.  Thus  Christ  shows  how  He  knows  our  inner  nature,  and 
speaks  to  the  inner  world  of  motive  and  imagination.  VI.  1.  He  knew.  Mark, 
His  knowledge  was  and  is  absolute.  We  speak  of  many,  and  say,  "  They  know 
human  nature  by  observation  or  by  intuition. "  Properly,  Christ's  knowledge  ia 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other ;  the  first  says,  I  know  human  nature  be- 
cause I  look  at  it ;  the  second  says,  I  know  human  nature  because  I  look 
at  myself,  and  find  myself  related  to  it.  Christ  knew  it  because  He  made  it.  2. 
Hence  His  authority  over  man.  Man  felt  His  knowledge.  3.  He  revealed  our 
thoughts  in  His  sympathy.  He  knew  what  was  in  man ;  hence  His  sympathy  with 
men.  Yes,  His  sympathy  with  man  1  VH.  Christ  not  only  revealed  the  thoughts 
of  many  hearts  by  eliciting  their  peculiar  moral  character,  but  He  spoke  to  thb 
UNIVERSAL  heaet  OP  MAN  IN  ALL  AGES,  BOTH  BY  His  DEEDS  AND  BY  His  woBDS ;  He  trans- 
formed the  great  instincts  of  men  in  all  ages  into  absolute  revelations.  Christianity 
has  revealed  and  authenticated  to  men  what  bad  been  for  ages  suspected,  or  hoped, 
or  feared.  VIII.  1.  He  saw  human  nature  was  dark.  He  came  to  enlighten  it. 
*'  I  am  the  light  of  the  world."  2.  He  saw  the  hardness  as  well  as  the  darkness  of 
man.  He  came  to  soften  the  world's  heart.  "  He  knew  what  was  in  man."  3. 
He  consecrated  humanity.  He  revealed  the  holy  destiny  of  man,  for  "  He  knew 
what  was  in  man."  4.  "That  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  might  be  revealed." 
He  came  to  sublime  and  to  crown  human  nature,  to  reveal  to  man  His  brightest, 
boldest  thought — Eternal  life — Immortality.  (E.  P.  Hood.)  The  detector  of 
the  heart : — It  may  be  profitable  for  us,  then,  to  inquire  :  I.  In  what  manneb  does 
THE  GOSPEL  BECOME  A  DETECTOB  OP  THE  HEAET?  There  are  two  ways  in  which 
this  detection  and  unveiling  are  most  apparent  and  most  important.  1.  By  its 
authoritative  conveyance  of  truths  and  facts,  it  detects  and  prostrates  the  pride  of 
human  reasoning.  2.  By  the  requirement  of  an  uncompromising  decision  of 
character.     Let  us  now  inquire — II.  What  abe  the  insteuctive  and  pbacticaii 

INFERENCES  WHICH  WE  SHOULD  DEDUCE    PROM    THESE    VIEWS    OF  THE    GOSPEL.      1.    That 

the  ministry  of  the  gospel  ought  to  be  so  conducted  as  to  secure,  as  much  as  pos- 
sible, this  important  object  of  discrimination  and  detection.  2.  Every  hearer  of  the 
gospel  should  feel  constrained  to  bring  home  to  his  own  heart  the  great  test  of 


CHIP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  841 

character.  3.  How  greatly  to  be  loved  and  prized  is  that  gospel,  which  can  give 
hope  to  the  sinner  even  on  the  detection  of  his  guilt  and  danger.  (H.  F.  Burder,  D.D.) 
The  first  prediction  of  the  Cross  : — I.  1.  This  is  the  first  announcement  that  the  way  of 
the  Holy  Child  must  be  the  way  of  sorrows.  The  angel  had  spoken  of  the  throne 
of  David ;  the  shepherds  had  brought  a  message  of  peace ;  Simeon  foretells  the 
Cross.  Yet  this  prophecy  is  called  a  blessing  1  "  He  blessed  them  !  "  Blessedness 
is  not  the  same  as  external  prosperity.  Blessedness  is  obedience  to  the  will  of  the 
Father.  2.  Mary  has  to  learn  that  she,  too,  must  suffer  with  her  Child.  ♦'  A 
sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul."  This  is  her  blessing  1  Is  it  not  true 
that  the  coming  of  the  Eternal  Word  in  human  flesh  has  brought  a  blessing  upon 
human  sufferings,  which  are  henceforth  linked  with  His  ?  3.  Simeon  foresees  that 
the  Christ  must  suffer  because  His  life  would  be  violently  opposed  to  the  principles 
by  which  men  were  guiding  their  lives.  He  is  among  men  as  the  Incarnate  Word, 
reading  their  inmost  thoughts,  and  revealing  to  them  their  true  selves.  Therefore 
must  He  be  for  the  salvation  of  some  and  for  the  condemnation  of  others  ;  there- 
fore must  He  be  a  Sign  that  is  spoken  against.  4.  Human  suffering  arises  from 
the  breach  of  the  Divine  order  which  was  made  when  man  chose  his  own  will 
rather  than  God's.  The  Divinely-ordered  human  life  is  lived  by  the  Word-made- 
flesh.  Inasmuch  as  the  Divinely-ordered  life  is  in  direct  opposition  to  the  self- 
centred  lives  of  fallen  men,  it  must  come  into  collision  with  them  and  must  suffer. 
At  the  same  time,  by  its  very  perfection,  and  by  its  hold  on  the  true  Centre — the 
Divine  Will — it  must  condemn  all  that  falls  short  of  it  or  opposes  it.  II.  1.  Contem- 
plate in  the  Child  here  presented  to  the  Father,  the  One  Perfect  Human  Life, 
unfolding  itself  amidst  the  evil  antagonisms  of  selfish  human  nature.  2.  Learn 
that  it  follows  that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution 
(2  Tim.  iii.  12).  {Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  3I.A.)  Fall  and  rise  : — Christ  is  set 
for  the  fall  of  some  and  the  rising  of  others.  1.  It  is  not  otherwise.  2.  It  cannot 
be  otherwise.  3.  It  ought  not  to  be  otherwise.  4.  It  will  not  be  otherwise.  {J.  J. 
Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  Struggle  and  triumph  : — The  sign  spoken  against.  1.  In 
its  continual  struggle.  2.  In  its  certain  triumph.  (Ibid.)  Dual  aspect  of 
ChrisVt  Advent : — Simeon  added  this  probably  as  an  explanation  of  an  ex- 
pression he  had  just  used  in  his  burst  of  inspired  song.  "  The  glory  of 
Israel "  was  a  phrase  already  consecrated  in  religious  language.  It  commonly 
meant  the  Sacred  Presence  or  Shekinah  between  the  cherubim  over  the  ark 
of  the  covenant.  Israel,  as  St.  Paul  in  later  years  pointed  out,  had  indeed 
many  a  prerogative  among  the  nations.  Israel  was  God's  adopted  family ; 
Israel  inherited  the  covenants — those  early  understandings  between  earth  and 
heaven,  of  which  the  great  patriarchs  had  been  the  favoured  recipients ;  to 
Israel  God  had  revived  in  its  completeness  the  moral  law ;  Israel  offered  to  God  a 
worship,  the  nature  and  details  of  which  had  been  Divinely  ordered ;  Israel,  so 
rich  in  the  past,  was  also  the  people  of  the  future  ;  the  promises  were  its  endow- 
ment for  the  coming  ages,  and  in  the  fathers  or  patriarchs  Israel  had  not  merely 
a  store  of  precious  memories,  but  a  lasting  possession.  The  patriarchs  were  the 
jwoperty  of  their  descen dents  to  the  end  of  time  ;  but  the  true  glory  of  Israel  was 
this,  that  of  its  stock  and  blood  "  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  " — whose  Incarna- 
tion the  Sacred  Presence  over  the  ark  prefigured — "  Christ  came,  who  is  all  over  all, 
God  blessed  for  ever."  All  else  that  Israel  was  or  had— its  sacred  books,  its 
typical  ritual,  its  ideal  of  righteousness  in  the  moral  law,  its  great  saints  and 
heroes — all  else  pointed  on  and  up  to  this  its  supreme  prerogative.  .  -  .  But  what 
would  it  mean  in  fact,  in  history  ?  Would  all  Israelites  hasten  to  recognize  their 
true  title  as  a  race  to  greatness  ?  Would  all  hearts  join  in  one  outburst  of  thank- 
ful praise  when  the  glory  of  Israel  presented  Himself  to  His  countrymen  ?  Simeon 
feels  it  his  duty  to  check  unwarranted  expectations  which  his  earlier  words  might 
have  seemed  to  raise.  1.  Christ's  coming  into  the  world  was  not  to  have  a  uni- 
form effect  upon  human  souls.  It  would  act  on  one  soul  in  one  way,  and  on  another 
in  another :  it  would  act  differently  on  the  same  soul  at  different  periods  of  its 
history.  It  is  Christ's  wish  to  bless  every  one  with  whom  He  comes  in  contact ; 
but  His  goodwill  is  limited  by  the  free  action  of  men,  who  are  left  at  liberty  to 
accept  or  reject  Him  as  they  choose.  The  spiritual  world  is  not  ruled  mechanically. 
The  truth  and  grace  of  God  only  act  upon  men  with  good  results  so  far  as  they  are 
willing  that  they  should  so  act.  That  Christ's  Advent  should  have  great  results 
was  inevitable.  It  acted  as  a  moral  shock  upon  the  existing  fabric  of  thought  and 
life,  dispelling  illusions,  and  making  men  think  and  choose.  None  could  regard 
Christ  with  indifference.    He  stirred  the  emotions  of  all.    2.  Of  the  two  effects  ei 

16 


241  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


Christ's  Advent,  Simeon  mentions  first  the  fall  of  many  in  Israel.    Bold  parados 

to  associate  His  blessed  name,  who  came  to  be  the  health  and  Saviour  of  men» 

with  spiritual  failure.  Yet  this  was  what  prophecy  had  led  men  to  expect.  And  it 
is  what  actually  happened.  When  Christ  appeared  as  a  public  teacher,  He  was 
"despised  and  rejected"  by  the  great  majority  of  the  Jewish  people.  Even  Buch 
as  heard  Him  gladly  at  first,  joined  the  priests  and  rulers  at  last  in  the  cry, 
"  Crucify  Him."  Only  a  few  clung  firmly  to  Him  through  it  all.  3.  When  our 
Lord  had  His  own  way  with  souls,  it  was  to  raise  them  to  newness  of  life.  To 
come  into  contact  with  Him — sympathetic  contact — was  to  touch  a  life  so 
intrinsically  buoyant  and  vigorous  that  it  transfused  itself  forthwith  into  the 
attracted  soul,  and  bore  it  onwards  and  upwards.  The  "  rising  again  "  of  which 
Simeon  speaks  is  not  the  future  resurrection  of  the  body,  but  the  present  moral 
and  spiritual  resurrection  of  believers'  souls.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Use  and  abuse 
of  God's  gifts  : — Everything  that  comes  from  God  is  naturally  fitted  and  originally 
intended  for  good.  But  His  gifts  are  often  perverted,  and  become,  though  not  the 
causs,  yet  the  occasion,  of  evil.  I.  It  is  bo  with  common  temporal  blessings. 
They  are  all  good  things  in  themselves,  but  they  prove  advantages  or  disadvantages 
according  to  our  use  of  them.  1.  Riches,  When  properly  received  and  used  to 
the  glory  of  God  and  good  of  men,  riches  are  a  great  blessing ;  but  when  coveted, 
or  rested  in  as  the  chief  good,  or  abused  in  extravagance  and  profligacy,  they 
become  t)je  root  of  all  evil,  and  drown  men  in  destruction.  2.  Greatness.  In 
God's  hand  it  is  to  make  great,  to  give  power  and  honour  to  men ;  and  those  great 
men  who  conduct  themselves  in  a  manner  becoming  their  exalted  station,  are 
honourable  and  happy  indeed ;  but  the  more  pre-eminent  in  station  men  are,  the 
more  sinful  and  ruinous  is  their  misconduct.  3.  Learning  is  justly  accounted 
honourable  and  valuable;  and  it  actually  not  only  promotes  a  man's  worldly 
distinction,  but  proves  a  blessing  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word,  when  conse- 
crated to  God,  and  possessed  in  humility  and  virtue ;  but  there  are  few  greater 
curses  than  learning  misapplied,  usurping  the  place  of  the  wisdom  which  is  from 
above,  or  co-existing  with  habits  of  immorality.  4.  Health  is  a  blessing,  without 
which  all  other  earthly  blessings  are  of  little  avail  ;  and  when  spent  in  piety  and 
usefulness,  it  enables  men  to  rise  to  a  high  degree  of  credit  and  success,  and  even 
moral  excellence  ;  but  when  its  stability  is  presumed  on  to  enconrage  men  to  pro- 
ceed in  a  career  of  dissipation,  and  its  vigour  wasted  on  crimes,  or  on  trifles,  it 
becomes  the  occasion  of  multiplied  evils  and  of  deep  degradation.  5.  Affliction  ia 
kindly  sent  for  the  benefit  of  transgressors ;  and  when  its  voice  is  listened  to,  it 
recalls  them  from  their  wanderings ;  but  when  it  is  unimproved,  it  only  hardens 
men  more  and  more,  and  sinks  them  deeper  and  deeper  in  misery.  6.  Nor  is  it 
otherwise  with  life  itself.  "  Skin  upon  skin,"  one  piece  of  valuable  property  after 
another — nay,  "  all  that  man  hath,  will  he  give  for  his  life."  Every  man  is  bound 
to  praise  the  Almighty  Author  and  Preserver  of  his  life ;  and  the  life  that  now  is, 
when  rightly  improved,  is  the  means  of  rising  to  the  happiness  of  the  endless  life 
which  is  to  come ;  but  life  spent  and  closed  in  nature's  guilt  and  depravity,  is  to 
all  who  BO  spend  it  and  so  close  it,  the  forerunner  of  the  second  death,  so  that  it  would 
have  been  better  for  them  never  to  have  lived  at  all.     H.  The  same  pbinciplb 

APPLIES   WITH   BESPECT    TO   ChRIST'S    COMING    INTO    THE    WORLD.      He  Came  tO  blcSS  all 

mankind ;  but  His  coming  may  only  increase  our  condemnation.  {Jas.  Foote, 
M.A.)  Treatment  of  Christ  and  the  gospel : — 1.  Remember  that  the  gospel  must 
prove  the  means  either  of  your  rise  or  of  your  fall.  It  is,  then,  a  matter  of  infinite 
moment,  involving  all  that  is  important  in  your  endless  character  and  destiny. 
2.  Speak  not  against  Christ,  but  for  Him.  Beware  of  speaking  lightly  of  Him,  or 
His  ordinances,  doctrines,  people.  On  the  contrary,  espouse  His  cause,  and 
embrace  every  opportunity  of  remembering  Him  to  others.  3.  Let  all  the 
sufferings  and  indignities  of  the  Redeemer  be  matter  of  grief  to  you.  Your  sins 
made  them  necessary.  4.  Suffer  the  gospel  to  have  its  proper  heart-searching 
effect  on  you.  That  "  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  shall  be  revealed,"  is  a  result 
not  to  be  deprecated,  but  desired  ;  in  order  that  what  is  right  and  pleasant  may  be 
cherished,  and  what  is  wrong  corrected.  God  sees  all  now,  and  one  day  He  will 
reveal  all.  It  will  then  be  too  late  to  think  of  amendment.  The  present  is  the 
time  for  any  salutary  discovery.  (Ibid.)  Christ — the  fall  and  rise  of  many : — • 
Wherever  Christ  Jesus  comes,  with  whomsoever  He  may  come  in  contact.  He  is  never 
without  influence,  never  inoperative,  but  in  every  case  a  weighty  result  is  produced. 
There  is  about  the  holy  Child  Jesus  a  power  which  is  always  in  operation.  He  is 
not  set  to  be  an  unobserved,  inactive,  slumbering  personage  in  the  midst  of  Israeli 


CRAT.  n.]  -ST.  LUKE,  243 

but  He  is  set  for  the  falling  or  for  the  rise  of  the  many  to  whom  He  is  known 
Never  does  a  man  hear  the  gospel,  but  he  either  rises  or  falls  under  that  hearing. 
Observe,  then,  the  two  sides  of  the  truth — Jesus  always  working  upon  men  with 
marked  effect ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  man  treating  the  Lord  Jesus  with  warmth 
either  of  affection  or  opposition ;  an  action  and  a  reaction  being  evermore  pro- 
duced. Why  is  this?  1.  Because  of  the  energy  which  dwells  in  the  Lord's 
Christ,  and  in  the  gospel  which  now  represents  Him  among  men.  The  gospel  is 
all  life  and  energy;  like  leaven  it  heaves  and  ferments  with  inward  energy,  it 
cannot  rest  tUl  it  leavens  all  around  it.  It  may  be  compared  to  salt  which 
must  permeate,  penetrate,  and  season  that  which  is  subject  to  its  influence.  It  is 
no  more  possible  for  you  to  restrain  the  working  of  the  gospel  than  to  forbid  the 
action  of  fire.  Stand  before  the  fire,  it  shall  warm  and  comfort  you  ;  thrust  your 
hand  into  it,  it  shall  burn  you.  It  must  work,  becaase  it  is  fire.  And  so  with 
yonder  sun.  Though  clouds  may  hide  it  from  our  sight  at  this  moment,  yet  for 
ever  does  it  pour  forth,  as  from  a  furnace  mouth,  its  heat  and  light.  Nor  could  it 
cease  to  burn  and  shine,  unless  it  ceased  to  be  a  sun.  As  long  as  it  is  a  sun,  it 
must  permeate  surrounding  space  with  its  influence  and  splendour.  Do  you 
wonder  that  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  of  yet  Diviner  energy  ?  2.  Jesus  Christ 
and  His  gospel  are  matters  of  such  prime  necessity  to  mankind,  that  from  this 
cause  also  there  must  always  be  an  effect  produced  by  Christ.  He  is  as  necessary 
to  our  souls  as  the  air  is  to  our  bodies.  If  we  receive  Him,  we  live ;  if  we  will  not 
receive  Him,  we  must  die.  It  is  unavoidable  that  it  should  be  so.  You  cannot 
reject  the  Saviour,  and  be  a  little  damaged  thereby ;  there  is  no  alternative  but 
that  you  utterly  perish.  3.  The  position  in  which  Jesus  Christ  meets  men  makes 
it  inevitable  that  He  must  have  an  effect  upon  them.  He  stands  right  in  men's 
way.  They  must  decide  about  Him  one  way  or  the  other.  4.  He  was  appointed 
for  this  very  thing.  "  Set."  It  was  for  this  very  end  He  came.  See  the  husband- 
man take  the  fan.  You  observe  the  heap  of  mingled  wheat  and  chaff  lying  on  the 
floor.  He  begins  to  move  the  fan  to  and  fro  till  he  has  created  a  breeze  of  wind. 
What  happens  ?  The  chaff  flies  to  the  further  end  of  the  threshing  floor,  and 
there  it  lies  by  itseK ;  the  wheat,  more  weighty,  remains  purified  and  cleansed,  a 
golden  heap  of  grain.  Such  is  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Such  is  Christ :  he  is 
the  separater  of  those  who  will  perish  from  those  who  shall  be  saved.  The  fan 
discerns  and  discovers,  it  reveals  the  worthless  and  manifests  the  precious.  Thus 
hath  Christ  the  fan  in  his  hand  I  Or,  take  another  metaphor,  which  we  find  in  the 
prophets,  "  Who  may  abide  the  day  of  His  coming  ?  and  who  shall  stand  when  He 
appeareth?  for  He  is  like  a  refiner's  fire,  and  like  fuller's  soap."  You  see  the 
refiner's  fire.  Notice  how  it  burns  and  blazes.  Now,  it  turns  to  a  white  heat;  you 
cannot  bear  to  look  on  it.  What  has  happened  ?  Why,  the  dross  is  divided  from 
the  silver  and  the  alloy  from  the  gold.  The  refiner's  fire  separates  the  precious 
from  the  vile.  And  so  the  gospel  reveals  the  elect  of  God,  and  leaves  to  hardness 
of  heart  the  finally  impenitent.  Where  it  is  preached,  the  men  who  accept  it  are 
precious  ones  of  God,  His  elect.  His  chosen  ;  the  men  who  reject  it  are  the  repro- 
bate silver.  So  shall  men  call  them,  for  God  hath  rejected  them.  Mark  too,  the 
fuller's  soap.  The  fuller  takes  his  soap,  and  exercising  his  craft  upon  yonder  piece 
of  linen  marked  with  many  stains  and  colours,  you  see  how  these  foul  thiugs  fly 
before  the  soap,  and  the  fair  fabric  alone  remains.  Both  spots  and  linen  feel  the 
power  of  the  soap.  So  doth  the  gospel  take  the  polluted  fabric  of  humanity  and 
cleanse  it :  the  filth  departs  and  flies  before  it,  and  the  fair  linen  remains.  Such 
are  the  saints  of  God  ;  when  the  gospel  comes  to  them  they  are  purified  thereby, 
while  the  wicked,  as  foul  spots,  are  driven  away  in  their  wickedness.  Having  thus 
set  forth  the  great  truth  of  the  text,  I  purpose  now  to  answer  briefly  one  or  two 
questions.  I.  Who  are  those  that  fall  by  Christ.  In  Christ's  day  the  question 
was  not  difiBcult  to  answer.  Those  that  fell  by  Christ  were — 1.  The  holders  of 
tradition,  who  gave  men's  sayings  higher  authority  than  God's  commands.  2.  The 
externalists.  3.  The  self-righteous.  4.  The  wiseacres.  5.  The  sceptical.  Very 
much  the  same  sort  of  people  as  fell  by  Christ  then  fall  by  Christ  now.  II.  To 
■WHOM  WILL  THE  LoED  Jesus  BE  A  RISING  AGAIN  ?  He  will  be  a  rising  again  to 
those  who  have  fallen.  Dost  thou  confess,  "  I  have  fallen  "  ?  Dost  thou  acknow- 
ledge, "  I  possess  a  fallen  nature  "  ?  Dost  thou  lament  thou  hast  fallen  into  sin  ? 
O  my  brother,  He  will  be  thy  rising.  He  cannot  uplift  those  who  are  not  brought 
low.  Note,  again,  those  that  rise  in  Him  are  those  who  are  now  willing  to  rise  in 
Him.  Jesus  is  set  to  raise  you  up.  III.  There  are  some  who  shall  both  fall 
xsD  RISE  AGAIN  IN  Christ  ;  to  whom  Christ  shall  give  such  a  fall  as  they  never  had 


244  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oaiii.  H. 

before,  and  snch  a  rise  as  shall  be  to  their  eternal  resarrection.  Bat  what  a  fall  was 
there  when  I  learned  that  if  salvation  was  of  works,  it  could  not  be  of  grace,  and 
if  it  was  of  grace  it  could  not  be  of  works ;  the  two  could  not  be  mixed  together. 
Then  I  said  I  would  hope  in  the  performance  of  the  duties  which  the  gospel  incul- 
cates ;  I  thought  I  had  power  to  do  this  ;  I  would  repent,  and  believe,  and  so  win 
heaven.  But  what  a  fall  I  had,  and  how  each  bone  seemed  broken  when  He  declared 
to  me,  "  without  Me,  ye  can  do  nothing."  Ah,  this  is  how  Christ  saves  souls.  He 
gives  them  a  fall  first,  and  afterwards  He  makes  them  rise.  You  cannot  fill  the 
vessel  till  it  is  empty.  There  must  be  room  made  for  mercy  by  the  pouring  out  of 
human  merit.  You  cannot  clothe  the  man  who  is  clothed  already,  or  feed  him  who 
has  no  hunger.  But  this  fall  which  Jesus  gives  us  is  a  blessed  fall.  He  never  did 
throw  a  man  down  without  lifting  him  up  afterwards.  "  I  kill  and  I  make  alive ;  I 
wound  and  I  heal,"  these  are  attributes  of  Jehovah  Jesus.  IV.  We  shall  conclude 
with  a  few  words  upon  the  last  part  of  the  text.  The  text  tells  us  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  «'  A  SIGN  THAT  SHALL  BE  SPOKEN  AGAINST."  1.  Chrfst  was  a  sign  of  Diviue 
love.  In  Him  God  reaches  the  climax  of  benevolence,  and  man  exhibits  the  climax 
of  deadly  hate.  The  greatest  gift  provokes  the  greatest  hostility,  and  the  loftiest 
sign  brings  forth  the  most  virulent  opposition.  2.  Christ  was  a  sign  of  Divine 
justice.  A  bleeding  Saviour,  the  Son  of  God  deserted  by  His  Father,  the  thunder- 
bolts of  vengeance  finding  a  target  in  the  Person  of  the  Well-beloved,  herein  is 
justice  revealed  most  fully.  I  hear  not  that  other  signs  of  vengeance  have  been 
spoken  against.  Men  have  trembled,  but  have  not  railed.  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
with  bowed  head  confessed  the  justice  of  their  doom.  Egypt  engulphed  in  the  Eed 
Sea  saith  nothing  of  it ;  none  of  her  records  contain  a  single  blasphemy  against 
Jehovah  for  having  swept  away  the  nation's  chivalry.  The  judgments  of  God,  as 
a  rule,  strikes  men  dumb  with  awe !  But  this,  which  was  the  greatest 
display  of  Divine  hatred  of  sin,  where  the  Son  of  God  was  made  to  descend  into 
the  lowest  depths  as  our  substitute,  this  provokes  to-day  man's  uttermost  wrath. 
Know  you  not  how  many  are  continually  railing  at  the  Cross  ?  The  Crucified  is 
stiU  abhorred.  How  matchless  is  the  perversity  of  human  nature,  that  when  God 
displays  His  justice  most,  but  blends  it  sweetly  with  His  love,  the  sign  is  everywhere 
spoken  against !  3.  Christ  was  the  sign  of  man's  communion  with  God,  and  of 
God's  fellowship  with  man.  A  ladder  reaching  from  earth  to  heaven  ;  a  connecting 
bridge  between  creature  and  Creator.  But  alas  1  man  does  not  want  to  be  near  his 
Maker,  and  hence  he  rails  at  the  means  provided  for  communion.  4.  Christ  is  the 
sign  of  the  elect  seed,  the  representative  of  the  holy,  the  newborn,  the  spiritual ; 
and  hence,  as  soon  as  the  carnal  mind,  that  knoweth  not  God  nor  loveth  Him,  per- 
ceives Christ  and  His  gospel,  it  at  once  stirs  up  the  depth  of  its  malevolence  to  put 
down  Christ  if  it  be  possible.  But  they  shall  never  put  Him  down.  They  may 
speak  against  the  gospel,  but  here  is  our  joy,  that  Christ  will  raise  up  His  people, 
and  will  certainly  give  the  fall  to  His  enemies.  The  ark  of  the  Lord  can  never  taXL 
before  Dagon ;  but  Dagon  must  fall  down  before  the  Lord's  ark.  (G.  H.  Spur- 
geon.)  Christ  reveals  hearts : — Eastern  fable  tells  of  a  magic  mirror  that  re- 

mained clear  and  unsullied  when  the  pure-hearted  looked  into  it,  but  became 
troubled  and  obscure  when  the  glance  of  the  guilty  fell  upon  it.  So  the  owner  of 
that  mirror  could  always  tell  the  character  of  those  who  looked  into  it.  Such  a 
test  we  have  in  Jesus.  We  can  tell  a  man's  nature  by  knowing  what  he  thinks  of 
Christ,  and  thus  "  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  "  are  "  revealed."  {Sunday  School 
Times.)  Christ  spoken  against  : — There  are  four  reasons  why  they  speak  against 
Him ;  that  is,  as  the  true  Christ  of  God.  I.  Ignorance,  men  not  knowing  their 
need  of  Him;  many  of  the  relations  he  bears  therefore  appear  to  the  natural 
man  to  be  superfluous;  he  does  not  know  his  need,  and  therefore  speaks 
against  it  in  ignorance.  II.  The  native  enmity  of  the  mind.  "  The  carnal 
mind  is  enmity  against  God ;  "  men  will  naturally  speak  against  that  that  they 
have  an  antipathy  to.  III.  Because  they  are  too  much  taken  up  with  the  world, 
and  they  do  not  hke  to  be  interrupted.  Now  we  must  pursue  the  world,  must 
enjoy  the  world  ;  to  become  one  of  these  religious  mopes  would  be  to  spoil  all  our 
pleasures.  Thus  they  have  an  idea  that  there  is  something  very  gloomy  about  religion, 
and  so  they  speak  against  it,  especially  the  truth.  IV.  The  natural  man  has  a  vague 
idea  that  the  threatenings  of  God  are  mere  words ;  that "  whoever  the  Lord  may  send 
to  hell,"  says  the  natural  man,  "  I  can't  believe  He  will  send  me  there."  (J.  Wells.) 
This  Child : — These  are  the  words  of  Simeon.  A  beautiful  picture — age  and  child- 
hood meeting  together,  a  gentle  shoot  and  the  full  ripe  corn  in  the  ear,  a  sapling 
and  a  full-grown  oak  ready  for  transplantation  into  that  realm  where  the  saints  of 


«HAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  245 

God  flourish  with  an  immortal  life  and  glory,  I.  A  child.  A  wonderful  thing. 
A  seed  containing  a  world  of  unknown  possibilities.  It  makes  parents  glad.  It 
should  do  so.  A  gift  of  God,  a  pledge  and  proof  of  the  gracious  tenderness  which 
roles  the  world.  But  a  child  should  also  make  parents  thoughtful.  Children  are 
not  mere  play-things — ornaments,  but  undeveloped  powers — slumbering  volcanoes, 
which  may  burst  out  with  desolating  eruptions;  or  shrouded  lights,  that  shall 
emerge  in  fuller  and  brighter  radiance  from  year  to  year,  shedding  gladness  and 
blessing  all  around.  II.  "  Behold  this  child."  Have  we  not  sometimes  wished 
that  some  Simeon  could  have  taken  a  child  of  ours  in  his  arms  and  become  pro- 
phetic with  respect  to  his  destiny  ?  But  it  is  not  permitted — graciously  so.  We 
know,  however,  that  the  future  of  children  is  not  a  thing  of  chance,  nor  is  it 
determined  only  by  what  the  chQd  is  in  itself.  Otherwise  the  parental  relationship 
would  be  largely  nullified.  A  child  has  its  own  native  powers  and  tendencies,  but 
they  are  capable  of  regulation  or  perversion.  The  doctrine  of  Scripture  is  that  the 
child  will  be  much  what  the  parent  makes  him.     III.  The  history  op  this  child 

WAS  10  BE  ONE  OF  A  CHEQUERED  NATURE,  AND  THE  MOTHER  WAS  TO  ENDURE  SAD  WOE. 

"  A  sword  shall  pierce,"  &o.  This  not  uncommon  for  mothers.  Simeon,  however, 
blessed  the  parents  in  spite  of  the  sorrow  that  would  be  mingled  with  the  lot  of 
Jesus  and  their  own.  Blessedness  not  the  same  as  continuous  happiness  or 
pleasure.  A  pathway  of  uninterrupted  joy  may  not  be  a  blessing.  "  Blessed  are 
they  that  mourn,"  &o.  Christ's  life  was  blessed  when  He  was  tempted,  had  not 
where  to  lay  His  head,  was  alone  upon  the  mountain,  was  robed  in  mock  royalty, 
beaten,  spit  upon,  agonized  in  the  garden,  died  upon  the  cross.  No  one  could  call 
Him  happy,  but  He  was  blessed.  IV.  This  Child  was  set  for  the  fall  and  rising 
AQAiN  OF  MANT  IN  ISRAEL.  The  effect  different  in  different  persons.  Not,  however, 
intended  to  be  different.  The  purpose  of  God  is  good  and  gracious.  All  His  gifts 
are  intended  for  benefit — health,  prosperity,  aiHictions.  How  differently  are  we 
affected  by  the  same  things  I  Children  in  the  same  house,  under  the  same 
training,  &o.     1.  Falling — (1)  In  aggravated  degradation ;  (2)  augmented  guilt ; 

i3)  humihation  and  repentance.  2.  Rising  again.  (1)  Faith.  (2)  Forgiveness. 
3)  Holiness.  (4)  Heaven.  The  words  of  Simeon  are  for  this  day,  for  this  nation, 
for  you.  This  Child  which  was  set  forth  then  is  still  set  forth,  until  in  the  counsels 
of  heaven  the  last  day  shall  break  upon  the  world,  and  the  throne  of  judgment 
shall  be  erected  where  now  stands  the  throne  of  grace.  This  Child  is  still  the 
turning-point  upon  which  are  centred  the  destinies  of  the  world.  This  Child  is  not 
for  a  race,  but  for  the  world ;  not  for  an  age,  but  for  all  time.  This  Child  you  have 
heard  of  from  your  infancy.  You  have  not  heard  so  much  of  any  child  as  this. 
This  child  runs  as  a  golden  thread  through  the  history  of  the  world.  You  may  neglect 
Him,  but  you  cannot  escape  Him.  You  may  despi.-e  Him,  but  you  cannot  escape 
Him.  You  may  hate  Him,  but  you  cannot  escape  Him.  It  cannot  be  with  you  as 
it  is  with  a  heathen  who  has  never  heard  of  His  name,  and  upon  whom  the  glory 
of  His  brightness  has  never  risen.  (E.  Mellor,  D.D.)  Christ  is  set  for  the  ruin 
of  many  : — I.  How  true  is  this  prophecy.  Undoubtedly  the  Son  of  Man  came  not 
to  destroy  souls,  but  to  save.  In  boundless  love  He  has  sacrificed  Himself  for  the 
world,  and  opened  heaven  by  His  cruel  death.  Nevertheless,  he  is  set  to  the  ruin 
of  many.  1.  Many  are  destitute  of  holy  faith,  which  is  the  gate  of  life  and  the 
ground  of  eternal  salvation.  2.  Many  are  destitute  of  Divine  charity,  which  we 
must  possess  in  addition  to  faith,  if  we  would  be  saved.  II.  How  terrible  is  this 
PROPHECY.  Dreadful  are  the  consequences  to  those  for  the  ruin  of  whom  Christ  is 
set.  1.  They  forfeit  the  price  of  their  redemption.  2.  They  lose  the  eternal 
happiness  destined  for  them.  {Joseph  Schuen.)  What  Christ  was  to  be  to 
different  people: — I.  What  this  Child  was  to  be  to  His  enemies — an  object  of 
opposition  and  an  occasion  of  ruin.  II.  What  He  was  to  be  to  His  mother — a 
cause  of  acute  suffering  (by  sympathy).  III.  What  He  was  to  be  to  His  people — ■ 
the  Author  of  their  recovery  or  restoration.  IV.  What  He  was  to  be  to  all  man- 
kind— a  test  or  touchstone  of  their  moral  and  spiritual  state.  {(?.  Brooks.)  The 
prophecy  of  Simeon  : — While  Joseph  and  the  mother  were  still  marvelling  at  the 
words  spoken  by  the  old  man  concerning  Jiesus,  he  turned  to  them,  and  with  a 
solemn  blessing  first  pronounced  upon  those  who  were  privileged  to  have  so  near 
a  place  on  earth  to  the  Saviour  of  mankind,  spoke  these  words  to  His  mother  only, 
"Behold  this  Child,"  &c.  He  is  placed,  or  laid,  as  a  firmly -planted  rock,  with  a 
twofold  result  and  purpose — the  fall  of  some,  the  rising  of  others.  Two  passages 
of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  the  one  from  the  eighth  and  the  other  from  the  twenty- 
eighth  chapter,  seem  to  be  here  brought  together ;  as  also  in  the  ninth  chapter  oi 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi».  a, 

the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  and  in  the  second  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  of  St.. 
Ptter.  God  places  this  Child  in  Zion  as  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure  founda- 
tion. Whosoever  will  may  build  upon  Him  the  house  of  his  habitation,  and  ris* 
into  a  hoi  J  temple,  safe  from  the  storms  of  time  and  the  devastations  of  judgment. 
He  is  set  for  the  rising  of  many.  But  if  men  will  not  thus  use  Him,  as  the 
foundation-stone  of  a  safe  and  sure  dwelling,  then  (according  to  the  other  passage) 
they  will  find  Him  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence.  He  will  be  like  an 
obstructing  rock  in  their  path — even  to  them  who  stumble  at  the  word,  being  diB« 
obedient.  God  will  not  move  Christ  out  of  the  way  because  men  are  perverse 
enough  to  stumble  over  Him.  This  Child  is  set,  by  a  hand  not  of  man,  to  be  either 
for  the  rising  (if  they  will  have  it  so),  or  else  for  the  fall  (if  they  will  have  it  so)  oi 
many  in  Israel.  A  solemn  responsibility  !  We  must  either  rise  by  Christ  or  fall— 
which  we  will.  "And  for  a  sign  spoken  against."  A  sign,  in  the  Scripture  use, 
denotes  something  or  some  one  pointing  to  God,  to  God's  being,  to  God's  working. 
Christ  is  a  sign.  He  came  upon  earth  to  point  to  God.  But  this  sign,  like  every 
other,  may  be,  and  commonly  is,  gainsaid,  or  spoken  against.  For  one  who  accepta 
it,  for  one  who,  because  of  Christ,  sees  and  believes  in  and  lives  for  God — many 
cavil,  many  reject,  and  many  neglect  the  gospel.  This  in  all  times.  But  most  of 
all  when  He  was  Himself  amongst  men.  Then  indeed  gainsaying  ran  on  into 
open  violence.  Such  is  the  warning  uttered  in  the  ears  of  His  mother,  over  the 
little  Infant  lying  still  and  helpless  in  the  arms  of  the  aged  saint.  "  Yea,"  he 
adds,  "  a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul  also."  She  who  is  now 
rejoicing  in  the  blessedness  of  being  her  Lord's  mother,  must  learn  that  no  one 
comes  so  near  Christ  without  partaking  in  His  sufferings.  For  us  the  prophecy 
of  Simeon  is  recorded.  Let  us  try  and  judge  ourselves  by  it,  that  we  be  not  judged 
of  the  Lord.  To  which  purpose,  in  our  case,  is  this  child  set  ?  To  which  of  two 
purposes  ?  for  our  fall,  or  for  our  rising  ?  1.  For  our  fall,  if  we  let  the  word  come 
to  us  unheeded,  to  be  snatched  away  by  the  tempter ;  if  we  receive  the  word  for  a 
moment  with  joy,  but  take  no  heed  to  its  watering  by  the  Spirit's  grace,  to  its 
growth  by  the  sunshine  of  God's  presence,  by  the  dew  of  God's  blessing ;  if  we 
allow  the  word  to  become  choked  in  us  by  cares  and  riches  and  pleasures  of  this 
life,  so  that  it  brings  no  fruit  to  perfection  ;  if  we  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound.  This  Child  is  set  for  the  fall  of  many.  And,  oh,  my  friends,  perhaps  we 
have  scarcely  yet  said  of  how  many.  It  is  not  only  the  utterly  hardened,  not  only 
the  avowed  unbeliever,  not  only  the  scoffer,  the  dishonest,  or  the  impure,  who 
stumble  at  the  great  stumbling-stone ;  it  is  quite  as  often  the  mere  neglecter,  the 
mere  procrastinator,  the  merely  undecided,  the  almost  Christian,  who  shows  what 
he  is  by  his  treatment  of  the  Saviour  and  the  great  salvation.  Not  to  be  with- 
Christ  is,  He  says  it  Himself,  to  be  (in  His  judgment)  against  Him.  2,  Let  us 
listen,  in  this  day  of  opportunity  and  of  blessing,  to  the  alternative  here  set  before 
tts.  This  Child  is  set  for  the  rising  of  many.  What  is  this  "  rising  "  ?  and  in 
whom  is  it  verified  ?  It  is  a  rising  out  of  darkness,  out  of  the  low,  misty  valley 
of  sense  and  worldliness,  into  the  clear  light  and  pure  knowledge  of  Him  whom, 
truly  to  know  is  eternal  life.  It  is  a  rising  out  of  misery  and  sin.  "  Set  for  the 
rising  of  many,"  the  text  says.  Who,  then,  are  these  ?  They  are  those  who  feel 
their  need  of  Clarist.  And  which  of  us  has  not  cause  to  do  so  ?  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
Man  saved  or  destroyed  by  the  truth : — Every  man  who  has  heard  the  word 
of  salvation  has  some  kind  of  connection  with  Christ.  Christ  is  offered  to 
each  of  us,  in  good  faith  on  God's  part,  as  a  means  of  salvation,  a  foundation 
on  which  we  may  build.  A  man  is 'free  to  accept  or  reject  that  offer,  if  he 
reject  it,  he  has  not  thereby  cut  himself  off  from  all  contact  and  connection 
with  that  rejected  Saviour,  but  he  still  sustains  a  relation  to  Him ;  and  the 
message  that  he  has  refused  to  believe  is  exercising  an  influence  upon  hi» 
character  and  his  destiny.  The  smallest  particle  of  light  falling  on  the  sensi- 
tive plate  produces  a  chemical  change  that  can  never  be  undone  again,  and 
the  light  of  Christ's  love  once  brought  to  the  knowledge  and  presented  for  the 
acceptance  of  a  soul,  stamps  on  it  an  ineffaceable  sign  of  its  having  been  there. 
The  gospel  once  heard  is  always  the  gospel  which  has  been  heard.  Nothing  can 
alter  that.  Once  heard,  it  is  henceforward  a  perpetual  element  in  the  whole  con- 
dition, character,  and  destiny  of  the  hearer.  Christ  does  something  to  every  one  of 
us.  His  gospel  will  tell  upon  you.  It  is  telling  upon  you.  If  you  disbelieve  it,  it. 
is  not  the  same  as  if  you  had  never  heard  it.  Never  is  the  box  of  ointment  opened 
without  some  savour  from  it  abiding  in  every  nostril  to  which  its  odour  has  been. 
wafted.    Only  the  alternative,   the  awful  "either,  or,"  is  open  for  each — tbs 


OHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  84? 

"savonr  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
dual  aspect  of  Christ's  advent : — St  Paul  experienced,  in  his  own  person,  the  doubW 
effect  of  the  advent  of  Christ  into  the  world  set  forth  in  Simeon's  language— first, 
the  repulsion  which  made  him  so  bitter  a  persecutor,  and  next  the  attraction  which 
made  him  so  glorious  an  apostle.  And  of  this  double  experience  Augustine  was  a 
Beoond  great  example.  There  are  many  in  our  modern  world  who  are  thinking  and 
speaking  and  hving  in  opposition  to  the  eternal  Christ.  It  may  be,  as  in  the  case 
of  Paul,  in  the  case  of  Augustine,  in  their  earlier  days  they  have,  from  whatever 
eaase,  taken  a  fright  at  religion ;  they  have  been  repelled  by  some  caricature  of  it, 
or  some  inconsistency  on  the  part  of  its  professors,  or  by  taking  only  one  aspect  of 
its  doctrines  and  claims  into  consideration,  or  by  a  sense  of  their  present  inability 
to  comply  with  its  demand  upon  the  conscience  and  upon  the  heart ;  but  it  is  a 
happiness  to  think  that  Christ  is  still  there  in  the  firmament  of  the  heavens,  in 
the  midst  of  the  Church,  among  the  golden  candlesticks,  set  not  merely  for  the  fall, 
but  for  the  rising  again  of  many  a  soul  in  Israel.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  brighter 
days  await  those  wanderers,  many  of  whom  are  most  assuredly  children  of  the 
kingdom  who  have  lost  their  way,  but  will  not  lose  it  for  ever.  A  nearer  sight,  a 
constraining  sense  of  the  Divine  Eedeemer's  claims,  will  come  when  men  see  that 
He  can,  and  does,  give  by  His  Spirit,  love,  joy,  peace,  patience,  to  those  who  ask 
Him.  When  they  take  into  account  the  works  which  He  did  of  old,  the  words 
which  He  spake,  the  impression  which  He  made  when  He  was  upon  the  earth  ; 
when  they  see  the  society  which  He  founded,  the  creed  which  radiates  from  and 
centres  in  His  person,  and  which  is  more  widely  accepted  now,  eighteen  centuries 
after  His  death,  than  ever  before,  they  may  reconsider  their  prejudices  ;  tbey  may 
Bay  less  than  they  mean  when  they  admit  that  there  is  something  to  be  said  for 
Ohristianity  after  all ;  they  may  rise  from  the  tomb  into  which  they  had  fallen — 
the  tomb  of  doubt,  the  tomb  of  care,  the  tomb  of  evil  living— into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Christ  set  for  our  fall  and 
upraising  : — How  is  He  set  for  our  fall  ?  That  seems  very  strange.  It  is  not  God's 
purpose  that  the  revelation  of  good  produces  fall.  We  must  seek  any  explanation 
rather  than  one  which  shakes  the  central  pillar  of  the  universe,  and  turns  God  into 
a  Master  of  evil.  No,  the  real  explanation  lies  in  ourselves,  in  what  we  know  and 
see  men  do  of  their  own  will.  Good  and  evil  lie  before  men,  and  they  choose  evil. 
There  ia  a  state  of  heart  which  naturally  turns  away  from  or  hates  the  life  of 
Christ  and  the  spirit  of  its  work.  There  is  no  kinship  between  Him  and  it.  When 
His  goodness  is  flashed  upon  such  men,  it  sends  them  into  violent  hatred  of  it. 
He  is  set  for  their  fall.  But  it  is  their  own  deeds  that  have  brought  them  to  that 
condition— not  God's  will.  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  men  loved  darkness 
rather  than  light.  Why?  Because  their  deeds  were  evil.  Plainly,  then,  if  we 
wish  to  rise  into  a  new  life  and  a  higher  one  when  the  revelation  of  goodness  is 
made  to  us,  if  we  wish  Christ  to  be  set  for  our  rising,  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  love 
Ught ;  and  in  order  to  love  it,  to  make  our  deeds  good.  Never  mind  having  high 
ideals,  until  you  have  got  your  daily  actions  and  thoughts  right.  It  is  a  simple 
promise,  but  it  is  eternally  true  and  sure  :  "  To  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation 
aright  wiU  I  show  the  salvation  of  God."  We  must  be  akin  to  Christ  before  we 
•an  receive  Christ.  To  such,  when  He  comes  home  to  the  heart,  when  we  feel  Him 
rushing  on  us.  He  comes  in  resurrection-power,  set  for  our  rising.  And  we  rise, 
shaking  off  our  sins,  our  dark  thoughts,  the  burden  of  our  sorrow,  the  besetting  of 
self,  the  curse  of  indifference,  impatience,  and  sloth  into  a  new  life.  It  is  like  the 
tmbinding  of  the  earth  in  spring.  Thus  is  Christ  set  for  our  rise  and  fall.  It  is  a 
solemn  thing  to  watch  a  man  when  that  testing  comes  to  him.  The  hour  strikes 
when  he  is  called  on  to  choose  between  two  ways  of  acting,  and  he  knows  God  is  in  one 
and  the  devil  in  the  other.  What  is  this?  It  is  Christ  set  before  him  for  his  rise  or  fall ; 
Christ  come  to  reveal  his  inward  thoughts,  his  inward  strength  or  weakness.  It  is  a 
judgment-hour ;  and  years  of  evil  fall,  or  of  righteous  growth  rest  upon  the  hour.  And 
still  more  grave  is  it  when  Christ  is  set  before  a  nation  for  its  fall  or  rising  again. 
All  great  ideas  are  set  for  the  rise  and  falling  of  men,  for  life  and  for  death.  Of  this^ 
law  the  strongest  instance  in  history  is  that  which  accompanied  the  coming  of 
Christ.  His  ideas  made  the  world  into  two  camps.  Nor  has  the  power  of  Christ's 
spiritual  thoughts  ceased  to  do  this  kind  of  work.  Through  the  solitary  contest  in 
each  man's  soul,  and  his  own  choice  of  good  or  evil ;  through  the  contest  in  every 
community,  in  every  nation,  in  the  whole  world,  men  and  nations  rise  and  fall,  and 
the  silent  separation  ever  going  on  accumulates  the  materials  for  the  last  great 
judgment  when  this  dispensation  of  time  is  over  and  another  shall  begin.    That 


^48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  n. 

day  is  not  what  has  been  pictured  in  poetry.  It  will  be  the  magnificent  indications 
of  God's  ways  to  men ;  the  clear,  unmistakable  revelation  of  the  holiness  and 
justice  and  truth  of  God.  Men  shall  see  then.  The  time  of  doubt  and  casuistry 
and  shadow  will  be  over ;  all  thoughts  shall  be  revealed,  and  we  shall  know  our- 
selves and  know  God.  Once  more  Christ  will  be  openly  set  for  the  rise  and  fall  ol 
men.  By  the  revelation  of  His  holiness  alone  the  good  shall  be  irresistibly  attracted ; 
the  evil,  tiU  they  find  out  their  evil,  irresistibly  repelled.  There  will  be  no  caprice. 
In  accordance  with  inevitable  law,  in  accordance  with  the  voice  in  men's  own  hearts, 
will  the  judgment-sentence  of  the  Son  of  Man  be  given.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke.) 
By  their  treatment  of  Christ  Himself  men  will  shoio  what  they  are  : — The  veil  will 
he  stripped  off  from  them — such  is  the  figure — by  their  own  language,  and  their 
own  conduct  towards  Christ.  By  their  estimate  of  His  character,  by  their  appre- 
ciation or  disparagement  of  His  holy  life,  and  mighty  works  and  Divine  doctrine — 
by  their  acceptance  or  rejection  of  Him  whose  appeal  was  ever  to  the  conscience  of 
man,  as  in  the  sight  of  a  heart-searching  God — men  will  disclose  their  true  dispo- 
sition ;  will  show  whether  they  love  the  world,  whether  they  echo  its  lying  voice, 
whether  they  desire  darkness  lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved,  or  whether,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  are  brave  to  see,  and  bold  to  confess  the  truth,  whether  they  have 
an  ear  to  hear  the  voice  of  God,  and  a  will  to  follow  Him  whithersoever  He  goeth. 
But,  most  of  all,  as  the  end  draws  nigh,  and  the  life  of  holiness  is  closing  in  the  death 
of  martyrdom.  Then,  even  more  than  in  earlier  days,  were  the  feelings  of  men 
tested,  the  thoughts  of  hearts  revealed,  by  their  dealing  with  the  Suffering  and  the 
Crucified.  The  high  priests  plot  and  blaspheme,  Pilate  vacillates  and  gives  way, 
the  soldiers  part  among  them  the  garments,  the  people  stand  beholding,  Judas 
despairs,  Peter  repents,  Joseph  of  Arimathsea  becomes  courageous,  Nicodemus  comea 
by  day,  the  centurion  confesses,  one  thief  blasphemes,  the  other  prays,  men  faint  and 
fiee,  women  out  of  weakness  are  made  strong,  a  sword  pierces  the  heart  of  the 
mother,  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  revealed.  Even  thus  has  itbeen 
in  all  time.  For  aU  time  the  words  were  uttered ;  it  is  by  their  treatment  of  Jesus, 
in  Himself  and  in  His  people,  in  His  word,  in  His  church,  in  His  sacraments,  in 
His  Spirit,  that  men  show  decisively  before  God,  before  one  another,  before  them- 
selves (if  they  will  behold  it)  what  manner  of  spirit  they  are  of.  (Dean  Vanghan.) 
Before  these  words  were  spoken  Mary  was  fuU  of  happiness.  She  had  come  into  the 
Temple  trembling  with  the  deep  pleasure  of  young  motherhood,  her  soul  filled  full 
of  natural  piety,  her  heart  leaping  with  joy.  And  when,  moved  still  more  by  the 
old  religious  rite,  she  heard  the  hymn  of  Simeon  over  her  boy,  all  her  joy  rose  to 
spring-tide  in  her.  Her  face  glowed.  Joy  and  triumph  filled  her  soul.  Simeon 
saw  this  lightning  on  her  face,  saw  her  mien  transfigured,  and  with  the  wisdom 
which  has  outlived  weakness  but  not  sympathy,  turned  and  touched  her  joy  with 
the  warning  of  his  prophecy.  "  A  sword  shall  pierce  through  thine  own  soul."  It 
was  cruel,  we  think  ;  it  was  pitiful  to  dash  her  young  delight  with  cold.  That  ia 
our  first  thought,  and  it  might  be  a  true  one,  had  the  sorrow  she  was  to  suffer  been 
ordinary  sorrow.  But  it  was  so  dreadful  a  pain  that  she  needed  to  prepare  herself, 
needed  the  warning.  Her  joy  was  too  great  at  this  moment  to  be  destroyed  by  the 
wotlIs  ;  it  was  only  chastened  by  a  shade  of  impending  sorrow,  so  that  when  the  pain 
came  it  was  not  so  great  a  shock.  Nor  did  the  shade  make  the  joy  retiUy  less.  Joy 
was  only  lodged  deeper  in  the  heart,  made  more  intense — a  secret,  sUent  posses- 
sion :  nay,  the  very  dread  of  its  loss  made  her  handling  of  it  tenderer,  and  her  love 
of  it  greater.  By  both,  by  joy  and  by  the  shadow  of  sorrow,  she  was  exalted, 
raised  from  the  girl  to  the  thoughtful  woman  who  kept  things  in  her  heart  and 
pondered  them.  Soon  Simeon's  prophecy  was  fulfilled.  She  saw  her  Son  go  forth 
■from  the  quiet  of  the  village  with  high  hopes,  and  at  His  first  return  to  His  home 
the  people  tried  to  kill  Him.  For  a  time  things  seemed  bright,  but  as  she  fol- 
lowed His  ministry  with  the  passionate  love  which  motherhood  has  for  a  son  who 
claims  also  by  his  character  deep  reverence,  she  saw  Him  despised  and  rejected  of 
men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,  hated  aud  driven  to  death.  Day 
by  day  the  sword  pierced  her  soul ;  day  by  day  its  sharp  edge  was  whetted  by  love  and 
fruitless  indignation.  Can  we  imagine  how  that  must  have  worn  life  away  ?  And 
•then  the  end,  the  hour  by  the  cross  when  she  knelt  apart,  silent  to  the  last,  seeing 
Him  die  so  cruelly — the  mother's  heart  pierced  in  twain.  No  wonder  she  died  early. 
?To  wonder  Christendom  has  sung  to  her,  painted  and  graven  her,  as  the  Mother  of 
Sorrows.  We,  looking  at  her  life  and  her  Son's,  know  of  a  truth  that  out  of  suffer- 
ing nobly  borne  for  love  of  man,  good  comes  to  all.  Involved  in  our  pain,  we  know 
cothing  but  that  we  suffer.     Yet  the  histoiy  of  Mary's  sorrow  is  the  history  of  all 


CHIP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  S49 

Borrow.  Good  flows  from  it  to  the  whole,  and  when  we  see  that  good  we  shall  rejoice 
that  we  have  suffered.  No  sword  pierces  the  human  heart,  but  the  blood  that  streams 
from  it  heals  the  nations.  {Stopford  A,  Brooke.)  On  the  advantages  of  affliction : — 
To  the  prophecies  which  Simeon  addresses  to  Mary  concerning  her  Divine  Son,  he 
adds  one  relative  to  herself.  The  very  moment  after  filling  her  heart  with  joy  by 
announcing  the  future  glory  of  Jesus,  he  announces  also  the  many  sufferings  she 
must  endure.  Such  is  the  ordinary  conduct  of  Providence,  towards  the  just  and 
elect.  He  chequers  prosperity  with  reverses,  so  that  they  may  be  induced  to  trans- 
fer still  more  and  more  their  affections  to  things  above,  and  to  elevate  their  hearts 
to  those  mansions  where  alone  true  joy  is  to  be  found.     I.  Thebe  is  no  real  cause 

WHY  BELIEVERS  SHOULD  FAINT  UNDEE  THE  CHASTISEMENTS  OF  THEIB  HEAVENLY  FaTHEB. 

1.  God's  corrections  are  tokens  of  His  love,  and  the  means  which  He  often  uses  for 
bringing  His  children  into  glory.  Amos  iii.  2  ;  Heb.  xii.  6-7.  Prosperity  is  not 
the  field  where  virtue  flourishes  ;  the  soil  is  too  rich  ;  a  luxuriance  of  baleful  weeds 
chokes  the  good  plants  and  makes  them  unfruitful.  Adam's  fall  was  in  paradise. 
Noah's  abundance  proved  a  snare  and  temptation  to  him.  David,  in  the  midst  of 
happiness,  became  an  adulterer  and  a  murderer.  Solomon,  in  the  midst  of  His 
opulence,  apostatised  from  his  God.  Such  has  been  the  opinion  of  some  of  the 
wisest  men  concerning  an  uninterrupted  course  of  prosperity,  that  they  have  even 
shunned  the  company,  and  broken  off  all  connection  with  those  who  enjoyed  it.  It 
is  written  of  St.  Ambrose,  that  being  upon  a  journey,  and  coming  to  an  inn,  he 
heard  the  landlord  boast,  that  through  his  whole  life  he  had  never  known  what  it 
was  to  be  under  trouble  or  affliction ;  upon  which,  that  father  would  not  so  much 
as  lodge  for  a  night  in  his  house,  but  foretold  a  sudden  destruction  to  him  and  his, 
which  soon  after  came  to  pass.  Thus  the  children  of  God,  instead  of  repining,  or 
sinking  under  pressure  of  affliction,  ought  to  thank  their  heavenly  Father  for  it, 
and  esteem  it  one  of  the  most  precious  blessings  He  bestows  on  them.  2.  The  ways- 
of  God  are  frequently  dark  and  obscure ;  and  we  may  not  for  a  long  time  perceive 
the  cause  of  our  affliction.  3.  It  is  common  for  us  to  place  our  affections  on 
trifles,  whilst  we  despise  things  of  the  greatest  value.  So  long  as  things  go  well 
with  us  in  this  world,  we  look  no  further.  Then  God,  in  order  to  wean  us  from 
these  snares,  embitters  them  to  us  ;  and  in  proportion  as  our  love  of  this  earth 
diminishes,  our  desire  of  heaven  will  increase.  II.  Advice  to  those  who  are  undeb 
THE  CHASTENING  AND  CORRECTING  HAND  OF  GoD.  1.  Usc  cvery  possible  mcans  to 
acquire  just  notions,  worthy  and  becoming  sentiments,  of  the  Omnipotent  Creator 
and  supreme  Governor  of  the  world.  Consider  Him  as  merciful  as  well  as  just ;  of 
infinite  goodness,  as  well  as  incomprehensible  wisdom  and  power  ;  as  One  who  hates 
nothing  that  He  has  made,  and  whose  kindness  to  His  children  is  unlimited.  2. 
Make  as  speet^y  and  strict  an  inquiry  as  possible  into  your  present  condition,  and 
try  to  find  out  what  are  the  causes  and  motives  of  the  Lord's  thus  dealing  with  you; 
and  at  the  same  time  consider  what  improvements  you  ought  to  make  of  His  dispen- 
sations. Were  you  to  meet  with  no  trials,  where  would  be  vour  fortitude  ?  If  no 
temptations,  where  would  be  your  virtue  ?  If  no  afflictions,  where  your  resignation  ? 
If  no  disappointments  in  your  worldly  pleasures,  what  would  become  of  your 
attention  to  heavenly  reahties  ?    (B.  Murphy. ) 

Vers.  36-38.  And  there  was  one  Anna,  a  prophetess. — First  female  testimony  t& 
Christ: — 1.  Excited  by  long  expectations.  2.  Based  on  personal  sight.  3.  Given  with 
full  candour.  4.  Sealed  by  holy  walk.  5.  Crowned  by  a  happy  old  age.  (VanDoren.) 
Anna  an  example  to  the  aged : — Let  me  recommend  to  all  persons  advanced  in  life 
her  spirit  of  holy  abstraction — an  abstraction,  not  from  duty,  but  from  the  sins,  and 
cares,  and  vanities  of  the  world.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  more  unbecoming,  or 
more  pitiable  object,  than  a  person,  whether  male  or  female,  far  advanced  in 
years,  but  still  engrossed  with  the  trifles  of  time.  It  will  not  be  supposed  that  it  is 
meant  to  say  that  aged  believers  should  not  be  truly  happy  and  cheerful ;  but  very 
different  is  the  joy  of  God  from  the  gaiety  of  the  world;  very  different  is  the  rational 
and  devout  placidity  from  the  unreflecting  and  ill-timed  mirth.  The  vain  attempt 
to  go  on  as  formerly,  in  defiance  of  the  ravages  of  time,  and  the  failing  of  nature ; 
the  affectation  of  the  dress,  manners,  and  enjoyments  of  youth,  in  the  midst  of  the 
infirmities  of  age  ;  the  haunt  of  giddy  amusement  resorted  to  With  feeble  and  totter- 
ing steps  ;  the  wreathy  garland  on  the  withered  brow ;  the  world  still  predominant 
at  threescore  and  ten,  or  fourscore  ;  the  heart  barricaded  against  the  admission  of 
serious  thoughts,  and  full  of  the  things  of  sense,  when  a  very  short  space  of  tima 
must  shut  the  scene,  and  dispel  every  dream,  and  fix  the  destiny  for  ever. ; — alas' 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHAt.  n 

alas  1  let  who  will  admire  this  and  call  it  pleasant,  every  wise  man  must  feel  disposed 
to  exclaim,  How  incongruous,  how  absurd,  how  melancholy,  how  sinful  1  But  an 
aged  Christian,  justly  estimating  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed,  contented* 
thankful,  grave,  pious,  and  consistent — how  becoming,  how  engaging,  and  how 
venerable  1  A  very  little  reflection,  too,  must  sufl&oe  to  show  the  impropriety  of 
the  aged  spending  the  small  remainder  of  their  time  in  unprofitable  amusements, 
ftnd  also  the  impropriety  of  others  encouraging  them  to  do  so.  If  it  be  so  that  soma 
who  are  far  advanced  into  the  vale  of  tears,  spend  some  hours  of  almost  every  lawful 
day  in  any  such  manner  as  merely  kills  the  time,  it  is  truly  to  be  much  lamented. 
If  indeed  their  mind  be  in  such  a  state  of  dotage  as  to  unfit  them  for  anything  use- 
ful, there  may  be  some  excuse  for  the  habit ;  but  it  must  be  criminal  and  very 
hurtful,  as  long  as  they  are  in  possession  of  ability  to  distinguish  right  from  wrong, 
and  to  make  any  preparation  for  the  unseen  world  on  which  they  are  verging.  Far 
other  employments  ought  to  engage  them.  It  was  not  thus  that  aged  Anna  sought 
her  amusement  and  solace.  Let  the  aged  get  interested,  deeply  interested,  about 
the  things  of  God,  and  they  will  not  then  stand  in  need  of  any  expedients  which 
are,  to  say  the  least,  of  doubtful  propriety.  Let  them,  like  Anna,  as  far  as  strength 
permits,  regularly  and  devoutly  frequent  the  temple  of  God.  Let  them  be  much  in 
religious  exercises  at  home.  Let  them  speak  to  others  on  the  subject  of  religion. 
Let  their  lips,  which  must  soon  be  closed,  speak  for  Christ  while  they  can.  Advices 
from  persons  of  their  experience  may  be  well  taken,  when  those  from  persons  of  less 
standing  may  be  despised.  Let  them  study  in  all  things  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of 
God  their  Saviour,  that  their  hoary  heads  may  be  crowns  of  glory,  being  found  in 
the  way  of  righteousness.  Thus,  that  God  who  hath  taught,  guided,  and  blessed 
them  from  their  youth,  will  not  forsake  them  when  they  are  old ;  they  shall  safely 
and  happily  come  to  their  grave  in  their  full  age,  like  a  shock  of  corn  in  its  season. 
{Jas.  Foote,  M.A.)         Piety  in  the  aged: — I.  Pibtt  in  the  aoed  confirms  and 

ILLUSTRATES   THE    PROMISE   WHICH    Gon   HAS   MADE  OF  LONQ   LIFE   TO   THOSE   WHO   FBAB 

His  naub.  II.  Piety  in  the  aged  crowns  those  who  possess  it  with  espboiaii 
HONOUR.    III.  Piety  in  the  aged  commends  religion  to  others.     IV.  Piety  in 

the  AOBD   furnishes     a     beautiful    illustration    op  the     maturity  and   RIPBNB88 

of  Chbistian  CHARACTER.  Concluding  inferences :  1.  We  should  imitate  the  pious 
aged.  2.  How  thankful  should  the  children  of  pious  and  aged  parents  be.  3.  The 
departure  of  aged  Christians  from  our  midst  reminds  us  who  remain  that  the  ranks 
before  us  are  thinning  out,  and  that  we  are  pressing  up  to  the  forefront  of  the 
line.  We  should  see  to  it,  then,  that  we  have  their  piety,  and  can  honour  their 
place.  {Preachers'  Treasury.)  The  prophetess  Anna : — A  very  beautiful  comple- 
tion of  a  very  beautiful  picture.  Simeon  standing  there  alone  as  the  representative 
of  humanity  is  isolated  ;  is  there  nowhere  a  companion  who  may  share  the  riches 
of  this  new  joy?  The  other  side  of  human  nature  must  be  represented,  and  that 
deficiency  is  made  up  by  the  presence  of  the  venerable  prophetess.  There  they 
stand  as  father  and  mother  of  the  whole  race,  giving  hospitality  and  welcome  to 
Him  who  came  to  save  the  world.  They  stood,  as  it  were,  at  the  fjont  door  of  the 
world's  house,  and  spake  to  the  young  King  in  the  name  of  the  captives  He  came 
to  deliver.  There  are  some  womanly  characteristics  in  this  passage  which  should 
be  noted.  \.  Anna  departed  not  from  the  Temple — persistent,  faithful,  constant, 
and  thus  a  ^oman  pre-eminently.  2.  She  served  God  with  fastings  and  prayers  night 
and  day — self-denial,  profound  devotion,  continual  watching.  3.  Where  Simeon 
prayed,  Anna  gave  thanks.  It  would  seem  as  if  there  was  just  the  faintest  touch  of 
self-consideration  in  the  prayer  of  Simeon,  as  he  wished  to  be  gone  from  scenes 
that  wearied  him ;  but  the  prophetess,  eighty  and  four  years  old,  constant 
through  all  changes,  hopeful  through  all  fears,  was  willing  to  linger  longer,  for 
she  spoke  nothing  of  her  own  release,  but  thanked  God  for  His  mercy,  and  com- 
forted many  that  looked  for  redemption  in  Jerusalem.  Blessed  are  they  who  can 
sing  in  their  old  age,  and  turn  all  their  own  experience  into  comfort  for  those 
who  mourn.       (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  story  of  a  lonely  woman'$  work: — Our 

text  presents  us  with  the  picture  of  a  lonely  woman,  old,  and  a  widow.  Could 
a  less  attractive  subject  be  chosen?  There  is  something  interesting  in  a  young 
widow ;  but  who  cares  to  look  at  an  old  one,  whose  charms  have  long  since  faded, 
whose  eyes  are  dim,  whose  hair  is  white,  whose  face  is  wrinkled,  and  whose 
hands  are  tremulous  r  But  there  is  a  beauty  that  does  not  depend  upon  youth, 
a  loveliness  that  wears  well,  and  cannot  be  washed  out  even  by  tears,  a  charm 
that  comes  in  answer  to  the  prayer,  "Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon 
Ui."    Of  this  beauty  Anna,  thu  prophetess,  had  a  fuU  share;  and  the  story  of  he£ 


lOHAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  851 

life,  briefly  as  it  is  told,  is  not  devoid  of  interest.  Anna,  "  the  gracious,"  as  her 
name  signifies,  was  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  evidently  a  man  who  lived  as  one  who 
«aw  the  face  of  God.  While  still  very  young  the  maiden  was  wedded,  and  for  seven 
happy  years  youth  and  love  filled  her  heart  with  gladness.  But  at  the  end  of  that 
time  the  shadow  of  death  passed  over  the  Jewish  home  and  hid  the  light,  and  stilled 
the  song,  and  filled  the  house  with  mourning.  What  was  she  to  do,  that  young 
widow  with  her  life  before  her  7  She  had  surely  some  excuse  for  joining  that  innu- 
merable company  of  disappointed  women  who  talk  of  blighted  lives,  and  are  them- 
selves a  blight  upon  everything  that  comes  near  them.  But  she  let  "the  useful 
trouble  "  of  her  life  soften  and  sanctify  her.  She  put  her  trust  in  the  God  of  Israel, 
and  received  with  meekness  the  chastening  of  His  hand.  She  took  herself  and  her 
florrow  to  the  Temple.  And  there  a  new  longing  and  a  new  love  took  possession  of 
her ;  for  were  they  not  all  looking  for  the  Messiah,  and  might  not  the  time  of  His 
coming  be  near  ?  She  would  consecrate  herself  to  God  and  to  His  service  in  the 
Temple.  Other  women  could  not  do  it ;  the  sweet  clamour  of  the  children,  and 
the  wishes  of  their  husbands  kept  them  at  home ;  but  she  would  have  her  pleasures 
too,  and  the  joy  of  the  Lord  should  be  her  strength.  And  so  the  young  widow  took 
her  place,  and  day  by  day,  and  year  by  year,  returned  to  it.  The  sun  touched  Olivet 
with  golden  beams  and  left  it  again  in  shadow  more  times  than  she  could  count. 
The  fig  trees  blossomed  and  shed  their  fruit,  the  valleys  drank  up  the  early  and  the 
latter  rain,  the  tender  grapes  became  ripe  and  were  gathered,  the  corn  showed  first 
the  green  blade,  and  then  the  full  ears  ;  the  feasts  came  round  with  their  joyous  assem- 
blings  ;  and,  year  after  year,  Anna  was  ixx  the  Temple,  neither  wretched  nor  useless. 
God  gave  to  her  the  gift  of  prophecy.  She  saw  what  some  eyes  could  not  see,  and 
she  had  power  to  utter  the  Divine  revelations  which  were  made  to  her.  Compla- 
cently and  tranquilly  she  saw  the  years  pass  away  until  eighty-four  had  seamed 
her  face,  and  bent  her  form.  But  He  whom  she  had  served  with  such  fidelity  and 
devotion  had  a  wonderful  joy  in  reserve  for  her  yet.  Coming  into  the  Temple  one 
day,  as  usual,  she  heard  an  unusual  sound.  Simeon,  with  tremulous  voice,  was 
einging  that  new  song,  which  has  been  continued  by  the  Church  ever  since.  In  hia 
arms  he  held  the  Child  Jesus  ;  and,  seeing  Him,  what  could  Anna  do  but  take  up 
the  strain  of  thanksgiving,  and  pour  out  her  soul  in  praise  ?  And  then  she  found 
that,  after  all,  her  work  was  not  over.  She  had  known  what  it  was  to  wait  long, 
and  others  were  waiting  still.  She  could  not  keep  the  good  news  to  herself.  She 
became  the  first  evangelist  of  His  advent  in  the  city  of  her  King,  and  "  spake  of 
Him  to  all  them,"  &o.  We  are  taught  at  least  three  things  by  the  brief  biography 
which  Luke  has  written  of  Anna.  1.  What  is  the  best  cure  for  loneliness  ? — Some- 
thing to  do,  and  the  determination  to  do  it.  2.  What  is  woman's  work  in  the 
Church,  and  who  are  the  women  to  do  it  ?  More  and  more  every  year  it  is  coming 
to  be  understood  that  there  are  departments  which  women  can  excellently  fill.  There 
are  thousands  of  devoted  women  scattered  about  in  different  parts  of  our  country  who, 
in  quiet  places,  and  by  womanly  methods,  are  doing  an  immense  amount  of  good. 
More  Annas  to  spend  their  days  in  God's  Temple,  and  speak  a  kindly  word  to  those 
who  are  in  darkness  :  women  who  have  a  ready  hand  to  take  up  any  duty  which 
iroald  not  otherwise  be  done — these  are  the  women  that  are  needed.  But  it  is  lonely 
women  especially  who  are  called  to  Christ's  work.  3.  God  will  most  richly  reward 
the  services  of  the  Jaithf ul.  No  one  knows  exactly  what  the  reward  will  be,  for  He 
deHghts  to  give  us  surprises  of  joy.      {Marianne  Farningham.)  Occupation 

of  Anna : — Anna  was  of  the  tribe  of  Asher,  and  therefore  a  Galilean.  She 
was  eighty-four  years  of  age,  and  had  thus  lived  through  the  long  sad  period 
of  war,  conquest,  and  oppression  which  had  intensified,  in  every  Jewish  heart,  the 
yearning  for  national  deliverance  by  the  promised  Messiah.  Her  long  life  had 
been  spent  in  pious  acts  and  services.  She  had  never  married  again  a  fact, 
mentioned  by  St.  Luke,  in  accordance  with  the  feeling  of  the  day,  to  her 
honour,  but  had  been,  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  "a  widow  indeed,"  trusting 
in  God,  and  continuing  in  supplications  and  prayers  night  and  day.  She  might 
in  truth  be  said  to  have  lived  in  the  Temple;  having  very  likely  come  from 
Galilee  to  be  near  the  holy  place,  and  thus  able  to  give  herself  up  to  religious  exer- 
cises, on  the  spot,  where,  in  the  eyes  of  a  Jew,  they  were  most  sacred.  Such  a 
woman  must  have  been  well  known  in  a  place  like  Jerusalem.  Catching  the  burden 
of  Simeon's  words  as  she  passed,  she  too,  like  him,  forthwith  thanks  God  that  the 
promise  of  the  Messiah  is  now,  at  last,  fulfilled.  There  could  have  been  few,  how- 
ever, to  whom  the  glad  tidings  of  such  a  Saviour  were  welcome,  for,  though  the 
heart  of  the  nation  was  burning  with  Messianic  hopes  of  a  political  kind,  we  axa 


259  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

told  that  Anna  was  able  to  tell  them  to  all  in  Jerusalem  who  looked  for  a  redemp- 
tion of  a  higher  type.  (Dr.  Geikie.)  Beautiful  old  age : — Sometimes  the  sun 
seems  to  hang  for  a  half-hour  in  the  horizon,  only  just  to  show  how  glorious  it  can 
be.  The  day  is  done  ;  the  fervour  of  the  shining  is  over,  and  the  sun  hangs  golden 
— ^nay,  redder  than  gold — ^in  the  west,  making  everything  look  unspeakably  beauti- 
ful, with  the  rich  effulgence  which  it  sheds  on  every  side.  So  God  seems  to  let 
fcome  people,  when  their  duty  in  this  world  is  done,  hang  in  the  west,  that  men  may 
look  ou  them,  and  see  how  beautiful  they  are.  There  are  some  hanging  in  the 
west  now.    {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  37.  Which  departed  not  from  the  Temple. — Neglectors  of  public  worship : — 
I  know  that  there  are  not  a  few  who  say  that  they  can  edify  as  well  or  better  at 
home.  Hence  these  eat  their  morsel  alone.  But,  so  far  as  I  have  ever  known 
them,  they  are  neither  to  be  envied  nor  imitated.  They  have  always  been  feeble, 
sickly,  useless,  spiritual  dyspeptics ;  while  as  certainly  all  observation  has  shown 
me,  and  all  experience  has  proved  to  me,  that  they  who  neglect  the  house  of  prayer,  or 
come  to  it  reluctantly  and  rarely,  are  invariably  dull  in  their  spiritual  conceptions, 
cold  in  their  affections,  wavering  in  their  convictions,  and  useless  in  Christian  work, 
while  they  are  easily  led  away  by  the  force  of  temptation.  (J.  Aldis.)  Blessed- 
ness of  public  worship  : — On  the  other  hand,  quite  as  certainly  all  who  through  long 
years  have  been  early  and  constant  in  their  attendance  on  the  means  of  grace,  who 
have  planned  carefully  and  toiled  hard  that  they  might  be  so,  who  have  brought  to 
the  exercises  of  religion  an  attentive  mind  and  a  living  heart,  have,  so  far  as  my 
observation  has  extended,  been  distinguished  for  the  cheerful  trustfulness  of  Chris- 
tian hope,  for  the  consistent  devotedness  of  Christian  life,  for  diligence  and  success 
in  Christian  work ;  while  they  have  been  to  all  their  brotherhood  an  example,  an 
inspiration,  and  a  joy.  (Ibid.)  Delight  in  being  in  God's  home : — A  minister  had 
noted  among  the  most  regular  attendants  at  his  church  an  aged  woman.  On  all 
occasions  she  was  in  her  place — always  in  time — always  attentive.  He  sought  her 
out  and  visited  her,  and  great  was  his  astonishment  to  find  this  poor  woman  so  deaf 
as  to  be  unable  to  hear  a  single  word.  By  means  of  a  slate  he  entered  into  conver- 
sation with  her,  and  his  first  inquiry  was,  "Why,  being  too  deaf  to  hear  one  word 
of  the  service,  are  you  so  regular  in  your  attendance  at  the  house  of  God  ?  "  "  Oh, 
sir,"  she  replied,  with  warm  tears  swelling  up  from  her  eyes,  "it  is  my  Father's 
house,  and  I  love  to  be  there.  He  meets  me  in  His  own  sanctuary,  and  I  can,  in 
spirit,  join  in  the  prayer  and  praise,  though  the  words  of  others  may  not  reach  me; 
and  as  Jesus  speaks  to  my  soul,  I  hear  the  whispers  of  His  love,  though  my  outer 
ears  are  dead  to  all  the  sounds  of  earth.  I  love  to  be  in  the  assembly  of  God's 
people,  because  they  are  the  people  of  God,  the  children  of  my  Father,  and 
and  it  is  very  pleasant  to  be  in  such  good  company,  though  I  can  no  longer  converse 
with  them.  There  is  now  very  little  left  that  I  can  do  for  the  cause  and  the  king- 
dom of  my  Eedeemer,  besides  trying  to  set  a  right  example.  My  day  for  active 
effort  is  past,  and  all  I  can  now  do  is  to  seek  to  influence  others  by  the  power  of  a 
humble  and  earnest  hfe.  Even  this  will  soon  be  over,  and  while  the  opportunity 
remains  I  would  improve  it  for  my  Master's  glory.  He  did  not  in  His  last  hour  of 
deepest  agony  forget  us  poor  sinners;  and  shall  we  weary  of  our  lightest  yoke,  and 
throw  it  off  before  our  last  hour  has  come  ?  "  What  a  powerful  reproof  was  this 
aged  woman's  example  to  those  who,  with  faculties  still  unimpaired,  and  strength 
unabated  by  the  infirmities  of  age,  yet  wilfully  absent  themselves  from  God's  house ! 
Served  God  with  fastings  and  prayers.  Fastings  and  prayers : — It  has  been  said  that 
her  form  of  piety  was  Jewish  rather  than  Christian ;  but  must  not  St.  Paul  have  had 
her  in  his  eye  when  he  speaks  of  the  true  type  of  the  Christian  widow  as  "  trusting 
in  God  and  continuing  in  supplications  and  prayers  night  and  day  "  ?  (1  Tim.  v.  5.) 
Her  piety  was  certainly  not  of  that  stamp  which  finds  most  favour  amongst  us  now — 
active,  bustling,  energetic,  and  so  assumed  to  be  the  most  useful ;  but  have  we  not 
gone  much  too  far  in  despising  the  contemplative,  ascetic,  prayerful  life  ?  Who  knows 
what  may  not  have  beeu  the  use  of  Anna's  fastings  and  prayers,  in  preparing  hearts 
to  receive  the  Lord  ?  God,  we  doubt  not,  answered  her  many  supplications  in  ways 
which  could  not  be  traced  out,  but  which  will  assuredly  be  known  at  the  last.  Her 
life  of  fasting  and  devotion  was  evidently  her  calling  of  God,  known  and  approved 
by  Him.  And  may  not,  in  this  very  day,  the  life  of  religion  amongst  ourselves  be 
owing  not  only  to  sermons,  and  visitings,  and  meetings,  but  to  the  prayers  of  the 
few  scattered  handfuls  of  worshippers  wlio  here  and  there  are  constant  at  daily  ser- 
vice?   It  has  been  rightly  said,  that  '  the  abuwes  which  have  attended  often  on  tht 


CHAP,  n.]  8T.  LVKh.  253 

f>rsctice  of  a  monastic  life,  should  not  render  us  insensible  to  the  duty  of  spending 
arge  portions  of  our  time  in  meditation,  and  prayer,  and  fasting."    (M.  F.  Sadler.) 

Vers.  89-52.  Now  Eis  parents  went  to  Jerusalem  every  year  at  the  feast  of  the 
Passover. — The  life  of  Jesus : — I.  Jesus  Chbist  in  home  life.  "  And  He  went 
down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  unto  them."  1.  We  see 
Eim  settling  down  to  the  relationships  of  home.  But  Jesus  Christ  was  perfectly 
content  in  the  home  circle.  He  did  not  complain  of  its  narrowness  and  confine- 
ment. For  He  did  not  judge  life  by  its  magnitude,  but  by  the  principle  which 
animates  it;  He  did  not  judge  life  by  its  conspicuousness;  but  by  the  spirit  which 
inspires  it.  The  tiny  speck  on  the  lady-bird's  wing  is  as  round  a  circle  as  that  of 
the  world.  The  sphere  which  a  tear  makes  is  as  mathematically  perfect  as  that  of 
yonder  sun.  It  makes  not  the  slightest  difference  in  the  real  merit  of  a  book 
■whether  it  is  printed  in  large  or  small  type ;  in  either  case  the  meaning  is  precisely 
the  same.  Some  people  seriously  object  to  the  privacy  of  home — the  type  is  too 
Bmall  to  please  their  fancy  ;  they  must  act  their  part  on  the  public  stage,  in  the 
corners  of  the  streets,  and  in  the  synagogues — they  dearly  love  a  large  type.  But 
the  Saviour  spent  thirty  years  in  the  privacy  of  home,  and  never  once  complained 
of  its  narrowness  and  obscurity.  2.  We  are  further  taught  that  He  faithfully  dis- 
charged the  duties  of  home — the  duties  which  devolved  on  Him  as  a  son  in  the 
family.  Each  member  of  the  family  has  its  respective  services  to  perform,  and 
harmony  always  depends  upon  the  right  adjustment,  the  proper  balancing,  of  dis- 
tinct interests.  "  He  went  down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject 
nnto  them."  He  might  have  been  wiser  than  they;  but  superior  knowledge  does 
not  justify  insubordination.  3.  And  the  context  shows  that  in  all  this  He  was  doing 
His  Father's  work.  *'  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  work  ?  "  And 
if  home  life  were  not  an  integral  department  of  that  work,  it  would  have  been 
utterly  impossible  for  Jesus  Christ  to  have  submitted  to  it.  But  home  life  ia 
a  Divine  life,  a  type,  possibly,  of  the  inner  life  of  the  Godhead.  The  Bible 
represents  God  as  a  Father,  it  describes  Him  as  haviug  a  family,  it  sets  Him 
forth  as  having  a  home.  Home  life  is  a  Divine  hfe,  and  by  serving  it  we  do 
God's  work.  II.  Jesus  Christ  in  social  life.  1.  Here  we  see  Him  settling 
down  to  the  relationships  of  society,  and  that  the  most  corrupt  society  in  the  whole 
world.  Nazareth  would  have  ranked  among  the  choicest  towns  of  Palestine ;  but 
its  inhabitants  were  notorious  far  and  near  for  their  impiety,  recklessness,  and 
heathenism.  "Every  prospect  pleases,  and  only  man  is  vile."  Strange  that  God 
should  choose  depraved  Nazareth  to  be  the  dwelling-place  of  His  Son  for  thirty 
years  I  We  would  have  imagined  that  a  select  and  secluded  spot  would  have  been 
chosen  where  He  would  have  been  kept  from  all  contact  with  sin,  and  where  He 
would  have  been  partitioned  off  from  other  children,  and  thus  secured  against  the 
contagion  of  evil.  But  that  was  not  God's  idea  of  holiness.  Glass-house  virtue 
He  did  not  covet.  For  the  dove  to  keep  her  wing  pure  and  unsullied  amid  the  free 
air  of  heaven  is  not  so  very  difficult — indeed  the  difficulty  is  to  soil  it ;  but  to  keep 
it  white  and  clean  among  the  pots  is  quite  another  matter,  and  harder  far  to  ac- 
complish. From  early  infancy  Jesus  Christ  had  to  face  vice ;  from  the  outset  He 
had  to  grapple  with  sin.  His  virtue  must  be  sinewy,  manly,  tried,  and  triumphant. 
Earthly  parents  may  here  learn  a  very  precious  lesson :  not  to  put  too  much  confi- 
dence in  glasshouse  virtue — it  generally  withers  on  its  first  exposure  to  the  rude 
winds  of  the  world.  Children  may  be  ruined  in  one  of  two  ways :  either  by  being 
permitted  to  visit  all  kinds  of  wicked  places  and  witness  all  manner  of  obscene 
spectacles  without  let  or  hindrance ;  or  by  being  kept  too  strictly  aloof  from  all 
society  and  guarded  too  narrowly  against  the  approach  of  other  children,  for  when 
the  protection  is  withdrawn,  as  withdrawn  it  surely  must  be,  and  they  are  left  to 
fight  for  themselves,  they  wUl  almost  necessarily  succumb  to  the  first  assault  of 
temptation.  And  conservatory  children  may  be  very  pleasing  to  look  at  so  long  as 
they  are  under  shelter ;  but  the  first  storm  will  make  a  sad  havoc  among  their 
branches.  Let  children  learn  from  the  first  how  to  defend  themselves  against 
physical  and  moral  foes  alike.  2.  We  further  learn  that  He  discharged  with  the 
utmost  fidelity  the  duties  of  society,  the  duties  that  devolved  upon  Him  as  a  citizen 
of  Nazareth.  "  He  went  down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,"  and  there,  adds 
the  evangelist  very  significantly,  "  He  grew  in  favour  with  God  and  men."  I  con- 
fess to  a  strong  liking  for  the  phrase  that  "He  grew  in  favour  with  men."  Ha 
knew  what  it  was  to  luxuriate  in  the  golden  opinions  of  His  neighbours.  And  let 
none  of  you,  young  people,  despise  the  favour  of  men ;  to  please  society  is  not  alto- 


S64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

gether  an  unworthy  aim.  Favour  with  God  must  precede  favour  with  men.  "  He 
grew  in  favour  with  men."  This  supposes  that  He  was  studious  of  the  little  pro- 
prieties ef  every-day  life.  There  are  men  who  cUng  with  indomitable  tenacity  to 
the  fundamental  verities ;  rather  than  relax  their  hold  of  them,  they  will  go  cheer- 
fully  to  the  stake  to  die.  But  they  are  culpably  regardless  of  the  little  politenesses 
of  social  intercourse — they  never  grow  in  favour  with  men.  They  remind  one  of  a 
rugged  granite  rock,  firm,  solid,  and  white  under  the  meridian  light ;  but  no  flower 
grows  in  its  clefts,  no  snowdrop  or  foxglove,  no  primrose  or  daisy,  softens  the  un- 
tarnished hardness.  They  are  men  of  strong  principles,  but  of  ungracious  disposi- 
tion ;  they  never  grow  in  favour  with  men.  3.  And  in  leading  the  life  of  a  citizen 
the  context  shows  He  was  doing  the  work  of  God.  "Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be 
about  My  Father's  business  ?  "  If  there  is  a  must  in  it,  it  is  evident  He  cannot 
leave  it ;  and  that  in  going  down  to  Nazareth  He  continued  to  be  about  it.  The 
truth  is,  society  is  a  Divine  institution ;  and  in  serving  it  we  do  God's  work.  Jesus 
Christ  lived  in  Nazareth  to  realize  the  Divine  idea  of  a  citizen,  to  reduce  to  actua- 
lity, to  embody  in  a  life,  the  thought  as  it  existed  in  the  Divine  mind.  Men  had  to 
see  the  perfect  life  acted  out  before  their  eyes.  He  was  not  of  the  world — not  of  it 
in  its  way  of  thinking,  not  of  it  in  its  way  of  feeling,  not  of  it  in  its  way  of  Uving  ; 
not  of  it,  yet  in  it.  And  as  He  was,  so  are  we — placed  in  the  midst  of  society,  and 
yet  of  a  Divine  citizenship.  The  highest  ideal  of  Christian  life  is  city  life. 
"  Ye  are  a  city  set  on  a  hill."  The  life  of  innocent  humanity  was  a  garden  or  rural 
life.  "  The  Lord  God  planted  a  garden  eastward  in  Eden,  and  put  man  there."  It 
was  a  free,  simple,  country  life.  "  But  ye  are  come  to  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  and  your  life  henceforth  must  be  city  life.  III.  Jbsus 
Chkist  in  industrial  life.     "  He  went  down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth." 

1.  By  thus  entering  into  industrial  life  He  shows  that  work  may  be  made  sacred. 

2.  He  further  shows  that  work  is  not  incompatible  with  the  highest  religious  attain- 
ments. 3.  By  following  a  trade.  He  further  showed  that  the  highest  purpose  of  work 
is  not  fortune  but  discipline.  I  suppose  we  cannot  all  get  on  in  this  world  of  ours, 
and  my  text  reminds  us  of  another  who  worked  very  hard,  who  followed  His  trade 
diligently,  but  did  not  get  on  very  well  except  towards  Gethsemane,  Calvary,  and 
the  grave.  He  can  sympathize  with  you  ;  He  stands  by  your  side,  ready  to  share 
your  burden ;  He  stoops.  He  bends  ;  may  you  have  the  grace  to  roll  it  on  His  shoul- 
ders 1  What  is  Christianity  ?  God  bending  beneath  and  bearing  aloft  the  burden 
of  the  world.  If  work  does  not  better  your  earthly  condition,  it  will  improve  your 
heart ;  if  it  does  not  add  to  your  fortune,  it  will  considerably  augment  your  man- 
hood ;  if  it  will  not  bring  you  affluence  in  this  life,  it  will  help  to  qualify  you  for  a 
more  abundant  entrance  on  the  rich,  profound  life  on  yonder  side  the  grave.  IV. 
Jesus  Christ  in  His  religious  oe  temple  life.  1.  The  context  shows  us  that  He 
was  in  His  Father's  house,  and  that  whilst  there  the  blessed  and  glorious  truth  of 
His  Sonship  dawned  upon  Him.  All  rich  natures,  all  deep  and  fertile  natures,  feel 
an  attraction  towards  God's  temple.  There  is  so  much  mystery  appeahng  power- 
fully to  the  worshipful  faculty,  so  much  solemn  grandeur  subduing  the  heart  and 
carrying  it  captive,  such  sublimity  and  loftiness  in  the  service  of  the  temple,  though 
outwardly  it  be  but  a  barn,  that  it  gives  ample  scope  for  the  imagination.  Hence  all 
rich,  poetical  natures  find  their  proper  food  and  their  appropriate  atmosphere  in  the 
service  of  God's  house.  2.  He  was  in  the  Temple,  asking  and  answering  questions. 
His  mind  thirsted  for  knowledge.  But  as  Christ  was  free  from  sin.  His  insight  was 
quicker,  clearer,  deeper  than  ours.  An  intellect  twelve  years  old  free  from  sin  will 
astonish  intellects  fifty  years  old  tainted  by  the  disease.  The  water-lily,  growing 
in  the  midst  of  water,  opens  its  leaves,  expands  its  petals,  at  the  first  pattering  of 
the  shower,  whilst  other  flowers  in  the  same  neighbourhood  are  quite  insensible  to 
the  descent  of  the  raindrops.  Why?  Because  reared  in  water,  it  has  quicker 
sympathy  with  rain.  And  so  with  the  Lily  of  our  Humanity :  His  soul,  planted, 
as  it  were,  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean  of  omniscience,  rejoiced  in  knowledge  with  a 
quicker  and  more  refined  sympathy  than  has  ever  been  witnessed  before  or  since  in 
the  history  of  our  race.  3.  Observe,  further.  His  total  absorption  in  His  Father's 
work.  "  Wist  y  enot  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business?  "  Literally,  "in 
My  Father's  business."  Not  about  it,  but  in  it.  (J.  C.  Jows.)  The  training  of 
Jesiis  Christ : — Observe,  then,  just  where  the  real  difficulty  lies:  it  lies  not  in  the 
fact  of  growth ;  it  lies  in  the  fact  of  incarnation,  or  the  Divine  birth  itself.  For  the 
distance  between  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  and  the  Man  of  Nazareth  is  infinitely  less 
than  the  distance  between  man  and  God.  But  Christ's  growth,  be  it  carefully  ob» 
served,  implies  no  sort  of  imperfection.    It  is  no  sign  of  imperfection  in  a  peaoh* 


mo.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  »S 

tree  that  it  does  not  bear  peaches  in  spring.  And  this  growth  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  marked  by  anything  striking.  Had  it  been,  the  presumption  is  that  hia 
biographers  would  at  least  have  hinted  it.  The  very  silence  here  of  the  evangelists 
is  thrilling,  for  it  brings  the  Divine  Man  within  the  range  of  our  human  sympathies 
and  affections,  thoroughly  identifying  Him  with  our  average  humanity.  He  grew 
up,  as  grows  His  own  kingdom,  without  observation.  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be 
in  My  Father's  house,  about  My  Father's  business  ?  "  All  these  years  the  heavenly 
Plant  has  been  unfolding,  and  now  appears  the  first  blossom.  1.  There  was 
the  school  of  home.  I  do  not  refer  here  to  the  lessons  consciously  taught  by 
parents  so  much  as  to  the  lessons  unconsciously  taught  by  the  home  institution 
itself.  We  are  trained  for  the  celestial  home  in  the  school  of  the  terrestrial,  learn- 
ing the  heavenly  sonhood  in  the  exercise  of  an  earthly,  the  universal  brotherhood 
in  the  sphere  of  a  personal.  Home — that  is  to  say,  true  home — is  the  best  soil  for 
the  germination  and  growth  of  large,  solid,  abiding  character.  Christ's  stay  of 
thirty  years  beneath  His  mother's  roof  is  an  eternal  glorification  of  the  home  insti- 
tution. 2.  There  was  the  school  of  subordination.  Loyalty  is  the  mother  of 
royalty.  3.  There  was  the  school  of  toil.  There  is  no  reason  for  supposing 
that  Joseph  and  Mary  were  especially  poor,  and  therefore  that  Jesus  was  brought 
tip  in  absolute  poverty.  Ah,  how  this  educates  Him  for  sympathy  with  what  must 
ever  be  the  preponderating  class  of  humanity,  the  working-class.  4.  There  was 
the  school  of  society.  No  desert  education  was  His,  like  that  of  His  forerunner, 
John  the  Baptizer.  He  must  feel  the  quickening,  broadening,  rounding  power  of 
society.  5.  There  was  the  school  of  isolation.  What  though  He  was  brought 
tip  in  society?  Society  comprehended  Him  not.  Even  His  brothers,  sons  of  His 
own  mother,  did  not  believe  on  Him.  For  the  foundations  of  character  are  laid  in 
moral  solitude.  Man's  grandest  victories  are,  and  ever  must  be,  won  single-handed. 
^.  There  was  the  school  of  the  synagogue.  Every  day  in  the  week,  and  three 
times  every  Saturday  or  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  Jesus  went  to  the  synagogue,  where 
He  saw  a  model  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  and  the  scrolls  of  the  sacred  books,  and 
joined  in  the  prescribed  prayers,  and  listened  to  the  reading  of  the  two  lessons — the 
one  from  the  law,  the  other  from  the  prophets.  7.  There  was  the  school  of 
providence.  Daily  providence  was  His  daily  teacher.  8.  There  was  the  school 
of  nature.  9.  There  was  the  school  of  routine.  Doubtless  it  was  the  same 
nnbroken,  monotonous  routine  of  family  and  workshop  and  synagogue,  week 
after  week,  month  after  month,  year  after  year.  The  frequent  and  tedious  drill  is 
the  best  preparation  for  the  battle  paean.  10.  There  was  the  school  of  delay. 
During  those  long  thirty  years  Jesus  doubtless  often  yearned  to  enter  at  once  upon 
His  glorious  mission  as  the  Christ  of  God  and  the  Saviour  of  men.  Not  that  enter- 
prise and  courage  and  energy  are  not  praiseworthy.  They  are  most  noble  traits. 
But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  prematurity,  and  prematurity  is  apt  to  mean  failure. 
This  lesson  of  patience  is  especially  needed  in  our  times  and  land.  It  is  an  age  of 
swift  things,  morally  as  well  as  physically.  Young  man,  patiently  abide  your  time. 
There  is  no  heroism  Uke  the  heroism  of  patience,  no  majesty  like  the  majesty  of 
Belf-continence.  11.  There  was  the  school  of  temptation.  And  temptation  is  not 
only  essential  to  character-disclosing,  temptation  is  also  essential  to  character- 
building.  12.  There  was  the  school  of  experience.  For  there  is  no  education 
like  the  education  of  personal  experience.-  Nothing  can  take  the  place  of  it: 
neither  wealth,  nor  genius,  nor  splendid  opportunities,  nor  indomitable  will.  And 
as  in  nature,  so  in  morals:  the  slower  the  crystallization,  the  more  perfect  and 
abiding.  And  all  this  was  as  true  for  the  Christ  as  it  is  for  you  and  me.  Such  is 
the  story  of  the  home-life  of  tne  Divine  Man.  As  that  Greater  than  Solomon 
was  rearing  that  temple  nobler  than  Moriah's,  no  stroke  of  hammer,  or  axe,  or  any 
tool  of  iron  was  heard. 

*•  No  workman's  steel,  no  ponderous  axes  rung, 
Like  some  tall  palm  the  noiseless  fabric  sprung.** 

The  great  lesson,  then,  of  the  home-life  at  Nazareth  is  this :  Every-day  life  oar 
training-school  for  heaven.  {G.  D.  Boardman.)  First  Sunday  after  Epiphany : — 
But  let  us  now  direct  our  attention  more  particularly  to  the  youthful  Saviour's  visit 
to  the  Temple,  as  narrated  in  this  day's  Gospel.  1.  It  appears  from  this  record, 
that  his  parents  were  punctual  and  regular  in  their  atteu dance  upon  the  appointed 
services  of  religion.  They  were  poor.  They  also  lived  very  far  away.  By  actual 
««periment,  I  found  it  two  days  and  a  half  hard  riding,  upon  active  horses,  ironj 


253  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  B. 

Nazareth  to  Jerusalem.  But  they  found  no  excuse  in  these  things  for  failing  to  b« 
present  in  the  holy  city  when  the  feast  of  the  Passover  came  round.  2.  It  appean 
that,  as  soon  as  Jesus  had  reached  His  twelfth  year,  these  pious  parents  took  Him 
with  them  on  their  annual  visit  to  the  sacred  city  and  Temple.  At  any  rate,  they 
took  Him  with  them,  an  example  which  it  would  be  well  for  all  parents  to  note  and 
follow.  3.  It  appears  that  this  visit  of  the  young  Saviour  to  the  holy  city  and 
Temple  was  the  means  of  an  enlarged  and  astonishing  spiritual  awakening  to  Him. 
Mind  left  to  itself  stagnates  and  fails  of  proper  fruitfulness.  The  quickening  spark 
needs  to  be  applied  to  kindle  it  into  living  flame  and  power.  New  subjects  were 
thrown  in  upon  His  human  intellect.  A  new  world  opened  to  His  soul  and  seized 
upon  His  heart,  already  in  holy  and  peaceful  harmony  with  the  deepest  underlying 
Spirit  of  all.  It  was  not  a  conversion,  for  He  needed  no  converting.  It  was  not 
the  implantation  of  the  new  life ;  for  He  never  was  dead  to  holy  things.  But  it 
was  the  opening  of  His  human  faculties,  the  quickening  of  their  activities,  to  grasp 
the  objects  which  were  to  fill  and  enlist  His  powers,  which  marked  the  commence- 
ment  of  tbat  higher  consciousness  and  ampler  realization  of  the  truth,  in  meek 
and  zealous  obedience  to  which  He  from  that  time  forward  went  forth,  and  which 
was  the  active  principle  of  all  His  subsequent  life  and  deeds  as  the  Bedeemer  of 
the  world.  Brethren,  will  any  one  look  these  facts  in  the  face  and  say,  that  there 
is  no  use  for  children  to  come  to  the  temple  of  God  1  I  know  of  a  boy,  who,  at 
fourteen  years  of  age,  walked  a  series  of  miles  from  his  home,  to  a  strange  place, 
to  see  a  synodical  convention.  He  started  out  in  the  morning,  and  returned  at 
night,  without  partaking  of  a  meal  during  his  absence,  and  repeated  the  same  on 
the  day  following.  And  from  what  he  saw  and  heard  during  those  two  days,  there 
was  formed  in  his  heart  the  purpose  to  devote  himself  to  the  gospel  ministry.  That 
purpose  he  also  carried  into  effect,  against  the  dissuasion  of  his  bishop,  the  disap- 
probation of  his  father,  and  all  the  disadvantages  of  the  absence  of  pecuniary 
resources.  That  contact  with  the  assembled  ministers  of  the  Church,  brought 
about  by  no  particular  object  save  to  gratify  a  general  desire  for  information,  and 
without  having  spoken  a  word  to  any  of  them,  touched  a  cord,  and  awoke  a  feeling, 
which  gave  shape  and  direction  to  his  whole  after  life.  And  that  boy  is  your 
preacher  to-day !  Nor  can  you  know  what  living  seeds  of  transforming  power,  and 
fruitfulness  in  virtue  and  grace,  may  be  planted  by  a  single  visit  of  a  youth  to  the 
temple  of  God !  See  to  it,  then,  that  your  children  are  early  brought  into  oonnec* 
tion  with  all  the  ministrations  of  the  sanctuary.  4.  It  also  appears  from  this 
record,  that  oven  the  pious  Joseph  and  Mary  expected  much  less  from  this  carrying 
of  the  youthful  Jef^us  to  the  temple,  than  actually  occurred.  Ah  yes,  there  is  often 
more  going  on  in  the  hearts  of  children  than  their  parents,  who  know  them  best, 
suppose  or  believe.  The  purest  waters  are  those  that  run  deepest  untler  ground, 
before  they  show  themselves ;  and  there  may  be  much  more  in  our  children,  and  in 
the  very  line  of  our  most  anxious  desires,  than  we  would  for  a  moment  think  of 
ascribing  to  them.  6.  Finally,  it  appears  from  this  record,  what  that  was  which 
from  earliest  youth  most  powerfully  absorbed  Christ's  feelings  and  attention,  and 
what  in  His  view  is  the  proper  thing  supremely  to  enlist  and  engage  the  young. 
"How  is  it  that  ye  sought  Me?  wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  busi- 
ness ?  "  He  had  relations  in  heaven  paramount  to  all  relations  of  kindred  and 
blood  on  earth.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  early  years  of  Christ : — Conceiving  of 
Him  then,  as  in  a  transition  from  childhood  to  manhood,  as  in  a  process  of  training 
for  the  highest  of  works,  we  ask  what  lessons  are  to  be  gathered  from  His  silent 
years  ?    I.  We  shall  conclude  that  God  qualified  His  Son,  bobn  oi"  a  woman,  madb 

ONDER    THE   LAW,  FOR   HiS  FUTURE  OFFICE,    BY    THE    TRAINING    OF  THE   FAMILY    BTATB. 

"  And  was  subject  to  His  parents."  The  family  state,  we  cannot  doubt,  was  most 
happily  devised,  according  to  the  original  plan  of  uncorrupt  human  nature,  not  only 
for  the  preservation  and  physical  welfare  of  the  child,  but  also  for  the  development 
of  all  the  higher  qualities  of  man.  It  is  the  beginning  and  the  condition  of  society. 
He  who  passes  out  of  its  healthy  training  into  the  larger  circle  of  fellow-citizens  or 
fellow-men,  has  a  foundation  already  laid  for  all  social  sympathies,  for  the  concep- 
tion of  human  brotherhood,  for  the  exercise  of  good  will  in  every  form.  It  is  also 
the  condition  of,  and  the  preparation  for,  all  law.  The  dependent  being,  trained 
up  in  it  to  listen  to  higher  authority  and  wisdom,  to  give  up  self-will  and  practice 
self-control,  becomes  fitted  for  the  loyal  life  of  the  citizen,  and  for  obedience  to  God. 
Thus  it  was  meant,  according  to  the  primaeval  plan,  that  the  infant  mind  should 
be  disciplined  in  the  family  for  a  lile  of  law  and  of  love — law  which  should  lead 
the  soul  up  to  the  great  central  Lawgiver  of  the  universe,  and,  love,  which  should 


OMAP.  n.]  ST.  LVKE,  >8T 

embrace  the  brotherhood  of  souls,  and  God,  the  Father  of  all.  His  soul  was  fitted 
for  its  work  by  entering  into  the  great  relations  of  humanity.  II.  Jesus  passed 
THKOTJGH  THE  DISCIPLINE  OF  A  LIFE  OF  HUMBLE  INDUSTRY.  "  Is  not  this  the  Carpenter  ?  " 
Here  we  have  two  things  to  notice,  the  discipline  of  a  life  of  industry  upon  the  Son 
of  Man,  and  the  influence  of  the  lowly  position  which  He  thus  assumed  among  His 
brethren  of  mankind.  We  must  conceive,  then,  that  during  these  years  of  labour 
as  a  carpenter,  the  Son  of  Man  had  time,  even  amid  His  work,  for  noble  and  holy 
thoughts.  Nor  ought  we  to  lay  out  of  account  the  patience  which  sedulous  manual 
labour  would  bring  along  with  it.  I  may  add,  that  the  helpfulness  of  our  Lord  in 
His  calling  tended  to  strengthen  the  principle  of  helpfulness  to  mankind,  or  of  un- 
wearied benevolence.  But  the  patient  helpfulness  of  Jesus,  as  He  did  His  work 
well  in  and  for  the  family,  inured  His  holy  mind  to  the  hard  toils  of  that  glorious 
life  of  love,  in  which  we  learn,  on  one  occasion,  that  He  had  not  time  so  much  as 
to  eat  bread,  and  gave  Himself  up  to  works  of  mercy  so  earnestly  that  His  friends 
thought  Him  mad.  What  other  training  could  have  equally  encouraged  His  un- 
wearied devotion  to  the  hard,  slow  work  of  doing  good  ?  But  the  obscurity  of  the 
sphere  in  which  Jesus  moved,  aided  the  graces  of  His  character,  such  as  meekness 
and  lowliness,  and  also  enlarged  His  power  of  usefulness.  Here  we  notice  only  the 
last  particular,  leaving  the  others  for  future  remark.  It  is  often  thought  to  add  to 
a  man's  power  among  men,  if  he  is  born  in  a  high  place,  and  commands  the  respect 
of  mankind  as  well  by  his  ancestry  and  station,  as  by  what  he  is.  But  the  power 
to  act  upon  men,  so  far  as  it  depends  on  feeling  with  them,  and  being  felt  with  by 
them,  is  generally  abridged  by  position  above  the  major  part  of  mankind.  Hence 
it  is,  that  those  monarchs  who  have  risen  from  the  people  can  know  them  better, 
and  come  closer  to  their  admiration  and  their  hearts,  than  such  as  have  inherited 
the  throne.  Hence,  too,  those  reformers  are  likely  to  be  most  successful,  who  add 
to  other  advantages  that  of  a  lively  interest  in  and  comprehension  of  the  great  mass 
of  men,  which  their  birth  and  early  education  has  encouraged.  The  soh  of  the 
miner,  at  Eisleben,  with  his  homely,  earnest  peasant-soul,  and  his  manly  courage, 
was  fitter  to  attract  and  mingle  with  his  countrymen,  was  better  able,  when  hia 
mind  had  become  enlarged  by  study,  to  spread  the  Protestant  Reformation,  than  if 
he  had  been  the  son  of  an  Emperor  of  Germany,  or  one  of  the  princes  of  the  empire. 
Such  a  personage,  if  he  could  have  understood  and  preached  the  gospel,  would  have 
found  that  a  gulf  was  fixed  between  him  and  his  people.  III.  The  silent  teabs  at 
Nazabeth  enabled  Him  to  meditate  long  and  deeply  on  the  Sceiptuees.  A  striking 
characteristic  of  our  Lord,  from  the  first  moment  of  His  public  ministry  onward,  is 
His  reverence  for  and  familiarity  with  the  Scriptures.  Here,  then,  in  this  seques- 
tered village,  away  from  the  emptiness  of  Pharisaical  learning,  and  from  Sadducean 
Bcepticism,  He  was  reared  on  the  Divine  Word  in  its  simplicity,  was  fortified  by  it 
against  temptation,  studied  its  promises  of  a  coming  Messiah,  and  became  ready 
to  apply  it  to  the  varying  circumstances  of  practical  life.  He  trained  mankind 
through  the  Jews ;  He  made  His  Son  a  Jew  that  He  might  build  up  on  the  old 
foundation  the  new  truths  of  a  religion  for  the  world ;  and  in  order  that  Jesus 
Himself  might  be  trained  up  for  this  work  He  chose  this  simple  method  of  placing 
Him  alone  with  the  ancient  Scriptures,  away  from  human  teachers  and  comments, 
that  the  pure  truth  of  God  might  fill  His  mind.  IV.  The  life  of  retirement  which 
Jesus  led  at  Nazareth  was  fitted  to  nourish  some  of  those  meek  and  unpbetbndino 
OBACES  of  chabacteb  WHICH  SHONE  BEYOND  COMPARISON  IN  HiM.  I  name  first  paticHce, 
or  willingness  to  wait  until  the  right  time  was  come.  The  same  discipline  which 
perfected  the  patience,  perfected  also  the  calmness  of  Jesus.  His  obedience  grew, 
through  His  years  of  waiting,  deeper  and  heavenlier  became  His  calmness.  This 
discipline  of  His  still  years  gave  strength  also  to  His  retiring  spirit,  or  modesty.  I 
only  add,  that  the  retirement  of  Nazareth  was  fitted  to  nourish  simplicity  of  feeling 
and  character.  It  has  been  made  a  definition  of  a  wise  and  pure  life  to  live  accord- 
ing to  nature.  The  simplicity  and  honesty  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus  were,  no  doubt, 
nourished  and  perfected  in  a  simple,  godly  family,  in  a  simple  village,  away  from 
much  of  the  gloss  and  falsehood  which  abounded  in  Judea.  We  might  conceive 
of  Divine  wisdom  taking  just  the  opposite  method  of  caUing  it  forth,  that  of  placing 
Jesus  in  close  neighbourhood  to  formal  and  false  Pharisees,  so  that  His  education 
should  consist  in  loathing  the  characters  which  He  should  see  around  Him.  That 
strength  would  come  from  such  a  discipline  we  cannot  doubt ;  and  yet  the  other  plan, 
which  was  in  fact  chosen,  seems  the  best  for  a  harmonious  perfection  of  the  whole  cha- 
raoter,andeBpeciallyforthepredominanceof  thegentlervirtues.  (T.D.  Woolsey,D,D.) 
The  per$onaUty  of  Jem* : — The  Man  in  germ,  the  personality  in  the  making,  we 

17 


S58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n, 

see  bnt  once,  yet  the  onoe  is  almost  enough.  The  Child  has  come  with  His  parents 
to  Jerusalem.  The  city,  the  solemnities,  the  Temple,  the  priests,  the  sacrifices,  the 
people,  have  stirred  multitudinous  new  thoughts  in  the  Boy.  He  becomes  for  a 
moment  forgetful  of  His  kin,  conscious  of  higher  and  Diviner  relations,  and  seeks 
light  and  sympathy  where  they  were  most  likely  to  be  found — ^in  the  Temple  and 
with  the  doctors.  It  is  an  eminently  natural  and  truthful  incident.  The  Ideal 
Child,  wise  in  His  iimocent  simplicity,  seeks  the  society  of  simple  but  learned  age, 
feels  at  homo  in  it,  wonders  only,  when  sought  and  found,  that  it  could  be  in  His 
mother's  mind  other  than  it  was  in  His  own.  The  light  that  streams  from  the 
question,  ♦•  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  among  My  Father's  matters,"  in  His  house, 
in  search  of  His  trutb,  mindful  of  His  purposes?  illumines  the  Youth  and  makes 
Him  foreshadow  the  Man.  For  He,  who  as  Boy,  was  anxious  to  be  absorbed  in  His 
Father  and  His  Father's  affairs,  became  as  Man  the  conscious  abode  of  God.  Here, 
indeed,  emerges  the  sublimest  and  most  distinctive  feature  of  His  personality.  In 
Him,  as  in  no  other,  Ood  lived ;  He  lived  as  no  other  ever  did  in  God.  Their  com- 
munion was  a  union  which  authorized  the  sayings,  "  I  and  the  Father  are  one  " ;  "  He 
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father."  His  consciousness  was  full  of  God,  was 
consciousness  of  God.  (Principal  Fairbaim,  D.D.)  Glimpses  of  the  Divins  Child' 
hood : — This  beautiful  and  only  glimpse  of  the  Boyhood  of  our  Saviour  is  full  of  interest. 
It  enables  us  to  behold  Jesus  on  this  memorable  occasion  through  the  medium  of 
others'  feelings.  We  can  often  more  vividly  represent  to  ourselves  a  scene,  and  take 
in  its  meaning,  when  we  are  told  what  thoughts  and  feelings  it  stirred  in  the  minds  of 
actual  spectators.  By  simple  and  natural  touches  the  story  before  us  fixes  our  thought 
upon  Mary  and  others,  but  especially  upon  the  mother,  and  the  changing  feelings 
of  her  heart  during  these  few  days.  By  the  side  of  Mary,  then,  let  us  first  approach, 
and  study  the  behaviour  of  the  Divine  Child,  so  perplexing  at  the  time  to  her,  so 
charged  with  significance  in  the  refiection  of  after-days,  and  now  so  full  of  light 
and  holy  beauty  to  all  disciples  of  Jesus  and  students  of  His  life.  1.  The  story 
opens  with  a  powerful  stroke  of  pathos.  A  child  is  lost  I  A  mother's  heart  is 
thrown  into  agony.  Several  details  left  to  be  filled  up  by  the  imagination. 
Caravan  had  set  out  early  in  morning.  A  large  group  of  relatives  and  friends  of 
Joseph  and  Mary's  house  amidst  the  throng.  Taken  for  granted  that  Jesus  was 
among  them  until  night  began  to  fall,  and  it  was  time  for  Him  to  come  to  His 
parents'  tent  to  rest.  Nightfall  made  the  discovery  all  the  more  terrible.  Let  us 
picture  to  ourselves  the  state  of  His  mother's  mind  during  those  three  weary  days 
that  followed — perhaps  not  to  the  Temple  that  Joseph  and  Mary  first  bent  their 
steps.  Narrative  seems  to  hint  that  they  were  quite  at  a  loss  to  imagine  where  the 
Child  was.  At  length,  however,  in  the  course  of  their  search,  their  steps  are 
directed  to  the  Temple.  There  were  connected  with  the  sacred  edifice  a  number  of 
halls  or  class-rooms,  where  the  Rabbis  met  and  instructed  their  scholars.  Amongst 
these  Eabbis  there  arose  from  time  to  time  true  and  weighty  moral  teachers,  who 
directed  attention  to  something  more  important  than  the  curious  mystical  specu- 
lations and  interpretations  which  form  so  large  a  part  of  the  Talmud.  Of  these 
the  most  famous  was  Hillel,  whose  memory  was  quite  fresh,  and  whose  infiuence 
was  still  great  in  the  Temple  schools.  There  is  Uttle  doubt  that  our  Lord  recognized 
a  true  spirit  in  tbis  eminent  Babbi ;  and  it  has  been  shown  that  there  are  striking 
points  of  resemblance  between  their  teachings.  To  that  school  Jesus  went,  and 
taking  His  seat  among  the  scholars,  proceeded  to  put  His  questions,  and  to  listen  to 
the  teacher's  answers ;  for  this  was  the  customary  mode  of  instruction  in  the  Jewish 
schools ;  and  a  great  part  of  the  rabbinical  books  consists  of  the  answers  to  such 
questions.  2.  Here,  then,  a  scene  opens  before  us  in  the  Temple  school  which  is 
impressed  apon  as  as  a  very  remarkable  one.  We  are  invited  to  look  upon  it 
throngh  the  eyes  of  the  bystanders,  who,  we  are  told,  were  filled  with  wonder  and 
astonishment.  But  what  was  so  astonishing  ?  What  was  it  that  made  this  Child 
the  focus  of  every  gaze — that  drew  upon  Him  the  profound  attention  of  bearded 
sages,  of  venerable  brows,  that  awakened  the  curiosity  of  young  and  old  ?  Not, 
probably,  the  fact  that  a  Boy  of  twelve  was  to  be  found  in  such  a  place  and  occu- 
pation ;  for  at  that  age  He  would  be  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  "  a  son  of  the  law." 
It  was  the  extraordmary  intelligence  of  His  remarks  and  replies.  His  *'  under- 
standing,"  i.e..  His  mental  grasp,  His  insight  into  things.  3.  Joseph  and  Mary 
coming  in  were  likewise  "  amazed  "  at  the  scene.  In  their  case  the  wonder  seems 
more  dif&cult  of  explanation ;  and  it  is  instructive  to  ponder  the  fact  for  a  moment. 
Is  it  not  often  so,  that  parents  or  relatives  are  blind  to  that  which  is  most  significant 
in  thdr  children  ?    Joseph  and  Mary  must  have  been  aware  of  the  great  destinj 


«Hir.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  «5f 

promised  to  Jesas ;  they  could  not  possibly  have  forgotten  all  the  Divine  marks  that 
were  attached  to  His  birth  and  infancy.  And  yet  they  were  astonished  when  His 
destiny  began  to  unfold  itself  before  their  eyes.  Must  we  not  all  reproach  ourselves 
with  some  such  fault  ?  Our  eye  rests  so  strongly  on  the  outward,  the  circumstan- 
tial side  of  life  that  our  interest  is  dxawn  away  from  the  real  and  spiritual.  4. 
The  contrast  of  the  calmness  of  the  Child  with  the  astonishment  of  those  around 
Him  deepens  our  impression  of  the  meaning  of  the  scene.  "  Why  did  ye  seek  Mef 
Did  ye  not  know  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business?  "  or,  "  in  My  Father's 
house  7  "  "  Where  should  you  have  expected  to  find  Me,  but  in  this  chosen  and 
beloved  spot  ? "  This  sense  seems  to  us  natural,  suggestive,  appropriate.  If  we 
take  the  phrase  in  the  wider  sense,  a  meaning  is  yielded  only  less  suggestive.^  But 
either  way  a  profound  devotion  to  God  and  to  His  kingdom  is  expressed  in  the 
language  of  the  Divine  Child — an  absorption  in  these  high  thoughts  as  all-com- 
manding and  supreme  over  ordinary  relations  and  affections.  His  words  were  not 
understood,  we  are  told,  by  those  nearest  to  Him  in  earthly  relation.  There  was  in 
their  idea  of  life  no  key  to  unlock  the  enigma  of  this  mysterious  Child.  But  the 
words  were  deeply  treasured  and  pondered  over  in  the  mother's  heart,  till  Divine 
Providence,  gradually  unclosing  this  bud  of  Heavenly  growth  grafted  on  an  earthly 
stock,  into  a  flower  of  immortal  beauty,  brought  the  long-hidden  meaning  of  the 
scene  to  light.  5.  Thus  early,  then,  we  behold  our  Saviour  in  His  Divine  and  native 
relations  to  His  Father,  and  to  the  kingdom  of  spirit;  thus  early  we  trace  the 
signs  of  His  indelible  consecration  to  the  service  in  which  He  was  to  spend  His 
days  and  to  shed  His  blood,  and  through  which  He  was  to  rise  to  be  spiritual  and 
universal  Lord.  But  what  a  completeness  it  gives  to  the  picture,  and  how  are  we 
touched  on  the  side  of  our  human  affections  when  we  read  that  "  Jesus  went  down 
with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  to  them."  Supremacy  of  His 
relations  to  His  heavenly  Father  did  not  mean  the  forgetting  or  ignoring  of  lower 
relations.  6.  Turn  a  parting  glance  at  the  scene,  and  read  it,  no  longer  by  the 
light  of  other's  eyes,  but  by  the  light  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  given  us  through 
the  word  of  the  gospel.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  ministry  of  children.  _  All  that 
is  simple  and  innocent,  inquiring  and  truth-loving  in  them,  should  remind  us  of 
the  Divine  Child  and  of  His  ministry  to  our  souls.  When  tempted  to  lose  ourselves 
in  the  materialism  of  the  age,  or  in  the  busy  cares  or  pleasures  of  the  present 
world,  let  us  think  of  Him  as,  in  the  Temple,  He  seems  with  uplifted  finger  to  be 
saying,  "  I  was  bom  to  other  things  1 "  And  so  may  grace  be  given  us  to  follow 
Him,  that  we  may  be  brought  in  the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit  into  childhood 
to  God,  and  to  dwell  in  the  heavenly  Temple  of  our  Father,  to  go  no  more  out 
for  ever.      E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Nazareth: — Travellers  tell  us  that  the  spot 

where  Jesus  grew  up  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Nazareth  is  situated  in  a  secluded,  cup-like  valley  amid  the  mountains  of  Zebulon, 
just  where  they  dip  down  into  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  with  which  it  is  coimected 
by  a  steep  and  rocky  path.  Its  white  houses,  with  vines  clinging  to  their  walls,  are 
embowered  amidst  gardens  and  groves  of  olive,  fig,  orange,  and  pomegranate  trees. 
The  fields  are  divided  by  hedges  of  cactus,  and  enamelled  with  innumerable  flowers 
of  every  hue.  Behind  the  village  rises  a  hill  five  hundred  feet  in  height,  from 
whose  summit  there  is  seen  one  of  the  most  wonderful  views  in  the  world — the 
mountains  of  Galilee,  with  snowy  Hermon  towering  above  them  to  the  riorth ;  the 
ridge  of  Carmel,  the  coast  of  Tyre,  and  the  sparkling  waters  of  the  Mediterranean 
to  the  west ;  a  few  miles  to  the  east,  the  wooded,  cone-Uke  bulk  of  Tabor ;  and  to 
the  south  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  with  the  mountains  of  Ephraim  beyond.  The 
preaching  of  Jesus  shows  how  deeply  He  had  drunk  into  the  essence  of  natural 
beauty  and  revelled  in  the  changing  aspects  of  the  seasons.  It  was  when  wandering 
as  a  lad  in  these  fields  that  He  gathered  the  images  of  beauty  which  He  poured  out 
in  His  parables  and  addresses.  It  was  on  that  hill  that  He  acquired  the  habit  of 
His  after-life  of  retreating  to  the  mountain-tops  to  spend  the  night  in  solitary 
prayer.  The  doctrines  of  His  preaching  were  not  thought  out  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment.  They  were  poured  out  in  a  living  stream  when  the  occasion  came,  but 
the  water  had  been  gathering  into  the  hidden  well  for  many  years  before.  In  the 
fields  and  on  the  mountain-side  He  had  thought  them  out  during  the  years  of 
happy  and  undisturbed  meditation  and  prayer.    {J.  Stalker,  M.A.) 

Yer.  40.  And  the  Child  grew,  and  waxed  strong  tn  spirit.  Our  LorcPi  early  yean 
upon  earth : — Notice  a  few  things  which  are  remarkable  in  our  Lord's  Childhood, 
and  which  we  too  often  wanting  in  that  of  others.    1.  His  obedience  to  His  earthlj 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHO.  lb 

parents.  2.  A  childhood  of  privacy  and  secltision.  He  was  kept  in  the  backgronnd, 
not  paraded  by  His  parents  as  an  instance  of  precocious  excellence  ot  Intellect.  He 
drank  in  the  pure  breezes  of  heaven,  and  was  in  secret.  3.  A  genuine  thirst  for 
improvement  (ver.  46,  Ac).  How  unlike  that  raging  appetite  for  mere  amusement 
which  begins  in  our  days  so  early,  and  has  turned  the  very  literature  of  the  young 
into  a  jest  and  plaything.  What  we  seek  is  something  to  make  us  laugh,  some- 
thing which  may  present  to  us  the  ludicrous  side  of  everything,  and  turn  away  from 
us  the  real  and  the  sobering.  What  Christ  sought  at  the  age  of  twelve  years  was 
knowledge,  and  He  sought  that  knowledge  in  the  courts  of  His  Father's  house.  4.  A 
spirit  of  docility.  He  sought  knowledge  even  from  men  little  qualified,  indeed,  to 
impart  it,  bat  who  yet  occupied  the  position  to  which  it  belonged  to  teach.  5. 
Christ's  childhood  was  stamped  with  a  sense  of  duty,  and  elevated  by  a  lofty  aim. 
A  sense  of  His  relation  to  God,  of  the  meaning  and  responsibility  of  life,  of  a  work 
to  be  done  on  God's  earth  in  which  He  was  Himself  to  be  a  fellow-worker  with  His 
Father — these  motives  had  already  dawned  upon  Him  at  that  young  age,  and  gave 
an  unwonted  seriousness  to  a  childhood  in  all  else  so  natural.  6.  Notice  the  testi- 
mony which  Christ's  childhood  bears  to  God's  patience  in  working  out  His  purposes; 
to  what  we  may  call  the  gradual  character  of  God's  works.  "  In  due  time  "  ia 
written  upon  all  of  them.  7.  Our  Lord's  early  life  was  the  consecration,  for  all 
time,  of  what  are  regarded,  by  way  of  distinction,  as  the  more  secular  and  the 
humbler  callings.  (S.P.C.K.  Sermons.)  The  holy  Child  Jesus : — Christ  might  haT* 
» been  made  full-grown  at  once.  Adam  was,  and  our  Lord  is  called  "  the  last  Adam,' ' 
"  the  second  man " ;  that  is  to  say,  Adam  was  a  type  or  figure  of  Christ.  One 
might  have  expected,  therefore,  that  our  Lord  would  be  what  Adam  had  been,  a 
man  sent  into  the  world  full-grown.  Infancy,  childhood,  boyhood,  are  very 
humbling  conditions.  Why  did  Christ  submit  to  them  ?  1.  Our  Lord's  condescen- 
sion is  infinite,  and  therefore,  in  coming  into  the  world.  He  desired  to  stoop  as  low 
as  possible,  in  order  to  set  us  the  more  striking  example  of  lowliness  of  mind. 
Therefore  He  preferred,  for  His  entrance  into  the  world,  the  condition  of  an  un- 
conscious babe,  and  of  a  child  dependent  upon  its  parents,  to  that  of  a  full-grown 
and  independent  man.  2.  Our  Lord,  out  of  His  infinite  compassion  for  us, 
earnestly  desired  to  sympathize  with  men  in  all  their  trials,  and  in  every  condition 
in  which  they  can  be  placed,  in  order  that  He  might  bless  and  comfort  them  by  His 
sympathy.  So  He  came  in  by  the  usual  gate — infancy.  8.  One  can  quite  see  this, 
that  for  a  grown-up  person  never  to  have  known  childhood,  a  home,  or  a  mother's 
care,  would  cut  them  off  from  all  the  most  beautiful  and  tender  associations  of  oox 
nature.  It  makes  a  man  tender,  as  no  other  thought  can,  to  look  back  on  his  child- 
hood and  early  home,  on  the  strong  interest  which  his  parents  used  to  take  in  him, 
and  on  the  sacrifices  which  they  were  at  all  times  ready  to  make  for  him.  Now  our 
Lord  was  to  be  infinitely  tender,  in  order  that  He  might  attract  the  miserable  and 
suffering  to  Himself ;  and  He  was  to  exhibit  all  the  beauties  and  graces  of  which 
human  nature  is  capable ;  and  therefore  it  was  that  He  willed  to  have  a  home  of 
childhood,  and  to  be  dependent  upon  a  mother's  care,  and  to  lisp  His  earliest 

?rayers  at  a  mother's  knee,  which  is  the  way  in  which  all  of  us  first  learn  to  pray. 
'hese  experiences  contributed  to  make  His  human  soul  tender.  Concluding 
lessons :  1.  Take  to  Him  all  your  little  troubles  and  trials  in  prayer,  and  assnre 
yourselves  that  He  is  most  ready  to  hear  and  help  yon.  Why  did  He  become  a 
child,  but  to  assure  children  of  His  sympathy  with  them  ?  2.  Take  Him  for  your 
example.  Observe  His  love  of  God's  house,  His  teachableness.  His  desire  for 
instruction.  His  submission  to  His  parents  (while  all  the  while  He  was  their  God), 
His  growth  in  wisdom  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man ;  and  try  to  copy  Him  in 
these  points.  3.  Trust  with  all  your  heart  in  the  goodness  which  He  as  a  child 
exhibited,  and  which  was  perfect  goodness,  such  as  yours  can  never  be.  Only 
for  the  sake  of  that  goodness  of  His  will  God  forgive  your  faults.  {Dean  Goml- 
burn.)  The  growth  of  children : — "  The  Child  grew."  Of  course  the  Child  grew. 
Every  child  grows.  There  is  not  a  child  in  the  world  who  is  not  older  to-day  than 
he  was  yesterday,  and  who,  if  he  lives,  will  not  be  older  to-morrow  than  he  ia 
to-day.  And  whatever  needs  to  be  done  for  a  child  while  he  is  young  as  now  ought 
to  be  done  to-day.  He  will  have  outgrown  the  possibility — if  not  the  need — of  such 
doing  for  him  wnen  to-morrow  is  here.  Childhood  is  quickly  lost.  It  is  not  to  be 
regained.  Unless  it  is  improved  as  it  passes,  it  is  unimproved  for  ever.  A  child 
grows  by  night  and  by  day,  whether  he  is  cared  for  or  neglected.  Oh,  how  soon 
the  child  has  outgrown  the  possibilities  of  training  in  the  ntursery,  of  a  mother's 
training,  of  a  father's  training,  of  a  teacher's  training  I   And  when  he  ha?  oatgrown 


«lBAr.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  281 

all  these,  •who  but  God  can  reach  him  ?  If  you  would  do  your  work  for  your  child, 
you  must  do  it  now — or  never.  Have  that  in  mind  with  your  every  breath ; 
for  with  every  breath  your  child  is  growing  away  from  his  plastic  and  impressible 
childhood.  (H.  G.  Trumbull.)  No  abasement  in  growth : — There  is  no  abasement 
in  the  fact  that  Jesus  grew  as  any  other  boy  grows.  The  apple  of  June  is  perfect  aa 
a  June  apple,  though  it  has  not  come  to  its  maturity.  The  acorn  is  perfect  as  an 
acorn,  just  as  the  oak  is  perfect  as  an  oak.  Jesus  was  a  perfect  Boy,  as  He  was  a 
perfect  Man.  If  Jesus  was  content  to  grow  slowly,  should  not  we  ?  The 
mushroom  may  spring  up  in  a  night ;  it  is  many  a  year  before  the  sturdy  oak 
attains  its  full  growth.  {Sunday  School  Times.)  The  source  of  Christ's  growth : — 
When  one  sees  a  river  flowing  deep  and  strong  through  a  parched  country,  as  the 
Ganges  in  India,  he  becomes  desirous  of  knowing  something  about  its  source.  He 
follows  it  up,  and  finds  that  it  comes  from  the  cold  hills  of  the  north,  issuing  it 
may  be,  in  full  flood  from  beneath  a  glacier.  So  the  source  of  Jesus'  growth  in  spirit 
and  wisdom  is  here  told — "  The  grace  of  God  was  upon  Him."  (Ibid.)  Youthful 
piety  of  Christ : — There  are  three  parts  of  our  nature  mentioned  in  the  Bible — the 
body,  the  soul,  the  spirit.  "  The  body  "  is  what  the  animals  have  in  common  with 
us;  it  is  the  part  of  us  in  which  we  feel  hunger,  tbirst,  and  weariness— the  part 
which  is  fed  by  food  and  rested  by  sleep.  "  The  soul  "  means  the  feelings  and  affec- 
tions ;  it  is  the  part  of  us  which  feels  pity  for  distress,  fear  of  danger,  anger  at  an 
insult,  and  so  forth.  "  The  spirit "  is  that  higher  part  of  our  nature,  which  makes 
us  reasonable  beings ;  it  is  by  the  action  of  our  spirit  that  we  think  of  God,  set 
Him  before  us,  pray  to  Him,  fear  Him,  worship  Him.  It  is,  then,  a  great  thing  to 
say  of  any  child,  and  it  could  only  be  said  of  a  good  and  holy  child,  that  he  "  waxes 
strong  in  spirit."  It  means  not  that  he  becomes  taller,  nimbler,  cleverer,  but  that 
his  conscience  becomes  more  and  more  formed  as  he  grows  up,  his  will  more  steady 
in  doing  what  is  right  and  avoiding  what  is  wrong,  his  prayers  to  God  more  earnest, 
his  sense  of  God's  presence  more  keen,  his  dread  of  sin  stronger.  Alas!  it  is  the 
very  opposite  with  children  in  general.  Tlieir  conscience,  which  was  once  tender, 
becomes  hardened  as  they  get  to  know  more  ;  they  soon  shake  off  any  dread  of  sin 
and  the  fear  of  God  ;  their  will  weakly  yields  to  temptation,  until  it  becomes  easy 
and  natural  to  yield.  And  it  is  added,  '•  He  was  filled  with  wisdom."  The  words 
imply  that  wisdom  kept  on  flowing,  hke  a  running  stream,  into  His  human  soul; 
there  were,  in  His  case,  none  of  those  thoughts  of  levity  and  folly,  by  which  child- 
hood is  commonly  marked.  "  And  the  grace  of  God  "  (meaning  both  the  favour  of 
God,  and  the  precious  influence  of  His  Holy  Spirit)  "  was  upon  Him."  _  When  the 
sun  shines  out  upon  the  dewdrops  that  cover  the  tender  grass  of  spring  in  the  early 
morning,  how  beautiful  is  each  spangled  bead  of  daw,  glistenicgwith  all  the  colours 
of  the  rainbow  I  Such  was  the  childhood  of  the  Holy  Child  1  The  dews  of  God's 
Spirit  rested  upon  Him  without  measure.  And  the  sunshine  of  God's  favour 
beamed  out  upon  Him,  as  "  the  Child  of  children,"  in  whom — and  in  whom  alone 
of  all  children  that  had  ever  been  born — God  the  Father  was  well_  pleased.  How 
early  can  a  child  love  God,  yearn  towards  God,  hope  in  God,  trust  in  God?  ^  I  can- 
not say.  Probably  much  earlier  than  we  suppose.  Do  not  the  youngest_  infants 
stretch  their  tiny  arms,  and  smile  graciously  when  their  mother  comes  into  the 
room  ?  They  are  not  too  young  to  show  that  they  love  and  trust  their  parents ;  I 
do  not  know  why  it  should  be  impossible  for  them  to  love  and  trust  _  their 
heavenly  Father,  especially  if  He  should  give  His  grace  to  them  "without 
measure,"  as  was  the  case  with  our  Lord.  Perhaps  you  say,  "It  is  impossible 
for  a  child  in  arms  to  understand  or  know  anything  about  God."  How  can 
any  one  be  sure  of  that?  It  was  foretold  of  John  the  Baptist,  that  he  should 
be  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  from  his  mother's  womb";  and  if  this 
was  the  case  with  him,  how  much  more  must  it  have  been  the  case  with  the 
Lord  Jesus?  Have  you  one  single  feeling  of  affection  and  trust  towards  your 
heavenly  Father,  as  He  had?  Do  you  even  wish  to  have  some  such  feeling? 
The  wish  is  something,  nay,  it  is  much ;  let  it  lead  you  to  pray  for  the  feeling, 
and  in  due  time  the  feeling  will  come.  If  your  earthly  parents  would  deny  you 
nothing  that  is  good  for  you,  which  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  give,  "  how 
much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask 
Him?  "  (Dean  Goulburn.)  Growth  under  ordinary  events  : — These  words,  applied 
by  St.  Luke  first  to  John  the  Baptist  and  then  to  our  Lord,  simply  express  an 
everyday  occurrence — what  we  habitually  take  for  granted  as  the  natural  course  of 
things.  This  very  fact — that  they  are  so  simple,  so  natural,  so  completely  on  the 
level  of  our  common  life — gives  them  the  rich  meaning  that  they  possess  for  OB. 


S6S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

For  they  teach  us  that  the  Divine  method  of  life  is  quite  different  from  what  we 
should  expect ;  that  each  man  may  find  in  and  about  him,  in  his  endowments  and 
in  his  environments,  just  what  he  requires  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  work. 
We  need  not  go  from  our  proper  place  in  order  to  discipline  ourselves  for  God's 
service ;  we  need  not  strive  after  gifts  which  He  has  not  entrusted  to  us,  or  forms 
of  action  which  are  foreign  to  our  position,  in  order  to  do  our  part  as  members  of 
His  Church,  It  is  enough  that  we  grow  and  wax  strong  under  the  action  of  those 
forces  by  which  He  moves  us  within  and  without,  if  we  desire  to  fulfil,  according  to 
the  measure  of  our  powers,  the  charge  which  He  has  prepared  for  us.  Thus  it  was 
that  John  the  Baptist,  the  stern,  bold  preacher,  grew  up  in  the  desert  according  to 
the  angel's  message — a  lonely  boy,  a  lonely  youth,  until  the  days  of  his  showing 
unto  Israel,  communing  only  with  the  severest  forms  of  nature  and  with  the  most 
awful  thoughts  of  God.  Thus  it  was  that  Jesus  lived  in  the  calm  seclusion  of  a 
bright  upland  valley,  in  the  Jewish  fellowship  of  a  holy  home,  subject  to  His  parents 
and  in  favour  with  God  and  man,  until  His  hour  came.  In  that  silent  discipline  ol 
thirty  years,  there  was  no  anxious  anticipation  of  the  future,  no  wistful  lingering 
on  the  past ;  the  past,  used  to  the  utmost,  was  the  foundation  of  the  future. 
(Canon  Westcott.)  God's  mode  of  training  men: — We  are  always  inclined  to 
look  for  some  joy  or  sorrow,  as  that  which  shall  stir  the  energies  of  oar  souls ; 
for  some  sharp  sickness  or  bereavement,  as  that  which  shall  make  us  trust 
more  faithfully  in  God ;  for  some  blessing  or  deliverance,  as  that  which  shall  bring 
us  to  love  Him  with  tender  devotion.  But  when  these  exceptional  events  happen, 
they  do  but  reveal  to  us  what  we  have  already  become ;  then,  at  length,  when  our 
eyes  are  opened,  we  see  ourselves ;  then  we  know  what  we  are ;  then  we  realize  the 
value  of  httle  things,  the  abiding  results  of  routine ;  then  we  marvel,  it  may  be,  to 
know  assuredly  that  we  despised  Christ  when  He  came  to  us  in  strange  disguises ; 
or  it  may  be  that  we  welcomed  Him  in  the  least  of  His  little  ones,  or  in  the  most 
insignificant  of  His  workings.  Great  occasions  do  not  make  heroes  or  cowards ; 
they  simply  unveil  them  to  the  eyes  of  men.  Silently  and  imperceptibly,  as  we 
wake  and  sleep,  we  grow  aud  wax  strong,  or  we  grow  and  wax  weak  ;  at  last  some 
crisis  shows  us  what  we  have  become.  (Ibid.)  Great  results  from  secret 
processes : — The  facts  of  the  material  world  help  us  to  feel  the  reality  of  thia 
still  and  secret  process  which  is  the  universal  law  of  life.  The  ground  on  which  we 
stand,  the  solid  rocks  which  lie  beneath  it,  are  nothing  but  the  accumulated  results 
of  the  action  of  forces  which  we  observe  in  action  still.  A  few  drops  of  rain  gathei 
on  the  hillside,  and  find  an  outlet  down  its  slope ;  grain  by  grain  a  channel  is 
fashioned,  fresh  rills  add  their  waters  to  the  flowing  stream,  and  at  last  the  runlet 
which  a  stone  might  have  diverted  from  its  course  has  grown  into  a  river  which  no 
human  force  can  stem.  The  sapling  is  planted  on  an  open  ridge,  straight  and 
vigoroos  ;  season  after  season  the  winds  blow  through  its  branches  ;  it  bends  and 
bends  and  rises  again,  but  with  ever-lessening  power ;  and  when  years  have  gone 
by,  and  the  sapling  has  become  a  tree,  its  strange  distorted  shape  bears  witness 
to  the  final  power  of  the  force  which  at  each  moment  it  seemed  able  to  overcome. 
And  BO  it  is  with  all  of  us.  From  small  beginnings  flow  the  currents  of  our  lives, 
from  constant  and  unnoticed  impulses  we  take  our  bias ;  the  stream  is  ever  gather- 
ing strength ;  the  bend  is  ever  being  confirmed  or  corrected.  At  any  time  of  this  life, 
our  character  is  represented  by  the  sum  of  our  past  lives.  There  is  not  one  act,  not 
one  purpose,  which  does  not  leave  its  trace,  though  we  may  be  unable  to  distinguish 
and  measure  its  value.  There  is  not  one  drop  which  does  not  add  something  to  the 
flowing  river,  not  one  branch  which  does  not  in  some  way  shape  the  rising  tree. 
The  ajipointed  duty,  heartily  or  carelessly  gone  through,  makes  us  weaker  for  the 
next  effort.  The  nnkind  word  epoken,  or  the  kind  word  not  spoken,  makes  us  less 
tender  when  our  love  is  next  needed ;  the  evil  thing  done,  or  the  evil  thought 
cherished,  makes  a  vantage-ground  for  the  tempter  when  he  next  assails  us.  The 
prayer  neglected,  or  said  with  the  lips  only,  makes  it  harder  for  us  to  seek  God  when 
we  next  desire  to  find  Him.  The  Communion  superstitiously  slighted,  or  super* 
Btitiously  frequented,  makes  it  more  and  more  difdcult  for  as  to  see  life  transfigured 
by  the  brightness  of  a  Divine  presence.  In  this  way  it  is  that  we  grow  and  wax 
weak,  happy  only  if  some  day  of  reckoning  startles  us  by  the  sense  of  our  loss,  and 
if  we  are  constrained  to  offer  to  God  in  the  humblest  spirit  what  remains.  And,  on 
the  other  hand,  every  faithful  answer  to  the  least  claim  upon  oar  service,  every 
manfol  contest  for  the  right,  every  painful  struggle  with  self-indulgence,  every  sore 
temptation  met  in  the  name  and  strength  of  Christ,  every  striving  towards  God  in 
prayer  and  praise,  is  froitful  for  the  futore — fmitfal  in  self-sacrifice,  in  courage,  in 


MUV.  n.]  ST.  LVKE.  263 

endurance,  in  the  joy  of  Divine  fellowship.  (Ibid.)  Childhood  disparaged  by  the 
ancienti : — In  those  brief  sketches  of  Christ  which  are  called  the  Gospels,  eighteen 
years  of  experience  are  wholly  wanting.  The  best  explanation  of  the  omission  is, 
that  in  that  epoch,  and  in  almost  all  past  periods,  child  life  was  not  a  matter  of 
importance.  It  did  not  enter  largely  into  literature,  nor  into  the  category  of  the 
great  things  of  the  world.  In  some  nations  the  death-day  rather  than  the  birthday 
was  celebrated,  because  the  latter  period  was  associated  with  fame  or  learning  or 
some  other  form  of  merit,  while  the  birthday  enjoyed  no  association  of  worth — it 
was  only  the  period  of  all  shapes  of  weakness.  In  the  most  of  the  ancient  philo- 
sophies the  reasonable  soul  did  not  come  to  the  body  until  it  was  about  twenty 
years  old.  According  to  one  of  the  old  Babbis  a  man  was  free  at  twelve,  might 
marry  at  eighteen  or  twenty,  should  acquire  property  until  he  was  thirty,  then 
intellectual  strength  should  come,  and  at  forty  the  profoundest  wisdom  should 
appear.  Amid  just  what  opinions  of  this  nature  the  youth  of  Jesus  was  spent  is 
not  known,  but  at  least  this  is  true  that  He  lived  in  an  era  when  early  life  seemed 
to  possess  but  small  worth,  and  no  scholar  or  biographer  encumbered  with  such 
details  his  record  or  oration  or  poem.  Not  only  do  we  know  httle  about  the  early 
life  of  Jesus,  but  the  early  years  of  Caesar,  and  Virgil,  and  Cicero,  and  Tacitus 
lie  equally  withdrawn  from  the  public  gaze.  Old  biographies  make  their 
first  chapter  out  of  the  actual  beginnings  of  the  public  service.  (David  Swing.} 
An  address  to  children  on  the  Child  Jesus : — The  Child  Jesus  grew.  He  did  not 
stand  still.  Although  it  was  God  Himself  who  was  revealed  to  us  in  the  life  of 
Jesus  Christ,  yet  this  did  not  prevent  Him  from  being  made  like  unto  us  in  all 
things,  sin  only  excepted.  And  so  in  all  things  He  is  an  example  for  us  to  imitate. 
Each  one,  whether  old  or  young,  must  remember  that  progress,  improvement,  going 
on,  advance,  change  into  something  better  and  better,  wiser  and  wiser,  year  by  year, 
is  the  only  way  of  becoming  like  Christ,  and  therefore  like  God.  The  world  moves, 
and  you  and  all  of  us  must  move  with  it.  God  calls  us  all  ever  to  something  higher 
and  higher,  and  that  higher  stage  we  must  reach  by  steadily  advancing  towards  it. 
There  are  three  things  especially  which  the  text  puts  before  us  as  those  in  which 
our  Lord's  earthly  education,  in  which  the  advance  and  improvement  of  His  earthly 
character,  added  to  His  youthful  and  childlike  powers.  1.  Strength  of  character. 
Christ  waxed  strong  in  spirit.  What  we  all  want  is  a  stout  heart  to  resist  tempta- 
tion, a  strong  hardy  conscience  which  fixes  itself  on  matters  of  real  importance  and 
will  not  trifle  or  waste  its  powers  on  things  of  no  concern.  We  must  earnestly  seek 
this  strength.  It  comes  to  those  who  strive  after  it.  2.  Wisdom.  To  gain  this — to 
have  your  mind  opened,  to  take  in  all  that  your  teachers  can  pour  into  it — you  are 
sent  to  school.  You  need  not  be  old  before  your  time,  but  you  must  even  now  be 
making  the  best  use  of  your  time.  These  are  the  golden  days  which  never  come 
back  to  you,  which  if  once  lost  can  never  be  entirely  made  up.  Seek,  therefore,  for 
wisdom,  pray  for  it,  determine  to  have  it,  and  God  who  gives  to  those  who  ask  for 
it,  will  give  it  to  you.  Try  to  gain  it,  as  our  Lord  gained  it  when  He  was  a  child, 
by  hearing  and  by  asking  questions,  i.e.,  (a)  by  being  teachable,  humble,  modest, 
and  fixing  your  attention  on  what  you  have  to  learn ;  (6)  by  trying  to  know  the 
meaning  of  what  you  learn,  by  cross -questioning  yourselves,  by  inquiring  right  and 
left  to  fill  up  the  blanks  in  your  mind.  3.  The  grace  or  favour  of  God,  or,  as  it 
Bays  in  ver.  52,  the  favour  of  God  and  man.  Our  Lord  possessed  God's  favour 
always,  but  even  in  Him  it  increased  more  and  more.  It  increased  as  He  grew 
older,  as  He  saw  more  and  more  of  the  work  which  was  given  Him  to  do  ;  He  felt 
more  and  more  that  God  was  His  Father,  and  that  men  were  His  brothers,  and  that, 
grace  and  loving-kindness  was  the  best  and  dearest  gift  from  God  to  man,  and  from 
man  to  man,  and  from  man  to  God.  He  was  subject  to  His  parents.  He  did  what 
they  told  Him  ;  and  so  He  became  dear  to  them.  He  was  kind,  and  gentle,  and 
courteous  to  those  about  Him,  so  that  they  always  liked  to  see  Him  when  He  came 
in  and  out  amongst  them.  So  may  it  be  with  you.  Look  upon  God  as  your  dear 
Father  in  heaven,  who  loves  you,  and  who  wishes  nothing  but  your  happiness. 
Look  upon  your  schoolfellows  and  companions  as  brothers,  to  whom  you  must  show 
whatever  kindness  and  forbearance  you  can.  Just  as  this  beautiful  building  in 
which  we  are  assembled  is  made  up  of  a  number  of  small  stones  beautifully  carved, 
every  one  of  which  helps  to  make  up  the  grace  and  beauty  of  the  whole,  so  is  all 
the  state  of  the  world  made  up  of  the  graces  and  goodnesses  not  only  of  full-grown 
men  and  women,  but  p*  'iatii  shildren  who  will  be,  if  they  live,  full-grown  one  day. 
(Dean  Stanley.)  The  Child  Jesus,  a  pattern  for  children : — 1.  The  Child  Jesus  was 
*  diligent  scholar.    He  did  not  "  hate  "  to  go  to  school.    He  d'd  not  neglect  Hi» 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  h. 

tasks,  or  slur  them  over  anyhow,  or  think,  as  perhaps  some  of  you  think,  that 
getting  out  of  school  was  the  best  part  of  the  whole  business.  We  might  be  quite 
sure  that  He  diligently  attended  to  the  wise  Eabbis  who  asked  and  answered  questions, 
who  uttered  so  many  wise  and  witty  proverbs,  and  told  so  many  pretty  stories,  if 
only  because  He  Himself  was,  in  after  years,  so  wise  in  asking  and  answering 
questions,  and  spoke  so  many  proverbs  and  parables  which  the  world  will  never  let 
die.  But  we  can  do  more  and  better  than  merely  infer  what  a  good  scholar  He 
was.  We  can  see  Him  while  He  was  yet  a  lad,  going  to  school  of  His  own  accord, 
and  staying  in  it  when  He  might  have  been  climbing  the  hills  or  running  through 
the  fields  with  His  friends  (vers.  41-46).  2.  This  good  scholar  was  also  a  good  son. 
The  Hebrew  boys  of  our  Lord's  time  were  very  well  bred.  They  were  taught  good 
manners  as  well  as  good  morals.  They  were  enjoined,  both  by  their  parents  and 
their  masters,  to  salute  every  one  they  met  in  the  street,  to  say  to  him  "  Peace  be 
with  thee."  To  break  this  rule  of  courtesy,  they  were  told,  was  as  wrong  as  to 
steal.  And  the  Boy  Jesus  was  well  brought  up,  and  was  full  of  courtesy,  kindness, 
goodwill ;  for  not  only  did  He  grow  in  favour  with  men  in  general,  but  He  had  a 
large  circle  of  kinsfolk  and  friends  who  loved  Him  and  were  glad  to  have  Him  with 
them  (ver.  44).  We  know,  too,  that  He  had  never  grieved  His  parents  before,  in  His 
eagerness  to  learn,  He  let  them  go  on  their  way  home  without  Him.  For  when 
they  had  found  Him  in  the  Temple,  they  were  so  astonished  that  He  should  have 
given  them  the  pain  of  seeking  Him  sorrowfully,  that  they  cannot  blame  Him  as 
for  a  fault,  but  can  only  ask  Him  why  He  had  treated  them  thus.  He  must  indeed 
have  been  a  good  son  to  whom  His  mother  could  speak  as  Mary  spoke  to  Jesus. 
3.  He  was  also  a  good  child  of  God.  Always  "  about  His  Father's  business  " — 
feeling  that  He  must  be  about  it,  wherever  He  went,  whatever  He  did.  The  one 
great  thing  He  had  to  do,  the  one  thing  which  above  all  others  He  tried  to  do,  was 
to  serve  God  His  Father ;  not  simply  to  become  wise,  and  still  less  to  please  Him- 
self, but  to  please  God  by  growing  wise  in  the  knowledge  and  obedience  of  His  com- 
mandments.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Superstitious  reverence  of  Christ's  person  guarded 
against: — After  informing  us  that  Jesus  was  filled  with  wisdom,  the  evangelist  adds, 
that  the  grace  of  God  was  upon  Him.  Now  as  the  grace  of  God  is  not  said  to  have 
been  in  but  upon  Him,  it  seems  intended  to  express  something  not  internal,  but 
obvious  to  the  senses.  Hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  here  the  grace  of  God 
denotes  a  Divine  gracefulness.  In  confirmation  of  this  opinion  it  has  been  said, 
that  in  several  passages  there  are  allusions  to  something  highly  graceful,  dignified, 
and  impressive  in  His  manner.  Thus,  the  ofiBcers  of  the  chief  priest  declared  that 
never  man  spake  like  this  man  ;  and  even  the  inhabitants  of  Nazareth  were 
delighted  at  first  with  the  words  full  of  grace  which  He  uttered.  It  is  particularly 
to  be  remarked,  however,  that  neither  in  the  four  Gospels,  nor  in  any  of  the  other 
books  of  the  New  Testament,  has  any  description  been  given  of  the  personal 
appearance  of  our  Saviour.  Tlaere  is  not,  indeed,  to  be  found  the  slightest  allusion 
to  the  subject.  Yet,  of  the  founder  of  every  other  religion,  whether  true  or  false, 
some  description,  however  concise,  has  been  preserved.  Thus,  we  are  told  that 
Moses,  when  a  child,  was  extremely  beautiful.  The  followers  of  Mahomet  have 
described  their  pretended  prophet  in  a  minute  manner;  and  the  persons  of  most  of 
the  eminent  sages  of  antiquity  have  been  delineated  by  their  disciples.  But  of  the 
external  appearance  of  Jesus  no  record  is  left.  Why  this  singular  omission  ?  Were 
not  the  apostles  of  Jesus  attached  to  their  Master  ?  Yes :  their  attachment  was 
stronger  and  more  disinterested  than  the  world  ever  witnessed,  for  they  suffered 
everything  and  sacrificed  everything  for  His  sake.  But  the  omissions  of  inspired 
writers  are  never  to  be  ascribed  to  oversight,  but  to  the  design  of  an  over-ruling 
Providence.  Nothing,  therefore,  was  to  be  inserted  in  the  Sacred  Becords  con- 
oeming  Jesns  which  might  lead  to  a  superstitious  veneration  of  His  person,  and 
thus  draw  away  the  attention  of  His  followers  from  His  sublime  doctrines 
and  precepts,  and  the  perfection  of  His  character.  {James  Thomson,  B.D.)  The 
development  of  Christ  through  the  influences  of  outward  nature : — The  Ebionitea 
thought  the  natural  humanity  of  our  Saviour's  early  life  unworthy  of  a  Divine 
person,  and  denied  His  essential  divinity.  To  them,  Christ  was,  till  His  baptism, 
a  common  man.  It  was  at  His  baptism  that  He  received  from  God,  as  an  external 
gift,  the  oonsoionsness  of  His  Divine  mission  and  special  powers  for  it.  We,  how- 
ever, do  not  hold  the  necessary  nnworthiness  of  human  nature  as  a  habitation  of 
the  Divine.  We  hold,  with  the  old  writer,  that  man  is  "  the  image  of  God."  Henea 
instead  of  looking  upon  Christ's  youth  and  childhood  and  His  common  life  as  de- 
fogatozy  to  His  glory,  we  see  in  them  tibe  glorification  of  all  human  thought  oni 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  J66 

action  in  every  stage  of  life.  The  whole  of  humanity  is  penetrated  by  the  Divine. 
This  is  the  foundation-stone  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  On  it  rest  all  the  great  doc- 
trines of  Christianity,  on  it  reposes  all  the  noble  practise  of  Christian  men,  and  we 
call  it  the  Incarnation.  But  this  re-uniting  of  the  divinity  and  humanity  took  place 
in  time,  and  under  the  limitations  which  are  now  imposed  upon  humanity.  The 
Divine  Word  was  self -limited  on  its  entrance  our  into  nature,  in  some  such  sense  as  our 
spirit  and  thought  are  limited  by  union  with  body.  Consequently,  we  should  argue 
that  there  was  a  gradual  development  of  the  person  of  Christ ;  and  this  conclusion, 
which  we  come  to  a  priori,  is  supported  by  the  narrative  in  the  Gospels.  We  are 
told  that  Jesus  "  increased  in  wisdom,"  that  He  "  waxed  strong  in  spirit,"  that  He 
*•  learned  obedience,"  that  He  was  "  made  perfect  through  suffering."  This  is  our 
subject — the  development  of  Christ.  And,  first,  we  are  met  with  a  difiEiculty.  The 
idea  of  development  seeme  to  imply  imperfections  passing  into  perfection— seems 
to  exclude  the  idea  of  original  perfection.  But  there  are  two  conceivable  ideas  of 
development ;  one,  development  through  antagonism,  through  error,  from  stage  to 
stage  of  less  and  less  deficiency.  This  is  our  development ;  but  it  is  such  because 
evil  has  gained  a  lodgment  in  our  nature,  and  we  can  only  attain  perfection  through 
contest  with  it.  But  there  is  another  kind  of  development  conceivable,  th*  develop- 
ment of  a  perfect  nature  limited  by  time.  The  plant  is  perfect  as  the  green  shoot 
above  the  earth— it  is  all  it  can  be  then ;  it  is  more  perfect  as  the_  creature  adorned 
with  leaves  and  branches,  and  it  is  all  it  can  be  then  ;  it  reaches  its  full  perfection 
when  the  blossom  breaks  into  flower.  Such  was  the  development  of  Christ.  He 
was  the  perfect  child,  the  perfect  boy,  the  perfect  youth,  the  perfect  flower  of  man- 
hood. A  second  illustration  may  make  the  matter  clearer.  The  work  of  an  infe- 
rior artist  arrives  at  a  certain  amount  of  perfection  through  a  series  of  failures, 
which  teach  him  where  he  is  wrong.  Such  is  our  development.  The  work  of  a 
man  of  genius  is  very  different.  He  has  seen,  before  he  touches  pencil,  the 
finished  picture.  His  first  sketch  contains  the  germ  of  all.  His  work  is  perfect  in 
its  several  stages.  Such  was  Christ's  development — an  orderly,  faultless,  unbroken 
development,  in  which  humanity,  freed  from  its  unnatural  companion,  evil,  went 
forward  according  to  its  real  nature.  It  was  the  restoration  of  humanity  to  its 
original  integrity,  to  itself,  as  it  existed  in  the  idea  of  God.  Think,  then,  of  His 
development  through  the  influence  of  outward  nature.  From  the  summit  of  the 
hill  in  whose  bosom  Nazareth  lay,  there  sweeps  one  of  the  widest  and  most  varied 
landscapes  to  be  seen  in  Palestine.  It  is  impossible  to  over-estimate  the  influence 
which  this  changing  scene  of  beauty  had  upon  the  mind  of  the  Saviour  as  a  child. 
The  Hebrew  feeling  for  nature  was  deep  and  extended.  By  care,  then,  alone,  the 
Child  Jesus  was  prepared  to  feel  the  most  delicate  shades  of  change  in  the  aspect  of 
outward  nature.  But  as  He  was  not  only  Hebrew  but  the  type  of  pure  humanity, 
we  may,  without  attributing  to  Him  anything  unnatural  to  childhood,  impute  to 
Him  the  nobler  feelings  which  are  stirred  in  the  Western  and  Northern  races  by 
the  modes  of  natural  beauty.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  MA.)  The  early  development 
of  Jesus : — I.  "  The  Child  grew."  Two  pregnant  facts.  He  was  a  child,  and  a 
child  that  grew  in  heart,  in  intellect,  in  size,  in  grace,  in  favour  with  God.  Not 
a  man  in  child's  years.  No  hotbed  precocity  marked  the  holiest  of  infancies. 
The  Son  of  Man  grew  up  in  the  quiet  valley  of  existence— in  shadow,  not  in 
sunshine,  not  forced.  II.  This  growth  took  place  in  three  particulars — 1.  In 
spiritual  strength.  I  instance  one  single  evidence  of  strength  in  the  early  years 
of  Jesus  :  I  find  it  in  that  calm,  long  waiting  of  thirty  yeairs  before  He  began 
His  work.  2.  In  wisdom.  Distinguish  wisdom  from  (1)  information,  (2)  talent. 
Love  is  required  for  wisdom — the  love  which  opens  the  heart  and  makes  it 
generous.  Speaking  humanly,  the  steps  by  which  the  wisdom  of  Jesus  was 
acquired  were  two— (a)  The  habit  of  inquiry.  (&)  The  collision  of  mind  with  mind. 
Both  these  we  find  in  this  anecdote :  His  parents  found  Him  with  the  doctors  in 
the  Temple,  both  hearing  and  asking  them  questions.  3.  In  grace.  And  this 
in  three  points— (1)  The  exchange  of  an  earthly  for  a  heavenly  home.  "  My 
Father's  business,"  "  My  Father's  house."  (2)  Of  an  earthly  for  a  heavenly 
parent.  (3)  The  reconciliation  of  domestic  duties  (ver.  51).  \F.  W.  Robertson, 
M.A.)  Apocryplml  stories  of  the  Infancy  .-—The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  must  have 
touched  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John  vrith  the  spirit  of  "selection,"  which 
saved  them  from  such  miracle-mongering.  For  Christ — the  Christ  that  I  adore-— 
rises  above  these  pitiful  tales.  (George  Dawson.)  A  bishop's  dream  of  our  Lord's 
childhood: — There  was  once— as  Luther  tells  us— a  pious,  godly  bishop  who  had 
often  earnestly  prayed  that  God  would  show  him  what  Jesus  was  like  in  His  youth. 


M6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  O, 

Now  once  the  bishop  had  a  dream,  and  in  his  dream  he  saw  a  poor  carpenter  work- 
ing at  his  trade,  and  beside  him  a  little  boy  gathering  up  chips.  Then  came  in  • 
maiden  clothed  in  green,  who  called  them  both  to  come  to  the  meal,  and  set  bread 
and  milk  before  them.  All  this  the  bishop  seemed  to  see  in  his  dream,  standing 
behind  the  door  that  he  might  not  be  seen.  Then  the  little  boy  began  and  said, 
"  Why  does  that  man  stand  there?  Will  he  not  come  in  also,  and  eat  with  us?" 
And  this  so  frightened  the  bishop  that  he  woke.  But  he  need  not  have  been  fright- 
ened, for  does  not  Jesus  say,  "  If  any  man  hear  My  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will 
come  in  to  him,  and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  Me."  And  whether  the  dream  ba 
true  or  not,  we  know  that  Jesus  in  His  childhood  and  youth  looked  and  acted  like 
other  children,  "  in  fashion  like  a  man,"  "yet  without  sin."  (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
St.  Edmund's  vision  of  the  Child  Jesiig : — There  was  once  a  boy  whose  name  waa 
Edmund  Eich,  and  who  is  called  St.  Edmund  of  Canterbury ;  and  his  brother  tella 
us  that  once,  when,  at  the  age  of  twelve,  he  had  gone  into  the  fields  from  the 
boisterous  play  of  his  companions,  he  thought  that  the  Child  Jesus  appeared  unto 
him,  and  said,  *'  Hail,  beloved  one  1 "  And  he,  wondering  at  the  beautiful  child, 
said,  "  Who  art  Thou,  for  certainly  thou  art  unknown  to  me  ?  "  And  the  Child 
Jesus  said,  "  How  comes  it  that  I  am  unknown  to  thee,  seeing  that  I  sit  by  thy 
side  at  school,  and  wherever  thou  art,  there  do  I  go  with  thee  ?  Look  on  My  fore- 
head, and  see  what  is  there  written."  And  Edmund  looked,  and  saw  the  name 
*•  Jesus."  "  This  is  my  name,"  said  the  child ;  "  write  it  on  thy  heart  and  it  shall 
protect  thee  from  evil."  Then  He  disappeared,  on  whom  the  angels  desire  to  look, 
leaving  the  little  boy  Edmund  with  passing  sweetness  in  his  heart.  (Ibid.) 
Jerome's  love  for  the  Child  Jesus : — There  lived,  fifteen  hundred  years  ago,  a  saint 
whose  name  was  Jerome,  and  he  loved  so  much  the  thought  of  the  ChUd  Christ, 
that  he  left  Eome,  and  went  and  lived  for  thirty  long  years  in  a  cave  at  Bethlehem, 
close  by  the  cavern-stable  in  which  Christ  was  bom.  And  when  men  wished  to 
invite  him  by  earthly  honours  to  work  elsewhere,  he  said,  "  Take  me  not  away 
from  the  cradle  where  my  Lord  was  laid.  Nowhere  can  I  be  happier  than  there. 
There  do  I  often  talk  with  the  Child  Jesus,  and  say  to  Him,  '  Ah,  Lord  I  how  can  I 
repay  Thee  ? '  And  the  Child  answers,  '  I  need  nothing.  Only  sing  thou  "  Glory 
to  God,  and  peace  on  earth." '  And  when  I  say,  •  Nay  I  but  I  must  yield  Thee 
something ' ;  the  Holy  Child  replies,  '  Thy  silver  and  thy  gold  I  need  not.  Give 
them  to  the  poor.  Give  Me  only  thy  sins  to  be  forgiven.'  And  then  do  I  begin  to 
weep  and  say,  '  Oh,  Thou  blessed  Child  Jesus,  take  what  is  mine,  and  give  me 
what  is  Thine  1  * "  Now  in  this  way,  by  the  eye  of  faith,  you  may  all  see  the  Child 
Jesus,  and  unseen,  yet  ever  near,  you  may  feel  His  presence,  and  He  may  sit  by 
your  side  at  school,  and  be  with  you  all  day  to  keep  you  from  harm,  and  to  drive 
away  bad  thoughts  and  naughty  tempers,  and  send  His  angels  to  watch  over  you 
when  you  sleep.  {Ibid.)  Jesus  the  Friend  of  children : — Once  there  was  carried 
into  a  great  hospital  a  poor  little  ragged  miserable  boy,  who  had  been  run  over  in 
the  streets  and  dreadfully  hurt.  And  all  night  he  kept  crying  and  groaning  in  hia 
great  pain?  and  at  last  a  good  youth,  who  lay  in  the  bed  next  to  him,  said,  "My 
poor  little  fellow,  won't  you  pray  to  Jesus  to  ease  your  pain?"  But  the  little 
wretched  sufferer  had  never  heard  anything  at  all  about  Jesus,  and  asked  who  Jesus 
was.  And  the  youth  gently  told  him  that  Jesus  was  Lord  of  all,  and  that  He  had 
<;ome  down  to  die  for  us.  And  the  boy  answered,  ••  Oh,  I  can't  pray  to  Him,  He's 
so  great  and  grand,  and  He  would  never  hear  a  poor  street-boy  like  me ;  and  I  don't 
know  how  to  speak  to  Him."  "  Then,"  said  the  youth,  "  won't  you  just  lift  your 
hand  to  Him  out  of  bed,  and  when  He  passes  by  He  will  see  it,  and  will  know  that  yoa 
want  Him  to  be  kind  to  you,  and  to  ease  your  pain  ?  "  And  the  poor,  crashed,  suf- 
fering boy  Ufted  out  of  the  bed  his  little  brown  hand,  and  soon  afterwards  he  ceased  to 
groan ;  and  when  they  came  to  him  in  the  morning  the  hand  and  the  poor  thin 
arm  were  still  uplifted,  but  they  were  stiff  and  cold ;  for  Jesus  had  indeed  seen  it, 
and  heard  that  mute  prayer  of  the  agony  of  that  strayed  lamb  of  ELis  fold,  and  He 
had  grasped  the  little,  soiled,  trembUng  hand  of  the  sufferer,  and  had  taken  him 
away  to  that  better,  happier  home,  where  He  will  love  also  to  make  room  for 
you  and  me,  it  we  seek  Him  with  all  our  hearts,  and  try  to  do  His  will.  (Ibid.) 
Religion  in  childhood : — "  I  can  never,"  said  the  late  Rev.  George  Burder, 
"  forget  my  birthday,  June  5,  1762.  It  was  on  a  Sabbath ;  and  after  tea,  and 
before  family  worship,  my  father  was  accustomed  to  catechize  me,  and  examine 
what  I  remembered  of  the  sermons  of  the  day.  That  evening  he  talked  to  me  very 
affectionately,  and  reminded  me  that  it  was  high  time  I  began  to  seek  the  Lord,  and 
to  become  truly  religious.  He  particularly  insisted  upon  the  necessity  of  an  interest 


CHAP,  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  267 

in  Christ  Jesua,  and  showed  me  that,  as  a  sinner,  I  must  perish  without  it,  and 
recommended  me  to  begin  that  night  to  pray  for  it.  After  family  worship,  when  my 
father  and  mother  used  to  retire  to  their  closets  for  private  devotion,  I  also  went  to 
my  chamber,  the  same  room  in  which  I  was  born,  and  then,  I  trust,  sincerely  and 
earnestly,  aad,  as  far  as  I  can  recollect,  for  the  first  time  poured  out  my  soul  to  God, 
beseeching  Him  to  give  me  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  desiring,  above  all  things, 
to  be  found  in  Him.  I  am  now  an  old  man,  but  reflecting  on  that  evening,  I  have 
often  been  ready  to  conclude,  that  surely  I  was  then,  though  a  little  child, 
brought   to    believe   in    Christ."  Christ  our  example    in  youth.       In    what 

respects,  then,  is  the  youth  of  Christ  an  ezamflk  to  us  t  1.  First,  it  is  an 
example  to  us  of  personal  piety,  and  that  from  our  earliest  years.  '*  The  grace  of 
God  was  upon  Him,"  is  the  evangelist's  expression  in  our  text ;  whilst,  a  few  verses 
lower  down,  we  have  him  saying,  "  And  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and 
in  favour  with  God  and  man."  2.  Again,  in  the  youth  of  Christ  we  have  an  example 
of  diligence  in  the  use  of  means  for  our  mental  progress  and  improvement.  "  He 
was  filled  vnth  wisdom,"  says  our  text.  And  after  His  visit  to  the  Temple,  it  is  said 
again,  *'  He  increased  in  wisdom."  The  youth  of  Christ,  then,  we  consider,  may 
fairly  be  cited  as  furnishing  us  with  an  example  of  the  dignity,  and  value,  and 
importance  of  intellectual  culture.  3.  We  note  next  that  Christ  in  His  youth  was 
an  example  of  reverent  submission  to  parental  authority.  "  And  He  went  down 
with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  to  them."  4.  Further,  Christ  in 
His  youth  is  an  example  to  us  of  the  duty  of  a  heartfelt  and  entire  consecration 
of  ourselves  to  the  Divine  service.  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My 
Father's  business  ?  "  was  the  question  of  the  Holy  One  to  His  parents,  when 
they  found  Him  in  the  Temple.  5.  Once  more,  Christ  in  His  youth  is  an 
example  to  us  of  patient  and  contented  acquiescence  in  our  providential  lot, — 
however  adverse,  however  obscure,  however  disappointing  to  the  expectations 
which  our  friends  may  have  formed  for  us,  or  which  we,  in  our  foolish  pride, 
may  be  tempted  to  form  for  ourselves.    (D.  Moore,  M.A.) 

Vers.  41, 42.  And  when  He  was  twelve  years  old.  Making  a  Jewish  boy  a  son  of  the 
Law: — The  following  description  refers  to  ceremonies  now  practised  : — "A  few  days 
ago  I  attended  a  very  interesting  service  in  a  Jevrish  synagogue.  A  boy  just  twelve 
years  old  was  brought  by  his  father  to  be  admitted  as  a  member  of  the  synagogue ; 
there  were  present  the  parents  of  the  boy,  his  brothers  and  sisters,  his  friends,  and 
some  few  strangers.  After  several  ceremonies  had  been  performed,  the  priests  read 
a  portion  of  the  law  in  Hebrew  ;  the  boy  then  stepped  forward  to  the  desk  or  plat- 
form, near  the  centre  of  the  building,  and  read  from  a  roll  of  parchment,  in  a  clear 
distinct  voice,  a  short  psalm.  A  pause  ensued,  and  then  the  old  man  addressed  the 
boy  in  a  few  brief  sentences,  teUing  him  that  he  had  attained  to  years  of  discretion, 
and  knew  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong,  great  responsibility  rested  on 
him  ;  that  it  was  his  duty  to  follow  the  good  and  shun  the  evil ;  that  it  became  him 
to  show  that  the  instruction  he  had  received  had  not  been  given  in  vain ;  that  he 
must  diligently  practise  that  which  he  knew  to  be  right ;  be  obedient  to  his  parents, 
kind  and  affectionate  to  his  brothers  and  sisters,  charitable  to  those  who  needed  his 
help,  and  faithful  to  the  religion  he  had  been  instructed  in.  Then,  placing  his 
hand  on  the  boy's  head,  he  prayed  earnestly  that  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob,  would  bless  the  lad,  would  preserve  him  from  danger  and  from  sin, 
and  make  him  a  wise  and  good  man,  if  he  should  be  spared  to  enjoy  length  of  days ; 
or,  if  his  life  should  be  short,  that  he  might  be  admitted  to  the  presence  of  God  in 
heaven."  (Biblical  Things  not  Generally  Known.)  The  Holy  Family  on  pilgrimage : 
— Every  year  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem.  Very  pleasant  must  their  journey  have 
been.  Very  different  was  it  from  the  journeys  we  make  in  this  Western  isle.  No 
wide  road  led  from  Nazareth  to  Jerusalem.  The  eighty  miles  of  ground  that 
stretched  between  the  village  and  the  city  was  only  crossed  by  narrow  paths.  The 
journey  had  to  be  made  on  foot.  Here  and  there  would  be  a  mule  carrying  some 
one  too  feeble  to  walk  the  whole  distance.  Each  village  on  the  route  would  furnish 
its  little  cluster  of  pilgrims,  and  as  the  new-comers  mingled  with  those  who  were 
already  in  the  pilgrim  band,  pleasant  would  be  the  greetings  passing  from  one  to 
another.  We  can  picture  them  to  ourselves  as  they  vrind  through  the  valleys  and 
at  times  cross  the  brow  of  a  projecting  hill.  We  can  hear  their  voices  raised  in 
song,  raised  so  that  the  hills  resound,  and  the  awakened  echoes  bid  you  think  that 
the  mountains  are  clapping  their  hands  for  joy.  You  perhaps  have  noticed  in  the 
Fsalms  as  they  aiy)  given  in  the  Bible,  here  and  there,  the  heading,  "  Song  of 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Degrees."  They  are  the  psalms  which  the  pilgrims  sang  at  they  stepped  along — 
processional  hymns  we  might  call  them.  Turn  to  two  of  them  (psalms  cxxi.  and 
cxxii.)  and  see  how  wonderfully  fitting  are  their  words  for  that  exulting  singing 
▼hich  the  pilgrims  would  encourage  one  another  to  give  utterance  to.  We  can  well 
imagine  Psalm  cxxii.  being  sung  by  the  pilgrims  when  first  the  walls  and 
palaces  of  the  Holy  City  appeared  in  sight.  The  Gospel  tells  that  when  Jesus  waa 
twelve  years  old  He  was  for  the  first  time  taken  by  His  parents  on  pilgrimage  to 
Jerusalem.  Too  may  be  sure  that  He  would  take  a  boy's  delight  in  the  journey. 
It  was  one  which  would  enable  Him  to  open  His  eyes  upon  His  Father's  beautiful 
world,  and  to  see  beyond  the  blue  mountains  which  always  seemed  so  mysterioua 
in  the  distance  as  He  looked  upon  them  from  the  vale  of  Nazareth.  We  may  be 
sure  that  He  would  be  on  the  look-out  with  all  a  boy's  eagerness,  for  the  first  view 
of  the  distant  towers  of  the  Holy  City.  He  would  enjoy,  too,  the  companionship 
of  the  other  pilgrim-boys.  There  were,  as  the  story  itself  tells  us,  many  of  His 
kinsfolk  among  the  pilgrim  band,  and  He  would  pass  from  one  group  to  another, 
and  be  welcomed  by  aU  whom  He  approached.  When  the  solemn  days  at  Jerusalem 
were  ended,  the  company  of  pilgrims  started  back  for  their  homes.  The  Child 
Jesus  tarried  behind  in  Jerusalem.  You  all  know  how  Joseph  and  Mary  sought 
Hitn.  I  will  not  now  ask  you  to  contemplate  the  scene  in  the  Temple-portico,  where 
He  was  at  length  discovered.  It  is  a  scene  of  great  beauty,  and  one  on  which  the 
thoughts  of  Christian  teachers  and  Christian  artists  have  reverently  pondered  ever 
since  it  has  been  described  on  the  Gospel  page.  But  the  story  of  our  Lord's 
pilgrimage  is  one  on  which  our  thoughts  may  well  rest,  one  which  we  may  well  take 
to  our  homes  and  ponder  over.  We  have  in  it  an  example  set  which  we  should 
never  lose  sight  of.  When  twelve  years  old,  children  were  considered  old  enough 
to  go  with  their  parents  to  the  great  worship  of  the  whole  year  at  Jerusalem.  The 
way  of  the  pDgrimage  was  made  glad  with  songs  such  as  would  stir  the  young 
heart.  In  our  Christian  services,  too,  we  ought  to  think  of  children  just  as  dad  the 
dwellers  in  the  Holy  Land,  in  their  Jewish  services.  Again,  all  life  long  we  should 
be  conscious  that  we  are  but  sojourners  and  pilgrims  upon  earth.  "  Here  we  have 
no  continuing  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come."  (H.  N.  Grimley,  M.A.)  Important 
things  wrought  silently  and  secretly : — You  have,  perhaps,  seen  a  beautiful  rose, 
soon  after  it  has  unfolded  its  blossom.  You  looked  at  it  yesterday,  as  you  passed 
it  in  the  garden,  or  watered  it  in  the  window,  and  it  was  only  a  rosebud,  a  little 
knot  of  fragrant  petals,  wrapped  up  together  and  clinging  to  one  another.  You  visit 
it  to-day,  and  you  find  that  during  the  night  a  change  has  taken  place.  The  knot 
has  untied  itself,  the  petals  have  separated  from  one  another,  and  now  form,  not  a 
knot,  but  a  little  cup,  in  which  are  some  drops  of  the  morning  dew,  a  cup  mora 
delicately  tinted  than  the  finest  porcelain,  and  breathing  forth  delicious  odours. 
The  rose  has  just  opened  its  breast  to  the  sun.  But  how  long  a  time  has  it 
taken  to  bring  about  this  result  1  First,  there  was  the  planting  the  root,  which  lay 
tinder  the  soil  all  the  winter,  and  showed  no  sign  of  hf e.  But  though  it  showed  no 
sign  of  life,  it  was  not  dead.  Nursed  for  a  time  by  the  warmth  and  moisture  of 
the  earth,  it  was  bursting  underground ;  and  in  the  spring  it  pushed  up  a  little 
green  sprout,  which  very  gradually  became  a  stem,  and  the  stem  grew  taller  every 
day,  and  at  length  a  bud  formed  as  the  crown  of  it.  And  the  bud  swelled  and 
swelled  day  by  day,  and  at  length  one  morning  you  found  it  with  its  breast  open  aa 
I  have  described.  And  all  this  was  done  quite  secretly,  without  any  noise  to  call 
attention  to  it.  Now,  in  the  Song  of  Solomon,  our  Lord,  speaking  of  Himself  by 
the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  calls  Himself  "the  Eose  of  Sharon."  And  in  Isaiah  it 
is  foretold  of  Christ,  "  He  shall  grow  up  before  Him  "  (i.e.,  before  God)  "  as  a 
tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground."  And  this  opening  of  the  rose  is 
something  like  the  opening  of  our  Lord's  human  soul,  when  He  reached  the  age  of 
twelve.  Up  to  that  period  the  Gospel  history  is  quite  silent  as  to  anything  thought, 
or  said,  or  done  by  Him.  No  doubt  much  was  going  on  in  His  human  mind  ;  no 
doubt  He  had  many  thoughts  and  feelings,  all  of  them  holy,  pure,  and  beautiful, 
the  exact  model  of  what  a  child's  thoughts  and  feelings  ought  to  be ;  but  God  has 
screened  them  from  us,  and  not  been  pleased  to  tell  us  what  they  were.  At  twelve 
years  old,  however,  the  bud  unfolds  itself ;  our  blessed  Lord  becomes  fully  conscious 
who  He  is ;  and  we  hear  Him  speaking  and  calling  God  His  Father,  and  are  allowed 
a  glimpse  into  His  mind  and  thoughts.  And  what  beautiful  fragrant  thoughts  thej 
are  1  Do  not  estimate  the  importance  of  events,  then,  by  the  noise  they  make  in 
the  world.  The  events  which  startle  us  most  are  not  always  those  of  greatest  con. 
•equenoe.    Men  often  stare  and  gaze  at  that  which  is  the  least  worthy  of  attention. 


•HIP.  n.]  8T.  LUKE,  fl69 

What  is  it,  tliink  you,  which  interests  the  holy  angels  most  ?  a  great  battle  ?  a 
great  triumph  ?  the  fall  of  a  great  city  or  a  great  empire  ?  Rather  it  is  the  growth 
and  progress  of  God's  kingdom  in  the  hearts  of  single  persons — the  battle  against 
Bin  which  this  man  is  fighting  in  Christ's  strength,  the  triumph  over  sin  which  that 
man  is  winning  by  Christ's  grace ;  in  a  word,  the  inner  life  of  men,  the  life  of  the 
immortal  spirit — not  that  life  which  is  acted  in  history,  and  related  by  historians. 
And  the  better  and  holier  we  become,  the  more  shall  we  be  interested  in  what 
interests  God  and  holy  angels.  {Dean  Goulburn.)  On  the  way  to  Jerusalem: — 
The  herdsmen  of  Nazareth  were  ignorant  and  poor  ;  still  they  complied  with  the 
law,  and  at  least  once  every  year  went  up  to  Jerusalem  after  the  custom  of  the 
feast.  In  the  procession  on  one  such  occasion  there  was  a  family,  the  head  of 
which  was  a  plain,  serious-looking  middle-aged  man,  with  whom  the  world  has 
since  become  acquainted  as  Joseph.  His  wife,  Mary,  was  then  about  twenty-seven 
years  of  age,  gentle,  modest,  sweet-spoken,  of  fair  complexion,  with  eyes  of  violet- 
blue,  and  hair  half  brown,  half  gold.  She  rode  a  donkey.  James,  Joses,  Simon, 
and  Jude,  full-grown  sons  of  Joseph,  walked  with  their  father.  A  child  of  Mary, 
twelve  years  old,  walked  near  her.  It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  group  attracted 
special  attention  from  their  fellow-travellers.     "  The  peace  of  the  Lord  be  with 

Jou  !  "  they  would  say  in  salute,  and  have  return  in  kind.  More  than  eighteen 
undred  years  have  passed  since  that  obscure  family  made  that  pious  pilgrimage. 
Could  they  come  back  and  make  it  now,  the  singing,  shouting,  and  worship  that 
would  go  with  them  would  be  without  end ;  not  Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,  nor 
Caesar,  nor  any,  or  all  of  the  modern  kings,  would  have  such  attendance.  Let  us 
single  out  the  Boy,  that  we  may  try  to  see  Him  as  He  was — afoot  like  His  brethren, 
small,  growing,  and  therefore  slender.  His  attire  was  simple :  on  His  head  a 
white  handkerchief,  held  in  place  by  a  cord,  one  corner  turned  under  at  the  forehead, 
the  other  comers  loose.  A  tunic,  also  white,  covered  Him  from  neck  to  knees,  girt 
at  the  waist.  His  arms  and  legs  were  bare  ;  on  his  feet  were  sandals  of  the  most 
primitive  kind,  being  soles  of  ox-hide  attached  to  the  ankles  by  leathern  straps.  He 
carried  a  stick  that  was  much  taller  than  Himself.  The  old  painters,  called  upon 
to  render  this  childish  figure  on  canvas,  would  have  insisted  upon  distinguishing  it 
with  a  nimbus  at  least ;  some  of  them  would  have  filled  the  air  over  its  head  with 
cherubs  ;  some  would  have  had  the  tunic  plunged  into  a  pot  of  madder :  the  very 
courtierly  amongst  them  would  have  blocked  the  way  of  both  mother  and  son  with 
monks  and  cardinals.  The  Boy's  face  comes  to  me  very  clearly.  I  imagine  Him 
by  the  roadside  on  a  rock  which  He  has  climbed,  the  better  to  see  the  procession 
winding  picturesquely  through  the  broken  country.  His  head  is  raised  in  an  effort 
at  far  sight.  The  light  of  an  intensely  brilliant  sun  is  upon  His  countenance, 
which  in  general  cast  is  oval  and  delicate.  Under  the  folds  of  the  handkerchief  I 
see  the  forehead,  covered  by  a  mass  of  projecting  sun-burned  blond  hair,  which  the 
wind  has  taken  liberties  with  and  tossed  into  tufts.  The  eyes  are  in  shade,  leaving 
a  doubt  whether  they  are  in  brown,  or  violet  like  His  mother's ;  yet  they  are  large 
and  healthfully  clear,  and  still  retain  the  parallelism  of  arch  between  brow  and 
upper  lid,  usually  the  characteristic  of  children  and  beautiful  women.  The  nose  is 
of  regular  inward  curve,  joined  prettily  to  a  short  upper  lip  by  nostrils  just  full 
enough  to  give  definition  to  transparent  shadows  in  the  corners.  The  mouth  is 
small,  and  open  slightly,  so  that  through  the  scarlet  freshness  of  its  lines  I  catch 
a  glimpse  of  two  white  teeth.  The  cheeks  are  ruddy  and  round,  and  only  a  certain 
squareness  of  chin  tells  of  years  this  side  the  day  the  Magi  laid  their  treasures  at 
His  feet.  Putting  face  and  figure  together,  and  mindful  of  the  attitude  of  interest 
in  what  is  passing  before  Him,  the  Lad  as  I  see  Him  on  the  rock  is  handsome  and 
attractive.  When  the  journey  shall  have  ended,  and  His  mother  made  Him  ready 
for  the  court  of  the  Temple,  He  may  justify  a  more  worshipful  description ;  we  may 
th«n  see  in  Him  the  promise  of  the  Saviour  of  men  in  the  comeliness  of  budding 
youth.  His  sad  destiny  yet  far  in  the  future.  [Author  of  "  Ben  Hur.^')  The  silence 
»/  Scripture  instructive : — There  is  inspiration  in  the  silence  of  Scripture.  The 
Holy  Spirit  records  only  this  one  incident  in  the  life  of  Jesus  from  His  infancy  to 
the  beginning  of  His  ministry.  He  thus  teaches  that  quietness  and  modesty 
are  the  best  ornaments  of  youth.  And  by  the  special  character  of  this  one  incident 
which  He  has  chosen  to  record,  He]  teaches  that  the  first  duty  of  children  is  to 
r«Bort  to  God,  in  His  House,  and  in  His  appointed  means  of  religious  instruction 
and  grace ;  and  the  second,  to  be  subject  to  parents  and  others  who  are  over  them 
in  the  Lord.  {Bishop  Chris.  Wordsworth.)  Religious  training : — As  soon  as  the 
Child  Jesus  was  old  enough  to  join  in  public  worship,  His  parents  took  Him  witb 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a^ 

them  to  the  Temple.  It  was  not  enough  to  Bet  Him  a  good  example.  They  pro- 
posed to  train  Him  in  the  right  way.  Whatever  a  child  ought  to  do,  his  parentf 
ought  to  see  that  he  does  do.  If  he  likes  to  do  it,  so  much  the  better.  If  he  does 
not  like  to  do  it,  so  much  the  more  need  is  there  that  his  parents  should  make  him 
do  it.  Prayer  and  praise  and  reverence  and  devotion,  and  obedience  and  right 
being  and  right  doing  in  all  things  at  home,  and  worship  and  attentive  hearing  in 
the  House  of  God,  are  duties  which  parents  ought  to  see  that  their  children  attend 
to.  If  the  children  fail  in  these  things,  the  parents  cannot  count  themselves  free 
of  responsibility  of  blame.    (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 

Ver.  43.  When  they  lisid  fulfilled  the  days. — The  gospel  of  the  Childhood : — We 
notice  in  the  Child  Jesus — 1.  A  holy  disposition.  It  was  this  which  led  His  mother 
to  bring  Him  with  her  to  the  Temple,  and  which  led  Him  to  tarry  there  after  His 
mother  had  gone  away.  A  holy  disposition  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  good- 
ness :  the  soft  wax  out  of  which  is  moulded  the  image  of  love,  purity,  obedienco 
(James  iii.  17).  2.  A  love  for  God's  house.  He  loved  the  Temple  far  better  than 
the  forum  or  market-place.  He  willingly  remained  in  the  house  of  His  heavenly 
Father — the  attribute  of  a  good  Son.  3.  A  desire  for  holy  conversation.  He  was 
found  not  playing  with  other  boys ;  not  engaged  in  idle  sports  :  but  conversing  with 
the  old  men  in  the  Temple ;  listening  to  words  of  soberness,  truth,  and  wisdom.  4. 
A  deep  sense  of  spiritual  relationship.  Loving  and  obedient  as  He  was  to  His 
earthly  parents,  yet  He  placed  His  spiritual  Father  before  them.  As  says 
iVugustine,  He  loved  the  Creator  before  the  generator.  5.  A  loving  reverence 
\owards  His  parents.  He  was  subject  to  them.  Who  ?  To  whom  ?  God  to  man. 
Humility  seen  in  its  highest  power.  Conclusion  :  The  child  is  ever  the  father  of 
the  man.  Let  us  take  care  to  form  and  fashion  the  child-minds  committed  to  our 
keeping  after  this  glorious  and  pure  model.  (William  of  Auvergne.)  Filial 
obedience: — Our  Lord  furnishes  us  with  a  striking  example  of  filial  obedience.  He 
was  true  God,  the  Creator  and  Lord  of  all ;  yet  He  submits  Himself  to  His  mother 
after  the  flesh,  and  to  His  foster-father  also,  for  our  imitation.  From  His  holy 
example  let  children  learn,  in  relation  to  their  parents — 1.  To  love  them  honestly, 
sincerely,  devotedly  ;  to  repay  them  somewhat  for  the  great  love  which  their  parents 
have  expended  upon  themselves.  2.  To  answer  them  respectfully.  3.  To  render 
them  honest  obedience.  (Eph.  vi.  1,  2  ;  Col.  iii.  20.)  The  disobedient  child  makes 
the  sinful  man.  4.  To  succour  them  in  need.  It  is  dreadful  ingratitude  to  do 
nothing  for  those  who  have  done  so  much  for  us.  Our  blessed  Lord  had  a  care  tor 
His  mother  even  on  the  cross.  A  noble  Eoman  lady  ministered  of  her  breast  to 
her  mother  in  prison.  Remember,  finally,  that  filial  love  ever  commands  a  bless- 
ing. (J.  CUchtove.)  Revelation  of  perfect  child-life : — The  life  of  the  child  is 
threefold.  It  is  lived  not  in  the  world ;  it  is  the  life  of  home,  and  church,  and 
school.  Think  of  Jesus  in  His  child-life  as  a  pattern  for  Christian  children.  I. 
Home  life.  1.  Obedience  to  parents.  This  is  a  prime  principle  in  home  life — the 
germ  of  all  other  obedience,  social  and  national.  A  habit  of  life  which  is  needful, 
in  order  that  we  may  be  led  to  obedience  to  Christ.  2.  Subjection  to  home 
authority.  Too  much  self-will  now-a-days  in  children;  they  are  impatient  of 
restraint,  want  to  be  their  own  masters,  to  strike  out  walks  of  life  when  very 
young.  Our  Lord  probably  wrought  at  His  reputed  father's  trade.  Anyhow,  He 
was  subject  to  His  parents,  i.e.  (1)  Never  gainsaid  their  authority.  (2)  Never 
crossed  their  wishes.  (3)  Never  questioned  their  right  to  His  time.  (4)  Never 
murmured  or  rebelled  against  them  in  word  or  deed.  II.  Chubch  life.  1. 
Religion  is  for  children  as  well  as  for  those  grown  up.  Children  are  members  of 
Christ's  Church,  and  should  be  trained  as  such.  2.  Like  the  Jews,  let  us  early 
teach  children  Holy  Scripture.  We  are  more  favoured  than  they,  in  having  the 
gospel  to  impart  to  our  little  ones.  3.  Child-life  is  passed,  as  it  were,  between  the 
font  and  the  holy  table.  With  confirmation  child-life,  strictly  speaking,  ends.  4. 
Let  the  ehild  ever  be  taught  to  look  forward  with  longing  and  hope  to  the  time  when 
he  may  go  up  to  the  great  Christian  feast.  Holy  Communion.  5.  Let  religious 
duties  be  made  a  custom,  so  that,  as  with  Jesus,  they  may  be  instinctively  ke;| 
up  in  later  years  of  manhood.  III.  School  lttb.  Education  a  question  of  the 
day.  Religious  education  the  only  legitimate  form  for  a  Christian  child.  But  the 
child's  part  is  in  accepting  and  seeking  knowledge.  1.  Children  must  be  content  to 
learn.  Teaching  is  necessary.  Even  Jesus  received  instruction.  2.  Children 
should  be  encouraged  to  inquire  into  things.  (Thot.  H.  Bamett.)  Ungrudging 
urviee : — "  When  they  had  fulfilled  the  days"— St.  Joseph  and  the  blessed  Yirgia 


.n.] 


8T.  LUKE.  VI 


did  not  only  attend  the  Passover,  which  was  celebrated  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
first  month  at  even,  but  stayed  in  Jerusalem  also  all  the  days  of  the  feast  ol 
unleavened  bread;  and  thus  did  not  leave  the  city  to  return  home  till  the  afternoon 
of  the  eighth  day  after  their  arrival.    They  were  not  in  duty  bound  to  stay  so  long ; 
thev  might  have  gone  back  sooner  without  doing  anything  wrong,  provided  that, 
for  all  the  days  of  the  feast  which  followed  the  Passover  they  had  been  careful  not 
to  eat  any  leavened  bread  at  their  own  home.    But  devout  people,  as  they  were,  do 
not  consider  how  Uttle  of  their  time  they  can  give  to  God  without  doing  wrong, 
but  give  Him  as  much  as  ever  they  can,  and  delight  in  worshipping  Him.     Think 
of  this  when  you  are  tempted  to  shorten  your  prayers,  or  to  drop  for  the  day  your 
readino  of   Holy  Scripture,  or  to  feel  the  hours  of   Sunday  a  restraint  and  a 
weariness,  and  to  long  that  they  would  fly  faster.    Prayer  and   Scripture  and 
Sunday  are  only  dull  because  your  heart  is  not  in  them,  because  you  do  not  try  to 
throw  your  mind  into  them,  and  so  to  create  for  yourself  an  interest  in  them.     If 
your  heart  were  in  them,  be  sure  you  would  find  them  the  purest  of  all  pleasures, 
and  wish  you  had  a  longer  time  to  give  to  them,  not  a  shorter.     (Dean  Goulburn.) 
Passover  duties  and  employments:— It  mU  he  interesting  to  know  how  St.  Josepu 
ind   St   Mary  spent  the  days  which  they  are  here  said  to  have   "  fulhlled, 
especially  when  we  remember  that  they  had  the  Holy  Child  with  them,  whose 
human  mind,  we  may  be  sure,  would  drink  in  eagerly  everything  which  He  saw  m 
the  Temple  worship.    Where,  then,  in  the  first  place,  did  they  live  during  these 
days?     Some  of   the  country  people  who  came  up  to  keep  the  Passover  were 
accommodated  in  private  houses.     This  was  the  case  with  our  Lord  and  His 
disciples,  who  ate  together  His  last  Passover  in  a  private  house,  to  which  He  directed 
theni  by  the  token  of  a  man  carrying  a  pitcher  of  water,  who  should  enter  into  it. 
It  was  usual  in  these  cases  for  the  guests  to  leave  behind  them,  as  a  kind  of  pay- 
ment for  their  accommodation,  the  skin  of  the  lamb,  and  the  utensils  employed  m 
cooking  it     But  very  often  such  accommodation  was  not  to  be  found ;  every  inn 
and  private  house  in  Jerusalem  was  quite  full,  and  in  this  case  people  from  the 
country  were  obliged  to  lodge  without  the  walls  in  a  tent  which  they  brought  with 
them      Perhaps  St.  Joseph  and  St.  Mary  may  have  been  all  the  more  ready  to  do 
this  because,  having  the  Holy  Child  with  them,  whose  life  had  already  been  sought 
by  those  in  power,  they  may  have  thought  it  prudent  not  to  be  seen  m  the  city 
niore  than  was  absolutely  necessary.     St.  Joseph  would  have  to  go  to  the  temple  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  fourteenth  of  Abib  to  kill  his  Passover  lamb,  and  probably  he 
would  take  our  Lord  with  him.     The  Holy  Child  watched  the  slaughter  of  the  lamb, 
as  the  blood  gushed  forth  from  the  wound  into  the  golden  cup  held  by  one  of  the 
priests  to  receive  it,  and  was  then  splashed  out  in  one  jet  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  of 
burnt-offering.     Then  they  returned  to  their  tent,  carrying  the  carcase  of  the  lamb 
with  them,  and  prepared  the  supper,  of  which,  probably,  as  their  household  must 
have  been  too  small  for  the  lamb,  and  as  ten  people  at  least  were  required  to  make 
a  Passover  company,  some  of  St.  Joseph's  family  or  neighbours  partook  with  them. 
The  first  thing  would  be  to  roast  the  lamb,  which  was  usually  done  by  running  two 
Bkewers  of  pomegranate  wood,  one  lengthwise  through  the  body  of  the  creature,  and 
another  crossing  it  through  the  breast  and  forelegs,  so  that  the  lamb  had  tna 
appearance  of  being  crucified,  and  then  placing  it  carefully  in  the  midst  of  an  oven, 
the  bricks  of  which  were  made  red-hot,  but  not  aUowing  it  to  touch  the  sides.     Then 
they  would  spread  the  table,  and  place  on  the  sideboard,  ready  at  hand,  a  plate  ol 
onleavened  bread  (large  thin  biscuits),  another  of  bitter  herbs,  such  as  endive,  or 
wild  lettuce,  and  a  vessel  containing  a  thick  sauce,  made  of  the  consistency  of  clay, 
to  remind  them  of  the  brickmaking  in  Egypt,  into  which  sauce  everything  eaten  at 
the  supper  was  to  be  dipped.    Last  would  come  the  partaking  of  the  supper.     St. 
Joseph,  as  head  of  the  family,  would  take  a  cup  of  red  wine  in  his  hand,  and,  after 
saying  a  grace,  taste  it  and  pass  it  round.    Then  the  herbs  were  placed  on  the  table 
and  partaken  of ;  then  the  unleavened  bread ;  and,  that  being  done,  the  roasted 
lamb  was  brought  in  and  placed  before  the  head  of  the  family.    But  before  it  was 
eaten,  a  second  cup  of  wine  was  filled ;  and  then  it  was  customary  for  some  child 
(perhaps,  in  this  case,  it  may  have  been  our  Lord  Himself)  to  ask  the  head  of  the 
house    "What  meaneth  this  service?"    In  reply,  the  reason  of  keeping  the  Pass- 
over  was  recited,  Ac,  after  which  Psalms  cxiu.  and  cxiv.  were  sung.     Then  the  lamb 
was  carved  and  eaten  ;  a  third  and  a  fourth  cup  of  wme  succeeded ;  and  then  aU 
was  conc'uded  by  singing  Psalms  cxv.  to  cxviii.    (Ifcid.) 

Ver.  44  45.  And  they  sought  Him  among  their  MnsfoUc— Out  of  company  with 


27J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 


Jesus : — It  seems  scarcely  credible  that  that  fond  mother— that  model  of  what  a 
mother  ought  to  be — could  have  gone  a  whole  day's  journey  without  Jesus ;  but  she 
did.  And  one  can  understand  too  how  she  fell  into  this  error.  She  had  a  great 
many  things  to  think  about.  She  had  been  meeting  a  good  many  friends  at  the 
feast.  Those  were  stirring  times.  People  had  been  coming  up  from  aU  parts  of 
Judjea  and  Galilee  with  tidings  of  an  upheaving  in  the  minds  of  the  people  and  a 
general  expectation  was  pervading  the  whole  population  ;  a  hope  of  approaching 
liberty ;  a  desire  to  break  the  tyrant  thrall  of  Rome.  So,  doubtless,  there  was  a 
good  deal  to  talk  about,  and  no  doubt  the  Virgin  Mary  was  deeply  interested  in 
what  Bhe  heard.  Joseph,  too,  would  have  a  good  deal  to  communicate  to  those 
with  whom  he  came  in  contact.  So  they  were  very  busy,  and  very  interested ;  and 
in  their  business  and  in  their  thronging  interest  they  forgot  the  absence  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  they  went  for  a  whole  day's  journey  concluding  that  He  was  with 
them  when  He  was  not.  Let  us  ask  ourselves,  "  How  is  it  that  Christians  lose  the 
sense  of  the  fellowship  of  Jesus  ?"  What  are  the  dangers  we  have  most  to  guard 
against  in  this  respect?  I.  The  danger  arising  from  intebcoubse  with  oub 
TELLOw-aiEN.  II.  The  danger  arising  from  gossiping  convebsation.  I  do  not  for  a 
moment  mean  to  charge  this  against  the  blessed  mother  of  our  Lord.  At  the  same 
time,  the  circumstances  of  the  case  suggest  such  a  possibility,  and  the  possibility 
suggests  a  lesson  to  ourselves.  III.  The  danger  of  losing  the  consciousness  of  the 
presence  of  Christ  in  beligious  intebcoubse,  is  a  danger,  I  believe,  that  specially 
belongs  to  this  day.  IV.  The  danger  of  losing  Cheist  in  His  sebvice.  Work  for 
Christ  has  its  own  peculiar  dangers.  (W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Religious  supposi- 
tion:— "  Supposing  Him  to  have  been  of  the  company  " — what  a  pity  they  did  not 
make  sure  1  Have  we  got  beyond  a  slow  uncertain,  "  I  hope,"  •'  I  suppose  Jesus  ia 
with  me  "  ?  If  you  must  suppose,  suppose  He  is  not  with  you.  Suppose  there  is  no 
home  and  no  welcome  for  you  at  the  journey's  end  ?  Of  whatever  else  you  may  be 
uncertain,  be  sure  about  this.  Where  did  they  lose  Him  ?  Not  in  Nazareth,  but  in 
the  city.  It  is  sadly  easy  to  lose  Christ  in  a  great  city  with  all  its  pleasures  and 
blandishments.  This  city  is  the  sepulchre  of  many  a  young  man's  piety,  the 
end  of  many  a  parent's  hopes.  Jesus  is  lost  since  \ou  came  to  the  city,  and  you 
are  likely  to  be  lost  too,  unless  you  find  Him  again.  They  lost  Him  at  a  feast. 
Where  the  company  of  Jesus  is  put  in  peril  stop  from  the  feast.  They  lost  Him  in 
a  crowd.  How  many  miss  Jesus  in  the  noise  and  bustle  1  Be  resolute  to  have 
your  quiet  hours.  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  they  turned  back  and 
sought  Him.  Jesus  is  lost  and  Jesus  must  be  found.  Have  you  sought  Him  ? 
Like  Joseph  and  Mary,  your  way  lies  in  another  direction.  Break  away  from  every- 
thing. Go  after  Jesus  until  you  find  Him.  {J.  JacU'^onWray.)  ^^  Supposing  Him 
to  have  been  in  the  company  " ; — I.  This  was  a  most  natueal  supposition.  1.  Christ's 
parents  did  not  expect  to  find  Him  wandering  alone.  He  loved  society.  Jesus  was 
not  one  whose  company  would  be  shunned  because  of  His  ill -manners ;  rather  would 
it  be  courted  because  of  the  sweetness  of  His  disposition.  He  would  not  make 
Himself  disagreeable,  and  then  crown  that  disagreeableness  by  stealing  away  from 
those  whom  He  had  vexed.  They  knew  the  sweetness  of  their  dear  child's 
character  and  the  sociableness  of  His  disposition,  and,  therefore,  they  supposed  Him 
to  have  been  in  the  company.  2.  They  never  suspected  that  He  would  be  found 
in  any  wrong  place.  We  never  look  for  Jesus  where  a  question  of  morals  might 
be  raised,  for  He  is  undefiled.  Let  His  example  be  followed  by  all  in  this.  IL 
This  supposition  bbought  them  qbeat  sobbow.  From  this  I  gather  that,  with  regard 
to  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  ought  to  leave  nothing  as  a  matter  of  supposition.  Do  not 
suppose  anything  about  Jesus  at  aU.  Do  not  suppose  anything  about  His 
character,  His  doctrine,  or  His  work ;  go  in  for  certainty  on  such  points.  1.  Do 
not  suppose  Him  to  be  in  your  hearts.  Outward  ceremonies  convey  no  grace  to 
graceless  persons.  2.  Do  not  ever  suppose  that  Christ  is  in  our  assemblies  because 
we  meet  in  this  house.  Christ  is  not  present  where  He  is  not  honoured.  All 
your  architecture,  music,  learning,  eloquence,  are  of  small  account ;  Jesus  may  be 
absent  when  all  these  things  are  present  in  profusion,  and  then  your  public  worship 
will  only  be  the  magnificent  funeral  of  religion,  but  the  life  of  God  will  be  faraway 
Our  question  every  Sunday  morning  ought  to  be,  "  What  think  ye  ;  will  He  come 
to  the  feast  ?"  for  if  He  does  not  come  to  the  feast  it  will  be  the  mockery  of  a 
festival,  but  no  bread  will  be  on  the  table  for  hungry  souls.  3.  Let  us  not  take  it 
for  granted  that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  necessarily  with  us  in  our  Christian  labours.  Dc 
we  not  too  often  go  out  to  do  good  without  special  prayer,  imagining  that  Jesus 
mast  surely  be  with  us  as  a  matter  of  course  ?    Perhaps  we  thus  conclude  because 


OHA*.  ■,]  ST.  LUKE.  273 

He  has  been  with  ns  so  long,  or  because  we  feel  ourselves  fully  equipped  for  the 
occasion,  or  because  we  do  not  even  think  whether  He  is  with  us  or  not.  This  is 
perilous.  If  Jesus  is  not  with  ns,  we  toil  all  the  night  and  take  nothing  ;  but  if 
Jesus  is  with  ns,  He  teaches  as  how  to  cast  the  net,  and  a  great  multitude  of  fishes 
are  taken.  III.  The  supposition  made  by  these  two  good  people  mat  instruct  us. 
This  is  for  the  children.  Jesus  is  here  an  example  to  them,  for  He  was  at  this  time 
a  child.  Suppose  He  had  been  in  the  company  returning  to  Nazareth?  How 
would  He  have  behaved  Himself  ?  1.  I  am  sure  when  the  whole  company  sang  a 
psalm,  He  would  have  been  among  the  sweetest  singers.  No  inattention  or 
weariness  in  Him  when  God  was  to  be  praised.  2.  I  feel  persuaded  that  Jesus 
would  have  been  found  in  that  company  listening  to  those  who  talked  of  holy 
things.  Especially  would  He  have  been  eager  to  hear  explanations  of  what  He  had 
seen  in  the  Temple.  He  would  have  been  anxious  to  share  with  the  grown-up 
people  all  the  solemn  thoughts  of  the  day.  3.  I  feel  sure  also  that  if  He  had  been 
in  the  company  going  home.  He  would  have  been  the  most  obliging,  helpful, 
pleasing  child  in  all  the  company ;  if  anybody  had  needed  to  have  a  burden 
carried,  He  would  have  been  the  first  to  offer  ;  if  any  kindly  deed  could  be  done,  He 
would  be  first  in  doing  it.  IV.  Supposing  Him  to  be  in  our  company  in  all  His 
GRACIOUS  INFLUENCE,  what  then  ?  1.  How  happy  will  such  company  be  1  2.  How 
united  His  people  will  all  become  I  3.  How  holy  they  will  all  grow  1  How  teach- 
able ;  how  lively  1  how  earnest ;  how  confident.  V.  Jesus  has  been  in  the  company, 
WHETHER  WE  HAVE  SEEN  HiM  OR  NOT.  (C.  H.  SpurgeoTi.)  The  dUappearance  of 
Jesus : — Every  child  is  a  treasure  to  the  heart  of  an  affectionate  parent ;  but  the 
Holy  Child  Jesus  must  have  been  so  sacred  and  precious  a  treasure  to  His  mother 
and  her  husband  that  one  wonders  how  they  could  ever  have  lost  sight  of  Him. 
Perhaps  it  may  have  happened  in  this  way :  when  they  were  about  to  return,  they 
would  doubtless  give  Him  notice  that  they  were  going  home,  and  would  expect  Hira 
to  follow.  But,  in  the  hurry  of  packing  and  starting,  they  would  necessarily  take 
their  eyes  off  from  Him  for  some  time,  and  then  He  would  find  His  opportunity  to 
withdraw  to  the  Temple.  It  must  be  remembered  that  hundreds  of  other  pilgrims 
would  be  on  the  move  homeward  at  the  same  moment.  All  those  who  lived  north 
of  Jerusalem,  forming  an  immense  caravan,  would  start  with  Joseph  and  Mary, 
and  go  by  the  same  road.  This  would  create  great  confusion;  and,  amidst  a 
general  lading  of  mules  and  asses  and  a  general  preparation  for  the  day's  journey, 
a  single  child  might  be  easily  missed.  Moreover,  we  are  told  by  some  writers  that 
it  was  the  custom  in  these  pilgrimages  for  all  the  men  to  travel  in  one  company 
by  themselves,  and  all  the  women  in  another,  the  boys  travelling,  as  it  might 
happen,  either  with  their  father  or  their  mother.  If  this  was  the  case,  it  is  easy  to 
understand  how  neither  our  Lord's  mother  nor  her  husband  were  made  uneasy  by 
missing  Him.  St.  Joseph  would  say,  "He  is  with  His  mother,  no  doubt ";  and 
the  blessed  Virgin  would  say,  "  Doubtless  Joseph  is  taking  care  of  Him."  (Dean 
Goulbum.)  A  lost  Christ: — Some  years  ago  an  institution  for  the  blind  was 
erected  in  one  of  our  large  towns.  The  committee  put  their  wise  heads  together, 
and  decided  that  as  the  building  was  for  the  blind,  for  those  who  could  not  see — 
there  was  only  waste  of  money  and  no  reason  in  going  to  the  expense  of  windows. 
Scientific  ventilation  and  heating  was  provided,  but  no  windows,  because — as  the 
committee  very  logically  put  it — it  was  no  use  in  the  world  providing  light  for  those 
who  cannot  see  it.  Accordingly,  the  new  Blind  Asylum  was  inaugurated  and 
opened,  and  the  poor  sightless  patients  settled  into  the  house.  Things  did  not  go 
well  with  them,  however.  They  began  to  sicken,  one  after  another;  a  great 
languor  fell  on  them,  they  felt  always  distressed  and  restless,  craving  for  something, 
they  hardly  knew  what ;  and  after  one  or  two  had  died,  and  all  were  ill,  the  com- 
mittee sat  on  the  matter,  and  resolved  to  open  windows.  Then  the  sun  poured  in, 
and  the  white  faces  recovered  colour,  and  the  flagging  vital  energies  revived,  the 
depressed  spirits  recovered,  and  health  and  rest  returned.  I  think  this  is  not 
nnlike  the  condition  of  a  vast  number  of  people.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Sun  of  the 
soul,  the  Light  of  the  world.  It  is  He  who  gives  health  and  rest  to  the  heart,  and 
fills  the  soul  with  that  peace  which  passes  man's  understanding.  But  there  are  s 
good  number  who,  in  their  wisdom,  think  they  can  do  without  Him  ;  they  are  the 
wise  committee  men  sitting  on  their  own  case,  and  building  up  walls  to  shut  them- 
selves in  and  shut  Him  out.  They  cannot  see  Jesus,  the  light  of  the  world ;  there- 
tore,  they  can  live  without  Him.  Have  you  ever  noticed  what  an  expression  of 
peace  there  is  on  the  faces  of  those  whose  walk  is  with  God,  as  contrasted  with  the 
unrest  that  characterizes  the  faces  of  those  living  without  God  in  the  world — not 

18 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAF.  B. 

necessarily  bad  people,  but  living  chiefly  for  the  world,  in  a  windowless  asylum 
of  their  own  construction.  I.  A  great  number  who  do  not  realize  their  unrest.  So 
engrossed  in  daily  work,  so  fuU  of  hopes  and  schemes,  they  can  think  of  nothing 
else.  Fond  of  the  bustle  and  excitement  of  active  life.  Do  not  know  they  ar« 
travelling  along  the  road  of  life  without  Christ ;  do  not  as  yet  feel  their  loss  and 
need  of  Him.  II.  They  become  uneasy.  Becoming  aware  that  all  is  not  qnit« 
right,  they  look  for  what  they  want  in  the  wrong  place.  They  seek  distraction, 
when  it  is  rest  they  need,  and  pleasure  instead  of  peace.  Then  they  give  them- 
eelves  np  to  tittle-tattle  with  kinstolk  and  acquaintance,  and  try  to  find  happiness 
in  society.  But  it  will  not  do.  Jesus  Christ  is  not  there,  and  it  is  He  they  need, 
in.  The  last  stage  is  not  taken  by  all ;  it  is  well  for  those  who  do  take  it.  Christ 
is  found  in  the  Temple.  Enthroned  on  His  altar,  made  known  in  the  breaking 
of  the  bread,  He  waits  to  enter  into,  refresh,  strengthen,  and  give  perfect  peace  to 
the  hungry  soul,  weary  with  the  unsatisfying  food  of  the  world.  (S.  Baring-Gould, 
M.A.)  Seeking  the  lost  Christ : — I.  Whebe  Christ  was  lost.  1.  In  the  city.  2. 
At  a  feast.  3.  In  a  crowd.  H.  How  and  wheee  He  was  sought.  1.  Immediately 
the  loss  was  reaUzed.  2.  Sorrowfully.  3.  In  the  Temple.  4.  With  perseverance 
and  continuity.  IH.  How  this  search  was  kewabded.  1.  Christ  was  found.  2. 
Christ  spoke  Divine  words  to  His  parents.  3.  Christ  went  back  with  them  to  Nazareth, 
and  was  more  precious  to  them  than  ever.  {E.  D.  Solomon.)  Easy  to  lose  Christ : — 
Perhaps  our  Lord's  parents  had  been  a  little  to  blame  in  ever  taking  their  eyes  off 
Elm.  Perhaps  they  had  been  too  eager  and  careful  about  their  homeward  journey, 
and  not  mindful  enough  of  the  Holy  Child.  If  so,  they  were  punished  by  the 
dreadful  anxiety  which  they  must  have  felt  in  looking  for  Him,  and  by  the  still 
more  painful  void  which  His  absence  would  make  in  their  family  circle.  When 
people  are  not  careful  to  keep  the  Lord  with  them.  He  easily  escapes.  A  little 
heedlessness,  a  little  want  of  watchfulness,  a  little  more  eagerness  and  hurry  aboat 
worldly  things  than  there  is  any  necessity  for — and  the  Divine  Presence  slips  away. 
We  may  have  really  spoken  to  Him  in  our  prayers,  or  in  church,  and  have  been 
comforted  by  the  thought  that  we  have  done  so.  And  then  we  may  dismiss 
altogether  the  thought  of  His  presence,  and  make  no  effort  to  call  it  back.  We 
may  forget  that  His  eye  is  upon  us,  and  do  and  say  things  in  a  fit  of  temper  and 
excitement  which  we  could  not  do  and  say  if  we  felt  He  was  looking  on.  And  then 
we  shall  be  punished  by  having  to  search  for  Him  with  labour  and  dryness  of  spirit. 
We  mast  try  to  live  in  His  presence,  to  be  always  conscious  of  it,  even  when  not 
directly  thinking  of  Him.  This  is  the  great  secret  of  perfection  (Gen.  ivii.  1). 
Great  peace  and  quietness  of  heart  is  to  be  found  in  always  having  oar  eye  apon 
Christ.    (Dean  Goulbum,) 

Ver.  46.  Alter  three  days  they  found  Him  in  the  Temj>l9.— The  Jlnding  of 
Jesus  in  the  Temple: — I.  A  lesson  to  boys  and  young  men — thb  makumbss 
OF  obediemce  and  subjection  to  a  mother.  U.  Teachers  may  learn  thb  best 
KETHOD  OF  ACQUiBiNO  ENOWLEDOB,  by  asking  and  answering  questions.  III. 
Mothers  are  by  this  incident  reminded  that  thbib  ohiij>ben  have  otheb  intebebts 
THAN  those  of  this  wobld.     IY.  A  lesson  for  all :  Jssus,  lost  m  the  bustlb 

AND  excitement  OF  THE  CBOWD,  IS  ALWAYS  TO  BB  FOUND  AGAIN  IN  THE  TEMPLX. 

(D.  LongwilL)  The  Saviour  lost  and  found: — Jesus  Christ  is  only  lost  by 
sin;  when  lost.  He  must  be  found  by  repentance  and  grace.  I.  W>  unsT 
KNOW  OF  ouB  LOSS.  We  often  lose  Him,  at  first,  without  knowing  it,  just  as  His 
parents  did ;  we,  like  them,  sooner  or  later  find  out  our  loss.  1.  We  must  know 
of  oar  loss  if  we  would  seek  to  regain  it ;  we  should  not  seek  Jesus  Christ  if  wa 
did  not  know  that  we  had  lost  Him.  The  beginning  of  salvation  is  the  know- 
ledge of  sin.  He  who  does  not  know  that  he  sins,  is  not  willing  to  saffer 
correction.  2.  We  must  know  of  our  loss,  or  we  can  never  render  God  fitting 
honour  and  glory  for  our  recovery  from  it.  II.  Cub  wat  must  bb  bbtboddbn. 
We  must  look  back,  by  examination  of  conscience,  over  that  past  life  during 
which  we  have  lived  without  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Sweep  all  sin  away  by  our 
detestation  of  it  (Luke  xv.  8).  2.  Cover  all  our  defilements  in  the  robe  of  grace, 
that  we  may  be  meet  for  Jesus  Christ  (Cant.  iii.  2).  III.  The  loss  must  bb 
vouBNED  FOB.  ContritioH  follows  examination.  1.  Undo,  as  far  as  possible,  th« 
dishonour  done  to  God.  2.  Punish  sin  in  ourselves.  The  heart  being  the  foant  of 
Bin,  we  afflict  it  with  sorrow  and  remorse.  IV.  We  betadj  oub  becovebed 
rsEisUBB.  1.  No  gain  to  have  found  Jesus  Christ  with  sorrow  and  hurt,  if  He  be 
loit  again.    2.  A  second  time  we  may  not  be  able   to  find  Him.     {M.  Faber.) 


(aup.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  275 

Jesiu  at  home  in  the  Temple: — It  is  easy  to  understand  that  the  Temple  mnst 
have  had  a  wonderful  attraction  for  Him,  bo  that  He  found  it  very  dii&cult  to 
tear  Himself  away  from  it.  Oar  Lord,  having  now  ceased  to  be  an  infaat, 
and  become  a  child,  was  fully  conscious  who  He  was.  He  was  now  able  to 
look  back  to  His  former  state  of  existence,  when  He  lay  in  His  Father's  bosom 
from  all  eternity,  and  was  worshipped  as  a  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity  by  the 
holy  angels.  As  His  faculties  opened,  it  would  dawn  upon  His  memory  what  He 
had  been.  Now,  therefore,  mark  the  effect  upon  Him,  when  He  sees  for  the  first 
time  the  services  of  the  Temple.  The  Temple  was  a  Uttle  figure  or  model  of  heaven ; 
the  Temple  music  of  the  praises  of  God  continually  sung  in  heaven  ;  the  Temple 
Bervices  of  the  pure  and  holy  worship  which  the  angels  continually  offer  in  heaven 
(Heb.  viii.  5).  When  He  saw  the  Temple  services  for  the  first  time,  they  struck  a 
chord  in  His  memory,  which  vibrated  sweetly  and  solemnly.  The  priests  and 
Levites,  offering  their  sacrifices  and  their  incense,  and  singing  their  psalms, 
reminded  Him  of  the  blessed  angels  paying  their  homage  to  God  and  chanting  His 
praises  in  heaven.  He  had  never  been  the  like  upon  earth  before ;  and  it  is  quite 
probable  that,  in  a  world  of  sin  and  sorrow,  the  blessed  Jesus  (even  as  a  child)  felt 
out  of  place,  and  away  from  His  true  home.  Can  you  not  imagine  a  person  who 
had  passed  his  early  childhood  in  a  southern  clime,  where  there  were  birds  of  rich 
plumage,  lovely  stars  at  night,  being  suddenly  banished  to  the  North  Pole,  where 
his  eye  rests  upon  nothing  but  ice  and  snow,  and  all  the  beauties  of  nature  seem 
to  be  locked  up  by  a  perpetual  winter  ?  Suddenly  a  bunch  of  bright  flowers,  or  a 
bird  of  beautiful  plumage,  is  brought  to  him  as  a  gift  from  the  south.  It  reminds 
him  of  his  native  country,  and  brings  back  in  a  moment  the  flowers,  birds,  and 
landscapes  of  that  happy  land.  Something  of  this  sort  may  have  been  our  blessed 
Lord's  memories,  on  seeing  in  early  childhood  the  services  of  the  Temple.  He 
would  feel  that  the  Temple  gave  a  true  idea  of  His  Father's  house  in  heaven — waa 
His  Father's  house  on  earth.  Now  a  Father  house  is  a  home  ;  and  what  dutiful 
child  is  there  who  does  not  love  home ;  who  is  not  drawn  towards  home,  when 
away  from  it ;  who  does  not  feel  it  to  be  a  place  of  shelter,  security,  happiness,  and 
peace,  and  cling  to  it  accordingly  ?  (Dean  Goulburn.)  Christ  engaged  in  Bible 
study : — Jesus  was  not  satisfied  with  worship  alone,  nor  yet  with  passive  hearing  of 
Bible  expositions.  He  wanted  a  share  in  Bible  study.  He  had  questions  to  ask  of 
the  teachers,  and  He  was  willing  to  be  questioned.  Although  He  was  the  Son  of 
God,  He  felt  the  need  of  Bible  study ;  and,  feeling  that  need.  He  went  into  the 
Bible  school,  where  the  need  could  be  met.  If  there  is  a  man  nowadays  who 
thinks  that  he  doesn't  need  Bible  study,  or  that  it  is  beneath  his  dignity  to  be  in 
the  Bible  school,  he  either  seems  to  suppose  that  he  knows  more  than  Jesus  knew, 
or  he  seems  to  count  it  hardly  safe  to  be  on  the  same  plane  with  the  Son  of  God. 
Yet  there  are  men  and  women  who  pnt  a  high  value  on  worship,  and  none  at  all 
— for  themselves — on  social  Bible  study.  They  are  regularly  at  the  preaching 
services,  but  never  in  the  Sunday  School.  Poor,  needy,  conceited  creatures! 
UI.  C.  Trumbull.)  The  power  of  simplicity  : — One  striking  feature  in  the  life  of 
Christ  upon  the  earth  is  the  unexpected  places  where  we  find  Him.  His  advent  was 
a  surprise  in  its  humbleness.  Eeason  would  never  have  deigned  to  stoop  to  a  manger 
for  a  Messiah.  Philosophy  would  scarcely  have  dreamed  of  pointing  out  the  Christ  of 
God  with  plane  and  hammer  at  the  carpenter's  bench.  Faith  itself  was  surprised  to 
discover  Him  as  a  lad  among  the  bearded  doctors  of  Israel.  But  there  He  is.  The 
great-browed  scholars  of  the  Temple  do  not  in  the  least  suspect  the  character  of  the 
wonderful  Child  standing  in  their  midst.  They  debate  with  Him  and  are  puzzled  at 
His  arguments.  Their  ritualism  will  not  hold  together  before  that  young  and  radiant 
face.  How  little  the  Masters  realize  that  from  those  tender  lips,  pronouncing  such 
sublimely  simple  things,  shall  fall  words  of  fire  which  shall  utterly  consume  all  their 
traditions  1  That  gentle  youth,  astray  from  His  mother,  by  His  quiet  life,  and 
Innocent  language,  shall  ere  long  expose  and  overthrow  the  last  vestige  of  pretentions 
and  priestly  religion,  and  establish  a  hving  religion,  vital  with  an  energy  which  shall 
conquer  death  and  the  grave.  The  Kabbins  have  handled  the  parchment  so  long  and 
mumbled  the  letter  so  much,  that  they  cannot  understand  the  gospel  of  the  Child. 
How  often  does  Christ  stand  among  the  learned  systems  and  schemes  of  this  world, 
unknown  and  unsuspected,  because  so  simple  and  unobtrusive  I  (Aleaander 
Clark.)  Christ  in  the  Temple  school: — It  was  not  in  the  more  sacred  parts 
of  the  Temple,  nor  in  the  Holy  Place,  nor  even  in  the  Court  of  the  Altar  of 
Burnt-offering,  that  our  Lord  was  found.  There  were  chambers  in  the  precincts  of  the 
Ihe  Temple,  which  were  used  sometimes  for  the  meetings  of  the  Sauhediim,  some- 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   n. 

times  as  schools  where  the  doctors  might  teach.  This  last  was  a  very  propet 
arrangement ;  for  the  training  of  young  persons  in  God's  law  is  a  work  of  piety 
most  acceptable  to  God,  and  may  be  fitly  carried  on  in  the  house  of  prayer. 
Perhaps  our  Lord,  during  the  eight  days  of  His  parents'  stay  at  Jerusalem,  may 
have  been  attracted  by  the  schools  in  the  Temple,  and  have  liked  to  linger  there  and 
to  hear  what  was  going  on.  And  so  His  parents  may  have  thought  of  seeking  Him 
in  these  schools,  feeling  that,  if  in  Jerusalem  at  all.  He  was  sure  to  be  there.  Let 
ns  observe  that  what  drew  Him  to  the  Temple  was  not  only  the  beautiful  and  solemn 
worship  which  went  on  in  it,  but  the  teaching  which  was  given  there.  He  loved 
not  only  prayer  and  praise,  but  leamiug  also.  Oh,  that  there  were  more  children 
like  Him  !  while  there  are  some  who  like  the  Church  service  well  enough,  if  it  ia 
conducted  with  stateliness  and  music,  how  very  few  are  there  who  show  a  desire 
for  religious  instruction,  who  take  great  pleasure  in  their  preparation  for  confirma- 
tion, and  listen  to  sermons  eagerly,  trying  to  get  what  good  they  can  out  of  them. 
{Dean  Goulburn.)  The  spirit  and  method  in  which  to  learn : — The  young  should 
be  eager  to  learn,  as  Christ  was  in  His  boyhood.  1.  He  showed  a  thirst  for  the 
knowledge  of  God's  law,  when  but  twelve  years  old ;  and  how  are  we  to  judge  of 
what  is  wrong  in  us,  but  by  taking  Him  as  our  model,  and  asking  what  there  is  in 
ns,  which  does  not  watch  with  His  example  ?  As  a  ruler  applied  to  a  line  which  we 
have  drawn  with  our  hand,  shows  that  it  is  not  straight,  so  our  Lord's  example, 
applied  to  any  particular  piece  of  human  conduct,  shows  at  once  how  far  it  is  from 
being  what  it  ought  to  be.  2.  Our  Lord  submitted  to  learn  of  the  appointed 
teachers  of  His  nation.  It  is  not  surely  very  much  that  He  should  require  of  ua 
submission  to  all  in  authority  over  us.  3.  We  see  also  that  quite  the  best  way  of 
learning  is  for  the  pupil  to  ask  questions  of  the  teacher.  Only  let  them  be 
thoughtful  questions.  Nothing  will  more  open  the  mind  of  the  taught  than  the 
explanation  of  a  difficulty  which  has  been  raised  in  the  mind  by  something  the 
teacher  has  said.  Very  often  the  question  will  be  useful  to  the  teacher  as  well, 
leading  him  into  some  new  and  interesting  train  of  thought  upon  an  old  and  well- 
worn  subject.  Questions  force  people  to  think.  (Ibid.)  Answers: — I.  Christ 
gives  a  clear  answer  about  the  spiritual  world.  II.  Another  cry  of  the  soul  is 
answered  by  Jesus  when  He  teUs  us,  that  God  is  the  heavenly  Father  of  mankind, 
HI.  The  Lord  Jesus  answered  another  question  of  humanity  by  showing  that  our 
heavenly  Father  knows  the  secret  inner  life  of  every  man.  IV.  Jesus  answers  the 
cry  of  the  soul  by  telling  UB,  that  oar  Father's  business  is  the  highest  work  of 
humanity.    {W.  Birch.) 

Ver.  48.  Son,  why  hast  Thou  thna  dealt  with  us  ^—Perplexity  in  pretence  of 
mystery : — This  question  of  the  mother  of  Jesus  reveals  an  experience  of  the  human 
heart  which  is  very  common,  which  is  most  common  in  the  best  hearts  and  those 
who  feel  their  responsibility  the  most.  The  Virgin  Mary  is  the  perpetual  type  of 
people  who,  entrusted  with  any  great  and  sacred  interest,  identify  their  own  lives 
with  that  interest  and  care  for  it  conscientiously ;  but  who,  by  and  by,  when  the 
interest  begins  to  manifest  its  own  vitality,  and  to  shape  its  own  methods,  are  filled 
with  perplexity.  They  cannot  keep  the  causes  for  which  they  labour  under  their 
own  care.  As  His  mother  asked-  of  Jesus,  so  they  are  always  asking  of  the  objects  for 
which  they  live,  "  Why  hast  thou  thus  dealt  with  us  ?  "  Such  people  are  people 
who  have  realized  responsibility  more  than  they  have  realized  God.  Just  as  Mary 
felt  at  the  moment  when  she  asked  this  question,  that  Jesus  was  her  Son  more  than 
that  He  was  God's  Son,  so  there  is  a  constant  tendency  among  the  most  earnest  and 
conscientious  people  to  feel  that  the  causes  for  which  they  live  and  work  are  their 
causes  more  than  that  they  are  God's  causes,  and  so  to  experience  something  which 
is  almost  like  jealousy  when  they  see  those  causes  pass  beyond  their  power  and 
fulfil  themselves  in  larger  ways  than  theirs.  For  such  people,  often  the  most 
devoted  and  faithful  souls  among  us,  there  must  be  some  help  and  light  in  this  story 
of  Jesus  and  His  mother.  {Phillips  Broola,  D.D.)  A  parent's  wonder: — The 
first  and  simplest  case  of  this  experience  is  that  which  comes  nearest  to  the  circum- 
stances of  our  story.  It  comes  in  every  childhood.  It  comes  whenever  a  boy  grows 
up  to  the  time  at  which  he  passes  beyond  the  merely  parental  government  which 
belonged  to  his  earliest  years.  It  comes  with  all  assertion  of  individual  character 
and  purpose  in  a  boy's  life.  A  boy  has  had  his  career  all  identified  with  his  homa 
where  he  was  cradled.  What  he  was  and  did  he  was  and  did  as  a  member  of  thai 
household.  But  by  and  by  there  comes  some  sudden  outbreak  of  a  personal  energy. 
He  shows  some  disposition,  and  attempts  some  task,  distmctively  his  own.    It  is  a 


OUT.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  «7t 

puzzling  moment  alike  for  the  child  and  the  parent.  The  child  is  perplexed  with 
pleasure,  which  is  akuost  pain,  to  find  himself  for  the  first  time  doing  an  act  which 
is  genuinely  his  own.  The  parent  is  filled  with  a  pain  which  yet  has  pride  and 
pleasure  in  it,  to  see  his  boy  doing  something  original,  something  which  he  never 
bade  him  do,  something  which  perhaps  he  could  not  do  himself.  The  real  under- 
standing of  that  moment,  both  to  child  and  parent,  depends  on  one  thing — upon 
whether  they  can  see  in  it  the  larger  truth  that  this  child  is  not  merely  the  son  of 
his  father,  but  is  also  the  son  of  God.  If  they  both  understand  that,  then  the  child, 
as  he  undertakes  his  personal  life,  passes  not  into  a  looser,  but  into  a  stronger,  re- 
sponsibility.  And  the  parent  is  satisfied  to  see  his  first  authority  over  his  son  grow 
less,  because  he  cannot  be  jealous  of  God.  It  is  a  noble  progress  and  expansion  of 
life  when  the  first  independent  venture  of  ■  a  young  man  on  a  career  of  his  own,  is 
not  the  wilful  claim  of  the  prodigal,  "  Give  me  the  portion  of  goods  that  falleth  to 
me,"  but  the  reverent  appeal  of  Jesus,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My 
Father's  business  ?  "  {Ibid.)  Divine  as  well  as  human  education : — ^Who  is  there 
of  us  that  is  not  aware  that  his  soul  has  had  two  educations  7  Sometimes  the  two 
have  been  in  opposition  ;  sometimes  they  have  overlapped ;  sometimes  they  have 
wholly  coincided;  but  always  the  two  have  been  two.  Our  own  goverimient  of 
ourselves  is  most  evident,  is  the  one  which  we  are  most  aware  of,  so  that  sometimes 
for  a  few  moments  we  forget  that  there  is  any  other ;  but  very  soon  our  plans  for 
ourselves  are  so  turned  and  altered  and  hindered  that  we  cannot  ignore  the  other 
greater,  deeper  force.  We  meant  to  do  that,  and  look !  we  have  been  led  on  to  this. 
We  meant  to  be  this,  and  lo  !  we  are  that.  We  never  meant  to  believe  this,  and 
lo  1  we  hold  it  with  all  our  hearts.  What  does  it  mean  ?  It  is  the  everlasting  dis- 
covery,  the  discovery  which  each  thoughtful  man  makes  for  himself  with  almost  as 
much  surprise  as  if  no  other  man  had  ever  made  it  for  himself  before,  that  this  soul, 
for  which  he  is  responsible,  is  not  his  sonl  only,  but  it  is  God's  soul  too.  The  reve- 
lation which  came  of  old  to  the  Virgin  Mother  about  her  Child — not  your  Child 
only,  but  God's  Child,  too ;  yours,  genuinely,  really  yours,  but,  behind  yours  and 
over  yours,  God's.  That  is  the  great  revelation  about  hfe.  When  it  comes,  every- 
thing about  one's  self- culture  is  altered.  Every  anticipation  and  thought  of  living 
changes  its  colour.  It  comes  sometimes  early  and  sometimes  late  in  life.  Some- 
times it  is  the  flush  and  glow  which  fills  childhood  with  dewy  hope  and  beauty. 
Sometimes  it  is  the  peace  which  gathers  about  old  age  and  makes  it  happy.  When- 
ever it  comes  it  makes  life  new.  See  what  the  changes  are  which  it  must  bring. 
First,  it  makes  anything  like  a  bewildering  surprise  impossible.  When  I  have  once 
taken  it  into  my  account  that  God  has  His  plans  for  my  soul's  culture,  that  these 
plans  of  His  outgo  and  supersede  any  plans  for  it  which  I  can  make,  then  any  new 
turn  that  comes  is  explicable  to  me,  and,  though  I  may  not  have  anticipated  it  all, 
I  am  not  overwhelmed,  nor  disturbed,  nor  dismayed  by  it.  I  find  a  new  conviction 
growing  in  my  soul,  another  view  of  life,  another  kind  of  faith.  It  is  not  what  I 
had  intended.  I  had  determined  that  as  long  as  I  lived  I  would  believe  something 
very  different  from  this  which  I  now  feel  rising  and  taking  possession  of  me.  It 
seems  at  first  as  if  my  soul  had  been  disloyal  to  me,  and  had  turned  its  back  faith- 
lessly upon  my  teaching.  I  appeal  to  it,  and  say,  "  Soul,  why  hast  thou  thus  dealt 
with  me  ?  "  And  it  answers  back  to  me,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my 
Father's  business  ?  Did  you  not  know  that  I  was  God's  soul  as  well  as  your  soul  ? 
This  is  something  which  He  has  taught  me."  Then  again,  the  true  man  will  have 
one  great  purpose  in  living,  and  only  one.  He  will  try  to  come  to  harmony  with 
God,  to  perfect  understanding  of  what  God  wants  and  is  trying  to  do.  Let  me  not 
be  trying  to  make  one  thing  out  of  this  soul  of  mine  while  He  is  trying  to  make 
entirely  another  1  As  Mary  went  back  with  her  Son,  realizing,  out  of  His  own 
mouth,  that  He  was  not  only  her  Son,  but  God's ;  as  she  settled  down  with  Him  to 
their  Nazareth  life  again,  must  not  one  single  strong  question  have  been  upon  her 
heart,  "  What  does  God  want  this  Son  of  His  to  be  ?  O  let  me  fiind  that  out,  that 
I  may  work  with  Him."  And  as  you  go  into  the  house  where  you  are  to  train  your 
aoul,  realizing,  through  some  revelation  that  has  come  to  it,  that  it  is  God's  soul  as 
well  as  yours,  one  strong  and  single  question  must  be  pressing  on  you  too — "  What 
does  God  want  this  soul  of  mine  to  be  ?  0,  let  me  find  that  out,  that  I  may  work 
with  Him."  And  how  can  yoo  find  that  out  ?  Only  by  finding  Him  out.  Only  by 
cnderstanding  what  He  is,  can  you  understand  what  He  wants  you  to  do.  And 
understanding  comes  by  love.  And  love  to  God  comes  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 
{Ibid.)  Christ's  strange  dealings  with  His  people : — The  words  may  usefully  re- 
joioA  as  that  the  dealings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with  those  who  sincerely  love  audsarr* 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [eakt.  lu 

Him  are  often  very  strange.  Not  only  does  He  try  them  by  ordinary  tronbles,  saolt 
as  loss  of  health  and  loss  of  friends,  but  sometimes  He  takes  away  from  them  all 
Bpiritaal  comfort,  and  leaves  their  souls  dark  and  disconsolate.  Once  they  had  joy 
and  peace  in  believing,  but  they  have  it  no  longer  now.  Perhaps  it  is  that  they 
have  grown  lukewarm  and  self-sufiQcient,  and  He  withdraws  Himself  from  them  for 
a  time,  to  make  them  seek  Him  with  greater  earnestness.  Where  this  is  the  case, 
people  must  go  on  seeking  till  they  find.  The  dryness  and  hardness  of  our  minds 
in  prayer  may  be  a  sore  distress  to  us,  but  we  must  not  give  over  praying :  we  must 
be  content  to  seek  Him  sorrowing.  Where  we  cannot  pray  as  we  would,  we  must 
pray  as  we  can.  We  must  not  "  faint,"  but  determine  to  make  ourselves  heard  at 
heaven's  gate.  And  then  it  shall  be  "  but  a  little,"  and  we  shall  find  Him  whom 
our  soul  loveth.  And  when  we  have  found  Him,  we  must  be  careful  to  hold  Him, 
and  "  not  let  Him  go."  One  who  knows  the  Saviour's  love,  and  Uvea  in  habits  of 
holy  intercourse  with  Him,  must,  as  it  were,  keep  His  eye  upon  Him  constantly  by 
Christian  watchfulness  and  an  effort  to  realize  EUs  presence  everywhere.  Let  such 
an  one  lose  Him  by  wilful  disobedience,  or  careless  self-indulgence,  or  by  relaxing  ia 
prayer  and  in  the  effort  to  beUeve,  and  there  will  be  nothing  but  "sorrowing"  till  He 
is  found  again.  Most  merciful  is  it  of  God,  when  we  are  living  without  Christ,  to  hedge 
np  our  way  with  thorns,  to  make  conscience  uneasy,  worldly  pleasures  unsatisfactory, 
and  even  religious  exercises  disappointing  and  irksome.  Anything  is  wholesome, 
however  bitter,  which  drives  us  to  His  side,  and  keeps  us  there.  {Dean  Goulburn.) 
The  manliness  of  Christ : — There  is  something  at  first  sight  wilful  indeed,  possibly 
courageous,  but  not  manly,  in  a  boy  of  twelve  staying  behind  his  parents  in  a  strange 
city  without  their  knowledge  or  consent ;  something  thoughtless,  almost  ungracious, 
in  the  words  of  reply  to  Mary's  question.  The  clue  to  this  apparent  divergence  from 
the  perfect  manly  life  is  given  with  rare  insight  and  beauty  in  Mr.  Holman  Hunt's 
great  picture — at  any  rate,  the  face  and  attitude  of  the  boy  there  seemed  for  the  first 
time  to  make  clear  to  me  the  meaning  of  the  recorded  incident,  and  to  cast  a  flood 
of  light  upon  those  eighteen  years  of  preparation  which  yet  remained  before  He 
should  be  ready  for  His  great  work.  The  first  sight  of  Jerusalem  and  of  the  Temple 
has  stirred  new  and  strange  thoughts  within  Him.  The  replies  of  the  doctors  ta 
His  eager  questionings  have  lighted  up  the  consciousness  which  must  have  been 
dimly  working  in  Him  already,  that  He  was  not  altogether  like  those  around  Him — 
the  children  with  whom  He  used  to  play,  the  parents  at  whose  knees  He  had  been 
brought  up.  To  the  young  spirit  before  whose  inward  eye  such  a  vision  is  opening,, 
all  human  ties  would  sink  back,  and  be  for  the  moment  forgotten ;  and,  when  re- 
called suddenly  by  the  words  of  His  mother,  the  half-conscious  dreamy  answer^ 
"  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  Me?  "  <fec.,  loses  all  its  apparent  wilfulness  and  abrupt- 
ness. And  so,  full  of  this  new  question  and  great  wonder.  He  went  home  to  the 
village  in  Galilee  with  His  parents,  and  was  subject  unto  them  ;  and  the  jurtain 
falls  for  us  on  His  boyhood  and  youth  and  early  manhood.  But,  as  nothing  but 
what  is  most  important  and  necessary  for  understanding  all  of  His  life  which  we 
need  for  our  own  growth  into  His  likeness  is  told  us  in  these  simple  narratives,  it 
would  seem  that  this  vivid  hght  is  thrown  on  that  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  because  it 
Tras  the  crisis  in  our  Lord's  earthly  life  which  bears  most  directly  on  His  work  for 
our  race.  If  so,  we  must,  I  think,  allow  that  the  question,  once  fairly  presented  to 
the  boy's  mind,  would  never  again  leave  it.  Day  by  day  it  would  come  back  with 
increasing  insistency,  gathering  power  and  weight.  (Thomas  Hughes.)  The 
Mother  and  Son : — There  has  descended  into  Mary's  humble  home  a  treasure  too 
great  for  heaven  itself  to  contain.  What  wonder  if  she  fails  to  understand  the  value 
of  tlds  Divine  Son  ;  if  she  wholly  mistakes  the  meaning  of  His  absence  T  What 
wonder  if  she  applies  to  His  case  the  common-place  rebuke, "  Thy  father  and  I  have 
sought  Thee  sorrowing "  ?  Kay,  but  we  may  be  told  it  was  inexcusable  in  one 
who  remembered  the  marvels  of  His  birth,  and  all  that  then  occurred,  to  chide  Him 
for  resorting  to  the  Temple,  and  to  be  astonished  that  He  sat  with  doctors  and  heard 
and  questioned  them.  Twelve  years  of  meek  obedience  in  common  household  tasks 
and  duties  had  passed  since  Elis  birth.  Miracles,  which  are  meant  to  witness  to 
doctrines,  were  not,  we  may  be  sure,  performed  to  startle  the  carpenter's  humble 
family,  and  she  had  forgotten  in  some  measure  the  significant  tokens  of  the  past, 
and  the  dutiful  boy  was  to  her  the  future  carpenter,  the  support  of  her  age,  the 
inmate  of  her  home,  or  of  some  frugal  home  like  hers,  to  the  end,  and  the  air  of 
authority  sat  easy  upon  her,  for  her  right  had  not  been  disputed.  But  other  rights 
asserted  themselves  now.  The  light  within  Him  breaks  forth  now  from  behind  the 
veil  of  flesh.    "  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  Me  ?    Wist  ye  not,"  &o.    Other  claimr 


CHA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  17» 

and  ties  snpersede,  or  soon  shall  do  so,  the  calm  family  life.  He  shall  dwell  with, 
that  Father  who,  in  His  baptism,  His  transfiguration,  His  death,  will  attest  that 
this  One  is  the  Son  of  God.  He  shall  seek  for  brethren  and  for  children  in  all  whom. 
the  ties  of  a  common  faith  in  His  Father  unite  to  Him.  His  work  shall  not  b» 
with  the  axe  and  hammer  in  Joseph's  workshop,  but  it  shall  lie  in  turning  sonls 
from  darkness  to  light,  from  death  to  life,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  What 
wonder  if  the  mother  after  the  flesh  cannot  at  once  train  her  ear  to  the  full  com- 

{>ass  of  this  new  revelation.  She  will  acquiesce,  but  not  till  she  has  painfully 
earned  the  plan  of  God  in  the  life  of  battle  with  all  forms  of  evil,  which  He  shaU 
lead,  in  the  face  of  Satan  and  his  host,  where  she  is  not ;  where  she  shall  be  met,  if 
she  venture  into  its  sphere,  by  words  of  strangeness,  "  Woman,  what  have  I  to 
do  with  thee?  "  (John  ii.  4).  Some  have  entertained  angels  unawares ;  but  the  King 
whom  angels  serve  is  a  sojourner  under  her  roof ;  she  has  to  unlearn  the  speech  of 
a  mother,  and  learn  that  of  a  worshipper  of  the  adorable  Son  of  God  and  her  Redeemer. 
She  must  cease  to  command  and  to  admonish,  and  kneel  with  the  rest  of  us  before 
the  Cross  that  was  raised  for  all  our  guilty  race  alike.  (Archbishop  Thomson.y 
Sorrow  for  grieving  a  mother : — When  Garibaldi  saw  any  one  looking  at  his  mother'a 
picture  the  tears  started  into  his  eyes.  He  felt  remorse  at  having,  by  his  adven- 
turous life,  been  a  source  to  her  of  cruel  anxiety.  He  believed  in  the  power  of  her 
prayers  to  preserve  him  from  the  effects  of  his  own  temerity,  and  on  the  field  of 
battle,  or  in  the  storm  at  sea,  he  never  lost  courage,  because  he  thought  h» 
saw  her  kneeling  before  God  and  imploring  for  him  the  Divine  protection. 
A  jHother't  solicitude : — The  parents  of  Eobert  Moffat  were  both  pious,  and  his 
mother's  heart  was  set  upon  his  "  knowing  from  a  child  the  Holy  Scriptures." 
When  about  to  leave  Inverkeithing,  in  Fifeshire,  where  he  was  in  service  in  the 
Earl  of  Moray's  gardens,  for  a  situation  in  Cheshire,  she  earnestly  besought  him  to 
promise,  before  going,  that  he  would  read  the  Bible  every  day,  morning  and  evening. 
Sensible  of  his  own  weakness,  and  of,  perhaps,  his  boyish  disinclination,  he  parried 
the  question.  But  at  the  last  moment  she  pressed  his  hand.  **  Robert,"  she  said, 
imploringly,  "  you  will  promise  me  to  read  the  Bible,  more  particularly  the  New 
Testament,  and  most  especially  the  Gospels — those  are  the  words  of  Christ  Himself ; 
and  then  you  cannot  possibly  go  astray."  There  was  no  refusing  then  ;  it  was  the 
melting  hour.  "  Yes,  mother,"  he  answered,  ♦♦  I  make  you  the  promise."  He 
knew,  as  he  remarked  in  relating  the  circumstances,  "  that  the  promise,  once  made, 
must  be  kept.  And  oh,"  he  added,  "I  am  happy  that  I  did  make  it  1 "  {Hand 
and  Heart.) 

Ver.  49.  Wist  ye  not  that  I  mnst  be  about  My  Father's  btulness. — The  Epiphany 
of  work  : — 1.  The  Epiphany  before  tis  is,  in  the  first  place,  that  of  the  two  lives,  the 
seen  and  the  unseen,  the  relative  and  the  personal,  the  human  relationship  to  the 
Divine.  Let  us  try  to  place  ourselves  in  imagination  in  those  Temple  precincts,  and 
picture  the  entrance  of  the  distressed  and  bewildered  mother  after  two  days  and 
nights  of  weary  and  watchful  searching.  Regardless  of  His  mother's  anxiety,  He 
has  been  sitting  in  the  Temple  courts.  "  Son,  why  hast  Thou  thus  dealt  with  as  ?  " 
was  a  natural  question  ;  and  it  fell  not  on  a  deaf  ear,  but  on  an  unupbraiding  con> 
science.  "  How  is  it  that  ye  sought  Me  ?  "  The  rebuke  is  turned  back  upon  herself. 
"  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business  ?  "  (Original :  "  In  the 
things  of  My  Father."  I  prefer  here  the  Authorized  Version  to  the  Revised.)  It 
was  a  hard  stern  lesson  for  the  heart  of  the  mother.  She  lives  only  in  Him ;  but 
He  has  now  another  life,  and  another  being.  Such  is  her  first  lesson  in  the  mystery 
of  the  two  Uves,  the  twofold  relationship.  This  lesson  we  have  all  to  learn  for  our- 
selves, and  to  learn  also  for  one  another.  What  a  unity  does  this  give  to  the  humaia 
being,  to  have  a  life  above  this  life,  a  business,  a  home,  a  Father,  away  from  the  desul- 
toriness,  the  dissipation.which  are  so  wearying  and  deteriorating  to  all  that  is  theman  ia 
us.  "  My  Father," — a  word  of  concentration,  a  word  significant  of  the  gathering  intoone- 
of  all  the  interests  and  affections  which  before  were  scattered  abroad.  This  the  one 
purpose  of  all  education  with  the  name,  to  make  real  to  the  young  life  this  spiritual 
Bonship  ;  and  this  the  one  principle  of  all  true  human  dealing,  so  to  recognize  in 
one  another  the  secret  of  the  Divine  relationship,  that  we  neither  seek  to  engross 
for  ourselves  hearts  which  belong  to  another,  nor  run  any  risk  of  seducing  from 
their  rightful  allegiance  those  whom  God  has  appropriated  to  His  own  possessioiu 
Yet,  secondly,  of  Him  who  has  just  spoken  of  this  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  H© 
shall  be  absorbed  in  His  Father's  business,  it  is  written  in  the  other  half  of  the  text 
that,  "  He  went  down  with  them,  and  came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  ante 


■280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

them."  We  are  brought  here  into  the  very  heart  of  the  great  myotery — God  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh.  And  this  is  all  that  is  told  us  of  the  boyhood  of  the  Saviour — this 
and  one  brief  hint  besides,  as  to  the  occupation  of  His  time  in  manual  labour.  This, 
then,  as  to  its  outward  shape  and  form,  was  His  Father's  business  ;  the  inner  hfo 
went  on  unknown  and  unnoticed.  He  was  growing  all  this  time  in  wisdom  ;  but 
ihe  one  feature  of  the  thirty  years  is  the  subjection.  All  else  is  taken  for  granted 
— the  industry  and  the  piety  and  the  beautiful  example — and  this  only  is  dwelt 
upon.  "  He  was  subject  unto  them."  ♦•  He  humbled  Himself,"  St.  Paul  writes,  as 
the  characteristic  of  the  whole  of  His  earthly  life — "  He  humbled  Himself,  and  be« 
came  obedient."  From  this  beginning  it  was  but  a  natural  process  to  the  long 
self-repression  of  the  village-home  and  the  drudging  workshop ;  thence  to  the  bap- 
tism in  Jordan,  and  the  temptation  in  the  desert ;  thence  into  the  homeless  unrests 
of  the  ministry,  the  scorn  and  rejection  of  men,  the  dulness  and  coldness  even  of 
His  own,  and  at  last  the  agony  of  Calvary,  and  the  shameful  death  of  the  cross. 
Though  He  was  a  Son,  yet  He  "  learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suffered." 
After  Him  let  us  struggle,  hving  the  Ufe  of  faith  which  realizes  the  Father  in 
heaven,  feehng  it  His  business  as  our  business  which  makes  the  knowledge  of  Him 
our  one  submission,  and  suffers  no  other  allegiance  to  interfere  or  compete  with 
this;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  counts  no  human  subordination,  and  no  personal  sac- 
rifice misplaced  or  undignified,  may  it  but  reproduce  in  faintest  reflection  the  great 
Epiphany  when  "  He  went  down  with  them,"  &o.  "  Let  your  light  so  shine  before 
men,"  &c.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  A  grand  purpose  : — A  measureless  weight  of 
conviction  is  in  that  Boy's  word,  *'  I  must."  A  Divine  necessity,  recognized  with 
blended  awe  and  joy,  has  Him  in  its  grip.  "  I  must  "  do  My  Father's  work.  A 
grand  purpose  fills  His  being,  and  His  whole  nature  is  bent  on  its  accompUshment, 
a  purpose  exalting  duty  above  all  human  ties  and  all  human  pleasures,  and  embrac- 
ing within  itself  the  highest  ideal  of  being  and  doing.  Difference  of  purpose  marks 
man  from  man.  Men  take  rank  in  the  scale  of  manhood  according  to  the  elevation 
and  purity  of  their  aims.  It  is  a  sign  of  unique  capability  that  the  Boy  Jesus 
should  soar  to  the  Divine,  and  embrace  it  with  His  whole  soul.  "  I  must  be  about 
My  Father's  house  and  work."  {J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  A  plea  for  a  rejected  transla- 
tion : — The  necessity  of  our  Lord's  being  in  His  Father's  house  could  hardly  have 
been  intended  by  Him  as  absolutely  regulating  all  His  movements,  and  determining 
where  He  should  be  found,  seeing  that  He  had  scarcely  uttered  the  words  in  question 
before  He  withdrew  Himself  with  His  parents  from  that  house,  and  spent  the  next 
eighteen  years  substantially  away  from  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  claim  to  be  en- 
gaged in  His  Father's  concerns  had  doubtless  frequently  been  alleged  both  explicitly 
and  implicitly  in  respect  of  the  occupations  of  His  previous  home  life,  and  con- 
tinued to  be  so  during  the  subsequent  periods  of  His  eighteen  years'  subjection  to 
the  parental  rule  ;  His  acknowledgment  of  that  claim  being  in  no  wise  intermitted 
by  His  withdrawal  with  His  parents  from  His  Father's  house.  Intimations  of  a 
more  general  kind  seem  to  the  writer  easily  capable  of  being  read  between  the  lines 
of  the  inspired  narrative,  which  increase  the  probability  that  the  Authorized  trans- 
lation, rather  than  the  rendering  of  the  Bevisers,  expresses  the  meacing  of  the 
evangeUst.     {R.E.Wallig,Ph.D.)        The  spiritual  development  of  Christ : — I.  Thb 

riBST  DAWNING  00NSCI0UBNES8  OP  Hl8  MeSBIAHSHIP.  II.  ThE  riBST  DAWNING  CON- 
SCIOUSNESS or  His  peouliab  belatiom  to  His  Fatheb.  III.  The  bebults  of  thesb 
THOUGHTS  UPON  His  LiiTE.  Eighteen  years  of  silence,  and  then — the  regeneration  of 
the  world  accomphshed,  His  Father's  business  done.  {Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 
The  first  recorded  words  of  Jesus  : — We  are  grateful  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  given 
ns  this  first  word  of  onr  Lord  Jesus,  and  we  love  it  none  the  less  because  it  is  a  deep 
word.  We  are  not  surprised  that  even  as  a  child  the  Son  of  God  should  give  forth 
mysterious  sayings.  Stier,towhom  I  am  much  indebted  for  thoughts  upon  this  subject, 
calls  this  text  "  the  solitary  floweret  out  of  the  enclosed  garden  of  thirty  years." 
What  fragrance  it  exhales  1  It  is  a  bud,  but  how  lovely  t  It  is  not  the  utterance 
of  His  ripe  manhood,  but  the  question  of  His  youth  ;  yet  this  half -opened  bud  dis- 
covers delicious  sweets  and  deHghtful  colours  worthy  of  our  admiring  meditation. 
We  might  call  these  questions  of  Jesus  the  prophecy  of  His  character,  and  the  pro- 
gramme of  His  life.  In  this  our  text  He  set  before  His  mother  all  that  He  came 
into  the  world  to  do ;  revealing  His  high  and  lofty  nature,  and  disclosing  His  glori- 
oos  errand.  This  verse  is  one  of  those  which  Luther  would  call  his  httle  Bibles, 
with  the  whole  gospel  compressed  into  it.  L  Here  we  see  the  Holv  Child's  per- 
OBPTioN.  1.  He  evidently  perceived  most  clearly  His  high  relationship.  2.  He 
perceived  the  constraints  of  this  relationship.    Here  we  have  the  first  appearing  of 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  281 

an  imperious  "  mnst "  which  swayed  the  Saviour  all  along.  We  find  it  written  of 
Him  that  "  He  must  need  go  through  Samaria,"  and  He  Himself  said,  "  I  must 
preach  the  kingdom  of  God  " ;  and  again  to  Zaccheus,  "  I  must  abide  in  thy  house  "; 
and  again,  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me."  "  The  Son  of  Man 
must  sufifer  many  things,  and  be  rejected  of  the  elders."  "  The  Son  of  Man  must 
be  lifted  up."  "It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer."  As  a  Son  He  must  learn  obedience 
by  the  things  which  He  suffered.  This  First  born  among  many  brethren  must  feel 
all  the  drawings  of  His  sonship — the  sacred  instincts  of  the  holy  nature,  therefor© 
He  must  be  about  His  Father's  business.  Now  I  put  this  to  you  again,  for  I  want 
io  be  practical  all  along  :  Do  you  and  I  feel  this  Divine  "  must "  as  we  ought  ?  Is 
necessity  laid  upon  us,  yea,  woe  laid  upon  us  unless  we  serve  our  Divine  Father? 
Do  we  ever  feel  a  hungering  and  a  thirsting  after  Him,  so  that  we  must  draw  nigh 
to  Him,  and  must  come  to  His  house,  and  approach  His  feet,  and  must  speak  with 
Him,  and  must  hear  His  voice,  and  must  behold  Him  face  to  face  ?  We  are  not 
truly  subdued  to  the  son-spirit  unless  it  be  so  ;  but  when  our  sonship  shall  have 
become  our  master  idea,  then  shall  this  Divine  necessity  be  felt  by  us  also,  impelling 
US  to  seek  our  Father's  face.  As  the  sparks  fly  upward  to  the  central  fire,  so  must 
we  draw  nigh  unto  God,  our  Father  and  our  all.  3.  He  perceived  the  forgetfulness 
of  Mary  and  Joseph,  and  He  wondered.  4.  He  perceived  that  He  Himself  person- 
ally had  a  work  to  do.  II.  The  Holt  Child's  homb.  Where  should  Jesus  be  but 
in  His  Father's  dwelling-place  ?  1.  His  Father  was  worshipped  there.  2.  There 
His  Father's  work  went  on.  3.  There  His  Father's  name  was  taught.  HI.  Thb 
Holt  Child's  occupation.  1.  He  spent  His  time  in  learning  and  inquiring.  "  How 
I  pant  to  be  doing  good,"  says  some  young  man.  You  are  right,  but  you  must  not 
be  impatient.  Go  you  among  the  teachers,  and  learn  a  bit.  You  cannot  teach  yet, 
for  you  do  not  know :  go  and  learn  before  you  think  of  teaching.  Hot  spirits  think 
that  they  are  not  serving  God  when  they  are  learning ;  but  in  this  they  err.  Be- 
loved, Mary  at  Jesus'  feet  was  commended  rather  than  Martha,  cumbered  with 
much  service.  "  But,"  says  one,  "  we  ought  not  to  be  always  hearing  sermons." 
No,  I  do  not  know  that  any  of  you  are.  *'  We  ought  to  get  to  work  at  once,"  cries 
another.  Certainly  you  ought,  after  yon  have  first  learned  what  the  work  is  :  but 
if  everybody  that  is  converted  begins  to  teach  we  shall  soon  have  a  mass  of  heresies, 
and  many  raw  and  undigested  dogmas  taught  which  wiU  rather  do  damage  thaa 
good.  Run,  messenger,  run  !  The  King's  business  requireth  haste.  Nay,  rather 
stop  a  little.  Have  you  any  tidings  to  tell  ?  1.  Learn  your  message,  and  then 
run  as  fast  as  you  please.  2.  This  Holy  Child  is  about  His  Father's  business,  for 
He  is  engrossed  in  it.  His  whole  heart  is  in  the  hearing  and  asking  questions. 
There  is  a  force,  to  my  mind,  in  the  Greek,  which  is  lost  in  the  translation,  which 
drags  in  the  word  "  about."  There  is  nothing  parallel  to  that  word  in  the  Greek, 
which  is,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  in  My  Father's  ?  "  The  way  to  worship  God 
is  to  get  heartily  into  it.  3.  The  Holy  Child  declares  that  He  was  under  a  necessity 
to  be  in  it.  "  I  must  be."  He  could  not  help  Himself.  Other  things  did  not 
interest  the  Holy  Child,  but  this  thing  absorbed  Him.  You  know  the  story  of 
Alexander,  that  when  the  Persian  ambassadors  came  to  his  father's  court,  little 
Alexander  asked  them  many  questions,  but  they  were  not  at  all  such  as  boys  gene 
rally  think  of.  He  did  not  ask  them  to  describe  to  him  the  throne  of  ivory,  nor  the 
hanging  gardens  of  Babylon,  nor  anything  as  to  the  gorgeous  apparel  of  the  king; 
but  he  asked  what  weapons  the  Persians  used  in  battle,  in  what  form  they  marched^ 
and  how  far  it  was  to  their  country ;  for  the  boy  Alexander  felt  the  man  Alexander 
within  him,  and  he  had  presentiments  that  he  was  the  man  who  would  conquer 
Persia,  and  show  them  another  way  of  fighting  that  would  make  them  turn  their 
backs  before  him.  It  is  a  singular  parallel  to  the  case  of  the  Child  Jesus,  who  is 
taken  up  with  nothing  but  what  is  His  Father's  ;  because  it  was  for  Him  to  do  His 
Father's  work,  and  to  live  for  His  Father's  glory,  and  to  execute  His  Father's  pur- 
pose even  to  the  last.  IV.  Let  us,  lastly,  learn  this  Holy  Child's  special  lesson 
TO  those  of  us  who  ABE  SEEKERS.  1.  Do  I  addrcss  any  children  of  God  who  have 
lost  sight  of  Christ  ?  Mark,  dearly  beloved  ones,  if  you  and  I  want  to  find  our  Lord  we 
know  where  He  is.  Do  we  not  ?  He  is  at  His  Father's.  Let  us  go  unto  His  Father's : 
let  us  go  to  our  Father  and  His  Father,  and  let  us  speak  with  God,  and  ask  Him  where 
Jesus  is  if  we  have  lost  His  company.  2.  One  more  word,  and  that  is  to  sinners  who 
are  seeking  Christ.  It  will  all  come  right  if  you  will  just  think  of  this — (1)  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  not  far  away  ;  He  is  in  His  Father's  house,  and  that  is  everywhere  ;  (2) 
that  He  is  always  about  His  Father's  business,  and  that  is,  saving  sinners.  (G.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        The  motto  of  Christ's  life : — We  have  heard  of  a  custom,  kept  up  b| 


S83  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n, 

some  good  men,  of  choosing,  each  New  Tear's  morning,  a  word  or  a  sentence  which 
elioald  be  their  motto  for  the  twelvemonth  they  had  commenced.  Bat  Jesas  of 
Nazareth  eeems  to  have  made  this  choice  once  for  all  early  in  His  career.  He  has 
recorded  it ;  and  we  now  ought  to  give  it  a  full  recognition  as  the  prevailing  and 
controlling  principle  of  His  wonderful  life ;  "  Wist  ye  not  .  .  .  f  "    I.  This  con- 

CEBNS  OUBSELVES  ONLT   BO  TAB  AS  WE  ADMIT  HlU   TO   BE   THE   MaSTEB  AND   MODEL  09 

ouB  EXISTENCE.    If  it  be  true,  as  we  so  often  assert,  that  the  Christian  life  is  merely 
Christ's  life  imitated  and  reproduced,  then  His  motto  is  ours  also.    We  write  it  up 
over  our  doorway  ;  we  make  it  the  seal  of  our  correspondence ;  we  emblazon  it  upon 
our  carriage  panels ;  we  engrave  in  on  our  plate ;  we  stamp  it  upon  our  coin  ;  even 
the  ring  on  our  finger,  and  the  buckle  on  our  shoe's  latchet,  bears  the  same  inscrip- 
tion and  device.     Each  devout  and  true  Christian,  that  is,  gives  himself  and  signs 
himself  over  unto  God.    II.  Hence,  here  is  a  test  of  the  genuineness  of  oub  beli. 
oiON.    III.  There  is  an  employment  foe  such  a  motto  in  the  interpreting  of  one's 
occupation  in  hfe.     Many  a  man  works  in  his  vocation,  without  looking  on  it  as  a 
"  calling  "  at  all.  Eemember,  your  business  is  not  yours  only,  but  your  "  Father's  " 
too.    IV.  This  motto  likewise  will  serve  admirably  to  exhibit  what  is  the  eabliest 
keed  of  a  BODL  disturbed  with  the  discovery  of  its  sins  and  exposure.    Write  across 
any  merely  moral  and  correct  life  this  saying  of  Jesus.    It  will  make  you  think  of 
the  line  in  red  ink  merchants  sometimes  print  on  their  cards  when  they  have 
changed  their  address  ;  it  is  on  the  card,  not  in  it.     A  worldly  life  requires  not 
regulation  only,  but  regeneration.     The  change  must  be  radical.     It  is  not  the 
twist  of  the  threads,  but  the  threads  which  make  the  fabric  of  the  character  wrong. 
V.  This  motto  will  settle  what  are  one's  safe  belations  to  the  wobld  abound. 
The  hne  must  be  drawn  at  the  point  where  the  world  yields  wholly  to  the  "  Father's 
business."    VI.  Eight  here  comes  the  decision,  also,  concerning  the  pbopbiety  of 
<JU0TING  CHUBCH  MEMBERS  FOR  PATTERNS.  The  imperf cctions  of  others  are  no  excuse  for 
oneself.  Being  a  Christian  does  not  consist  in  proving  other  people  to  be  hypocrites. 
The  motto  of  Jesus  says  nothing  about  church  members'  business,  but  the  "  Father's." 
VII.  This  motto  will  show,  iu  like  manner,  the  reason  fob  such  soke  disappoint- 
ments AS  WE  sometimes  EXPERIENCE,  when  those  who  promise  well  for  a  while  fall 
away  suddenly  into  sin.     They  have  only  been  living  a  surface  life  of  dependence 
on  self.    Their  purpose  has  gone  no  higher  than  mere  conduct.    Whereas  the  end 
of  Christian  life  in  all  its  outgoings  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  Wealth  is  gained  that  the 
owner  may  use  it  for  Christ.    Learning  is  acquired  in  order  to  teach  our  fellow-men 
about  Christ.     Out  from  the  plane  of  human  history  springs  one  mysterious  life, 
the  model  of  all  worthy  existence.     There  it  stands  in  the  Scriptures  out  against 
the  clear  sky,  visible  to  a  hundred  generations.     The  pattern  of  our  life  is  found  in 
the  characteristics  of  that :  the  motive  of  our  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  love  we  bear 
for  that :  the  corrective  of  our  life  is  to  be  found  in  laying  it  alongside  of  that:  and 
the  stability  of  our  Christian  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  unfailing  help  it  receives  from 
that.     We  are  held  up  from  falling,  not  by  our  hold  upon  Jesus'  hand,  but  by  His 
hold  upon  ours ;  we  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us  ;  united  to  Him  we  can  be 
sure  He  will  sustain  us  in  temptation.     VHI.  This  saying  will  aid  us  in  estab- 
WISHING  OPEN  issues  whcrever  we  are.    Compromises  are  an  invention  of  the  devih 
Keep  up   the   boundaries   between  good   and   evil.     On  the  one  side  is  right, 
on  the  other  is  wrong ;  on  the  one  peril,  on  the  other  safety ;  on  the  one  truth, 
on  the  other  falsehood ;  on  the  one  those  who  are  of  the  world,  worldly,  on  thf 
other  those  who   are   about  the    "  Father's   business."    (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
Christ  about  His  Fatlier'g  business  : — I.  Note  the  spibit  of  Chbist.     It  was  a 
spirit  of  undivided  consecration  to  the  will  of  God  His  Father.    It  was  a  spirit 
urged  onward  by  an  absolute  necessity  to  serve  God.     "  Wist  yet  not  that  I  must  J  " 
There  is  a  something  in  Me  which  prevents  Me  from  doing  other  work.    I  feel  an 
all-controlling,  overwhelming  influence  which  constrains  Me  at  all  times  and  in 
every  place  to  be  about  My  Father's  business ;  the  spirit  of  high,  holy,  entire, 
sincere,  determined  consecration  in  heart  to  God.     1.  What  was  the  impelling 
power  which  made  Christ  say  this?     (1)  The  spirit  of  obedience  which  thoroughly 
possessed  itself  of  His  bosom.     (2)  A  sacred  will  to  the  work  which  He  had  under- 
taken.    (3)  He  had  a  vow  upon  Him — the  vow  to  do  the  work  from  all  eternity.  2. 
What  was  His  Father's  business?     (1)  To  send  into  the  world  a  perfect  example 
for  our  imitation.     (2)  The  establishment  of  a  new  dispensation.     (3)  The  great 
work  of  expiation.     II.  Imitate  the  Spirit  of  Christ.    Be  about  your  Father's 
business  with  all  earnestness,  because  that  is  the  way  of  usefulness.     You  cannot 
do  your  own  business  and  God's  too.  Yoa  cannot  serve  God  and  self  any  more  thaa 


«SAr.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  S8& 

you  can  serve  God  and  mammon.  If  yon  make  year  own  business  God's  business, 
you  will  do  your  business  weU,  and  you  will  be  useful  in  your  day  and  generation. 
Again,  would  you  be  happy  ?  Be  about  your  Father's  business.  Oh,  it  is  a  sweet 
employment  to  serve  your  Father.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Epiphany  of  Christ's 
Childhood : — Christ  is  thoroughly  a  child,  thoroughly  a  youth,  thoroughly  a  man. 
In  every  stage  of  His  life  He  is  a  representative  of  human  life  at  that  stage.  He  is 
not  an  unnatvrral  child  or  boy ;  but  He  shows  His  Divine  nature  in  the  natural 
ways  and  forms  of  childhood.  His  humanity  is  perfect ;  not  marvellously  or 
strangely  precocious.  We  may  draw  all  the  usual  features  of  human  child- life  out 
of  this  story.  I.  Take  first  the  active  delight  in  a  new  expebibnce,  which  so 
belongs  to  all  children.  Manhood  loses  it.  Disappointment  takes  off  the  edge.  It 
is  Christ's  first  visit  to  Jerusalem,  and  He  is  sensitively  and  zestfully  full  of  it.  He 
is  alive  to  all  the  surroundings  of  His  country's  capital  and  centre.  Thus  He  is  the 
champion  of  childhood,  insisting  that  its  natural  features  (such  as  inquisitivenessl, 
must  be  met  and  gratified  ;  showing  that  through  them  God  was  manifested  in  His 
life,  that  they  are  not  wrong  in  themselves,  that  they  may  be  channels  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  action.  Delight  and  liberty  are  the  simple  creed  of  childhood.  It  would 
save  many  a  young  life  from  future  excess ;  it  would  keep  in  the  family  many  a 
prodigal  and  wanderer,  and  early  emigrant,  if  this  feature  of  a  true,  full  child  were  at 
once  recognized ;  if  parents  would  not  only  look  for  a  child's  trust  and  obedience, 
but  also  for  his  activity.  II.  Impulsive  truthfulness  to  self.  Childhood  never 
argues  sophistically,  contrary  to  the  impulses  of  its  nature,  as  a  man  delights  to  do 
often.  "How  is  it  .  .  .  ?"  "  How  could  I  help  going  into  My  Father's  temple 
and  talking  of  Him  and  speaking  for  Him  ?  It  is  the  great  impulse,  and  duty,  and 
mission  of  My  life.  And  I  but  obeyed  it.  Did  you  not  know  I  would  be  here  ? 
How  could  you  expect  anj  thing  else?  "  Here  was  a  perfect,  holy  nature,  saying  in 
its  childhood  "  I  must,"  and  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said  in  answer.  III. 
fiLiALNESs:  sense  of  Fatherhood,  and  of  a  family.  Eemember  every  child  has  a 
heavenly  as  well  as  an  earthly  father  and  home.  Besides  the  second  command- 
ment in  our  Lord's  code  there  is  the  first.  Eeligion  is  but  a  higher  application  of 
the  principles  of  morality,  the  doing  for  God  what  you  do  for  man ;  being  filled 
with  the  sense  of  God's  Fatherhood  as  with  that  of  earthly  parentage  ;  carrying 
dutifulness  from  the  home  of  one  to  the  higher  home  of  the  other.  I  remember 
going  through  a  cave  of  stalactite,  hung  with  glistening  pendants,  and  capable  of 
wonderful  reflections,  but  shut  away  from  all  sunlight  and  gleam  of  heaven's 
power.  A  simple  torch  won  marvellous  effects  from  those  waiting  walls.  But  it 
was  a  great  longing  all  the  while  in  one's  mind.  Oh  for  one  stream  of  daylight 
through  all  this  sleeping  glory  1  If  earth,  made  light,  will  so  lighten  it,  what  would 
the  light  of  heaven  do?  So  one  looks  with  regret  on  much  of  the  sweetness 
of  life :  upon  a  filial  son ;  upon  a  life  whose  earthly  affection  Ughts  it  up  with 
gleams  of  bright  beauty,  but  with  none  of  heaven's  light  streaming  through  its 
filial  devotion,  to  give  it  the  supreme  glory  of  a  life  of  a  son  of  God,  delighting  in 
being  about  the  Father's  business ;  flinging  over  it  the  life  which  you  see  in  Christ, 
jn  this  Epiphany  of  His  childhood.  (Frederick  Brooks.)  Childhood  to  be 
dedicated  to  God  : — Life  must  be  wholly  a  manifestation  of  God.  Every  age  is  of 
▼alue.  Each  section  of  life  brings  its  own  contribution  to  the  perfected  Christima 
character.  Childhood  has  its  own  forces,  its  own  kinds  of  strength  and  power, 
which  other  parts  of  life  do  not  furnish ;  and  they  must  be  used  in  developing  the 
man  of  God.  You  lose  something  if  you  put  off  religion  to  your  later  years.  Your 
religious  character  never  feels  the  benefit  and  power  of  these  child  forces,  which  do 
not  belong  to  later  life.  You  know  the  value  of  an  overture  in  music ;  how  its 
eimplicity  helps  all  the  remainder  of  the  more  elaborate  variations  and  movements. 
You  could  not  start  at  once  into  the  midst  of  the  symphony  or  oratorio,  and  intelli- 
gently enjoy  and  use  it.  So  youth  brings  its  own  peculiar  contribution  to  the  har- 
mony of  godly,  Christly  living.  That  is  the  teaching  of  the  Boyhood  of  Christ. 
As  the  day  without  its  dewy  morning  and  all  its  influences ;  as  the  day  beginning 
with  hot  noon ;  so  is  a  life  which  begins  for  God  at  late  years.  We  disjoint  our 
religious  lives,  not  seeing  that  •  the  child  is  the  father  of  the  man,'  and  that  all  our 
days  must  be  bound  each  to  each  by  natural  piety.  Christ  puts  them  altogether 
again,  shows  God  in  and  through  all  of  them,  even  in  and  through  boyhood,  and 
Bays,  "It  is  not  merely  that  you  may  be  God's  at  the  end  ;  it  is  that  all  from  the 
beginning  may  be  His ;  and  that  at  the  end  you  may  have  a  product  towards  which 
every  stage  of  living  has  assisted."  Oh,  may  Christ,  the  truest  human  child  that 
iias  ever  hved,  win  all  the  freshness  and  young  strength  there  is  yet  in  us  for  His 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [cha».  tl 

Father.  {Fbid.)  The  constraining  motive  : — What  could  compel  Ae  God  who  waB 
equal  to  the  Father?  Was  it  not  the  constraint  of  His  own  loving  and  obedient 
heart  ?  He  must  be  about  His  Father's  business,  because  He  could  not  help  it.  To 
obey  the  Father  was  to  obey  the  impulse  of  His  own  heart.  He  had  undertaken  to 
do  His  Father's  will,  and  in  doing  it  He  did  what  was  emphatically  His  own  wilL 
They  were  so  completely  one,  that  Christ  was  compelled  to  be  about  His  Father's 
business.  This  word  must  is  no  strange  word  to  us  women.  We  know  well 
enough  what  it  means.  We,  too,  have  rendered  the  obedience  of  love,  which  is  the 
only  kind  of  obedience  worth  the  name.  Is  there  any  sweetness  in  all  the  world 
that  can  equal  that  which  comes  from  obedience  to  our  soul's  beloved  ?  The  must 
is  not  a  yoke  which  other  hands  have  laid  upon  us  ;  it  is  the  outcome  of  our  own 
hearts.  It  never  thinks  of  possible  reward  or  possible  punishment,  There  is  no 
need  of  a  set  of  rules,  or  of  verbal  commands,  much  less  of  urging  words.  We  obey 
because  we  must ;  because  otherwise  the  hunger  of  our  love  could  never  be  satis- 
fied ;  because  if  there  were  a  must  not  instead  of  a  must,  all  the  joy  and  gladness 
would  go  out  of  our  life.  We  should  not  know  what  to  do  with  our  lips,  and 
hands,  and  hearts,  if  we  might  not  employ  them  for  our  dearest.  But  think  what 
this  must  means  in  the  text.  "  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business."  Is  the 
Divine  love  within  us  less  strong  than  the  human  ?  Are  we  Christ-like  in  this 
respect  ?  Can  we  say,  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God  "  7  Would  it  not  change 
our  lives  a  little  if  we  felt  this  must  as  Jesus  felt  it  ?  Would  it  not  make  of  us 
better  women,  because  better  Christians?  We  feel  that  we  must  be  about  the 
business  of  our  husbands,  our  children,  or  our  friends ;  but  we  too  often  regard  our 
Father's  business  as  something  for  our  leisure  moments  only,  to  be  taken  up  or  left 
according  to  convenience.  There  is  too  often  no  must  in  this  case.  And  this  is  the 
reason  of  much  of  the  sorrow  which  is  in  our  lives.  We  know  so  little  of  Christian 
joy,  because  we  know  so  httle  of  perfect  obedience.  We  are  Marthas,  who  are 
cumbered  about  much  serving,  rather  than  Marys,  whose  whole  souls  go  out  in 
love  to  the  Master.  Let  us  start  afresh,  and  begin  at  the  beginning.  Let  us  abide 
with  our  Father,  until,  knowing  Him  better,  we  love  Him  more  ;  and  then  say  to 
all  the  hindering  influences  that  are  round  about  us,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be 
about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  {Marianne  Farningham.)  The  earthly  and  the 
heavenly  parentage  : — It  was  a  hard,  stern  lesson  for  the  heart  of  the  mother ;  she 
lives  only  in  Him,  but  He  has  now  another  life  and  another  being.  Such  is  her  first 
lessons  in  the  mystery  of  the  two  lives,  the  twofold  relationship.  For  a  considerable 
portion  of  the  life  of  all  men,  the  two  relationships  are  at  one.  The  parent  represents 
God  to  the  child,  and  the  child  sees  God  through  the  parent.  It  is  a  sweet  and 
lovely  time  for  the  mother,  which  nature  perhaps  would  bid  her  protract.  She 
feels  that  only  good  can  come  of  it,  so  pure  and  so  heavenward  are  her  own  aspi- 
rations for  her  child.  Cannot  the  son  continue  to  seek  heaven  only  through  her  ? 
Is  there  any  moral  blank,  is  there  any  spiritual  necessity  to  forbid  her  saying  as  a 
thing  for  all  time  and  for  all  life,  "  So  be  it,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  thus  "  ?  Yes, 
she  must  learn  the  great  lesson,  "  All  souls  are  Mine ;  as  the  soul  of  the  parent,  so 
also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  Mine  " ;  and  God  is  the  speaker.  She  must  bend  her  neck 
to  this  disciphne,  or  it  will  be  the  worse  for  her  and  for  her  child.  The  child 
has  a  Father  in  heaven,  and  at  the  first  dawn  of  reason  he  must  be  about  hia 
Father's  business.  There  are  parents  who  have  sought  to  perpetuate  the 
spiritual  infancy,  to  stand  between  God  and  the  boy,  to  be  still  the  conscience- 
keeper  and  the  mediator  even  when  the  open  consciousness  of  the  relationships 
direct  and  immediate  should  have  warned  them  off  as  from  holy  ground.  They 
have  done  so,  and  the  Nemesis  has  been  sharp  and  swift,  the  devotion  diverted  from 
God  has  found  its  object  in  Belial  or  Mammon.  The  mother  may  divert,  but  she 
cannot  retain  it.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  God's  business  the  only  work  for  man : — 
Here  is  the  true  thought  for  us,  not  only  that  all  true  work  which  we  do  is  God's 
work,  bat  that  work  which  is  not  of  God  is  not  work,  does  not  properly  exist  in  the 
universe  at  all.  •' There  is  no  work  but  Thine."  When  we  first  take  up  our  place 
and  labour,  we  mistake  the  meaning  of  our  life.  We  think  we  are  born  to  do  oar 
own  will,  and  we  act  upon  our  thought.  Straightway  all  our  work  becomes  selfish : 
we  toil  and  struggle  for  ourselves,  we  are  an  end  unto  ourselves ;  and  the  result  is 
that  we  find  our  work  becoming  mean  ;  our  view  of  life  contemptuous  ;  ourselves 
ignoble.  But  when  the  root  idea  of  life  is  changed,  when  we  know  that  we  are  here 
to  do  God's  will,  and  that  His  will  is  love  to  us  and  all,  the  impulse  and  end  of  our 
work  are  altered.  We  accept  the  duties  laid  upon  us,  and  are  not  anxious  to  make 
them  into  advantages  to  self.     We  think,  "  God  has  placed  me  here  and  told  me  t« 


osup.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  289 

do  this.  He  is  Eight,  and  knowledge  and  good  must  flow  to  all  if  I  am  faithful.  I 
am  His  instrument ;  through  me  He  is  making  a  phase  of  Himself  known  to  man ; 
through  me  He  is  doing  a  portion  of  His  mighty  labour."  The  thought  transfigures 
our  view  of  the  universe ;  immediately  work  becomes  unselfish  and  sanctified,  life 
is  ennobled,  the  commonest  drudgery  is  rendered  beautiful,  suffering  is  gladly  borne. 
Men  call  us  aside  to  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  to  the  passion  of  excitement,  to  the 
fame  and  honour  we  may  win,  to  seek  our  own  will  and  gain  it.  '•  Hush,"  we  say, 
*'  we  live  now  in  deeper  joy  than  you  can  know,  we  have  loftier  excitements.  Fame, 
honour,  they  are  in  His  hand  and  not  in  ours.  My  own  will  1  I  have  my  will 
■when  I  do  His  will. "  How  magnificent  a  thing  might  life  become  could  we  but 
tarn  away  from  all  temptations  to  do  our  own  will,  and  say  to  the  tempters,  were 
they  even  father  or  mother — say  in  the  strength  of  Christ — "  I  cannot ;  wist  ye  not 
that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business?  "  {Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  About 
His  Father's  business  : — At  His  mother's  tender  reproach  He  turns,  and  lifts  His 
dreamy  eyes  towards  her — eyes  that  have  been  only  intent  on  the  sacred  scroll 
before  Him,  and  raised  only  to  the  grave  faces  of  the  ofBcial  teachers  around  Him. 
For  the  first  time  He  is  aware  of  His  own  absorption.  It  seems  incredible  to  Him 
that  those  nearest  and  dearest  should  be  out  of  sympathy  with  Him  at  such  a 
moment — unconscious  of  the  spiritual  influences  which  to  Him  were  all  in  all — of 
the  fascination  of  the  law — of  the  solemnities  of  the  Temple,  from  which  He  had 
not  been  able  to  tear  Himself.  He  stands  still,  rooted  to  the  spot ;  He  has  one 
more  question  to  ask,  not  of  the  priest,  but  of  His  parents :  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I 
must  be  about  My  Father's  business  ?  "  It  sounded  like  a  simple  home  appeal — 
had  He  not  always  been  zealous  about  the  carpentering  business  in  the  workshop 
of  His  reputed  father  at  Nazareth — should  He  be  less  zealous  about  the  work  the 
heavenly  Father  was  carrying  on  in  Him  at  Jerusalem  ?  A  caU  so  distinct — an 
opportunity  so  unique — a  combination  so  complete — in  the  Temple — sitting  in  the 
midst  of  doctors,  both  hearing  them  and  asking  them  questions ;  there  was  indeed 
business — more  profitable  beyond  compare  than  anything  to  be  found  at  Nazareth ; 
there  was  at  last  edification  beyond  all  human  handicraft.  He  could  not  choose 
but  be  there — until  called  back.  I  must.  He  said — such  moments  of  spiritual  con- 
straint fashion  our  lives.  I  must  speak  out,  I  must  give  it  up,  I  must  strike  the 
blow,  make  the  sacrifice,  sound  the  matter  to  its  depths,  be  alone  in  prayer,  search 
out  one  who  can  teach  or  guide  me,  if  only  for  a  single  brief  hour,  or  for  one  fugi- 
tive day  at  a  certain  crisis — under  the  constraint  of  guiding  events,  a  spiritual 
voice,  a  Divine  leading.  I  viust  sit  in  the  Temple,  hear,  inquire.  I  feel  this 
leap  into  the  future,  this  sudden  growth  in  wisdom.  I  can  make  no  mistake 
— the  revelation  is  too  cogent,  too  inward,  too  harmonious.  I  am  being 
dealt  with.  I  cannot  choose,  but  hear  and  be  as  I  am.  I  must  be  about 
My  Father's  business.  (R.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Earnfstness  exemplified: — 
The  Kev.  N.  Haycroft,  in  urging  earnestness  as  an  essential  qualification  in  a 
Sunday-school  teacher,  says: — The  narrative  of  a  colporteur  in  Spain,  on  one 
ooeasion,  wiU  best  illustrate  this  point.  He  was  travelling  on  foot  through  the 
provinces,  selling  Bibles.  At  the  close  of  a  long  and  weary  day's  journey,  he 
approached,  hungry  and  footsore,  the  outskirts  of  a  village,  where  he  met  a  Boman 
Catholic  priest,  who  asked  him  what  he  had  in  his  pack.  The  colporteur  repUed, 
"  Bibles  and  Testaments  ;  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  sell  you  one."  "  Can  you  sell 
me  a  real  Bible  ?  "  "  Yes ;  a  real  Bible  for  real  money."  He  unshouldered  his 
pack,  and  the  priest  purchased  a  Testament.  Just  as  he  was  about  to  depart  he 
eaid  to  the  colporteur,  "  Tou  seem  to  have  travelled  far  to-day  1 "  "  Yes,  I  have," 
was  the  answer ;  "  but  it  is  about  my  Master's  business."  •'  You  are  footsore  and 
wayworn."  Yes  ;  but  it  is  all  about  my  Master's  business."  "  Your  Master  must 
have  a  very  faithful  servant  in  you,"  said  the  priest.  The  colporteur,  not  liking  to 
expatiate  on  his  own  merits,  was  inclined  to  cut  the  conversation  short,  and  prepared 
to  pursue  his  journey.  The  priest  interposed,  and  pressed  him  to  remain  and 
lodge  with  him  aU  night.  "  No,"  said  the  colporteur ;  "  I  cannot  accept  your 
hospitality,  for  I  must  be  about  my  Master's  business."  "  But  you  must  lodge  some- 
where, so  that  you  may  as  weU  come  with  me."  After  some  persuasion  he  went. 
Having  spent  a  useful  hour  or  two  together,  they  retired  for  the  night.  The  priest 
was  an  early  riser,  and  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  called  to  his  housekeeper  to 
know  whether  the  stranger  was  up  yet.  "  Oh  yes  1  "  said  she, "  he  has  been  gone  from 
here  this  three  hours ;  and  the  last  words  he  said  were,  •  I  must  be  about  my 
Master's  business.'"  Here  was  earnestness; — and  remember  there  is  no  qualifica- 
tion for   a   high   pursuit   like  earnestness.      Luther   was  in   earnest  :  and  he 


isa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  n. 

pressed  on  till  he  had  secured  the  glorioas  Beformation.  Howard  was  in  earnest ; 
and  be  rested  not  till  he  bad  visited  all  the  prisons  of  Earope,  and  made  their 
sorrows  patent  to  tbe  world.  Wilberforce,  and  Clarkson,  and  Buxton  were  in 
earnest ;  and  they  persevered  till  they  bad  obtained  the  liberation  of  the  slave. 
Napoleon  was  in  earnest  in  his  ambitious  projects ;  and  step  by  step  he  dashed  on 
to  victory,  nor  rested  till  he  had  trampled  nnder  foot  the  thrones  of  Europe,  and 
made  himself  the  arbiter  of  the  destinies  of  the  world.  His  one  saving  quality  was 
earnestness.  Need  of  diligence  in  God's  terviee : — ^What  a  lesson  for  all  young 
people  1  You  think  you  need  not  begin  serving  God  just  yet.  You  have  plenty  of 
years  before  you.  How  do  you  know  that  ?  Do  people  never  die  young — suddenly, 
without  warning  ?  Begin  at  once  to  redeem  the  time.  Say  to  yourself  each  mom- 
ing — •'  My  soul,  thou  hast  to-day  a  God  to  glorify,  a  Christ  to  imitate,  a  soul  to 
save,  a  body  to  keep  under,  time  to  redeem,  temptation  to  overcome — ^verily,  I 
must  be  about  my  Father's  business."  {Dean  Goulburn.)  Attending  to  God'i 
business  : — Dr.  Parr,  in  his  Life  of  Archbishop  Ussher,  relates  that  while  that  pre- 
late was  once  preaching  in  the  church  at  Covent  Garden,  a  message  arrived  from 
the  Court  that  the  king  wished  immediately  to  see  him.  He  descended  from  the 
pulpit,  listened  to  tbe  command,  and  told  the  messenger  that  he  was  then,  as  he 
saw,  employed  in  God's  business,  but  as  soon  as  he  had  done  he  would  attend  upon 
the  king  to  understand  his  pleasure ;  and  then  continued  his  sermon.  {Baxendale's 
A  necdotes.)  Self-forgetfulness  in  the  Lord's  work : —  There  is  in  New  York  a 
Christian  lady,  who  surely  is  one  of  the  bravest  of  the  brave.  It  was  found  neces- 
sary that  the  surgeons  should  perform  upon  her  a  severe  and  dangerous  operation, 
and  for  that  purpose  she  was  taken  from  her  home  to  a  private  room  in  the  City 
Hospital.  The  probabilities  were  against  her  living  through  the  operation,  but  it 
was  the  only  hope  of  relief.  She  stood  face  to  face  with  probable  death  under  the 
surgeon's  knife,  to  say  nothing  of  her  great  suffering  from  her  disease.  It  might 
have  been  supposed  that  her  anxiety  for  her  children,  her  own  suffering,  and  her 
great  danger  would  have  so  filled  her  mind,  that  she  would  have  done  well  had  she 
fixed  her  thoughts  on  heaven,  borne  her  sufferings  meekly,  and  waited  in  unshaken 
faith  for  her  summons  home.  But  she  was  one  of  God's  heroines.  She  found  that 
the  skilled  nurse  who  had  charge  of  her  was  not  a  Christian,  and  she  lost  sight  of 
herself,  in  the  desire  to  bless  the  soul  of  this  stranger.  She  requested  the  nurse  to  read 
the  Bible  aloud  to  her,  and  selected  such  passages  as  she  believed  most  likely  to 
rouse  the  nurse  to  repentance.  She  talked  to  her  about  religion,  prayed  with  her 
and  asked  God  to  give  her  this  soul  before  He  called  her  home  ;  and  the  prayer  was 
answered.  We  are  glad  to  be  able  to  add  that  the  lady  recovered,  and  it  is  likely 
she  owed  her  life,  humanly  speaking,  to  her  zeal  for  her  Lord's  work.  For  her 
thoughts  were  thus  withdrawn  from  herself,  so  that  sorrow  for  her  loved  ones  and 
shrinking  from  suffering  and  dangers  did  not  wear  her  nerves  and  exhaust  her  vitality. 
The  spirit  of  ChrisVs  life  : — Such  a  sentence  at  this  time  in  His  career  is  solitary  in  its 
grandeur,  and  rears  its  head  like  a  sunlit  peak,  flashing  its  golden  light  backward 
along  His  infancy  and  boyhood,  reveahng  its  hidden  progress  and  interpreting  its 
experiences  ;  reaching  forward  to  the  day  of  His  baptism,  and  even  to  the  hour  in 
which  He  offers  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world  ;  and  proving  that  the 
"  element "  present  in  this  early  utterance  makes  this  but  one  of  a  series  of  lumi- 
nous summits  of  the  same  mountain  range.  Look  into  the  consciousness  out  of 
which  that  saying  leaps.  It  bespeaks  a  soul  that  lies  like  an  unruffled  lake  in  the 
broad  and  beaming  sunshine  of  the  Father's  face.  It  is  as  surprising  in  its  frank- 
ness  as  it  is  marvellous  in  its  fulness.  As  if  it  were  a  flash  of  a  divinely  religious 
genius,  we  listen  and  ponder  and  admire  ;  as  when,  for  tbe  first  time,  the  spirit  is 
epell-bound  before  Angelo's  Moses,  or  when  Milan  Cathedral,  a  splendid  mass  of 
perfected  thought  and  finished  loveliness,  first  stands  out  revealed  to  our  gaze  in  the 
clear  sunlight  of  heaven.  (J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  Christ  our  example  : — "  Wist  ye 
not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business  1 "  Let  us  then — First,  state  the 
circumstances  in  which  He  now  was.  Secondly,  concede  what  was  peculiar  in  His 
case.  And  thirdly,  explain  what  is  common  between  Him  and  you  on  this  subject. 
I.  And,  first,  with  begakd  to  the  ciecumstancbs  in  which  He  now  was.  A 
remarkable  veil  is  thrown  over  the  Saviour's  infancy.  His  childhood.  His  youth, 
and  His  private  life.  But  there  is  a  difference  between  Him  and  us,  and  I  there- 
fore  pass  on — H.  Secondly,  to  concede  what  was  peculiar  in  His  case.  There 
was  much  that  was  peculiar.  1.  His  relation  was  pecuUar.  God  was  His  Father 
in  such  a  sense,  as  He  is  not  ours.  2.  The  business  He  had  to  accomplish  for  His 
Father  was  peculiar.    He  said  in  His  intercessory  praj  er,  "  I  have  glorified  The* 


OKAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  t87 

on  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thon  gavest  Me  to  do."  This  was,  to 
interpose  as  a  Mediator  between  God  and  ns ;  to  lay  His  hands  on  as  both  ;  to  finish 
transgression.  No,  "  He  trod  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was 
none  to  help  Him."  3.  His  obligations  were  peculiar.  "I  must  be  about  My 
Father's  business."  He  was  not  originally  under  this  obligation.  He  incurred  it 
for  our  sakes.  Lastly,  His  answer  was  peculiar.  Never  was  there  before,  and  never 
can  there  be  again,  a  child  to  be  addressed  in  a  state  like  this.  Though,  therefore. 
His  reply  was  exactly  pertinent  as  regarded  Himself,  yet  it  is  not  proper  in  all  re- 
spects for  others.  Yet  where  there  is  no  equality,  there  may  be  a  likeness.  Though 
in  all  things  He  has  the  pre-eminence.  He  is  the  model  of  the  new  creation,  and  we 
are  predestinated  as  Christians  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  own  Son. 
And  now  I  come  to  the — III.  Third  part  of  my  subject,  in  which  I  purpose  to 

EXPLAIN   WHAT    IS    COMMON    BETWEEN    HiM    AND    TOU    ON    THIS    SUBJECT.       1.    God   it 

your  Father.  2.  That  there  is  a  business  which  your  Father  has  assigned  you. 
We  call  it  your  Father's  business,  because  He  will  punish  all  who  neglect  it,  and 
graciously  reward  those  who  observe  it.  What  is  this  business  ?  You  have  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  search  the  Scriptures.  There  you  will  find  it  described  both  negatively  and 
positively.  There  you  will  learn  that  it  is  to  avoid  that  which  is  evil  and  to  cling 
to  what  is  right.  3.  Bemember  that  this  business  you  are  under  an  obUgation 
to  regard  and  pursue.  It  is  not  to  be  observed  as  a  thing  of  indifference  ;  not  as  an 
optional  thing  ;  but  you  must  be  about  your  Father's  business.  You  are  under  the 
obligation  of  justice  in  this  business.  Whatever  talents  you  possess,  or  blessings 
you  enjoy,  they  come  from  Him,  and  He  never  relinquished  EQs  property  in  any 
one  of  them.  4.  His  answer  is  to  be  your  answer,  to  all  those  who  would 
interfere  with  your  concern  in  this  cause,  you  must  say  as  He  did,  "  Wist  ye  not 
that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  There  are  many  who  will  in  various 
ways  do  this  ;  but  for  the  present  we  may  rank  them  under  five  classes.  And  in  the 
first  class  we  put  those  whom  I  shall  call  wonderers.  The  apostle  says,  "  The  natural 
man  knoweth  not  the  things  of  God,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  They 
wonder  with  regard  to  your  conduct.  Second  class,  we  put  reproachers.  That  which 
you  do  from  the  conviction  of  conscience  many  will  ascribe  to  obstinacy  or  hypocrisy, 
or  to  a  wish  to  excite  notice  and  to  distinguish  yourself.  Third  class,  I  put  the 
hinderers.  There  are  some  persons  who  have  nothing  in  the  world  to  do  themselves, 
and  very  naturally  judge  of  others  by  themselves.  Fourth  class,  I  put  bigots.  There 
are  some  persons  who  seem  to  possess  nothing  like  judgment,  and  are  never  able  to 
distinguish  between  things  that  differ.  Fifth  and  last  class  are  complainers.  But 
to  conclude.  Here  is  a  beautiful  example  to  the  young.  The  youthful  Redeemer, 
my  dear  children,  of  twelve  years  old,  is  saying,  •'  I  must  be  about  My  Father's 
business."  Oh  1  be  influenced  by  this  example ;  and  remember  what  He  says, 
*  They  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  (W.  Jay.)  How  we  must  make  religion 
&ur  business  : — From  this  example  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  in  making  His  Father's 
work  His  business,  we  learn  this  great  truth  : — That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  Chris- 
tian to  make  religion  his  business.  For  the  illustrating  and  unfolding  of  this,  there 
are  three  questions  to  be  resolved  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  religion  ?  IL  Why  we 
mast  make  religion  our  business  ?  III.  What  it  is  to  make  religion  our  business  1 
Question  i.  What  is  meant  by  belioion  ?  Question  n.  The  second  question  is, 
WHT  WE  MUST  MAKE  BEUOioN  ouB  BUSINESS  f  I  auswcT,  becauso  religion  is  a  matter 
of  the  highest  nature ;  while  we  are  serving  God,  we  are  doing  angels'  work. 
Question  hi.  The  third  question  is,  what  it  is  to  maeb  belioion  oub  business  t  I 
answer  :  it  consists  principally  in  these  seven  things  : — 1.  We  make  religion  oar 
business,  when  we  wholly  devote  ourselves  to  religion.  "  Stablish  thy  word  onto 
thy  servant,  who  is  devoted  to  thy  fear  "  (Psa.  cxix.  38)  ;  as  a  scholar  who  devotes 
himself  to  his  studies  makes  learning  his  business.  2.  We  make  rehgion  our  busi- 
ness, when  we  intend  the  business  of  religion  chiefly.  It  doth  principatum  obtiTiere 
f"  gain  the  pre-eminence  "].  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (Matt,  vi,  33)  ; 
first  in  time,  before  all  things,  and  first  in  affection,  above  all  things.  3.  We  make 
religion  our  business,  when  our  thoughts  are  most  busied  about  religion.  4.  We 
make  religion  our  business  when  our  main  eiid  and  scope  is  to  serve  God.  6.  We 
make  religion  our  business,  when  we  do  trade  with  God  every  day.  "  Our  conver- 
sation is  in  heaven  "  (Phil.  iii.  20).  6.  We  make  religion  our  business,  when  we 
redeem  time  from  secular  things  for  the  service  of  God.  A  good  Christian  is  the 
greatest  monopolizer :  he  doth  hoard  up  all  the  time  he  can  for  religion :  "  At 
midnight  I  will  rise  to  give  thanks  unto  Thee  "  (Psa.  cxix.  62).  7.  We  make 
religion  our  business  when  we  serve  God  with  all  our  might.    Use  i.  InyobmaxioS* 


388  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

Bbanch  I.  Hence  learn,  that  there  are  few  good  Christians.  Oh,  how  few  malce  re- 
ligion  their  business  1  Is  he  an  artificer  that  never  wrought  in  the  trade  ?  Is  he 
a  Christian  that  never  wrought  in  the  trade  of  godliness  I  How  few  make  religion 
their  business  !  1.  Some  make  religion  a  complement,  but  not  their  business.  2. 
Others  make  the  world  their  business.  "  Who  mind  earthly  things  "  (Phil.  iii.  19). 
Branch  ii.  Hence  see  how  hard  it  is  to  be  saved.  Use  ii.  Teial.  Let  us  deal  im- 
partially with  our  own  souls,  and  put  ourselves  upon  a  strict  trial  before  the  Lord, 
whether  we  make  religion  our  business.  And  for  our  better  progress  herein,  I  shall 
lay  down  ten  signs  and  characters  of  a  man  that  makes  religion  his  business,  and  by 
these  as  by  a  gospel-touchstone,  we  may  try  ourselves  : — Chakacteb  i.  He^  who 
makes  religion  his  business  doth  not  place  his  religion  only  in  externals.  "  He  is  not 
a  Jew  who  is  one  outwardly  "  (Kom.  ii.  28).  Character  ii.  He  who  makes  religion 
his  business  avoids  everything  that  may  be  a  "  hinrlrance  "  to  him  in  his  work. 
Character  hi.  He  who  makes  religion  his  business  hath  a  care  to  preserve  con- 
science inviolable,  and  had  rather  offend  all  the  world  than  offend  his  conscience. 
"  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers  with  pure  conscience  "  (2  Tim.  i. 
3).  Character  iv.  He  who  makes  religion  his  business,  religion  hath  an  influence 
upon  all  his  civil  actions.  Character  v.  He  who  makes  religion  his  business,  is 
good  in  his  calling  and  relation.  Eelative  grace  doth  much  grace  religion.  Charac- 
ter vi.  He  who  makes  religion  his  business  hath  a  care  of  his  company.  He  dares 
not  twist  into  a  cord  of  friendship  with  sinners  :  "  I  have  not  sat  with  vain  persons  " 
(Psa.  xxvi.  4).  Diamonds  will  not  cement  with  rubbish.  Character  vn.  He  who 
makes  religion  his  business  keeps  his  spiritual  watch  always  by  him.  The  good 
Christian  keeps  his  watch  candle  always  burning.  Character  viii.  He  who  makes 
religion  his  business,  every  day  casts  np  his  accounts  to  see  how  things  go  in  hia 
soul.  Character  ix.  He  who  makes  religion  his  business  will  be  religious,  whatever 
it  cost  him.  Character  x.  He  that  makes  religion  his  business  lives  every  day  as 
his  last  day.  Rules  for  making  religion  our  business.  Eulb  i.  If  you  would 
make  religion  :vour  business,  possess  yourselves  with  this  maxim,  that  religion  is  the 
end  of  your  creation.  Eule  ii.  If  you  would  make  religion  your  business,  get  a 
change  of  heart  wrought.  Eule  hi.  If  you  would  make  religion  your  business,  set 
yourselves  always  under  the  eye  of  God.  Eule  rv.  If  you  would  make  religion  your 
business,  think  often  of  the  shortness  of  time.  Eule  v.  If  you  would  make  religion 
your  business,  get  an  understanding  heart.  Eule  vi.  If  you  would  make  religion 
your  business,  implore  the  help  of  God's  Spirit.  Motive  i.  The  sweetness  that 
is  in  religion.  All  her  paths  are  pleasantness  (Prov.  iii.  17).  MoTrvE  ii.  The 
second  and  last  consideration  is,  that  millions  of  persons  have  miscarried  to 
<jternity,  for  want  of  making  religion  their  business.  They  have  done  something  in 
religion,  but  not  to  purpose  :  they  have  begun,  but  have  made  too  many  stops  and 
pauses,  (r.  Watson,  M.A.)  The  business  of  youth:— 1.  To  regain  the  knowledge 
of  God.  S.  To  renew  intercourse  with  God.  The  business  of  youth  is— 3.  To  return 
to  the  service  of  God,  "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,  we  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way."  "  Ye  were  as  sheep  going  astray,  but  are  now  returned  unto 
the  shepherd  and  to  the  bishop  of  souls."  By  the  service  of  God,  I  intend,  a  life  of 
filial  obedience  to  God's  will  His  service  does  not  consist  in  mere  prayers  and 
praises,  in  reading  Scripture,  and  in  attending  public  worship  ;  even  activity  in 
spreading  religion,  blended  with  devotional  exercises,  does  not  compass  God's  ser- 
vice ;  that  service  consists  in  doing  and  in  suffering  all  God's  will,  and  His  will 
embraces  every  act,  and  claims  every  hour.  The  business  and  the  service  in  which 
you  are  occupied,  may  be  made  a  course  of  duty  to  God  :  perform  what  you  have  to 
do,  as  unto  God  ;  do  it  according  to  God's  will ;  do  it  in  the  spirit  of  obedience  to 
God  ;  and  in  your  worldly  calling  you  will  glorify  Him  ;  your  conduct  will  exhibit 
the  holiness,  the  justice,  and  the  goodness  of  His  will ;  your  spirit  will  manifest  His 
nature  ;  your  circumstances  will  display  His  power  and  His  love  ;  the  place  of  your 
daily  labour  will  be  as  much  the  temple  of  your  ministrations,  as  the  place  where 
the  seraphs  cry  ;  and  your  avocations  as  truly  worship,  as  is  their  song  of  "  Holy, 
Holy,  Holy,  is  the  Lord  Almighty."  This  is  the  business  of  youth :  through  the  pro- 
visions of  the  gospel,  to  regain  the  knowledge  of  God— to  renew  intercourse  with  God 

to  return  to  the  service  of  God— in  one  word,  to  "  Eemember  the  Creator."    Youth 

are  expected  to  be  thus  occupied,  by  the  highest  authority  and  by  the  holiest  beings. 
This  expectation  is  reasonable  :— Because,  1.  The  season  of  youth  is  the  right  time 
for  the  commencement  of  this  business— it  is  the  right  time,  because  the  youth  is 
as  much  the  creature  of  God  as  he  ever  can  be— it  is  the  right  time,  because  the 
tiTTi»  in  which  God  requires  it  to  be  begim.     "  In  the  days  of  thy  youth,  remember 


iiHAP.  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  S89 

thy  Creator."  I  do  not  deny  that  religion  is  often  entered  upon  during  manhood, 
and  sometimes  in  old  age  ;  but  it  is  too  late  ;  not  too  late  for  salvation,  but  too  late 
to  be  right.  God  has  not  given  men  a  discharge  from  His  service  during  youth  ; 
delay  is,  therefore,  sin.  Are  mid-day  and  evening  only  ruled  by  the  sun  ?  does  the 
earth  nourish  only  the  full-grown  tree,  or  the  full-blown  flower  ?  then  why  should 
life's  morning  be  without  God,  and  the  plants  of  youth  without  a  place  in  God's 
vineyard  ?  The  expectation  is  reasonable  : — 2.  Because,  in  the  youthful  stage  of 
life,  there  is  no  peculiar  impediment  to  the  pursuit  of  this  business.  There  are  im- 
pediments, and  they  are  great,  and  they  are  many :  a  fallen  nature,  an  adversary  in 
Satan,  and  an  evil  world,  involve  them.  But  these  sources  of  opposition  exist  in 
every  stage  of  life  ;  and,  I  ask,  when  are  they  most  full  and  powerful  ?  Youth  has 
nothing  in  it,  as  youth,  presenting  impediments.  The  peculiar  features  of  early 
life  are  these  : — The  character  is  unformed — habits  are  not  fixed — the  spirits  are 
buoyant — cares  are  not  heavy  ;  but  in  these  features  of  youth  we  find  faciUties,  not 
obstacles.  The  Scriptures  and  the  ordinances  of  religion  are  as  adapted  to  youth  as 
to  old  age  ;  if  they  supply  strong  meat  for  men,  they  yield  also  milk  for  babes.  God 
is  not  slow  to  be  found  of  the  young,  to  hold  fellowship  with  them,  and  to  introduce 
them  to  His  service.  "  I  love,"  saith  God,  "  them  that  love  Me,  and  them  that 
seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  The  expectation  is  reasonable  : — 3.  Because, 
nothing  so  promotes  the  happiness  of  life,  as  the  early  pursuit  of  this  business. 
Distinguish  happiness  from  mere  pleasurable  feeling  :  the  latter  is  not  always 
the  state  of  a  godly  man.  But  if  a  quickened  intellect,  if  shelter  from  many 
moral  evils,  if  fellowship  with  that  Being  whose  wisdom  and  knowledge  and 
influence  are  infinite,  if  peace  of  mind,  if  securing  the  chief  end  of  life,  if 
the  love  and  care  of  God,  if  the  prospect  of  a  glorious  immortality  can 
constitute  happiness,  then  it  is  found  in  the  knowledge,  in  the  fellowship, 
and  in  the  service  of  God.  The  season  of  youth  is  the  time  in  which  happiness 
is  most  ardently  sought ;  and  if  the  young  but  become  occupied  with  that  which  we 
have  called  the  business  of  Ufe,  they  not  only  secure  in  youth  the  purest  and  most 
Bohd  enjoyment  which  can  be  ifound  on  earth,  but  they  treasure  up  happiness  for 
manhood  and  old  age,  yea,  even  to  eternity.  Godhness  will  promote  the  welfare  of 
the  young  in  their  business.  The  godly  youth  attends  to  business  with  diligence  and 
fidelity,  and  (performing  his  duties  in  the  spirit  of  prayer)  with  the  prospect  of  suc- 
cess. He  performs  everything  as  unto  God — he  acts  by  God's  guidance,  he  inherits 
God's  blessing.  Any  wise  master  will  value  greatly  a  pious  apprentice,  a  godly 
assistant,  a  religious  servant.  Sunday  religion — mere  Bible-reading  religion — 
mere  church-  and  chapel-going  religion,  all  employers,  pious  and  profane,  agree 
to  abhor,  but  the  reality  in  a  youth  all  must  prefer.  (S.  Martin,  D.D.)  My 
Father^s  business  : — Once,  a  great  Boman  emperor  had  conquered  a  great  country, 
and  he  had  come  back  to  Borne,  and  he  was  having  what  is  called  "  a  triumph." 
He  was  going  up  with  great  pomp,  chariots,  and  soldiers,  and  great  hosts  of  people ! 
A  very  little  boy  ran  out  of  the  crowd  that  was  looking  at  the  emperor,  and  waa 
Fanning  up  to  him,  when  the  crowd  put  him  back,  and  said,  "  Don't  you  know  it  is 
the  emperor  ?  "  The  boy  rephed,  "  Yes,  he  is  your  emperor,  but  he  is  my  father  I " 
*♦  My  father  1 "  "  That  great  king  is  your  emperor,  but  he  is  my  father  1 "  A  man 
(moe  said,  "  Life  is  a  thread  ;  but  the  thread  is  in  my  Father's  hand,  so  it  is  all 
right  1 "  Do  you  understand  that  ?  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  be  able  to  say, 
•»  My  Father  I  "  Beautiful  words,  aren't  they  ?  I  don't  know  any  words  Like  them. 
••  My  Father  1 "  It  is  no  use  unless  you  can  say,  "  My."  My  dear  boys  and  girls, 
ean  you  look  up  into  that  great  Father's  face,  and  say,  "  He  is  my  Father  "  ?  «♦  I 
must  be  about  my  Father's  business."  (/.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Busy  : — I  hare  read 
a  little  fable  about  a  hard  frost.  When  everything  was  frozen  there  was  one  little 
Btream  running  still.  It  was  not  frozen,  and  somebody  said  to  the  little  stream, 
"  Little  stream,  why  aren't  you  frozen  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  I  am  too  busy  to  be 
frozen.  I  am  going  too  fast,  too  quickly,  to  be  frozen."  The  best  way  is  to  be  very 
busy — have  plenty  to  do.  (Ibid.)  Father's  business: — I  should  like  to  say  something 
about  a  man  who  wrote  a  very  clever  book.  At  one  time  he  did  not  believe  in  God. 
One  day  he  was  wanting  a  little  water,  and  he  knocked  at  a  cottage  door  and  asked 
for  some  water.  A  little  girl  opened  the  door,  and  he  said  to  her,  "  Will  your 
mother  give  me  a  little  water  to  chink  ?  "  She  replied,  "  Come  in,  sir ;  my  mother 
wHl  be  happy  to  give  you  some  water."  He  went  in,  and  saw  the  little  girl  had  been 
reading  the  Bible ;  and  he  said  to  her,  ••  What,  getting  your  task  done  ?  "  She  said, 
"  No,  sir,  no  task.  I  am  reading  my  Bible."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  yoa  are  getting 
your  task  oat  of  the  Bible."    "  No,  sir,"  she  repeated,  "I  am  readinff  the  Bible." 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cm*,  a. 

He  said  to  her,  "  Do  yon  love  the  Bible  ?  "  In  a  childiBh  way  she  replied,  •♦  I 
thoiight  everybody  loved  the  Bible."  This  struck  him  very  much.  This  little  girl 
loved  her  Bible  ;  it  was  no  task  to  her,  but  a  pleasure.  He  went  home  and  read  the 
Bible  for  himself.  That  was  the  beginning  of  it.  She  was  "  doing  her  Father's 
business."  How  did  it  become  God's  business  ?  And  it  is  the  great  business  of  ooi 
day,  to  be  reading  the  Bible,  praying,  thinking  ;  and  in  our  private  devotions. 
{Ibid.) 

Vers.  50, 51.  And  was  subject  unto  them. — Obedience  toparent$:—How  signifieant 
a  sentence  !  God,  whom  the  angels  obey,  is  subject  to  Joseph  and  Mary  I  Children, 
behold  your  model,  and  learn  from  the  example  of  Jesus  to  be  obedient  to  your  parents. 
I.  Bt  beverence.  Reverence  is  required — 1.  By  the  law  of  nature.  (1)  God  has 
planted  in  the  hearts  of  men  a  reverential  feeling  towards  those  to  whom  they  owe 
their  lives.  Hence,  even  the  heathen  honour  their  parents.  (2)  Reverence  is  due  to 
every  superior  from  his  subjects ;  consequently  due  to  parents  from  their  children, 
because  they  are  the  God-given  superiors  and  guardians.  2.  By  the  duty  of  grati- 
tude. The  parents  are,  next  to  God,  the  greatest  benefactors  of  their  children  ;  it 
is  from  them  that  they  receive  food,  clothing,  education.  3.  By  an  explicit  com- 
mandment of  God  (Exod.  XX.  12).  (1)  The  first  commandment  with  promise  (Eph. 
vi.  1-3).  (2)  The  most  dreadful,  because  of  the  threats  imposed  upon  its  violation 
(Deut.  xxvii.  16).  II.  By  lovb.  Love  is  required — 1.  By  God  Himself  (Prov.  xxx. 
17).  2.  By  reason.  Parents  love  their  children,  wherefore  they  deserve  to  be 
loved  in  return.  The  children  of  the  Gentiles  loved  their  parents,  ^neas  carried 
on  his  shoulders  his  old  father  out  of  Troy.  3.  Love  is  excited  by  the  example  of 
good  children.  Joseph.  Jesus.  III.  Bt  deeds.  1.  Obedience,  which  is  required 
(1)  by  nature  ;  (2)  by  God  Himself.  2.  By  active  charity  in  their  necessities. 
Children  must  (1)  bear  their  imperfections  and  infirmities;  (2)  console  them  in 
their  adversities  and  relieve  their  wants  if  necessary;  (3)  assist  them  in  their 
advanced  age ;  (4)  in  time  of  dangerous  illness  provide  for  spiritual  and  medical 
help ;  (5)  pray  for  them.  Conclusion  :  If  children  would  comply  with  these  duties 
towards  their  parents,  their  reward  would  be  temporal  and  eternal  happiness. 
(Wansidal.)  The  Holy  Family  : — There  is  a  pious  legend  that  St.  Luke,  an 
artist  as  he  was,  painted  several  pictures  of  Jesus  and  Mary ;  however  this  may  be, 
we  know  at  any  rate  that  he  drew  some  lovely  pictures  of  the  youth  of  Jesas,  and 
of  the  Holy  Family  in  which  he  dwelt.  I.  The  domestic  vtrtdes  of  the  Holi 
Family.  1.  Fear  of  God.  This  was  manifested  by  their  journey  to  Jerusalem, 
made  by  Mary  the  tender  Virgin,  though  not  required  by  law,  and  by  Jesus  hardly 
yet  bound  by  law.  An  admonition  to  Christian  families  not  to  stay  away  from 
public  worship.  2.  Their  activity.  (1)  Joseph  was  a  carpenter,  and  supported  the 
Holy  Family  by  handiwork.  Mary  managed  the  household.  Jesus  assisted  both 
of  them.  (2)  They  were  united  in  their  daily  works.  Co-operation.  3.  Peaceful- 
nesB  and  meekness.  II.  The  characteristic  virtues  of  the  iKDrriDCALS  oom- 
FOSiNO  the  Holy  Family.  1.  Joseph.  An  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  was  no  guile ; 
a  model  to  all.  (1)  His  willingness  to  yield  to  God's  arrangements.  Protection  of 
Mary.  Flight  into  Egypt.  (2)  His  loving  care  of  Jesus  and  Mary.  2.  Mary„  Full 
of  grace ;  a  model  to  all  women.  (1)  Her  innocence,  resignation,  humility.  (2)  Her 
discretion  and  love  of  retirement.  3.  Jesus  is  your  model,  ye  sons  and  daughters. 
(1)  His  conduct  at  the  Temple  school.  He  manifested  His  knowledge,  but  without 
ostentation.  (2)  His  obedience.  This  is  the  touchstone  of  the  inner  value  of  a 
child,  and  the  path  to  wisdom  and  happiness.  (3)  His  growth  in  wisdom  and 
grace.  {Weinzierl.)  Development  of  Chritt  through  the  inflxunceM  of  home: — 
In  the  life  of  Christ  we  have  the  actual  union  of  pure  Divinity  with 
ordinary  human  life.  He  traversed  all  its  stages — childhood,  boyhood,  youth, 
and  manhood ;  He  touched  all  that  was  universally  common  to  pore  homanity  in 
each,  and  from  henceforth  there  is  no  life,  even  to  the  very  lowest,  in  which  the 
real  may  not  become  what  it  is  in  its  purity— the  ideal ;  no  office,  no  work,  which, 
done  in  His  spirit,  the  making  of  a  book  or  the  digging  of  a  garden,  may  not  accord 
with  the  highest  imagination  of  your  spirit,  and  chime  in  with  your  most  poetical 
vidon  of  perfection.  Trace  Uie  influence  of  His  home-life  upon  the  character  ol 
Clhrist.  L  It  istablisheo  His  lovs  of  ham  xtfon  a  bitbb  fouhdatiom.  He  grew 
naturally  in  love.  It  was  a  normal,  slow  development  of  the  affection  which  was 
to  die  for  the  world.  U.  It  bstablisbed  ih  His  mikd  a  deep  sense  of  the 
woBTHimss  or  dohxbtio  ahd  soclui  bblatioks.  He  gives  no  sanction  to  the  erroi 
of  tbosa  who  think  that  in  separation  from  all  domestic  and  social  ties  they  oaa 


CHAP,  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  991 

live  more  purely  and  worship  God  with  a  more  entire  devotion ;  that  a  systematic 
contempt  for  all  the  bonds  which  bind  mother  to  son,  and  wife  to  husband,  is  a 
proof  of  the  highest  spirituality ;  whose  spiritual  religion  consists  in  a  denial  of  the 
natural  piety  of  the  heart,  and  whose  efforts  for  a  reformation  of  human  nature  are 
founded  on  a  denial  of  human  nature.  Think  of  Him  at  the  marriage  feast ;  at  the 
grave  of  Lazarus ;  see  how  tenderly  He  deals  with  the  widow  of  Nain,  and  after- 
wards with  His  own  mother  at  the  Cross.  III.  Friendship.  IV.  Patbiotibm.  The 
source  of  the  tears  He  shed  over  Jerusalem  arose,  humanly  speaking,  in  the  heart 
of  His  mother.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  home  at  Nazareth: — I.  In  this 
one  verse  we  are  admitted  to  see  the  home  life  of  Jesus.  Home  life  is  the  God- 
appointed  training  ground  of  the  human  character ;  from  the  home  life  of  child- 
hood springs  the  maturity  of  manhood  for  good  or  for  evil.  II.  1.  Let  children  and 
young  people  learn  from  the  example  of  the  Divine  Child  that  home  life,  with  all 
its  Uttle  duties  and  trials,  is  the  discipline  which  God  has  appointed  as  the  best 
training  for  the  duties  and  trials  of  a  wider  sphere.  2.  Not  infrequently  when  in 
youth  the  spiritual  eye  is  opened  to  the  things  of  God,  and  a  desire  is  kindled  after 
a  higher  life,  there  follows  a  restlessness  which  rebels  against  the  irksomeness  of 
the  small  details  and  daily  duties  of  common  life.  At  such  a  time  it  is  well  to 
remember  that  it  was  immediately  after  the  Child  Jesus  had  recognized  more  clearly 
the  Divine  mission  to  which  He  was  summoned,  that  He  went  down  to  Nazareth 
and  there  lived  in  subjection  to  His  earthly  guardians,  conscious  that  in  so  doing 
He  was  most  truly  "  about  His  Father's  business."  3.  Let  parents  also  learn,  from 
the  example  of  the  Virgin  Mother,  to  reverence  the  child-mind.  (Canon  Vernon 
Hutton,  M.A.)  Every  duty  has  its  proper  place  and  time: — The  fact  that  Jesus 
loved  Bible  study  did  not  keep  Him  from  going  with  His  parents  when  they  called 
Him,  or  from  obeying  them  so  long  as  they  had  a  right  to  His  obedience.  Duties 
never  conflict.  The  wish  to  go  to  a  prayer-meeting,  or  to  a  Sunday  school,  or  to 
any  other  church  service  will  not  justify  the  neglect  of  any  well-defined  duty  else- 
where. God  approves  of  no  devotion  on  the  part  of  any  servant  of  His  which 
makes  that  servant  less  loving  and  considerate  and  faithful  toward  mother,  sister, 
wife,  or  child.  (H.  C.  Trumbull.)  The  true  order  of  obedience : — The  only  acts 
recorded  of  Christ's  childhood  are  acts  of  obedience— to  God  His  heavenly  Father, 
and  also  to  His  earthly  parents.  He  thus  shows  what  the  special  duty  of  child- 
hood and  youth  is ;  and  teaches  what  the  true  order  of  obedience  is,  viz.,  that  the 
foundation  of  obedience  to  man  is  to  be  laid  in  obedience  to  God  ;  a  lesson  made 
more  cogent  by  the  particular  circumstances  of  our  Lord's  relationship  to  Joseph, 
which  was  not  one  of  natural,  but  of  putative  filiation  ;  and  therefore  teaches  the 
duty  of  obedience  to  parents,  natural,  civil,  and  ecclesiastical.  (Bishop  Chris. 
Wordsworth.)  The  filial  dutifulness  of  Jesus : — He  was  subject — He,  the  great 
God  of  heaven  and  earth,  continually  submitted  Himself  to  His  parents.  In  little 
things  doubtless ;  for  domestic  life  consists  of  little  things ;  and  submission  could 
not  otherwise  have  been  shown.  If  they  sent  Him  on  a  message  to  a  neighbour.  He 
the  Great  Sender  of  the  apostles,  delivered  the  message  faithfully.  If  they  bade 
Him  sweep  the  house  and  search  for  a  lost  coin,  He,  "  the  wisdom  of  God,"  who 
seeks  diligently  for  lost  souls,  did  even  as  He  was  bade.  If  they  taught  Him 
joiner's  work,  and  showed  Him  how  to  make  a  plough  or  a  yoke  for  oxen,  He,  who 
lays  on  men  an  easy  yoke  and  a  light  burden,  learned  cheerfully  and  gladly,  and 
threw  His  mind  into  the  trade.  If  they  bade  Him  work  in  their  httle  plot  of 
garden  ground,  and  train  the  creepers  or  water  the  flowers.  He,  the  great  Dresser 
of  the  vineyard  of  His  Church,  who  rears  souls  by  the  dews  of  His  grace  and  the 
disciphne  of  His  providence,  took  in  hand  the  water-pot  and  the  gardening  tools. 
(Dean  Ooulbum.)  A  great  love  and  a  great  lesson: — A  great  love,  inasmuch  as 
He  yielded  this  submission  in  our  nature  for  our  sakes ;  and  we  are  freely  welcome 
to  all  the  benefits  of  it.  A  great  lesson ;  for,  if  submission  were  the  law  of  His  Ufe, 
how  much  more  fitting  is  it  that  it  should  be  the  law  of  ours  1  Oh,  that  we  may 
embrace  the  love  1  Oh,  that  we  may  learn  the  lesson  1  In  doing  both  these  things 
the  Christian  life  consists.  (Ibid.)  Home  duties : — The  earthly  call  found  Him, 
too.  It  was  EUs  duty,  when  found,  to  go  with  His  parents,  and  He  went.  Ponder 
that.  Hint  of  universal  significance.  Never  trust  a  heavenly  call  which  bids  you 
neglect  your  obvious  duties  whilst  they  remain  such.  The  things  that  lie  near  to 
your  hand,  round  about  yoa,  are  aa  much  the  Father's  business  as  anything  else. 
Don't  think  that  being  off  to  early  communion  and  neglecting  your  ckildren  and 
your  husband  and  your  housework,  is  doing  your  Father's  business.  Don't  suppose 
that  charity  out  of  the  house,  and  dancing  attendance  on  the  clergyman  to  the 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap  tt. 


neglect  of  hearth  and  home,  is  your  Father's  business.    Learn  of  the  Saviour. 
When  the  home  claim  came  He  immediately  left  what,  at  the  moment,  was  of 
absorbing  interest  to  Him  ;  He  left  the  excitement  of  Jerusalem,  the  high  pressure 
atmosphere  of  religious  emotion — with  its  thrills  of  new  knowledge  and  its  vistaa 
of  new  thought — and  went  quietly  back  eighty  miles  to  the  little  rustic  hamlet  in 
the  north,  and  the  carpenter's  shop  at  Nazareth.    What  divinity  lies  here  1    What 
Divine  philosophy  and  Divine  life,  which  is  also  a  most  human,  a  most  simple* 
a  most  homely  life.    {H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)        The  obedience  of  childhood  : — There 
is  an  Oriental  proverb  which  says,  "  The  first  deities  which  the  child  has  to  acknow* 
ledge  are  its  parents" ;  and  another,  that "  Obedient  children  are  as  ambrosia  to  the 
gods,"     The  parent  is  to  the  child  God's  representative  in  a  sense.    Jesus  places 
filial'  obedience  and  obedience  to  God  together  when  He  says  (ver.  49),  "  Wist  ye 
not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business  ?  "    If  a  king  places  a  viceroy  over 
a  portion  of  his  dominions,  it  is  the  duty  of  loyal  subjects  to  obey  the  viceroy.  ^  If 
they  make  war  against  the  viceroy,  they  are  actually  making  war  against  the  king 
who  appointed  him.     So  a  child  disobeying  its  parents  is  disobeying  God.    And 
obedieuce  is  made  easy  by  love.     What  wings  are  to  a  bird,  or  sails  to  a  ship,  love 
is  to  the  child.    Heaven  is  high,  and  the  path  of  obedience  slopes  up  to  it.    (Sunday 
School  Tinirs.)       Christ's  life  of  submission : — Though  the  words,  "  He  was  subject 
unto  them,"  apply  especially  to  the  period  of  our  Lord's  youth,  they  would  be  « 
perfectly  true  motto  for  His  course  in  after-years.    His  whole  life  was  one  of  Bub- 
jection  and  submission.     He  submitted  Himself,  and  He  taught  submission,  to 
every  ordinance  of  man  lor  the  Lord's  sake.    He  submitted  to  receive  John's 
baptism  though  He  had  no  need  of  it.   He  submitted  to  pay  the  tax  for  the  support 
of  the  Temple,  though,  as  the  only-begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  whose  house  the 
Temple  was.  He  was  rightfully  exempt  from  the  tax.     He  bade  the  Jews  submit 
themselves  to  the  Komans  who  had  conquered  them,  and  render  unto  Csesar  the 
dues  which  were  Caesar's.     He  bade  His  disciples  observe  and  do  all  that  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  enjoined,  because  they  sat  in  Moses'  chair,  and  held  a  posi- 
tion of  authority.    And,  finally,  fle  became  obedient  unto  the  sentence  of  death, 
drinking  with  the  utmost  meekness,  even  to  the  dregs,  the  cup  of  suffering  whieh 
the  Father  had  given  Him.     (Dea?i  Gtmlburn.)       Obedience  to  parents: — The  Rev. 
Herbert  Palmer,  master  of  Queen's  College,  Cambridge,  who  died  in  1647,  waa 
remarkable  for  his  dutiful  affection  to  his  parents,  not  only  when  he  was  a  child, 
but  during  his  whole  life.     He  was  peculiarly  attentive  to  his  pious,  aged  mother ; 
promoting,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  both  her  temporal  and  spiritual  comfort, 
even  to  the  day  of  her  death,  which  happeued  not  long  before  his  own.    He  used 
frequently  to  enforce  this  duty  in  his  ministry,  observing  the  emphasis  which  God 
puts  upon  it  through  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures.    He  used  to  say  that  he  had 
noticed  the  effects  of  disobedience  to  parents,  so  that  he  scarcely  ever  knew 
nndutiful  children  escape  some  visible  judgment  of  God  in  the  present  life ;  he  also 
thought  that  the  mischiefs  which  occur  in  gociety  frequently  take  their  rise  in  the 
contempt  of  parental  authority.        Mr.  Cecil's  obedience : — When  the  Rev.  Richard 
Cecil  was  bat  a  little  boy,  his  father  had  occasion  to  go  to  the  India  House,  and 
took  his  son  with  him.    While  he  was  transacting  business,  the  little  fellow  was 
dismissed,  and  told  to  wait  for  his  father  at  one  of  the  doors.    His  father  on 
finishing  his  business  went  out  at  another  door,  and  entirely  forgot  his  son.     In 
the  evening,  his  mother  missing  the  child,  inquired  where  he  was ;  on  which  his 
father,  suddenly  recollecting  that  he  had  directed  him  to  wait  at  a  certain  door, 
said,  "You  may  depend  upon  it,  he  is  still  waiting  where  I  appointed  him." 
He  immediately  returned   to  the  India    House,  and   found    his  dear  boy  oa 
the   very    spot   where   he    had    been    told    to    remain.     He    knew    that    his 
father    expected   him    to  wait,  and   therefore  he  would    not   disappoint  him. 
The  Christian  family : — 1.  The  family  gives  a  practical  solution  to  the  great  pro- 
blems of  moral  truth.    It  is  the  typical  form  of  the  vast  organiEations  that  belong 
to  human  life.   It  teaches  sobordination  in  love,  and  subordination  is  only  anothec 
word  for  fitting  together.     2.  Order  and  government  are  hkewise  taught  in  the 
family,  and  it  is  the  government  or  order  which  springs  from  paternal  love  that 
carries  with  it  a  sense  of  its  fitness  and  its  necessity.    Love  is  the  sapreme 
governor.    3.  It  is  in  the  family  that  we  for  the  first  time  leam  with  some  degree 
of  olear  intelligence  what  is  the  meaning  of  vicarious  suffering.    4.  The  family  also 
teaches,  as  we  can  soaroely  find  it  taught  otherwise,  the  true  doothne  of  sin  and 
penalty.    It  is  of  the  first  importance  that  we  should  frame  our  theology  respiting 
sin  and  penalty,  not  on  the  theory  of  oniTersal  civil  gOTemments,  which  is  an 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  293 

artificial  thing,  derived  from  the  ideas  of  different  nations,  and  which  has  never 
been  wisely  administered.  The  administration  of  pain  and  penalty  in  governments 
and  courts  is  exceedingly  rude  and  imperfect ;  but  the  administration  of  pain  and 
penalty  in  the  family  is  beautiful  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  The  mother's 
frown,  the  mother's  refused  kiss,  the  mother's  hand,  carries  pain,  or  the  execution 
of  penalty  ;  but  it  is  never  odious,  and  it  is  never  cruel.  5.  We  learn  in  the  family 
likewise  the  doctrine  of  the  liberty  of  law.  Nowhere  else  is  there  more  law  than  in  the 
household — law  unwritten,  but  well  understood ;  and  yet  there  is  no  law  there  that 
violates  love.  6.  We  learn  also,  from  the  household,  the  true  nature  of  forgiveness 
— what  it  is,  and  the  conditions  of  it.  Harmony  with  the  spirit  of  love  is  forgiveness. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  eighteen  silent  years : — These  eighteen  years  are  of  immeasur- 
able importance  in  any  human  hfe.  They  cover  the  period  when  human  nature  is 
most  impressionable,  most  receptive,  most  plastic.  The  seeds  of  all  future  produc- 
tion are  sown  then.  Year  by  year,  month  by  month,  day  by  day,  the  Ufe  is  built 
up — life  physical,  moral,  spiritual.  By  processes  slow  but  sure,  never  to  be  undone, 
by  steps  never  to  be  retraced,  development  is  gained,  the  coil  of  life  is  lengthened 
and  unwound.  At  thirty  the  man's  character  is  formed.  What  he  will  be  in  the 
future  depends  on  what  he  is  then.  Now,  it  is  the  history  of  this  time— all- 
important — that  St.  Luke  describes  in  these  verses  "  obscurely  bright  "  ;  revealing, 
yet  enveloping  in  sacred  and  profound  mystery,  the  life  of  the  Second  Adam  who 
regenerates,  redeems  the  world.  What  is  here  recorded  is  the  earthly  and  human 
side  of  Christ's  preparation  for  that  work.  What  you  and  I  are  to-day,  what  the 
Church  is  to-day,  what  the  world  is  to-day,  is  the  outcome  of  those  eighteen  silent 
years.  Study,  then,  this  short,  sweet  record  of  the  human  life  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
study  it,  not  only  to  admire,  but  to  imitate.  Our  motto  should  be — "  Christ  for 
me.  Saviour,  example.  Lord  :  I  for  Christ,  scholar,  follower,  servant."  In  this 
record  we  may  trace  some  lessons  which  may  enable  us  the  better  to  fight  the  good 
fight.  1.  Submission.  The  characteristic  virtue  of  childhood,  its  natural  and 
necessary  condition.  The  daily  round  of  home  life,  with  its  routine  of  duties,  its 
continual  calls  for  submission,  often  all  the  more  difficult  to  obey  because  we 
cannot,  even  to  ourselves,  dignify  them  with  the  name  of  hardships  or  great  trials — 
this  Christ  has  consecrated  by  these  eighteen  silent  years.  2.  Work.  Doing  each 
day's  work  in  its  appointed  time — be  the  work  what  it  may — fitted  Him  for  the 
future,  when  the  work  was  different.  Surely  the  lesson  is  not  what  you  do,  but 
how  you  do  it.  3.  Growth.  (1)  This  does  not  necessarily  mean  imperfection. 
The  child  is  not  to  blame  because  he  is  not  a  man  all  at  once.  It  is  the  law  of  his 
being  to  grow.  He  lives  by  growth.  Up  to  his  measure  he  may  be  perfectly  deve- 
loped ;  but  that  measure,  that  capacity,  is  continually  expanding.  So  we  learn  to 
think  of  growth  as  inseparable  from  healthy  human  life,  of  progress  as  the  law  of 
our  nature,  of  increase  in  wisdom  as  perfectly  compatible  with  all  moral  and 
spiritual  excellence.  In  Christ  this  earth  has  for  once  been  permitted  to  witness 
the  natural  development  of  a  sinless  childhood — development,  not  by  sudden 
miracle,  but  by  Divine  indwelling.  The  glory  that  dwelt  in  Jesus  shone  in  those 
eighteen  quiet  years  in  the  orderly  progress,  step  by  step,  of  the  boy  to  the  youth, 
the  youth  to  the  man.  For  (2)  nothing  can  be  more  plain  than  this,  that  the 
Lord's  humanity  was  real  indeed.  Every  hne  of  the  gospel  tells  us  this  ;  every 
word  of  these  verses,  which  record,  while  they  do  not  reveal,  these  eighteen  years. 
We  do  not  doubt  it,  indeed  ;  perhaps  we  dwell  on  it  with  appreciation  and  thank- 
fulness. But  let  us  never  forget  that  the  same  Lord,  who  thus  lived  and  toiled, 
rose,  ascended,  lives,  reigns.  It  is  not  simply  by  contemplation,  even  devout  con- 
templation, of  the  perfectly  human  Jesus,  that  our  spurits  live.  It  is  by  personal 
fellowship  with  the  God-man,  as  human  now  as  ever,  but  God  then  in  the  days  of 
His  flesh,  as  now.  This  is  the  message  of  redemption,  God's  message  to  the  Church 
and  to  the  world,  to  the  soul  that  suffers,  sins,  dies,  to  the  world  that  sickens, 
staggers,  swoons — God  made  man  for  you  1  {John  Brown,  M.A.)  Go<V»  lessons 
tlowly  learned : — All  these  eighteen  years  were  years  of  preparation.  Thirty  years 
of  obscurity,  and  only  two,  or  at  the  most  three,  of  active  work.  "  What  extra- 
ordinary want  of  proportion  I  what  failure  of  moral  perspective  I  "  we  should  have 
said.  But  God's  lessons  are  only  to  be  slowly  learned.  Mark  this  point.  See, 
then,  how  Christ  used  the  discipline  of  this  preparation.  See  Him  when  He  came 
forth  from  the  thirty  years  of  silence  and  toil.  See  Him  as  He  moved  among  men- 
calm,  unruifled,  unresting  indeed,  but  unhurried.  Did  He  not  know  the  depth  of 
human  need  ?  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  but  to  Thee  for  words  to  express  man's 
alter  emptiness  ?    Who  has  gauged  sin  like  Thee  t    W^ho  sees  sin  as  the  man  doe* 


9M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n 

who  views  it  in  Thy  light  ?  "  Did  Christ,  then,  not  feel  how  short  the  time  is  f 
Well,  He  knew  that  "the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work."  Yet,  knowing 
man's  need  and  life's  shortness,  He  moves  among  men  like  a  wise  physician  in  a 
sick-room,  the  only  one  not  flurried,  not  distracted,  because  the  only  one  who 
adequately  knows  at  once  the  greatness  of  the  crisis,  and  the  right  remedies  to  use. 
Whence,  then,  hath  thii  Man  this  wisdom  and  these  marvellous  gifts?  How 
kuoweth  this  Man  letters,  having  never  learned  ?  Surely  the  answer  on  the  human 
side  is  this:  Because  He  has  used  rightly  the  opportunities  of  preparation,  the 
times  of  waiting,  aU  that  we  mean  by  the  discipline  of  life.  Bemember,  then,  that 
God's  lessons  are  only  to  be  slowly  learned.  "  First  the  blade ;  then  the  ear ;  after 
that" — not  before — "the  faU  corn  in  the  ear."  "What  is  the  use  of  all  this 
drudgery,  all  this  taking  pains,  all  this  monotonous  attention  to  Uttle  wearisome 
details  of  duty  ?  I  want  to  strike  out  boldly  for  the  shore.  I  am  tired  of  buffeting 
with  these  tiresome  little  waves  "  : — it  is  the  child's  voice  that  speaks  thus,  not  the 
full-grown  man's.  Experience  teaches  that  painful,  laborious  learning  must  go 
before  successful  activity.  Day  by  day  you  go  on  drudging,  shpping,  failing, 
hoping,  blundering :  at  last  the  moment  comes  when  you  find  out  that  you  have 
mastered  your  lesson,  and  you  sweep  along  the  icy  path  with  confidence  and  power. 
So  in  all  things.  God's  lessons  are  to  be  mastered  only  by  the  man.  First  you 
receive  some  spiritual  truth — say,  e.g.,  the  fact  of  personal  sinfulness — as  an  out- 
side thing  altogether  ;  then  by  degrees  it  becomes  more  real  and  living ;  you  begin^ 
to  see  that  it  has  a  meaning  for  you  as  a  thing  to  be  striven  after ;  until,  at  last, 
you  hardly  know  how,  it  becomes  a  part  of  your  very  self,  nothing  in  the  world  for 
you  more  real  than  this,  your  sinful  soul  in  God's  presence.  Fully  to  attain  such 
knowledge  you  must  do  as  Jesus  did — go  apart  by  yourself  along  the  divinely- 
chosen  road  of  difficult  duty — content  to  fill  a  little  space,  if  God  be  glorified — 
ready  to  learn,  ready  to  obey,  because,  above  all,  more  ready  to  pray.  All  this  can 
only  be  deUberately,  consciously  chosen,  as  an  act  of  the  whole  man,  when  you 
have  mastered  the  spiritual  alphabet,  the  sinful  soul  drawn  and  drawing  toward 
ihe  Divine  Saviour.  It  is  blessed,  though  it  is  very  hard,  and  we  learn  but  slowly, 
to  be  taught  by  Him.  So,  so  only,  we  find  rest  to  our  souls.  No  higher  wish  can 
I  !e  framed,  no  better  prayer  offered  than  this :  that  all  may  be  able  to  learn  those 
I'  ssons  of  daily  life  which  Christ  Himself  had  practised  before  He  taught.  {Ibid.) 
Chriat  an  example  in  filial  duties : — 1.  First,  we  may  remark,  that  the  subjection  o£ 
oar  Lord  to  His  parents  was  that  of  love.  Again,  the  love  of  children  to  their 
parents  should  manifest  itself  in  a  ready  compliance  with  their  wishes,  and  in  a 
disposition  to  correct  everything  in  the  temper  or  conduct  which  gives  them  pain. 
2.  Another  point  in  the  subjection  of  Christ  to  His  parents  worthy  of  notice  is, 
that  it  was  yielded  to  those  who  were  so  much  His  inferiors.  3.  Again,  the  subjeo- 
tion  of  Christ  to  His  parents  included  obedience  to  them.  4.  And  another  point  io 
our  Lord's  example  of  subjection  to  His  parents  is,  the  returns  He  made  to  them. 
If  we  were  favoured  in  childhood  with  wise  and  religious  guardians,  they  have  laid 
us  under  a  debt  of  obligation  for  which  we  can  never  be  too  thankful  to  them  and 
to  CKmL  Jesus  Christ  toiled  as  a  carpenter  with  His  father  until  nearly  thirty  years 
of  age,  and  probably  supported  the  family  after  Joseph's  death ;  while  many  a 
young  lad  among  us  feels  that  he  is  hardly  dealt  with  if  he  does  not  receive  hia 
earnings  before  he  «omes  of  age.  {W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  Subjection  of  children  :— 
"Whatever  else  yon  teach,  or  omit  to  teach,  your  children,"  said  the  Bev.  T. 
Scott,  "  fail  not  to  teach  them  subjection,  and  that  to  the  mother  as  well  as  the 
father.  This  is  as  essential  to  their  own  welfare,  temporal  and  eternal,  as  to  that 
of  the  family,  the  Church,  and  the  State.  Establishing  authority — which  is  quite 
consistent  with  kindness  and  affection — so  that  from  childhood  they  shall  never 
deliberately  think  of  having  or  doing  what  a  parent  disapproves ;  this  is  the  greatest 
safeguard  you  can  place  around  young  persons.  Subjection  to  authority  is  God's 
ordinance,  essential  to  the  belief  and  practice  of  religion.  If  it  be  true,"  he  adds, 
"  that  there  are  more  pious  women  than  men,"  he  ascribes  it  much  to  this  circom- 
stanoe,  "  that  they  are  more  used  to  restraint  and  subjection."  Duty  to 
parents : — A  pious  servant  girl,  who  had  '*  lived  out "  for  a  number  of  years,  and 
laid  by  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  hearing  that  her  aged  parents  were  feeble  and 
in  needy  circumstances,  left  her  situation,  and  went  home  to  take  care  of  them. 
She  spent  her  savings  for  their  comfort,  making  the  money  last  as  long  as  possible; 
bat  in  time  it  was  all  gone,  and  her  own  health  began  to  fail.  Worldly-wise 
friends  ottered  their  sympathetic  regrets  that  she  should  have  spent  all  her  sapplj 
when  she  needed  it  so  much  herseli.    "  I  have  only  done  my  dnty  to  mj  parenta, 


CHAP,  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  KS 

she  said.  "  God  will  provide  foF  me  Bomehow.  He  will  never  let  me  perish  for 
doing  right."  God  did  provide  for  her.  She  was  able  to  continue  her  loving 
ministrations  till  the  death  of  both  her  father  and  mother;  and  then  a  whole 
applauding  neighbourhood  united  to  place  her  in  circumstances  of  comfort  for  the 
rest  of  her  life.  Gratitude  to  parent$ : — I  thank  God  for  two  things — yea,  for  a 
thousand ;  but  for  two  among  many — first,  that  I  was  born  and  bred  in  the 
country,  of  parents  that  gave  me  a  sound  constitution  and  a  noble  example.  I 
never  can  pay  back  what  I  got  from  my  parents.  If  I  were  to  raise  a  monument 
of  gold  higher  than  heaven,  it  would  be  no  expression  of  the  debt  of  gratitude 
which  I  owe  to  them  for  that  which  they  unceasingly  gave,  by  the  heritage  of  theii 
body  and  the  heritage  of  their  souls,  to  me.  And  next  to  that  I  am  thankful  that 
I  was  brought  up  in  circumstances  where  I  never  became  acquainted  with  wicked- 
ness. (H.  W.  Beecher :  from  his  last  public  letter.)  His  mother  kept  all  these 
aaylng^  in  her  hesirt. — '*  His  mother  kept  all  these  sayings  in  her  heart "  ; — 
Not  in  her  memory,  nor  her  understanding,  nor  her  diary,  but  in  het 
heart — that  well  of  silence  in  the  bosom  of  true  motherhood,  where  all  freshest, 
purest  waters  are  kept  fresh  and  pure.  Infiltered  there,  and  stored  by  loving 
thought,  they  are  not  vapourized  and  shallowed  by  much  talk,  and  seem  to  be  only 
the  sweeter  the  deeper  fill  they  make.  Her  family  story  she  cannot  carry  into  the 
street,  or  even  speak  of  with  her  friends.  And  things  are  occurring  with  her  Jesua 
every  day,  in  which  stamps  and  signatures  of  His  divinity  are  distinctly,  and  even 
visibly,  manifest,  but  which  cannot  be  advertised  without  becoming  tokens  of  weak- 
ness in  the  mother  and  precocity  in  the  child.  She  sometimes  wants  to  even  strike 
a  song  of  triumph,  but  her  loudest  song  will  be  silence — a  hymn  that  she  keeps  hid 
in  her  heart,  as  she  does  all  the  sayings  and  great  acts  of  her  wonderful  Son.  {H. 
Bushnell,  D.D.)  The  jnemory  of  the  heart : — They  tell  us  that  memory  is  one  of  the- 
intellectual  powers.  I  think  that  the  strongest  memory  is  a  power  of  the  heart.  There 
are  memories  of  the  intellect  which  are  short-lived  and  evanescent ;  they  are  like  the 
morning  cloud  that  vanishes  away.  But  the  things  that  are  kept  in  the  heart  are 
not  evanescent ;  they  last  for  ever.  There  are  those  who  complain  of  having  short 
memories,  but  how  often  does  it  spring  from  want  of  sufficient  interest?  If  we 
eould  transfer  our  duties  from  the  intellect  to  the  heart,  we  should  rarely  forget 
them.  Love  photographs  impressions  of  the  past,  in  colours  that  do  not  fade; 
the  things  which  are  kept  in  the  heart  are  kept  for  ever.     {O.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  52.  And  Jesus  Increased  In  wisdom. — A  pattern  childhood  and  youth: — 
1.  He  grew,  not  in  stature  only,  but  in  wisdom  and  favour  with  God  and 
man.  Christ,  as  Divine,  must  have  had  all  knowledge  and  power  from  the  first. 
But  subjecting  Himself  to  the  laws  of  human  development.  He  thereby  consented 
to  an  unfolding  which,  in  childhood  should  exhibit  a  perfect  Child,  in  youth  a  perfect 
Youth,  in  manhood  a  perfect  Man.  It  was  the  unfolding  of  a  perfect  bud  into  a 
perfect  flower.  At  each  advancing  step  He  was  only  evincing  hirger  measures  of 
that  wisdom  and  moral  excellence  which,  in  possibility  and  germ,  were  in  Him  from 
the  first.  2.  He  was  content  with  an  obscure  and  humble  home.  In  these  days 
there  is  everywhere  a  great  crowding  into  cities  and  populous  towns.  These  are 
thought  to  have  peculiar  advantages  for  the  training  and  education  of  children. 
But  have  not  the  solid  men,  for  whose  living  in  it  the  world  has  most  reason  to  b« 
grateful,  oftenest  come  from  hillsides  and  homes  like  that  of  Nazareth?  It  is  in 
obscure  places  that  youth  escapes  the  wasting  strifes  of  ambition,  the  unproductive 
chase  after  vanities  ;  that  he  learns  not  only  "  to  scorn  delights  and  love  laboriooa 
days,"  bat  to  think  his  own  thoughts  and  to  stand  alone.  The  wise  youth  is  con- 
tent just  where  it  has  pleased  God  to  place  him.  If  the  station  is  lowly  and  the 
lot  obscure,  he  does  not  chafe  and  repins ;  he  rather  gives  thanks.  3.  He  was  m 
winning  example  of  filial  piety  and  obedience.  For  thirty  years  He  was  contentedly 
subject  to  parental  guidance  and  authority.  It  is  the  discipline  of  a  well-ordered 
home  which  makes  good  citizens.  It  is  a  blessing,  above  all  others,  to  grow  np  in 
a  house  where  the  gospel  rule  prevails.  There  it  is  that  foundations  are  laid  for 
every  moral  virtue.  There  is  the  best  safeguard  of  purity.  It  is  there  that  one 
learns  the  sweetness  of  lowly  ambitions  and  the  surpassing  wealth  of  pure  affection. 
4.  It  is  time  to  speak  of  His  self-subjection  to  the  discipline  of  helpful  industry. 
He  was  called  "  the  carpenter's  son."  He  was  Himself  "  the  carpenter."  Justin 
Martyr,  who  lived  as  near  to  Him  as  we  do  to  George  Washington,  speaks  of  Him 
M  "a  worker  in  wood,"  and  says  that  He  "made  ploughs  and  yokes  and  other 
implements  relating  to  husbandry."    After  Joseph's  death,  the  care  of  £Ua  mothor 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n.' 

would  devolve  upon  Him.  It  is  therefore  proper  to  think  of  Him  as  early  sharing 
the  lighter  labours  of  His  home.  His  little  feet  bear  Him  on  many  a  helpful  errand 
for  His  mother.  Pitcher  in  hand,  He  runs  for  water  to  the  well.  To  kindle  the 
fire  He  gathers  and  brings  the  wood.  Soon,  with  growing  limbs,  He  begins  to  wield 
the  hammer,  the  axe,  and  the  saw  in  the  shop  ;  to  invent  and  shape  toys  forHimself 
and  useful  things  for  the  house.  In  the  process  of  time.  He  settles  into  a  more 
patient  industry.  In  the  little  village  on  the  hilleide  of  Nazareth,  He  is  "the  car- 
penter." And  such  a  shop  as  that  in  which  He  wrought,  must  have  been  I  Do  you 
think  He  ever  made  reckless  promises,  and  failed  to  keep  them  ?  Do  you  think 
He  ever  did  poor  work,  and  charged  the  price  of  good  ?  That  He  ever  concealed  a 
flaw,  or  tried  to  get  the  better  of  another  in  trade — can  you  believe  that  ?  5.  He 
was  not  in  undue  haste  to  have  done  with  the  work  of  preparation  and  to  enter 
upon  His  public  ministry.  In  such  backing  lies  the  strength  of  all  great  workers. 
Have  we  not  often  seen  men  of  ripened  age,  men  of  whom  the  world  never  so  much 
as  heard  the  name,  suddenly  burst  upon  the  stage  of  action,  assume  an  easy  leader- 
ship, and  carry  off  the  best  prizes  of  emolument  and  honour?  They  are  equal  to 
the  places  they  attempt  to  fill.  They  endure.  Such  men  have  taken  time  for 
preparation.  They  have  both  knowledge  and  self-knowledge.  They  have  that  self- 
control  which  comes  of  quiet  introvision.  They  have  root ;  and  a  root  grows  :  it  is 
not  made  ;  only  to  an  extent  can  it  be  forced.  6.  The  childhood  and  youth  of  Jesus 
were  marked  by  delight  in  the  truths  and  ordinances  of  religion.  At  twelve  years 
old,  when  taken  to  Jerusalem,  His  feet  swiftly  bare  Him  to  the  Temple.  Let  no 
parent,  or  teacher,  or  worker  in  the  Lord's  vineyard  look  upon  a  child  as  too  young 
to  be  interested  in  holy  things.  Little  feet  linger  where  earnest  words  are  spoken 
about  God  aud  duty  to  Him.  Little  minds  are  full  of  wonder  concerning  the  very 
deep  things  of  the  world  unseen.  Little  hearts  would  gladly  know  and  ch*ose  the 
way  of  grateful  and  loving  service.  Childhood's  years  may  be  given  to  God.  And 
oh,  what  glory  and  safety  and  blessedness  it  is  to  have  begun  thus  early.  7.  He 
made  His  most  earthly  work  a  service  unto  His  Father.  Back  at  Nazareth  He  was 
all  the  time  doing  His  Father's  business,  just  as  truly  as  when  sitting  among  the 
doctors  in  the  Temple.  There  is  a  time  to  pray,  and  there  is  also  a  time  to  read, 
and  a  time  to  work.  Give  to  each  its  own  time.  And  if,  in  each,  your  purpose  is 
equally  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  bring  honour  to  Him,  He  is  jiist  as  well  pleased 
with  the  one  as  with  the  other.  Go  where  God  bids  you  go,  abide  where  He  would 
have  you  abide,  and  do  each  hour  the  work  He  appoints  for  that  hour;  do  all  in 
faith  and  love,  and  for  His  glory;  for  the  rest  you  need  have  no  fears.  Thus  the 
lowly  can  win  as  sweet  a  smile  and  as  large  a  reward  as  those  who  fill  the  highest 
places.  He  is  with  us  in  life's  valleys  as  truly  as  on  the  mountain-tops.  The  little 
child  can  come  as  close  to  His  heart  as  the  great  king.  It  is  not  a  great  name,  or 
a  giant  intellect,  or  conspicuous  service,  which  God  wants.  It  is  only  a  trusting  and 
obedient  heart.  Who  cannot,  who  would  not,  give  that  ?  {H.  M.  Grout.)  Progress 
in  spiritual  things : — Religion  is  a  generous  and  noble  thing,  in  regard  to  its  progress; 
it  is  perpetually  carrying  on  that  mind,  in  which  it  is  once  seated,  towards  perfec- 
tion. Though  the  first  appearance  of  it  upon  the  souls  of  good  men  may  be,  but 
as  the  wings  of  the  morning,  spreading  themselves  upon  the  mountains,  yet  it  is 
still  rising  higher  and  higher  upon  them,  chasing  away  all  the  filthy  mists  and 
vapours  of  sin  and  wickedness  before  it,  till  it  arrives  to  its  meridian  altitude. 
There  is  the  strength  and  force  of  the  Divinity  in  it ;  and  though,  when  it  first 
enters  into  the  minds  of  men,  it  may  seem  to  be  •'  sown  in  weakness,"  yet  it  will 
raise  itself  "  in  power."  As  Christ  was  in  His  bodily  appearance,  He  was  still 
increasing  in  wisdom,  and  stature,  and  favour  with  God  and  man,  until  He  was 
perfected  in  glory  ;  so  is  He  also  in  His  spiritual  appearance  in  the  souls  of  men : 
and  accordingly  the  New  Testament  does  more  than  once  distinguish  of  Christ,  in 
His  several  ages  and  degrees  of  growth  in  the  souls  of  all  true  Christians.  Good 
men  are  always  walking  on  from  strength  to  strength,  till  at  last  they  see  God  in 
Zion.  Religion,  though  it  hath  its  infancy,  yet  it  hath  no  old  age :  while  it  is  in  its 
minority,  it  is  always  in  motu ;  but,  when  it  comes  to  its  maturity,  it  will  always  be  in 
quiete;  it  is  then  "  always  the  same,  and  its  years  fail  not"  ;  but  it  shall  endure  for 
ever.  {John  Smith.)  Orderly  development : — An  orderly  development ;  none  of 
your  monstrous  athletes ;  none  of  your  mere  intellectual  book-worms ;  none  of  your 
emaciated,  hysterical  saints  and  ascetics ;  none  of  your  hermits  or  fanatical  anti- 
social visionaries.  He  grew  in  body,  in  mind,  in  soul,  and  heart ;  stature,  wisdom, 
favour — human  and  Divine.  Is  not  that  parable  of  diildhood  writ  clear  I  Is  not 
the  message  to  yon  and  to  your  children  1    Follow  the  lines,  not  of  your  crashed. 


OHAP.  u.]  ST.  LUKE.  29? 

but  of  your  restrained,  controlled,  and  regenerate  nature.  Learn,  like  Him,  by  the 
things  that  you  suffer,  undergo,  have  to  put  up  with.    Learn,  before  you  teach ; 
obey,  before  you  command ;  going  in  and  out  amongst  men,  toil  hand  and  heart 
about  the  Father's  business,  and  with  an  ear  ever  attuned  to  the  voices  in  the  upper 
air,  until  we  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God, 
to  a  perfect  man,  to  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.      {H.  B. 
Haweii,  M.A.)         Christ's  growth  in  wisdom : — The  increase  of  Jesus  in  wisdom 
during  this  period  was — 1.  Beal.  Jesus  had  to  learn  from  the  words  of  others  what 
SB  yet  He  knew  not ;  and  that  was  entirely  unknown  to  Him  as  a  child,  which  He 
had  a  glimpse  of  as  a  boy,  conjectured  as  a  youth,  and  first  clearly  perceived  as  a 
man.     2.  Unchecked.     In  attributing  to  the  Lord  Jesus  the  relative  imperfection 
of  childhood,  we  must  carefully  avoid  imputing  to  Him  the  failings  of  childhood. 
His  hfe  showed  no  trace  of  childish  faults,  to  be  hereafter  conquered.     The  words 
of  John  (Matt.  iii.  14)  show,  on  the  contrary,  what  impression  was  made  by  His 
moral  purity  when  thirty  years  of  age,  and  the  voice  from  heaven  (Matt.  iii.  17)  sets 
the  seal  of  the  Divine  approval  on  the  now  completed  development  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  a  seal  which  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  would  only  have  offered  to  absolute  per- 
fection.   3.  It  was  effected  by  means — (1)  Careful  home-training.     (2)  The  natural 
beauties  of  the  neighbourhood  of  Nazareth.     (3)  The  Scriptures.     (4)  The  annual 
journeys  to  Jerusalem.     (5)  Prayerful  communion  with  His  heavenly  Father.    4. 
Normal,  and  so  an  example  of  what  our  development  should  be  in  fellowship  with 
Him.     (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)       The  growth  of  Jesus  in  wisdom : — Our  Lord's 
body  grew  in  stature,  so  that,  when  He  reached  manhood.  He  had  attained  fair  and 
comely  proportions.    And  while  the  body  grew,  His  human  mind  grew  also ;   His 
human  intelligence  unfolded  itself  gradually  into  full  blossom,  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  mind  and  intelligence  of  other  children,  only,  doubtless,  in  a  much  greater 
degree.     Perhaps  you  cannot  understand  how  this  could  be.     To  grow  in  wisdom 
must  imply  that  the  person  who  grows  is,  at  a  more  advanced  age,  wiser  than  when 
He  was  younger ;  knows  something,  understands  something,  which  be  did  not  know, 
and  understand  before.  But  how  could  this  be  in  His  case  ?  you  may  reasonably  ask. 
Was  He  not  God,  you  may  say,  even  when  He  was  quite  a  young  child  ?  And  how 
can  God  be  ignorant  of  anything,  or  fail  to  understand  anything  ?    Now  it  is  true, 
doubtless — absolutely   true — that  our  Lord,   even  while  He  was  a  child,   was 
the  everlasting  God.     But  it  is  true  also  that  He  was  "God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,"  God  sinking  Himself  down  to  the  low  level  of  human  nature.     He  became 
really  and  truly  for  our  sakes  an  infant,  a  child,  a  youth,  a  man.   He  did  not  merely 
seem  to  be  human,  but  He  actually  was  human.     Now  in  order  that  He  might  be 
really  and  truly  a  man.  He  consented,  in  His  wonderful  condescension,  not  to  call 
into  exercise  those  powers  which  He  had  as  God.     You  can  quite  understand  a 
person  having  strength,  but  not  using  it.     A  man  might  have  the  strength  of  a 
giant,  who  might  choose  to  exert  Himself  very  Uttle,  might  never  walk  above  a  few 
yards,  might  not  employ  his  hands  in  any  harder  work  than  turning  over  the 
leaves  of  a  book  or  reeling  off  a  skein  of  silk.   And  in  like  manner  a  man  may  have 
a  perfectly  strong  and  good  eyesight,  but  he  need  not  use  it  farther  than  he  pleases. 
He  may  shut  his  eyes  altogether,  in  which  case  he  will  see  nothing.    He  may  only 
half  open  them,  in  which  case  he  will  see  but  dimly  and  confusedly ;  or  he  may  go 
and  live  in  a  dungeon,  where  only  a  few  straggling  rays  of  light  pierce  the  gloom ; 
and  then,  however  good  his  eyesight  may  be,  he  will  for  the  first  few  seconds  be 
able  to  see  nothing ;  but  when  the  eye  .has  adjusted  itself  to  the  circumstances  in 
which  it  is  placed,  he  will  begin  to  make  out  the  forms  of  things  around  him,  but 
will  not  see  their  colours,  or  have  any  power  at  all  of  examining  them  closely.  This 
may  help  you  to  understand  how  our  Lord,  while  He  had  in  His  Divine  nature  all 
power  and  all  knowledge,  yet,  when  He  made  His  appearance  among  us  as  man, 
was  ignorant  of  certain  things,  and  unable  to  do  certain  things.     In  coming  into 
the  world,  He,  by  His  own  free  will  and  consent,  limited  Himself  to  do  the  things 
which  a  man  could  do,  and  to  know  the  things  which  a  man  could  know.     He  came 
into  our  poor,  narrow,  dark  nature,  just  as  a  free  man  might  come  out  of  the  light  of 
day  into  a  narrow,  dark,  prison-dungeon,  and  there  consent  to  be  shut  up.     Such 
an  one  might  have  the  power  of  walking  miles,  but  in  the  dungeon  he  can  only  walk 
a  few  paces ;  he  might  have  a  very  keen  eyesight,  but  in  the  dungeon  he  cannot  even 
see  to  read.     Christ  took  a  nature  which,  tUl  He  took  it,  was  not  His  own,  and 
accommodated  Himself  to  the  feebleness  and  ignorance  of  that  nature — limited 
Himself,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  to  the  walls  of  it.      {Dean  Ooulbum.) 
Chritt'$  imreaae  in  the  favour  of  God: — We  may  compare  our  Lord'g  period  of 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [amr.  tu 

^owth,  during  which  He  was  prepared  for  His  work,  to  the  gradual  exeontior  ol 
some  great  piece  of  sculpture,  a  bust  or  a  statue.  Let  us  say  that  the  marble 
chosen  for  the  work  " ,  a  piece  without  flaw,  spotless  white,  without  a  single  vein 
running  through  it.  Thus  our  Lord's  human  nature,  unlike  that  which  all  of  as 
inherit,  was  perfectly  free  from  all  tendency  to  evil ;  holy,  harmless,  undefiled  at 
His  very  birth.  But  a  white  block  of  marble,  though  white  when  it  is  drawn  from 
the  quarry,  can  be  made  a  more  perfectly  beautiful  thing  by  being  chiselled  into  an 
exquisite  form.  And  a  human  nature,  which  was  originally  sinless,  may  be  made 
a  more  perfectly  beautiful  thing  by  being  disciplined  through  grace,  and  through 
the  experience  of  suffering,  into  the  perfect  likeness  of  God.  And  you  can  quite 
understand  how  a  sculptor,  who  is  daily  at  work  upon  a  statue,  haB  an  increasing 
satisfaction  in  it,  as  the  work  becomes  more  and  more  perfect,  views  it  with  greater 
pleasure  and  complacency  to-day,  when  it  has  received  so  many  flourishing  touches, 
than  he  did  some  months  ago,  when  it  was  a  mere  resemblance  of  the  human  form 
in  outline.  The  work  increases  in  favour  with  him  daily ;  and  when  it  is  finished, 
he  is  then  perfectly  satisfied.  Thus  it  was  that  Jesus,  as  a  man,  "  increased  in 
favour  with  God."  (Ibid.)  On  the  education  of  children: — It  is  not,  alas, 
according  to  this  model,  that  the  generality  of  Christians  form  their  children. 
We  behold  them  principally  intent  on  procuring  for  them  worldly  accomplish- 
ments, while  they  totally  neglect  to  make  them  acquainted  with  the  great 
duties  of  Christianity.  1.  The  human  mind  cannot  be  too  early  impressed 
with  rehgious  principles.  The  prudent  wiU,  indeed,  be  careful  not  to  make 
that  a  burden  which  should  be  a  pleasure ;  they  will  be  content  to  unfold  the  gospel 
principles  by  degrees,  as  the  youthful  mind  is  able  to  receive  them.  2.  Nature 
only  requires  a  little  gentle  assistance  to  perfect  all  her  productions.  You  have 
seen  a  tender  plant  springing  upon  a  fertile  soil,  what  though  tall  and  straight,  and 
promising  to  become  the  pride  of  the  forest,  since  one  unlucky  stroke  may  have 
crushed  its  aspiring  head,  and  forced  it  from  its  natural  direction,  from  that 
moment  it  bended  and  grew  downwards  to  the  earth,  instead  of  towering  to  the  skies. 
Thus,  the  human  mind  whUe  yoimg  and  pliable,  is  in  perpetual  danger  of  growing 
luxuriant  by  too  much  indulgence,  or  losing  all  its  strength  by  the  unnatural  re- 
straint of  too  much  severity,  to  be  suppressed  by  misfortune,  checked  by  disappoint- 
ment, or  chilled  by  penury.  How  liable  is  it  to  deviate  from  the  straight  line  of 
rectitude  and  honour,  by  the  fascination  of  example,  and  the  influence  of  imitation ; 
to  folly,  vice,  and  rain.  It  is  the  pleasing  but  important  task  of  parents  and 
guardians,  to  direct  and  defend  this  young  and  delicate  production  ;  leading  it  from 
lower  degrees  of  perfection  to  higher,  from  the  nursery  to  the  field  of  action,  till  it 
is  adorned  with  the  fairest  honours,  enriched  with  the  most  precious  fruit,  and  ripe 
for  transplanting  to  the  paradise  of  God,  where  it  shall  bloom  afresh  under  the 
immediate  sunshine  of  heaven,  and  flourish  for  ever  in  immortal  beauty  and  per- 
fection.  8.  The  prejudices  received  in  youth  are  sometimes  so  violent  and  in- 
veterate, that  even  maturity  of  years,  the  admonition  of  friends,  the  principles  of 
hope,  fear,  honour,  and  religion,  are  unable  too  often  to  restrain  them.  Nay,  the 
•best  of  all  teachers,  experience,  frequently  attempts,  bat  in  vain,  to  cure  the 
maladies  of  a  wrong  education.  It  is  nonsense  to  expect  a  harvest,  where  the  seed- 
time has  been  lost,  and  you  must  be  disappointed,  who  wish  to  reap  where  you  have 
not  sown.  4.  The  least  indulgence  of  the  bad  inclinations  of  children,  sometimes 
produces  the  most  fatal  effects  in  society.  Witness  David's  indulgence  of  Amnon— 
it  produced  incest ;  of  Absalom — it  produced  assassination  and  a  civil  war ;  of 
Adonijah — it  produced  a  usurpation  of  the  throne  and  crown.  Observe,  again, 
how  God  punished  Eli,  who  neglected  to  correct  duly  the  crimes  of  his  children. 
Can  you,  O  parents,  bear  these  awful  truths,  and  not  shudder  at  the  idea  of 
indulging  the  least  vicious  propensity  in  your  children  1  But  let  me  tarn  from 
those  gloomy  images,  to  hold  ap  to  your  view  the  picture  of  a  parent's  care,  rewarded 
in  a  wise  and  virtuous  offspring.  These  will  be  your  pride  and  glory  in  the  day  of 
your  health  and  strength ;  but  in  the  gloomy  and  melancholy  season  of  eicknesfl 
amd  old  age,  they  will  be  the  light  of  yoar  eyes,  and  the  cordial  of  yoar  fainting 
apirits ;  and  as  once  with  tender  care  you  watched  their  tender  infancy,  bo  shall 
they  with  pioos  duty  support  yoar  failing  strength,  soften  the  panga  of  a  dying 
boor,  close  your  eyes  in  peace,  and  eventually  follow  you  to  that  world  where  lovt 
.ftnd  bliss  immortal  reign.  {B.  Murphy.)  Ood^t  favour  to  he  tought : — Jesas  won 
the  favour  of  man  by  seeking  the  favour  of  God.  It  is  not  so  important  that  man 
should  be  pleased  with  as  as  that  Ood  should.  But  man's  favour  is  more  likely  to  b« 
won  thioogh  seeking  God's  favoor  than  in  any  other  way.    U  we  are  always  asking 


atux.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  299 

how  those  about  us  will  look  at  us ;  if  we  give  large  weight  in  our  thoughts  to  the 
opinion  of  our  fellows ;  if  we  endeavour  to  so  shape  our  course  as  to  win  popular 
approval,  we  are  by  no  means  sure  to  have  what  we  strive  for ;  we  may  fall  far  short 
of  the  coveted  favour  of  man  ;  and,  moreover,  may  utterly  lack  God's  approval, 
whether  man  likes  or  dislikes  us.  But  if  we  are  always  asking  how  God  will  look 
at  our  course ;  if  we  give  large  weight  in  our  thoughts  to  His  opinion  and  Hia 
commandments ;  if  we  seek  to  shape  our  course  to  win  His  approval,  we  are  sure  to 
get  what  we  most  long  for ;  and  we  are  surer  of  having  also  the  favoiar  of  man 
than  we  could  be  through  any  other  course.  If  God  is  our  friend,  He  can  secure  to 
as  man's  approval.  The  best  of  human  friends  cannot  win  for  us  God's  favour. 
{H.  C.  Trumbull.)  The  secret  of  the  growth  of  Jesus : — See  the  daisy.  It  opens 
it3  petals  when  the  light  dawns,  and  closes  them  at  sunset.  It  is  in  the  right  place 
to  absorb  out  of  earth  and  atmosphere  the  nutritive  forces  it  needs,  and  it  grows. 
Go  into  a  garden  and  ask  what  all  these  various  plants  are  doing.  They  toil  not 
neither  do  they  spin ;  they  have  no  visible  machinery  and  yet  they  are  all  capturing 
Bunbeams  and  converting  them  into  fragrances,  essences,  flowers  and  fruits  for  the 
welfare  of  the  world.  Does  your  boy  trouble  about  growth  as  he  eats  and  drinks 
and  plays  7  No  I  He  takes  no  thought  for  the  morrow's  growth.  Flowers  and 
children,  rightly  placed,  grow.  Get  a  piston  and  place  it  where  the  steam  is  and 
it  will  go.  Put  your  water-wheel  in  the  stream,  and  it  turns.  Man  takes  advantage 
of  the  energies  close  to  hand  and  multiplies  his  forces  a  million-fold.  So  long  as 
we  are  in  the  wrong  place  we  cannot  grow.  The  secret  of  the  growth  of  Jesus  is 
that  He  starts  in  the  right  place  and  keeps  in  it  to  the  very  end  ;  He  lives  in  and  for 
God ;  is  bathed  with  the  warm  light,  and  refreshed  by  the  pure  breath  and  nourished 
by  the  sweet  fellowship  with,  and  work  for,  the  Father.  (J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  The 
tilent  growth  of  Jesus : — It  is  perplexing  to  some  of  us  that  there  should  be  eighteen 
years  of  unbroken  silence  in  such  a  life  as  Christ's.  We  have  asked  what  was 
Jesus  at  17,  20,  and  at  25  ?  and  though  no  audible  voice  responds  to  us,  yet  the 
eUence,  read  in  the  light  of  the  wonderful  work  accomphshed  in  His  brief  ministry, 
is  itself  a  sign  of  the  depth,  continuity,  and  fulness  of  the  moral  growth.  All 
growth  is  silent.  When  nature  is  baptized  in  the  fulness  of  spring  forces,  you  hear 
not  a  rustle.  The  whole  movement  takes  place  secretly  and  silently,  and  the  world 
oomea  up  anew  without  the  sound  of  trumpet  or  the  message  of  herald.  God 
builds  His  temples  without  the  sound  of  hammer.  His  great  moral  structures  go 
np  from  day  to  day  without  noise,  His  kingdoms  come  without  observation,  not- 
withstanding the  moment  of  their  arrival  may  be  one  of  tempest  and  storm. 
Tyndall  says :  "  All  great  things  come  slowly  to  birth.  Copernicus  pondered  his 
great  work  for  thirty-three  years  ;  Newton,  for  nearly  twenty  years,  kept  the  idea  of 
gravitation  before  His  mind ;  for  twenty  years  also,  he  dwelt  upon  his  discovery  of 
fluxions ;  Darwin,  for  twenty-two  years  pondered  on  the  problem  of  the  origin  of 
epecies,  and  doubtless  he  would  have  continued  to  do  so  had  he  not  found  Wallace 
upon  his  track."  So  Jesus  stayed  in  His  place,  did  His  carpentry,  was  obedient  to 
His  parents,  accepted  the  restraints  of  His  position,  silently  devoured  the  many 
chagrins  of  His  lot,  met  His  cares  with  a  transcendent  disdain,  drank  in  the  sun- 
light of  His  Father's  face,  and  possessed  His  soul  in  perfect  patience,  though  urged 
by  deep  sympathy  and  throbbing  desire  to  save  men.  No  boasting,  no  hurry,  no 
impatience,  but  a  quiet  maturing  of  power,  and  then  so  clad  was  He  in  strength 
that  He  never  lost  an  opportunity  through  delay  or  marred  a  bit  of  His  work  by 
haste.  When  Perseus  told  Pallas  Athene  that  he  was  ready  to  go  forth,  young  as 
he  was,  against  the  fabled  monster  Medusa  the  Gorgon,  the  strange  lady  smiled  and 
said,  "  Not  yet ;  you  are  too  young,  and  too  unskilled :  for  this  is  Medusa  the 
Gorgon,  the  mother  of  a  monstrous  brood.  Eetum  to  your  home  and  do  the  work 
which  awaits  you  there.  Yon  must  play  the  man  in  that  before  I  can  think  yoa 
worthy  to  go  in  search  of  the  Gorgon."  It  is  hurry  that  enfeebles  us.  {Ibid.) 
The  three  ages  of  Christian  life  : — God  in  Christ  has  appeared  among  men 
to  raise  up  again  fallen  humanity.  In  order  to  do  this.  He  laid  hold  upon 
It,  in  the  cradle,  and  left  it  only  at  the  tomb ;  passing  through  all  the  stages 
of  its  growth,  traversing  in  succession  all  the  ages  of  life,  sanctifying  otir 
nature  at  all  periods  of  our  existence,  and  causing  as  to  see  in  His  person, 
from  the  moment  when  H3  came  into  the  world  till  that  of  His  exaltation 
in  glory,  the  perfect  type  of  innocence  and  holiness.  It  is  thus  that  He 
became  in  turn  an  infant,  youth,  man ;  an  infant,  obedient  and  submissive ;  a 
yonng  man  without  reproach  and  keeping  Himself  pure  from  all  defilement  of  the  flesh 
and  of  the  world ;  a  f  oU-grown  man  showing  as  in  His  character  and  in  His  conduct  the 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  n. 


model  of  absolute  perfection.  He  stopped  there ;  for  He  by  whom  and  for  whom  are 
all  things  ought,not  to  fail ;  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  offer  Himself  a'sacrifioe 
in  all  the  vigour  of  age  and  in  all  the  fulness  of  life :  it  was  not  becoming  that  He 
should  present  to  us  the  picture  of  decrepitude  and  old  age.  But  as  there  has  been 
a  birth  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  Man  Jesus,  a  growth  of  the  God-man  in  the  person 
of  the  Redeemer,  so  there  has  been,  there  is,  and  there  will  be,  to  the  end  of  time, 
a  birth  and  growth  of  Christ  in  all  the  souls  belonging  to  Him.  Christ  is  truly 
born.  He  grows  up,  He  developes  Himself  in  His  people.  There  is  in  turn,  in 
their  case,  the  infant,  the  youth,  and  the  grown-up  man,  and  He  completes  in  them 
the  work  of  His  grace  till  they  come  to  the  height  of  His  perfect  stature.  {J.  H. 
Grandpierre,  D.D.)  The  humanity  of  Christ: — That  Jesus  was  really  a  man. 
Here  it  may  be  observed,  I.  That  He  was  really  man  because  He  had  a  htjmam 
BODY.  It  was  formed  and  fashioned  in  His  mother's  womb  by  the  great  Parent  of 
of  all  flesh.  So  it  was,  says  the  inspired  writer,  that  while  His  mother  was  at  Beth* 
lehem,  "  the  days  were  accomplished  that  she  should  be  delivered."  II.  He  was 
really  man  because  He  had  a  human  soul  as  well  as  a  human  body.  This  is  neces- 
sarily implied  in  what  is  said  of  Him  in  the  text.  He  "increased  in  wisdom  and 
stature,  and  in  fayour  with  God  and  man."  Here  both  His  wisdom  and  piety  are 
asserted ;  and  we  know  that  these  are  properties  of  the  soul,  and  not  of  the  body. 
III.  That  Christ  was  properly  a  human  person  will  appear,  if  we  consider  the  state 

AND  CIBCUMSTANCES  IN  WHICH  He  WAS  PLACED  WHILE  He  LIVED  IN  THIS  WORLD.     Fof^ 

1.  He  was  fixed  in  a  state  of  dependence.  2.  He  was  placed  under  law,  which  implies 
that  He  was  a  human  moral  agent,  and  accountable  to  God  hke  other  men.  We 
are  told  that  "  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  God  sent  forth  His  Son, 
made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law." 
3.  That  Christ  was  placed,  Uke  all  other  men,  in  a  state  of  probation  from  Hia 
birth  to  His  death.  I  now  proceed  to  improve  the  subject.  1.  If  Christ  was 
really  man,  then  the  Arian  notion  of  His  pre-existence  before  He  came  into  the 
world  IS  entirely  unscriptural  and  absurd.  The  Arians  suppose  that  Christ  was  the 
first  and  noblest  of  created  beings,  and  existed  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
Por  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  Christ  had  both  a  human  soul  and  a  super-angelio 
soul,  and  that  both  these  were  personally  united  with  the  Second  Person  in  the 
Trinity,  and  so  constituted  Him  a  Divine  Person.  The  true  scriptural  doctrine  of 
Christ's  divinity  is  founded  upon  the  true  scriptural  doctrine  of  Christ's  having  a 
human  body  and  a  human  soul,  which  was  personally  united  with  the  second  person 
in  the  Godhead.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  believe  the  real  humanity,  in  order 
to  believe  the  real  divinity  of  Christ.  It  has  been  found  by  observation  and  expe- 
rience, that  the  denial  of  Christ's  humanity  directly  leads  to  the  denial  of  His 
divinity.  2.  If  Christ  had  a  human  body  and  a  human  soul,  then  we  cannot 
account  for  the  early  depravity  of  children  through  the  mere  influence  of  bad  ex- 
amples, or  bodily  instincts  and  appetites.  He  was  an  infant,  but  He  did  not  sin  in 
infancy.  He  had  a  frail,  mortal  body,  but  it  did  not  corrupt  His  heart.  He  lived 
in  a  w  icked  world,  where  He  saw  many  bad  examples,  but  they  did  not  lead  Him  to 
follow  them.  He  was  a  free  moral  agent,  but  He  never  chose  to  sin.  3.  If  Christ 
was  really  a  man,  then  there  is  no  natural  impossibility  of  men's  becoming  perfectly 
holy  in  this  hfe.  4.  If  Christ  was  really  man,  then  God  is  able  to  keep  men  from 
sinning  consistently  with  their  moral  agency.  6.  If  Christ  was  really  man,  then 
there  is  no  absurdity  in  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance  of  saints.  6.  If  Christ 
was  really  man,  then  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  men  possess  a  self-deter- 
mining power,  or  a  power  to  act  independently  of  the  Divine  influence  and  control. 
7.  If  Christ  was  really  man,  then  His  conduct  is  a  proper  example  for  all  men  to 
follow.  8.  If  Christ  was  really  man,  then  He  is  weL  qualified  to  perform  all  the 
remaining  parts  fo  His  mediatorial  office.  In  particular,  to  perform  the  part  of  an 
intercessor.  9.  If  Christ  be  really  a  man,  then  they  will  be  unspeakably  happy, 
who  shall  be  admiUed^into  His  visible  presence,  and  dw  ell  with  Him  for  evtt.  (^T. 
Emmons,  i>J).) 


CQKAP.  m.]  ST.  LUES.  801 


CHAPTER  m. 

Veb.  1.  How  In  tbe  flfteenth  year  of  the  reign,  of  Tlbertns  Csesar.— TA^  fifteenth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Casar : — In  this  year,  which  fell  between  August,  a.d.  28, 
and  August,  a.d.  29,  the  Roman  empire  lay  under  the  shadow  of  the  darkest  years  of 
the  tyrant,  now  an  old  man  of  seventy-one.  Among  those  alive  at  the  time,  and 
remembered  since,  for  good  or  for  evil,  the  elder  Pliny — afterwards,  when  a  Roman 
admiral,  killed  at  the  first  eruption,  in  historical  times,  of  Mount  Vesuvius — was  a 
child  of  four ;  Vespasian,  hereafter,  with  his  son  Titus,  to  crush  Jerusalem,  was  full 
of  the  ambitions  and  dreams  of  a  youth  of  nineteen ;  Caligula,  one  day  to  horrify 
the  world  by  the  spectacle  of  an  insane  despot  at  the  head  of  the  empire,  was  a  lad 
of  sixteen ;  Claudius,  one  day  to  be  emperor,  was  a  poor  lame  trembling  man  of 
thirty-eight ;  and  among  the  marriages  of  the  year  was  that  of  the  daughter  of  the 
ill-fated  Germanicus,  from  which,  nine  years  later,  was  born  Nero.  Pontius  Pilate 
had  been  two  years  procurator  of  Samaria,  Judaea,  and  Idumea ;  Herod  Antipas  had 
been  reigning  for  about  thirty-two  years  over  Galilee  and  Samaria,  and  was  now  a 
man  of  about  fifty ;  and  Philip,  his  brother,  about  the  same  age,  and  of  the  same 
standing  as  ruler,  was  still  tetrarch  of  the  rest  of  the  land  beyond  the  Jordan,  living 
a  quiet  life,  usefully  and  worthily.     (Dr.  C.  Geikie.)  The  date  : — Singularly 

enough  this  very  exactness  is  a  source  of  difficulty.  Augustus  Caesar  died,  and  was 
succeeded  by  Tiberius  in  August,  a.d.  14.  Reckoning  from  this  date,  the  fifteenth 
year  of  Tiberius  was  from  August,  a.d.  28,  to  August,  a.d.  29.  But  this  does  not  fit 
with  the  date  which,  on  other  grounds,  we  are  led  to  assign  to  the  beginning  of  our 
Lord's  ministry,  viz.,  a.d.  27.  The  solution,  however,  is  simple  and  satisfactory. 
The  reign  of  Tiberius  as  sole  emperor  began  at  the  death  of  Augustus ;  but  he  had 
been  joint  emperor  with  Augustus — a  sort  of  vice-emperor — for  two  years  previously. 
The  word  used  by  St.  Luke,  translated  "  reign,"  by  no  means  implies  sole  empire, 
but  applies  with  perfect  accuracy  to  this  share  in  the  government,  which  had  special 
reference  to  the  provinces.  We  therefore  understand  the  fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius 
to  have  begun  in  August,  a.d.  26.  {E.  R.  Gander,  D.D.)  Lysanias : — It  has  been 
said  that  St.  Luke  erred  in  stating  that  Lysanias  was  tetrarch  of  Abilene  in  the 
fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Cjesar.  [Strauss,  "Leben  Jesu,"  §  44.] 
Lysanias,  it  is  said,  died  sixty  years  previously,  and  St.  Luke  has  ignorantly  made 
him  alive,  being  deceived  by  the  fact  that  Abilene  continued  to  be  called  the  Abilene 
of  Lysanias,  after  its  former  ruler,  for  sixty  or  seventy  years  subsequently.  Now, 
here  it  is  in  the  first  place  assumed,  without  any  word  of  proof,  that  the  Lysanias 
who  died  b.c.  34,  once  ruled  over  Abilene.  Secondly,  it  is  assumed,  also  without 
any  word  of  proof,  that  Abilene  came  to  be  known  as  the  Abilene  of  Lysanias, 
from  him.  I  venture  to  assert  that  there  is  absolutely  no  ground  for  believing 
that  the  old  Lysanias  was  ever  ruler  of  Abilene ;  and  I  venture  to  maintain  that 
Abilene  came  to  be  called  the  Abilene  of  Lysanias  from  a  second  or  later  Lysanias, 
a  son  of  the  former  one,  who  is  the  person  intended  by  St.  Luke.  Till  recently. 
Christian  apologists  were  defied  to  show  historically  that  there  was  ever  more  than 
one  Lysanias,  and  were  accused  of  inventing  a  second  to  escape  a  difficulty.  But 
a  few  years  since  a  discovery  was  made  which  must  be  regarded  by  all  reasonable 
persona  as  having  set  the  whole  matter  at  rest.  This  was  an  inscription  found 
near  Baalbek,  containing  a  dedication  of  a  memorial  tablet  or  statue  to  "  Feno- 
dorus,  son  of  the  tetrarch  Lysanias,  and  to  Lysanias,  her  children,"  by  (apparently) 
the  widow  of  the  first  and  the  mother  of  the  second  Lysanias.  Fenodorus  was 
already  known  as  having  succeeded  the  first  Lysanias  in  his  government.  It  ia 
thus  clear  that  there  were,  as  previously  suspected,  two  persons  of  the  name,  a 
father  and  a  son,  and  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  for  doubting  that  the 
latter  waa  tetrarob  of  Abilene  in  the  fifteenth  of  Tiberius.    (Professor  Rawlinson.) 

Yer.  2.  Axmu  and  Caiaphas  being  the  Ugh  prlestaL — Annas  and  Caiaphas : — The 
way  in  which  these  two  names  occur  in  the  New  Testament  has  given  some  trouble 
to  commentators.  They  are  found  in  St.  Lnke'a  Gospel,  mentioned  both  together 
at  the  commencement  of  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  are  there  called 
"  the  high  priests."  St.  Matthew,  in  the  narrative  of  our  Lord's  trial,  speaks  only 
of  Caiaphas,  and  calls  him  *'  the  high  priest."  But  St.  John,  who  also  mentions 
Caiaphas  as  "  the  high  priest,"  tells  us  that  Jesus,  after  His  arrest,  was  first  brought 
to  Annas,  as  if  he  were  of  chief  importance,  and  then  wad  sent  by  him  to  Caiaphaa. 


30J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Lastly,  in  the  Acts,  we  have  Annas  called  the  high  priest,  and  the  name  of  Caiaphaa 
mentioned  at  the  same  time,  but  no  title  is  given  to  the  latter.  But  we  know  from 
Josephus  that  Annas  (Ananus),  wno  was  tather-m-law  to  Caiaphas,  was  made  high 
priest  by  Quirinus  (Cyrenius),  a.d.  7,  and  continued  in  that  office  for  seven  years, 
when  he  was  deprived  of  it  by  Valerius  Gratus,  and  was  never  chosen  to  be  high 
priest  afterwards.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  from  the  earliest  times  down  to  a  date 
after  the  composition  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  there  were  often  circumstances 
under  which  two  men  were  called  high  priests  at  the  same  time.  That  one  who 
had  once  been  high  priest,  but  had  ceased  to  be  in  office,  would  still  be  called  high 
priest,  is  evident  from  that  principle  which  is  laid  down  in  several  places  in  the 
Talmud,  that  "you  may  elevate  in  the  matter  of  a  sacred  thing,  or  office,  but  yon 
■cannot  bring  down."  As  with  us,  "once  a  bishop,  always  a  bishop."  We  see, 
therefore,  that  when  Annas  had  been  high  priest,  it  was  not  only  likely  that  he 
would  continue  to  be  so  called,  but  that,  according  to  Jewish  usage,  he  could  be 
called  nothing  else.  The  age  of  Annas,  and  the  influential  position  naturally 
occupied  by  one  who  had  been  acting  high  priest  himself,  whose  son  had  twice  held 
the  same  office,  and  who  was  father-in-law  to  the  present  high  priest,  are  sufficient 
to  warrant  the  action  of  the  crowd  in  taking  Christ  to  Annas  first ;  while  in  the 
passage  of  the  Acts,  the  mention  of  Annas  at  the  head  of  the  list,  with  the  title  of 
high  priest,  was  nothing  more  than  was  due  to  his  years  and  to  the  relationship  in 
which  he  stood  to  Caiaphas,  while  the  omission  of  the  high  priest's  title  after  the 
name  of  Caiaphas  is  no  more  a  proof  that  he  was  not  also  high  priest  than  the 
language  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel,  where  it  is  said,  "  Go  your  way,  tell  His  disciples, 
and  Peter,"  is  evidence  that  Peter  was  not  one  of  the  disciples.  (J.  Rawson  Lumby , 
D.D.)  The  Word  of  God  came  unto  John. — An  important  statement : — 
The  events  of  the  first  verse,  as  compared  with  the  events  recorded  in  the  second, 
are  of  the  most  trifling  importance.  In  the  first  instance  there  is  a  list  of  govern* 
mental  personalities  and  districts,  and  in  the  second  verse  there  is  the  solemn  fact 
that  the  word  of  God  came  unto  the  forerunner  of  our  Lord.  This  juxtaposition 
of  events  is  remarkably  suggestive  as  bearing  upon  what  is  current  in  our  own 
day.  The  world  has  a  large  list  of  its  own  appointments,  regulations,  and 
authorities,  which  reads  most  imposingly :  on  the  other  hand^  there  are  single 
sentences  bearing  upon  spiritual  life  and  work  which  totally  eclipse  the  pomp  of 
royal  nomenclature  and  dominion.  Tiberius  Caesar,  Pontius  Pilate,  Herod,  Philip, 
and  Lysanias,  are  names  which  will  perish  from  the  roll  of  the  highest  factors 
of  human  history  and  service;  but  the  name  of  John  will  be  remembered  and 
reverenced  as  the  highest  name  known  amongst  men  before  the  building  up  of 
the  distinctive  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  word  of  God  came  unto 
John.  This  is  a  most  remarkable  expression,  showing  that  John  did  not  run 
before  he  was  sent,  and  showing  also  that  Ood  knows  where  to  find  men  when 
He  wants  them  for  any  work  in  the  world.  John  in  the  wilderness  is  nobody, 
but  the  word  of  God  entering  into  this  same  John  kindles  him  into  a  light  that 
is  seen  afar.  The  true  minister  of  God  is  charged  with  the  word  of  Heaven. 
That  which  he  speaks  he  speaks  not  of  himself,  he  simply  pronounces  and  pro- 
claims with  earnestness  and  persistency  the  truth  which  has  been  breathed  into 
his  own  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  sword  in  the  scabbard  is  a  useless 
weapon,  but  when  grasped  by  the  hand  of  the  trained  soldier  carries  with  it  alike 
death  and  victory.  It  is,  indeed,  possible  to  have  received  the  word  of  God  as  a 
commandment  to  go  forth,  and  yet  to  have  stifled  the  great  conviction.  There  are 
men  who  are  silent  to-day  in  the  Church,  who,  if  faithful  to  their  convictions,  would 
be  heard  in  loud  protest  against  evil,  and  vehement  proclamations  as  the  apostles 
of  Christian  truth.  Grieve  not  the  Spirit  1  Quench  not  the  Spirit  I  We  do  not 
begin  by  quenching  the  Spirit;  the  deadly  work  begins  by  grieving  the  sacred 
presence.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  John  was  in  the  wilderness  when  the  word  of  God 
came  unto  him.  Time  spent  in  solitude  is  not  misspent  if  the  ear  be  bent  towards 
God,  and  our  love  be  listening  for  the  coming  of  His  word.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Teachings  of  the  wilderness : — Few  Bible  characters  are  so  strangely  fas- 
cinating to  the  devout  reader  as  that  of  John  the  Baptist.  In  the  wildemesa 
God  came  to  him ;  in  the  wilderness  he  was  equipped  for  public  service ;  from  the 
wilderness  he  began  his  missionary  work.  This  fact  suggests  three  ideas  of 
practical  importance.  I.  The  natube  of  wildebness  life.  1.  Solitude.  2.  Ab- 
stemiousness. 8.  Privation.  II.  The  lessons  of  wildebness  life.  What  John 
was  taaght  in  the  wilderness  gave  him  bis  regal  manhood,  viz.,  the  high  moral 
lessons  of — 1.  Self-deniaL    2.  Humility.    8.  Courage  for  what  is  true  and  holj-, 


OBAV.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  80t 

•*  Separate  from  the  world,  his  breast 
Did  deeply  take  and  strongly  keep 
The  print  of  heaven." 

in.  Thb  bsason  o»  God's  visitation  in  thb  wildbbnbss.  The  "  word  "  was  a  call 
to  active  endeavour  in  the  bnsy  world.  The  wilderness  had  done  its  work,  thav  is, 
had  made  John  a  fit  person  in  the  sight  of  God  to  be  called  to  the  important  work 
of  heralding  the  ministry  of  Christ.  That  same  "  word  of  God  "  is  constantly 
coming  to  us  all  in  all  the  great  and  little  wildernesses  of  life.  In  aU  ages  notable 
instances  of  such  visitations  have  been  recorded.  Moses,  Luther,  Wordsworth, 
amongst  the  hills  and  vales  of  his  native  Westmoreland;  Carlyle,  who,  in  the 
wilderness  of  Craigenputtock,  heard  and  obeyed  a  call  to  preach  in  his  books 
repentance  as  the  first  and  last  need  of  his  age.  If  we  would  be  trae  to  oar  higher 
natoxa  we  mast  cultivate  the  love  of  solitude. 

••  Mom  is  the  time  to  act,  noon  to  endure. 
But  0 1  if  thou  wouldst  keep  thy  spirit  pure. 
Turn  from  the  beaten  path  by  worldlings  trod, 
Go  forth  at  eventide  in  heart  to  walk  with  God." 

And  if  to  solitude  there  be  added  suffering  in  our  wilderness,  let  ns  despise  it  not. 
Though  often  dreary,  it  has  its  charms,  its  blessings.  God  may  be  found  there. 
(/.  McOavin  Sloan.)  John  in  the  wilderness  : — Wide  as  was  the  moral  and 
spiritual  difference  between  the  two  great  prophets  of  the  Jordan  wilderness,  and 
the  wild  ascetics  of  later  times,  it  is  for  this  very  reason  important  to  bear  in  mind 
the  outward  likeness  which  sets  off  this  inward  contrast.  Travellers  know  well  the 
startling  appearance  of  the  savage  figures  who,  whether  as  Bedouins  or  Dervishes, 
still  haunt  the  solitary  places  of  the  East,  with  a  cloak — the  usual  striped  Bedonin 
blanket — woven  of  camel's  hair  thrown  over  the  shoulders,  and  tied  in  front  on  the 
breast ;  naked  except  at  the  waist,  round  which  is  a  girdle  of  skin,  the  hair  flowing 
loose  about  the  head.  This  was  precisely  the  description  of  Elijah,  whose  last 
appearance  had  been  on  this  very  wilderness,  before  he  finally  vanished  from  the  eyes 
of  his  disciple.  This,  too,  was  the  aspect  of  his  great  representative,  when  he  came, 
in  the  same  place,  dwelling,  hke  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  in  a  leafy  covert,  woven 
of  the  branches  of  the  Jordan  forest,  preaching,  in  raiment  of  camel's  hair,  with  a 
leathern  girdle  round  his  loins,  eating  the  locusts  of  the  desert,  and  the  wild  honey 
or  manna  which  dripped  from  the  tamarisks  of  the  desert  region,  or  which  distilled 
from  the  palm-groves  of  Jericho.  To  the  same  wilderness,  probably  that  on  the 
eastern  side,  Jesus  is  described  as  "  led  up  "  by  the  Spirit — up  into  the  desert-hills 
whence  Moses  had  seen  the  view  of  all  the  kingdom  of  Palestine — "  with  the  wild 
beasts  "  which  lurked  in  the  bed  of  the  Jordan,  or  in  the  caves  of  the  hills,  "  where 
John  was  baptising,  beyond  Jordan."  (Dean  Stanley.)  John's  life  in  the 
desert: — A  soul  lost  in  the  greatness  of  eternal  truths,  like  that  of  John,  may 
well  have  risen  to  an  indifference  to  the  comforts,  or  even  ordinary  wants  of  the 
body,  otherwise  almost  impossible.  We  have  no  record  of  his  daily  life,  but  that 
of  one  who,  in  saintliness  of  spirit,  trod  in  his  steps,  is  still  preserved.  Saint 
Antony,  in  the  deserts  of  Egypt,  was  wont  to  pass  whole  nights  in  prayer,  and 
that  not  once,  but  often,  to  the  astonishment  of  men.  He  ate  once  a  day,  after 
the  setting  of  the  sun  ;  his  food  was  bread  with  salt,  his  drink  nothing  but  water. 
Flesh  and  wine  he  never  tasted.  When  he  slept,  he  was  content  with  a  rush  mat, 
but  mostly  he  lay  on  the  bare  ground.  He  would  not  anoint  himself  with  oil,  saying 
that  it  was  more  fit  for  young  men  to  be  earnest  in  subduing  the  body,  than  to  seek 
things  which  softened  it.  Forgetting  the  past,  he,  daily,  as  if  beginning  afresh, 
took  more  pains  to  improve,  saying  over  to  himself,  continually,  the  apostle's 
words — ••  Forgetting  what  is  behind,  stretching  forth  to  what  is  before "  ;  and 
mindful,  too,  of  Elijah's  saying,  "  the  Lord  liveth,  before  whom  I  stand  " — he  said, 
im  himself,  that  the  ascetic  ought  ever  to  be  learning  his  own  life  from  that  of  the 
great  Elias,  as  from  a  mirror.  The  picture  may  not  suit  in  some  particulars,  but 
as  a  glimpse  of  the  mortified  life  of  the  desert,  in  its  best  aspect,  it  may  serve  to  realize 
that  of  John,  in  the  loneliness  of  the  rough  wilderness  of  Judaea.  (Dr.  C.  Geikie.) 
John  in  the  vnlderness : — Here  St.  John  the  Baptist  spent  long  years  of  solitary 
musing  on  the  things  of  God,  till  his  soul  kindled  into  irresistible  ardour,  which 
drove  him  forth  among  men  to  plead  with  them  to  prepare  for  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah.    Daring  the  hot  months  it  is  a  land  of  scorpions,  lizards,  and  snakes,  so 


804  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  m, 

that  hia  experience  readily  supplied  him  with  a  oomparison  for  his  wicked  contem« 
poraries,  whom  he  denounced  as  "  a  generation  of  vipers."  Wild  bees  make  their 
combs  in  the  hollows  of  the  limestone  rocks;  the  aromatic  thymes,  mints,  and  other 
labiate  plants,  sprinkled  over  the  face  of  the  wilderness,  furnishing  them  with 
honey,  which  is  more  plentiful  in  the  wilderness  of  Judsea  than  in  any  other  part  of 
Palestine.  They  thus  provided  for  him  a  main  article  of  his  diet,  while  in  one  wady 
or  another,  or  in  some  cleft,  there  was  always  water  enough  to  quench  his  thirst. 
Locusts,  the  other  article  of  his  food,  are  never  wanting  in  this  region,  and,  indeed, 
are  to  this  day  eaten  by  the  Arabs  in  the  south-east  of  Judsa,  the  very  district 
where  John  lived ;  by  those  of  the  Jordan  valley,  and  by  some  tribes  in  Gilead. 
They  stew  them  with  butter,  and  travellers  say — for  I  mysdf  have  never  tasted  th«m 
— that  they  are  very  like  shrimps  in  flavour.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  The  country  about  Jordan. — The  river  Jordan: — The  river  Jordan 
rises  in  the  Anti-Lebanon,  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem.  Imagine  that  you  are 
looking,  as  your  glance  may  be  directed  towards  me,  to  Jerusalem ;  yonder  on 
your  right  is  Hermon.  The  river  Jordan  rises  in  the  Anti-Lebanon  range,  1,700 
feet  above  the  sea  level.  There  are  many  streams  that  contribute  to  it  in  its  first 
flow,  it  is  disputed  which  of  them  is  the  real  source.  The  streams  gather;  they 
enter  the  waters  of  Merom,  the  first  little  lake.  From  that  they  pass,  and,  after 
a  course  of  a  few  miles,  they  enter  a  larger  lake,  and  one  more  familiar  to  us  all, 
and  endeared  to  us  all,  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret,  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  They  pass 
through  this  lake,  which  is  itself  between  six  and  seven  hundred  feet  below  the  sea 
level.  It  is  said  that  their  current  may  be  traced  through  the  lake.  They  pass 
from  the  Lake  of  Galilee  and  go  down,  and  ever  down,  until  they  enter  into  what 
we  now  call  the  Dead  Sea,  the  Lake  Asphaltites.  Now,  reading  the  Scripture,  we 
cannot  discover  the  wonder  of  this  lake,  and  this  itself  is  noticeable.  The  Scripture 
instructs  us  respecting  the  Jordan  and  the  events  that  occurred  on  its  sides,  but 
modem  travel  tells  us  that  in  all  the  wonders  of  the  world  there  is  none,  of  ita 
kind,  comparable  to  the  great  chasm  of  the  Jordan.  It  is  the  lowest  of  rivers.  We 
go  to  the  margin  of  the  sea,  and  there  we  count  ourselves  indeed  low.  We  descend 
from  the  mountains  to  the  sea.  Near  the  sea,  as,  e.g.,  in  Cornwall,  there  are 
sometimes  mines ;  you  descend  those  mines,  and  of  course  you  are  below  the  sea 
level.  The  Jordan  is  a  river  that  flows  down  and  down,  till,  when  it  enters  the 
Dead  Sea,  it  is  1,300  feet  below  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,  below  our  ordinary 
holiday  seaside  level,  and  if  you  try  the  depth  of  the  water  itself,  you  find  there  is 
another  1,300  feet  before  you  reach  the  bottom.  The  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea  are 
briny,  sour,  smarting ;  they  hang  about  your  skin  hke  oil ;  they  enter  into  any 
chaps  of  the  skin  and  torment  you.  They  are  so  heavy  that  if  you  go  in  and  bathe 
you  can,  as  it  were,  sit  on  the  waters.  Heavy,  salt,  sour,  sharp,  are  these  terrific 
waters — waters  of  death,  flowing  towards  Jerusalem  from  the  north,  but  lying  far 
below  Jerusalem,  as  they  pass  it  on  the  east,  for  the  mountain  city  is  2,600  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea — the  Mediterranean  ;  and  the  river  Jordan  as  it  enters 
its  lake  of  death  is  1,300  feet  below  the  level  of  that  sea,  or  4,000  feet  below  the 
level  of  Jerusalem ;  and  again  the  bottom  of  that  lake — the  sunken  sea — is  1,300 
feet  below  its  surface.  There  is  no  parallel  to  this  in  the  globe — none.  You  do 
not  get  a  hint  of  it  in  the  Bible.  Does  it  mean  anything  ?  If  I  take  a  poker  and 
dash  a  coal  to  pieces  for  the  sake  of  feeding  my  fire,  do  I  care  how  the  fragments 
Bplit  ?  Not  I.  But  I  arrange  the  fragments  presently  that  they  may  burn  in  the 
most  agreeable  manner.  Does  anybody  suppose  that  Jehovah  made  the  world  as 
a  man  splits  a  coal  for  the  Christmas  fire,  caring  even  less  for  the  arranging  of  the 
parts  or  pieces  ;  that  He  made  a  height  here  and  a  hollow  there,  and  a  broad  river 
here  and  a  comparatively  narrow  but  foaming  cataract  there,  without  any  purpose 
or  meamng  in  His  arrangements?  Does  any  one  suppose  that  in  the  placing  of 
such  a  people  as  Israel  there  was  no  correspondence  between  the  character  and 
story  of  the  people  and  the  kind  of  country  that  they  occupied  ?  Do  not  think  it. 
**  Sodom  "  is  a  proverb  of  wickedness,  and  tha  Sodomites  lived  in  the  lowest  place 
on  the  globe.  "  Jerusalem  "  is  a  DHne  of  glory,  and  Jerusalem  is  the  mountain 
city  of  the  world.  Is  there  no  meaning  there?  The  one  river,  so  c«Ued,  of 
Palestine  is  as  crooked  as  a  serpent.  It  rushes  on,  muddy  and  foaming,  like  a 
maddened  sinner,  and  it  loses  itself  utterly  in  the  sea  of  death,  a  sea  wi&out  an 
ontlet,  a  sea  without  a  city  on  its  shore,  a  sea  without  any  animation  of  boata^  and 
traiofto  upon  its  suriace,  a  sea  without  fish — not  without  its  aspects  of  occasional 
loveliness  though — and  a  sea  that  sends  forth  from  its  surface  watera  purified 


«HAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  805 

invisibly  into  the  heavenly  air.  Wonderful  sea  I  Does  this  mean  anything,  or 
does  it  mean  nothing  ?  .  .  .  The  Jordan  is  the  river  cf  judgment.  There  is  no 
such  emblem  of  a  sinner  in  the  world  as  the  river  Jordan.  There  is  no  such 
emblem  of  the  prohibitive  law  of  Moses  in  its  ultimate  results  as  the  Jordan  and 
the  lake  into  which  it  enters.  The  sinner  goes  down,  down,  and  the  end  of  his 
way  is  death.  The  prohibitive  law  drives  us  down,  down,  and  the  end  of  it  is  the 
sentence  of  death.  Die  we  must  if  sin  drive  us  on ;  dead  we  are  if  we  understand 
not  the  law  spiritually.  But  were  we  born  to  be  destroyed  ?  No  ;  but  to  be  saved. 
Were  we  born  to  be  driven  on  by  mere  impulse  ?  No  ;  but  to  be  rescued  from  such 
"driving."  Were  we  born  to  enter  into  and  be  lost  in  the  deep,  the  to  us,  as  it 
were,  unfathomable  brine  ?  No ;  but  to  be  raised  from  it,  purified,  exalted.  There 
is  the  Dead  Sea :  here  the  living  Jerusalem.  You  look  up — the  living  Jerusalem : 
you  look  down — the  Dead  Sea.  From  the  heights  of  Jerusalem  we  look  down  and 
think  of  the  Dead  Sea  as  the  sea  from  which  we  are  rescued.  We  think  of  the 
Jordan,  muddy,  swollen,  rapid,  and  know  that  not  such  is  now  the  course  of  our 
life ;  but  that  we  are  rescued  from  such  a  course,  and  that  we  are  to  enter  into 
"life"  itself  by  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  to  become  the  rescuer.  {T,  T,  Lynch.) 
Symbolism  of  the  Jordan: — Pass  from  the  thought  of  the  Jordan  to  that  "  river  of 
God  which  is  full  of  water,"  whatever  river  may  be  by  this  phrase  specially  denoted 
in  the  Psalms,  and  recall  this  fact,  that  Jerusalem  is  especially  the  city  of  waters. 
Springs  of  water  and  subterranean  streams  are  there  in  so  much  that  if  you  are  on 
the  site  of  the  old  temple  of  Jerusalem,  you  may  lay  your  ear  to  the  ground  and 
hear  water  running  underneath,  running,  running.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing.  In 
the  Church  when  it  is  most  desolate,  lay  but  your  ear  to  the  ground  and  you  shall 
hear  the  waters  of  God  running,  running.  The  earth  shall  not  perish  of  thirst, 
then?  No,  it  shall  not.  The  river  of  God,  it  is  full  of  water.  Glorious  river  I 
Will  He  keep  it  full  ?  He  will.  Has  not  He  kept  the  Nile  "  in  its  courses  "  through 
these  thousand,  thousand  years?  Has  not  He  kept  all  the  great  rivers  in  the 
world;  and  He  will  keep  the  river  of  His  own  truth,  of  His  own  love  running, 
running.  Fear  not,  then  ;  deliver  thyself  up,  as  to  the  "  flesh,"  to  Jordan.  Let 
Jordan  make  away  with  thee,  and  the  swellings  of  Jordan  carry  thee  down,  down. 
Let  his  twenty-seven  cataracts,  or  some  of  them,  sweep  thee  on.  Care  nothing  for 
the  descents  of  Jordan.  God  will  make  away  with  thee  by  the  current  of  Jordan, 
and  yet  will  give  thee  to  dwell  by  the  river  of  His  love  and  mercy,  the  river  of 
which  He  will  make  us  to  drink ;  the  river  beside  which  trees  of  life  grow ;  the 
river  about  which  the  Beautiful  City  is  builded,  the  City  of  God  so  glorious  and  so 
peaceful.  Believe  in  this  river  and  take  the  imagery  of  Scripture,  and  use  it  as 
you  will,  this  way  to-day  and  another  way  to-morrow,  yet  always  so  as  to  enable 
your  heart  to  trust  and  love  God  more  and  more,  and  you  will  rejoice  that  Scripture, 
as  it  were,  is  written  in  cipher ;  not  merely  in  English,  or  Latin,  or  Greek,  or 
Hebrew,  but  in  cipher ;  in  the  language  of  hieroglyph,  so  that  the  more  a  man  haa 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  his  heart,  the  more  he  finds  the  Holy  Ghost's  meaning  and 
comfort  as  he  reads  the  ancient  Word.  {Ibid.)  Baptism  in  the  Jordan : — The 
Jordan  was  regarded  by  the  Israelites  as  the  glory  of  their  country,  for  it  is  the 
only  river  in  Palestine  which  always  flows  in  a  copious  stream,  though  its  sunken, 
tumultuous,  twisted  course,  which,  between  the  Sea  of  Galilee  and  the  Dead  Sea, 
winds  for  some  two  hundred  miles  over  a  space  only  about  sixty  miles  in  direct 
length,  has  made  it  useless  for  navigation,  or  as  an  attraction  to  human  communi- 
ties, except  at  the  plain  of  Jericho.  The  great  miracle  when  the  Hebrews  passed 
over  made  it  sacred  to  them,  so  that  its  waters  were  already  regarded  with  reverence 
when  Elisha  commanded  Naaman  to  wash  in  them  as  a  cure  for  his  leprosy.  Hal- 
lowed still  more  by  the  preaching  of  John  and  the  baptism  of  Christ,  the  Jordan 
has  been  the  favourite  goal  of  all  pilgrimages  to  the  Holy  Land  in  every  age  since 
the  first  Christian  centuries.  As  early  as  the  days  of  Constantine,  to  he  baptized 
in  its  waters  was  deemed  a  great  privilege,  while  in  the  sixth  century  Antoninua 
relates  that  marble  steps  led  down  into  the  water  on  both  sides  at  the  spot  where 
it  was  believed  our  Lord  had  been  baptized,  while  a  wooden  cross  rose  in  the 
middle  of  the  stream.  Upon  the  eve  of  the  Epiphany,  he  adds,  "  great  vigils  are  held 
here,  a  vast  crowd  of  people  is  collected,  and  after  the  cock  has  crowed  for  the 
fourth  or  fifth  time,  matins  begin.  Then,  as  the  day  commences  to  dawn,  the 
deacons  begin  the  holy  mysteries,  and  celebrate  them  in  the  open  air ;  the  priest 
descends  into  the  river,  and  all  who  are  to  be  baptized  go  to  him."  Holy  water 
was  even  in  that  early  age  carried  away  by  masters  of  vessels  who  visited  it  as 
pilgrims,  to  sprinkle  their  ships  before  a  voyage ;  and  we  are  told  that  all  pilgrima 

20 


806  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n^ 

alike  went  into  the  water  wearing  a  linen  garment,  which  they  sacredly  preserved 
as  a  winding-sheet  to  be  wrapped  round  them  at  their  death.  The  scene  of  the 
yearly  bathing  of  pilgrims  now  is  near  the  ford,  about  two  miles  above  the  Dead 
Sea,  and  each  sect  having  its  own  particular  spot  which  it  fondly  believes  to  be 
exactly  that  at  which  our  Saviour  was  baptized.  The  season  of  baptism  has  been 
changed  from  the  colder  time  of  Epiphany  to  that  of  Easter,  and  as  the  date  of  the 
latter  feast  differs  in  the  Eoman  and  Greek  Churches,  no  collisions  take  place. 
Each  Easter  Monday  thousands  of  pilgrims  start  in  a  great  caravan  from  Jern> 
salem  under  the  protection  of  the  Turkish  government,  a  white  flag  and  loud  music 
going  before  them,  while  Turkish  soldiers,  with  the  green  standard  of  the  Prophet, 
close  the  long  procession.  On  the  Greek  Easter  Monday  the  same  spectacle  ia 
repeated,  four  or  five  thousand  pilgrims  joining  in  this  second  caravan.  The  streeta 
of  Jerusalem  are,  for  the  time,  deserted,  to  see  the  vast  cavalcade  set  out :  women 
in  long  white  dresses  and  veils,  men  in  flowing  robes  and  turbans,  covering  the 
space  outside  the  walls  and  the  slopes  and  hollow  of  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat  in 
a  parti-coloured  crowd,  eager  to  see  the  start.  At  last  the  procession  streams  from 
the  gate  and  pours  along  the  camel-track  towards  Bethany  and  the  Jordan  ;  some 
on  foot,  others  on  horseback,  or  on  asses,  mules,  or  camels.  ...  The  broad  space 
between  the  Sultan's  Spring  and  Eriha  is  soon  an  extemporized  town  ;  tents  of  all 
sizes  rising  as  by  magic,  while  at  night  the  plain  is  lighted  up  by  the  flames  of 
countless  fires.  Next  morning  they  start  from  this  resting-place  before  sunrise, 
and  march  or  ride  by  the  light  of  the  Passover  moon  towards  the  brink  of  the 
Jordan,  but  the  pace  of  such  a  confused  throng  is  slow.  To  help  them  on  the  first 
stages  of  their  way  multitudinous  torches  blaze  in  the  van,  and  huge  watchfires, 
kindled  at  the  sides  of  the  road,  guard  them  past  the  worst  places,  tUl,  as  daylight 
breaks,  the  first  of  the  throng  reach  the  sacred  river.  Before  long  the  high  bank 
above  the  trees  and  reeds  is  crowded  with  horses,  mules,  asses,  and  camels  in  ter- 
rible confusion ;  old,  young,  men,  women,  and  children,  of  many  nationalities,  all 
pressing  together  in  seemingly  inextricable  disorder.  Yet  they  manage  to  clear 
themselves  after  a  time,  and  then,  dismounting,  rush  into  the  water  with  the  most 
business-like  quiet,  too  earnest  and  practical  to  express  much  emotion.  Some 
strip  themselves  naked,  but  most  of  them  plunge  in  clad  in  a  white  gown,  which  is 
to  serve  hereafter  as  a  shroud,  consecrated  by  its  present  use.  Families  bathe 
together,  the  father  immersing  the  infant  and  his  other  children  that  they  may  not 
need  to  make  the  pilgrimage  in  later  life.  Most  of  them  keep  near  the  shore,  but 
some  strike  out  boldly  into  the  current ;  some  choose  one  spot,  some  another,  for 
their  bath.  In  little  more  than  two  hours  the  banks  are  once  more  deserted,  the 
pilgrims  remounting  their  motley  army  of  beasts  with  the  same  grave  quiet  as  they 
had  shown  on  leaving  them  for  a  time,  and  before  noon  they  are  back  again  at 
their  encampment.  They  now  sleep  till  the  middle  of  the  night,  when,  roused  by 
the  kettledrums  of  the  Turks,  they  once  more,  by  the  light  of  the  moon,  torches, 
and  bonfires,  turn  their  faces  to  the  steep  pass  up  to  Jerusalem  in  such  silence  thai 
they  might  all  be  gone  without  waking  you  if  you  slept  near  them.  It  was  thus 
with  a  great  caravan  of  pilgrims  who  encamped  a  few  yards  from  my  tent  near  the 
Lake  of  Galilee.  Noisy  enough  by  night,  with  firing  of  pistols  and  guns,  they 
struck  their  tents  and  moved  off  in  the  morning  without  breaking  my  sleep. 
(C.  Geiku,  D.D.)  Preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance. — The  preacher 
and  hit  message : — I.  The  preacher.  You  can  often  guess  a  man's  style 
or  the  character  of  his  message  from  his  personal  appearance  and  demeanonr. 
I  presume  it  is  because  of  this  that  Scripture,  a  book  intended  for 
man's    salvation,   should    still  find  space    here   and  there  for  notices    of    the 

Eersonal  appearance  of  some  of  its  chief  actors  and  characters.  John  Baptist, 
ke  Elijah,  was  a  thorough  vmn.  We  are  told  that  his  raiment  was  of  camel's  hair, 
that  he  had  a  leathern  girdle  round  his  loins,  and  that  he  lived  upon  the  poorest 
of  food ;  but  I  wonder  why  all  this  is  described,  unless  to  show  us  that  there  are 
times  and  crises  in  the  history  of  nations  and  of  towns  when  a  true  man  cannot 
live  in  society.  God  help  the  towns  and  communities  that  drive  a  John  Baptist 
into  the  wilderness  that  he  may  there  Hve  and  thrive  and  gather  mental  and 
spiritual  strength.  II.  His  messaoe.  1.  What  he  preached  was  a  gospel  of  Divine 
origin.  There  can  be  no  other.  A  human-made  gospel  is  a  self-condemned  thing. 
Ton  cannot  manufacture  a  gospel — it  comes  like  the  grace  of  God ;  it  comes  like 
•  breath  of  heaven  filling  the  soul  and  commanding  a  rugged,  rough  man  even  in 
the  very  wilderness  to  cry  out,  *' I  am  a  preacher."  It  is  inspiration — "the  word 
of  the  Lord  came."    If  the  gospel  be  not  Divine,  it  is  nothing.    2.  This  gospel  i* 


CHAP,  ni.]  ST.  LUKE.  807 

an  old-fashioned  one.    A  recent  writer  has  declared  that  the  producers  of  truth  are 
very  few,  that  the  jobbers  in  truth  are  many,  and  that  the  retailers  of  truth  are 
numberless.    I  believe  it  is  precisely  the  same  with  the  gospel.     The  originators  of 
the  gospel  are  few — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit;  I  know  none  other.    The  jobbers 
in  the  gospel  are  many,  alas  ;  and  the  retailers  of  the  gospel  are  numberless.     But 
it  is  the  one  gospel,  and  it  must  be  an  old-fashioned  one,  because  the  thing  that 
called  it  into  existence  is  as  old  as  the  history  of  mankind.    What  called  the  gospel 
into  the  world  ?    Man's  helplessness  and  sin.     3.  Notice,  further,  that  the  gospel 
according  to  John  Baptist  is  a  self-accredited  thing.     It  has  its  credentials  within 
itself.     It  does  not  need  inspiration  to  tell  me  that  such  a  verse  as  "  God  is  love  " 
is  inspired  :  there  is  the  fragrance  of  heaven  upon  that  thought.    4.  This  gospel  is 
a  simple,  intelligible  gospel.    It  is  said  of  Moliere  that  he  would  allow  no  play  of 
his  to  be  published  in  which  there  was  a  single  word  which  his  slave  did  not  under- 
stand.    Simpleness  was  the  secret  of  his  success,  as  it  was  of  Shakspere,  Milton, 
and  John  Bunyan.    They  don't  manufacture,  as  it  were,  long  words,  they  speak  in 
the  language  of  nature,  and  that  is  pre-eminently  the  great  qualification  and  sign 
of  the  gospel  of  God.    6.  Now,  let  us  notice  the  universal  tone  of  John  Baptist's 
gospel.     "  All  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God."    How  unlike  a  Jew  is  this 
style  I    Let  us  all — ministers,  Sunday-school  teachers,  &c. — beware  of  preaching 
the  gospel  in  a  narrow  way.     Do  not  cramp  it ;  give  it  free  currency,  and  be  sure 
that  the  gospel  you  preach  is  not  your  own,  but  God's.     6.  The  subject-matter  of 
the  Baptist's  gospel  is  ••  Repent."    When  a  man's  heart  is  wrung  with  grief  for  sin 
there  is  not,  and  there  never  has  been,  any  gospel  that  can  be  preached  to  him 
save  this.     Eepentance  means  atonement;    atonement  demands  love;   and  the 
harsh,  brassy  sound  of  the  call  to  repentance  may  bring  a  man  face  to  face  with 
the  more  mellow,  happier  music  of  the  spheres  of  glory — "  God  is  love."     {J.  B. 
MeJiarry,  B.A.)        John  Baptist's  preaching  : — The  preaching  of  the  Baptist  was — 
1.  Stern,  as  was  natural  to  an  ascetic  whose  very  aspect  and  mission  were  modelled 
on  the  example  of  Elijah.     The  particulars  of  his  life,  dress,  food — the  leathern 
girdle,  mantle  of  camel's  hair,  living  on  locusts  and  wild  honey — are  preserved  for 
us  by  the  other  evangelists,  and  they  gave  him  that  power  of  mastery  over  others 
which   always  springs  from  perfect  self-control,  and    absolute    self-abnegation. 
Hence  "  in  his  manifestation  and  agency  he  was  like  a  burning  torch ;  his  whole 
life  was  a  very  earthquake ;  the  whole  man  was  a  sermon."     2.  Absolutely  daunt- 
less.    The  unlettered  Prophet  of  the  desert  has  not  a  particle  of  respect  for  the 
powerful  Sadducees  and  long-robed,  luxurious  Rabbis,  and  disdains  to  be  flattered 
by  their  coming  to  listen  to  his  teaching.    Having  nothing  to  hope  for  from  man's 
favour,  he  has  nothing  to  fear  from  man's  dislike.     3.  It  shows  remarkable  insight 
into  human  nature,  and  into  the  needs  and  temptations  of  every  class  which  came  to 
him — showing  that  his  ascetic  seclusion  did  not  arise  from  any  contempt  of,  or 
aversion  to,  his  fellow-men.     4.  It  was  intensely  practical.     Not  only  does  it 
exclude  all  abstract  and  theological  terms  such  as  "  justification,"  &o.,  but  it  says 
nothing  directly  of  even  faith  or  love.    In  this  respect  it  recalls  the  Old  Testament, 
•nd  might  be  summed  up  in  the  words  of  Balaam,  preserved  in  Micah  vi.  8.   5.  Yet, 
though  it  still  belongs  to  the  dispensation  of  the  shadow,  it  prophesies  of  the  dawn. 
His  first  message  was  "Repent";  his  second,  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand." 
6.  It  does  not  claim  the  credentials  of  a  single  miracle.     Without  a  "  sign  "  it 
stirred  to  its  depths  the  heart  of  a  sign-demanding  age.    What  enormous  moral 
force,  then,  it  must  have  possessed.     7.  It  had  only  a  partial  and  temporary  popa- 
larity.    The  lamp  is  laid  aside  when  the  sun  has  dawned.     (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
Eepentance  the  first  thing  : — A  ship's  company  rise  against  their  officers,  put  them 
in  chains,  and  take  the  command  of  the  ship  upon  themselves.     They  agree  to  set 
the  officers  ashore  on  some  uninhabited  island,  to  sail  to  some  distant  port,  dispose 
of  the  cargo,  and  divide  the  amount.    After  parting  with  their  officers  they  find  it 
necessary,  for  the  sake  of  self-preservation,  to  establish  some  kind  of  laws  and  order. 
To  these  they  adhere  with  punctuality,  act  upon  honour  with  respect  to  each  other, 
and  propose  to  be  very  impartial  in  the  distribution  of  their  plunder.    But  while 
they  are  on  their  voyage  one  of  the  company  relents  and  becomes  very  unhappy. 
They  inquire  the  reason.    He  answers,  "We  are  engaged  in  a  wicked  cause." 
They  plead  their  justice,  honour,  and  generosity  to  each  other.    He  denies  that 
there  is  any  virtue  in  it.    "  Nay,"  he  declares,  "  all  our  equity,  while  it" is  exercised 
in  pursuit  of  a  scheme  which  violates  the  great  law  of  justice,  is  in  itself  a  species 
of  iniquity."     "  You  talk  extravagantly,"  they  reply ;  "  surely  we  might  be  worse 
than  we  are  if  we  were  to  destroy  each  other  as  well  as  our  officers."    "Yes 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIl.  [cwap.  m. 

wickedness  admits  of  degrees;  but  there  is  no  virtue  of  goodness  in  all  our  doinps ; 
all  has  arisen  from  selfish  motives.  The  same  principles  which  led  ns  to  discar<i 
our  officers  would  lead  us,  if  it  were  not  for  our  own  sake,  to  destroy  each  other." 
"  But  you  speak  so  very  discouragingly ;  you  destroy  all  motives  to  good  order  in 
the  ship ;  what  would  you  have  us  do  ?  "  "  Kepent ;  return  to  our  injured  officers 
and  owners,  and  submit  to  mercy."  ••  Oh,  but  this  we  cannot  do :  advise  us  to 
anything  which  concerns  the  good  order  of  the  ship,  and  we  will  hearken  to  you,'*-' 
*•  I  cannot  bear  to  advise  in  these  matters.  Return,  return,  and  submit  to  mercy  1 " 
{A.  Fuller.)  The  religion  of  penitence  : — The  only  religion  possible  to  man  is  the 
religion  of  penitence.  The  righteousness  of  man  cannot  be  the  integrity  of  the 
virgin  citadel  which  has  never  admitted  the  enemy ;  it  can  never  be  more  than  the 
integrity  of  the  city  which  has  been  surprised  and  roused,  and  which,  having 
expelled  the  invader  with  blood  in  the  streets,  has  suffered  great  inward  loss, 
A  true  penitent's  feeling  towards  $in : — I  once  walked  into  a  garden  with  a  lady  to 
gather  some  flowers.  There  was  one  large  bush  whose  branches  were  bending 
under  the  weight  of  the  most  beautiful  roses.  We  both  gazed  upon  it  with  admira- 
tion.  There  was  one  flower  on  it  which  seemed  to  shine  above  all  the  rest  in 
beauty.  This  lady  pressed  forward  into  the  thick  bush,  and  reached  far  over  to 
pluck  it.  As  she  did  this,  a  black  snake,  which  was  hid  in  the  bush,  wrapped  itself 
round  her  arm.  She  was  alarmed  beyond  all  description;  and  ran  from  the 
garden,  screaming,  and  almost  in  convulsions.  During  all  that  day  she  suffered 
very  much  with  fear ;  her  whole  body  trembled,  and  it  was  a  long  time  before  she 
could  be  quieted.  That  lady  is  still  alive.  Such  is  her  hatred  now  of  the  whole 
serpent  race,  that  she  has  never  since  been  able  to  look  at  a  snake,  even  though  it 
were  dead.  No  one  could  ever  persuade  her  to  venture  again  into  a  cluster  of 
bushes,  even  to  pluck  a  beautiful  rose.  Now  this  is  the  way  the  sinner  acts  who 
truly  repents  of  his  sins.  He  thinks  of  sin  as  the  serpent  that  once  coiled  itself 
round  him.  He  hates  it.  He  dreads  it.  He  flies  from  it.  He  fears  the  places 
where  it  inhabits.  He  does  not  willingly  go  into  the  haunts.  He  will  no  more 
play  with  sin  than  this  lady  would  afterwards  have  fondled  snakes.  {Bishop  Merd.) 

Ver.  4.  The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wlldemess. — Self-effacement: — John 
Baptist  is  a  type  of  those  who  resolve,  at  all  risks,  to  discharge  their  duty  and  to 
deliver  the  message  entrusted  to  them  by  God,  without  one  single  thought  of  self, 
without  one  transient  wish  to  appear  themselves  in  the  matter.  There  is  no 
indolence  here,  nor  cowardice.  There  is  simply  an  absence  of  any  ambition  to  be 
prominent,  and  of  any  desire  to  hear  their  name  whispered  among  the  crowd.  It 
is  enough  to  be  a  "  voice  " — to  preach  God's  Word,  and  not  their  own ;  to  pursue 
some  truth  which  is  not  to  enhance  their  own  reputation ;  to  advocate  some  causa 
which  is  not  to  redound  to  their  own  advantage.  Alas  !  how  few  are  such  persons; 
but  how  precious  in  proportion  to  their  rarity  I  K  any  of  us,  then,  be  on  the  way 
to  the  attainment  of  this  high  grace,  let  us  be  supremely  careful  that  our  own  self- 
effacement  be  both  genuine  in  itself  and  be  a  sacrifice  offered  to  a  worthy  cause. 
For  if  I  merely  surrender  to  the  first  comer,  or  abdicate  in  favour  of  some  worse 
person  than  myself,  the  very  humility  that  "  should  have  been  for  my  wealth, 
becomes  to  me  an  occasion  of  falling."  Instances  are  not  uncommon,  in  every  one's 
circle  of  acquaintance,  where  a  man  has  surrendered  not  his  pleasures,  or  his 
advantages,  but  his  principles,  to  some  other  person's  opinion.  But  if  a  single 
person's  private  opinion  be  sometimes  thus  overpowering,  what  must  the  combined 
force  of  a  thousand  people's  opinion,  of  "public  opinion,"  be!  Every  one,  it  is 
obvious,  has  a  visual  horizon  of  his  own,  in  the  centre  of  which  he  lives  and 
moves  and  has  his  being  ;  and  just  so  every  one  has  a  social  circle — "  a  world  " 
(as  the  Bible  calls  it)  of  his  own,  amid  which  he  lives,  and  which  reacts  too  often 
with  fatal  influence  upon  his  character.  We  must,  by  prayer  and  watchful  cir- 
cumspection,  safeguard  this  precious  grace  of  humble  self-effacement,  lest  we 
expend  it  on  unworthy  objects.  (Canon  G.  H.  Curteis.)  Admission  to  the  king' 
dam : — I.  1.  The  one  thing  that  is  essential  in  order  that  we  may  enter  the  king- 
dom of  God  is  that  we  should  be  sincere.  It  was  the  evident  sincerity  of  John 
the  Baptist  which  drew  around  him  the  sinners  of  Judea,  even  rough  soldiers  and 
mercenary  tax-gatherers.  He  demands  sincerity  in  return.  He  could  not  do  with 
professions  unless  they  were  accompanied  by  fruits  worthy  of  repentance  2. 
But  there  were  those  who  came  out  to  John's  baptism  in  insincerity.  II.  It  is  not 
necessarily  a  proof  of  sincerity  that  we  are  keenly  interested  in  the  reHgioif 
movements  which  are  agitating  men's  minds.     It  is  a  better  test  when  we  ara 


CHAP,  in.]  ST.  LUKE»  80* 

willing,  in  all  simplicity,  to  put  away  those  special  sins  which  are  hindering  ua 
from  surrendering  ourselves  to  the  rule  of  God.  (Carwn^  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.) 
The  voice  in  the  wilderness: — "When  the  tale  of  bricks  is  doubled,  then  cornea 
Moses  "  :  this  is  an  apothegm  familiar  among  the  Jews  even  to  the  present  day, 
and  rehearsed  in  their  stories  of  the  past.  But  Moses  came  twice  ;  and,  the  firsi 
time,  he  was  abruptly  rejected.  The  "Prophet  like  unto  Moses,"  promised  and 
at  last  announced  to  our  sin-enslaved  race  as  the  Redeemer,  was  introduced  by  a 
forerunner,  who  was  not  accepted  any  more  than  his  Master.  John  the  Baptist 
was  ultimately  beheaded  for  his  reward  of  fidelity ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  was  cruci- 
fied. Thus  it  comes  about  that  Christ's  sad  history  strikes  back  on  John's,  and 
gives  it  an  unexpected  interpretation.  Very  true  have  proved  those  words  of 
Heinrich  Heine :  "  Wheresoever  a  great  soul  in  this  world  has  uttered  its  thoughts, 
there  always  has  been  Golgotha."  Affairs  had  now  reached  the  last  crisis. 
Pontius  Pilate  was  misgoverning  Judea,  filling  history  with  extortions  and  infamies 
of  crime.  A  new  Herod,  worthy  of  the  name,  was  shaming  the  people  with 
villainous  lusts  and  defections  in  faith,  his  desperate  morals  fitly  keeping  pace  with 
his  downward  career  in  apostasy.  Suddenly  was  heard  a  voice  in  the  wilderness. 
There  was  singular  pathos  in  it,  as  there  is  in  all  human  tones  that  have  power. 
But  it  had,  besides  that,  a  sort  of  vibrating  ring  in  it  which  intimated  a  challenge. 
Experts  say  that  idiots,  even  in  the  midst  of  a  gibbering  frolic,  will  pause  abruptly 
to  listen  to  the  sound  of  a  musical  instrument ;  perhaps  some  vague  recollection 
of  primal  harmonies  in  a  healthy  nature  before  it  was  shattered  may  be  aw*ikened 
at  the  stir  near  by ;  the  soul  seems  seeking  to  render  answer,  but  only  succeeds  in 
giving  wistful  attention.  That  was  not  a  loud  voice  in  those  days  down  by  the 
Dead  Sea,  but  all  Judea  heard  it,  and  up  the  Jordan  it  rushed  with  more  than  the 
usual  celerity ;  it  certainly  in  due  time  reached  the  villagers  in  the  land  of 
Gennesareth,  for  some  of  them  journeyed  at  once  towards  it — notably,  Simon  son 
of  Jonas,  and  John,  and  James,  and  Andrew,  who  were  destined  to  figure  in  the 
train  of  Jesus  Christ.  (C.  S.  Rnbinson,  D.D.)  The  reality  of  the  Baptist: — 
John  the  Baptist  was  a  reality.  This  poor  world  of  ours  has  been  so  often  trifled 
with,  that  it  has  learned  to  be  satisfied  thoroughly  only  with  what  is  honest  and 
true.  There  could  be  no  ordinary  possibility  of  mistaking  such  a  man ;  he  was 
genuine.  And  he  shook  that  miserable  generation  of  hypocrites  as  might  have  been 
expected.  Virgil  tells  us  that  when  ^neas  descended  into  Hades  to  visit  his 
father,  became  to  Charon's  ferry  across  the  dark  river;  as  he  stepped  into  the 
light  boat,  accustomed  to  carry  only  spirits,  so  heavy  a  burden  of  a  real  and  living 
man  made  the  craft  tremble  and  creek  dismally  through  all  the  length  of  its 
sewed  seams.  We  can  presume  that  the  hollow  forms  of  social  life  in  those 
wretched  days  were  writhed  and  strained,  if  not  shattered,  by  an  uncompromising 
reality  of  manhood  like  that  of  John  the  Baptist  at  the  Jordan,  He  was  a  man 
among  the  shadows  of  men.  He  had  an  actual  "  idea."  He  shook  off  the  shams 
of  religion,  and  told  souls  a  great  deal  more  about  religion  itself  than  they  ever 
knew  before.  He  put  himself  within  the  reach  of  living  people,  and  down  on  their 
planes  of  existence.  Only  he  shred  away  the  veils  and  tinsels  and  mockeries  of 
an  outward  show,  and  with  an  unsparing  hand  tore  up  the  traditions  and  mere 
commandments  of  Pharisees.  {Ibid.)  Repentance  is  not  alike  in  all: — Let 
every  man  come  to  God  in  his  own  way.  God  made  you  on  purpose,  and  me  on 
purpose,  and  He  does  not  say  to  you,  '•  Repent,  and  feel  as  Deacon  A.  feels,"  or, 
"  Repent,  and  feel  as  your  minister  feels,"  but,  •'  Come  just  as  you  are,  with  your 
mind  and  heart  and  education  and  circumstances."  You  are  too  apt  to  feel  that 
your  religious  experience  must  be  the  same  as  others  have ;  but  where  will  you 
find  analogies  for  this  ?  Certainly  not  in  nature.  God's  works  do  not  come  from 
His  hand  like  coins  from  the  mint.  It  seems  as  if  it  were  a  necessity  that  each 
one  should  be  in  some  sort  distinct  from  every  other.  No  two  leaves  on  the  same 
tree  are  precisely  alike ;  no  two  buds  on  one  bush  have  the  same  unfolding,  nor  do 
they  seek  to  have.  {H.  W.  Beechcr.)  The  baptsts  gospel : — John,  too,  had  a 
gospel  to  preach,  though  at  the  first  sounding  of  it  there  was  terribleness  enough  in 
the  tone.  John  preached  the  baptism  of  repentance,  but,  behold,  it  was  repentance 
with  hope,  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins.  John  the  Baptist  is  not  a  mere  his- 
toric figure ;  his  ministry  represents  a  great  fact  which  has  a  prominent  place  in  the 
spiritual  transformation  and  progress  of  mankind ;  his  voice  of  repentance  must 
always  be  first  heard ;  his  call  to  humiliation  must  always,  in  the  first  instance, 
bow  down  the  sonl ;  and  after  the  thunder  and  fire  of  his  ministry  will  come  the 
atill  small  voice  of  redeeming  and  welcoming  love.     John  did  not  appear  before 


SIO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR,  [cHi».  ni. 

his  eonteniporaries  without  connection  with  all  the  solemn  and  beautifal  past  ol 
Jewish  history.  Though  he  came  from  the  wilderness,  yet,  as  to  the  spiritual 
aspects  of  his  ministry,  he  came  up  from  the  region  of  holy  prophecy,  and  upon 
him  there  rested  the  benediction  of  holy  men  oi  old.  It  is  something,  after  all,  to 
feel  that,  as  preachers  of  repentance  and  grace,  we  are  not  speaking  in  our  own 
name,  or  clothing  our  words  with  the  petty  authority  of  merely  personal 
position ;  the  ages  repeat  their  demands  in  our  voices ;  the  prophets  are  heard 
again  when  we  speak  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.  John's  speech  seemed  to  be 
regulated  by  the  music  of  prophecy.  This  quotation  from  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is 
like  the  sounding  of  a  military  march,  the  anthem  of  those  who  move  on  to 
momentary  battle,  followed  by  everlasting  triumph.  In  this  prophecy  it  will  b© 
observed  that  there  is  the  same  combination  of  the  human  and  Divine  which  is 
found  throughout  the  whole  of  the  gospel  scheme:  men  are  called  upon  to  make 
straight  paths  for  the  Lord,  and  they  are  also  called  upon  to  work  out  their  own 
salvation ;  they  are  exhorted  to  prepare  the  way,  as  they  were  commanded  to  roll 
away  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre ;  and  when  they  have  done  their 
little  part,  there  comes  the  full  outflow  of  the  Divine  sympathy,  power,  and  love. 
Nothing  can  exceed  in  minuteness  and  completeness  the  description  which  is 
given  in  verses  5  and  6.  The  sixth  verse  contains  the  grandest  utterance  that 
can  possibly  be  put  into  human  words,  "  All  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God." 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Character  and  mission  of  the  Baptist : — These  words,  quoted  by 
John  the  Baptist,  had  been  spoken  seven  hundred  years  before  by  Isaiah.  Nearly 
three  hundred  years  after  that,  Malachi  closed  the  course  of  Scripture  with  thes& 
remarkable  words :  "  Behold,  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet,"  &o.  Then 
intervened  a  period  of  four  hundred  years,  during  which  the  voice  of  prophecy 
was  mute,  and  all  that  was  left  to  guide  the  Israelite  was  that  of  which  Malachi 
reminded  him  in  the  previous  verses :  "  Eemember  ye  the  law  of  Moses  My  ser- 
vant." And  then,  when  these  four  hundred  years  were  closed,  suddenly,  inmiediately 
before  the  Messiah's  advent,  there  appeared  in  the  wilderness  a  wonderful  man, 
living  a  life  like  that  of  Isaiah  and  Elias,  applying  to  himself  this  prophecy  of 
Isaiah,  and  having  applied  to  him  by  Christ  that  of  Malachi  concerning  Elijah. 
I  propose  to  endeavour  to  answer  these  two  questions.  1.  By  what  right,  and  in 
what  sense,  are  these  two  prophecies,  the  one  originally  spoken  by  Isaiah  of  him- 
self, and  the  other  distinctly  marking  out  a  particular  man  Elias,  referred  to  John 
the  Baptist?  And — 2.  In  what  sense  was  John  the  forerunner  of  the  Redeemer, 
preparing  His  way  before  Him  ?  I.  Now,  to  understand  on  what  principle  these 
words  are  applicable  to  John,  we  must  carry  along  with  us  the  leading  principle  of 
prophecy.  It  is  not  merely  a  prediction  of  separate  events,  but  far  rather  an 
announcement  of  principles ;  through  the  interpretation  of  the  present  the  pro- 
phets predicted  the  future ;  for  the  announcement  of  every  principle  connected 
with  a  fact  is  a  prediction  of  all  future  events  that  shall  occur  under  similar  cir- 
cumstances. For  instance,  the  astronomer,  in  the  announcement  of  the  eclipse, 
has  so  plainly  discovered  the  principles  that  regulate  it  as  to  be  able  to  foretell 
without  a  doubt  the  very  moment  of  its  return.  Thus  it  was  that  our  Lord  and 
the  prophets  applied  their  prophecy.  The  prophet  Malachi  uses  the  name  of 
EUjah,  and  says,  "  Before  another  great  and  dreadful  day  come,  another  man  shall 
rise  up  in  the  same  spirit  as  Elijah."  Our  blessed  Lord  applies  this  prophecy  to 
John  the  Baptist.  He  told  men  that  "  EUas  truly  shall  flrst  come  and  restore  all 
things,"  but  that  the  Elias  that  was  to  come  was  not  the  Elias  they  had  expected, 
but  one  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  EUas,  who  should  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers, 
&o.  He  thus  reminded  them  that  what  the  prophet  meant  was  not  a  resurrection 
of  the  man,  but  of  his  spirit.  II.  In  the  next  place  we  return  an  answer  to  the 
second  question  proposed — In  what  sense  was  John  the  forerunner,  &o.  The 
expression  of  the  prophet  a  figurative  one.  In  Eastern  countries,  when  a  monarch 
desired  to  pay  a  visit  to  a  distant  part  of  his  dominions,  he  was  accustomed  to 
send  his  messengers  before  him  to  demand  of  the  inhabitants  of  every  part  through 
which  he  was  to  pass  that  they  should  make  his  road  easy  by  filling  valleys  and 
cutting  through  hills.  Precisely  in  the  same  way  was  John  the  Baptist  to  prepare 
the  way  for  Christ.  He  came  proclaiming  a  King,  declaring  the  conditions  without 
which  the  kingdom  could  not  come,  and  without  which  the  King  could  not  reign. 
The  first  of  these  conditions  was  this :  he  prepared  the  way  for  Christ  by  declaring 
private  righteousness  preparatory  to  public  reformation.  "  Change  yourselves,  or 
to  you  at  least  no  kingdom  of  God  can  come."  2.  John  prepared  the  way  fo'  the 
advent  of  the  Messiah  by  a  simple  assertion  that  right  is  ri^t,  and  wrong,  wrong. 


CHAJ.  m.\  ST.  LUKE.  811 

8.  The  Baptist  prepared  the  way  for  the  Messiah  by  teaching  simple  truths,  falling 
back  upon  first  principles.     Observe  that  all  this  was  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ 

it  was  not  Christ.    Yet  in  all  ages  the  baptism  of  John  in  the  laver  of  duty 

must  precede  the  baptism  of  Christ  in  the  laver  of  self-sacrifice.  {F,  W»  Eobertsont. 
MJL.) 

JOHN  THE  BAPTIST, 

"Also  of  John  a  calling  and  a  crying 

Bang  in  Bethabara  till  strength  was  spent. 
Cared  not  for  counsel,  stayed  not  for  replying, 
John  had  one  message  for  the  world — Bepxn% 

John,  than  which  man  a  sadder  or  a  greater 

Not  tiU  this  day  has  been  of  woman  bom ; 
John,  like  some  iron  peak  by  the  Creator 

Fired  with  the  red  glow  of  the  rushing  morn. 

Thus,  when  the  sun  shall  rise  and  overcome  it, 

Stands  in  his  shining  desolate  and  bare. 
Yet  not  the  less  the  inexorable  summit 

Flamed  him  his  signal  to  the  upper  air."       (F,  W.  H.  Myers.) 

Preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord  in  worship : — The  way  of  the  Lord  should  be  prepared 
in  oar  hearts.  If  we  would  have  the  Lord  come  to  us  in  our  Sabbath  worship, 
we  must  think  of  Him  in  our  week-day  work.  As  it  often  is  now,  when  the  Sabbatii 
comes,  the  gathered  rubbish  of  a  whole  week  must  be  cleared  away.  The  way  of" 
the  Lord  is  blocked  up  by  the  remembrance  of  the  week's  cares.  A  man  brings 
his  business  right  up  to  the  borders  of  the  Sabbath,  and,  of  course,  the  Sabbath 
itself  is  full  of  it.  Boxes  and  barrels,  bales,  dry  goods,  groceries  and  hardware, 
remain  over  in  the  mind  from  the  week's  work  and  worry.  Now,  a  man  has  no 
more  right  to  take  these  things  with  him  in  his  thoughts,  than  to  leave  his  goods 
exposed  for  display  and  sale  in  his  store.  If  it  were  not  for  disturbing  others,  he 
might  just  as  well  take  his  ledgers  and  invoices  with  him  to  church,  and  be  making 
out  his  bills  and  checking  off  his  goods  while  there,  as  to  be  doing  these  things  in 
his  thought  all  day.  He  might  just  as  well  wheel  his  boxes  and  bales  right  into 
the  aisle,  as  to  have  them  present  to  mental  vision  all  the  time.  Jesus  drove  out 
the  traders  from  the  temple  with  a  scourge  of  cords.  But  if  He  should  come  intc 
our  modem  churches  and  drive  out  all  who  in  their  thoughts  have  brought  money, 
and  merchandise,  and  trade  into  the  house  of  God,  He  would  leave  some  very 
email  congregations.  If  all  the  business  that  is  planned  in  church  were  really 
transacted  there,  it  would  make  that  a  busier  place  than  ever  the  Jewish  Temple 
was  in  the  days  of  the  Passover.  If  we  would  enjoy  the  Sabbath  as  a  day  of  rest 
and  communion  with  God,  we  must  drive  these  money-changers  of  our  thought 
out  from  the  sacred  temple  of  our  hearts,  and  let  those  hearts  be  again  the  temples 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  must  prepare  for  the  day,  not  merely  by  laying  aside  our 
work,  but  by  excluding  it  from  our  hearts,  that  God  may  come  and  dwell  there. 
Thus,  in  all  things,  we  must  prepare  for  God's  work.  We  must  lay  our  plans  for 
it,  and  shape  our  affairs  for  it.  The  Lord  comes  to  reign,  if  He  comes  at  alL  We 
must  so  prepare  the  way  that  He  can  come  and  can  reign.  There  must  be  fore- 
thought as  well  as  good  will ;  preparation  as  well  as  diligence.  It  is  true  the  Lord 
Bometimes  comes  suddenly  to  His  temple.  But  when  He  thus  comes,  "  Who  shaC" 
abide  the  day  of  His  coming?  for  He  shall  be  like  a  refiner's  fire."  _  All  may^ 
assist  in  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord : — Not  one  little  brown  and  withered  leafi 
falls  to  the  ground  on  one  of  the  November  days  but  the  shape  of  the  plant  ia 
clianged;  so  there  is  not  one  little  act  of  yours,  one  whispered  prayer  that  Hid 
kingdom  may  come,  but  becomes  a  factor  in  the  world's  redemption.  If  I  can  only 
place  one  little  golden  brick  in  the  pavement  of  the  Lord's  highway,  I  will  place 
it  there,  that  coming  genera.tions  may  walk  thereon  to  the  heavenly  city.  {Phillipt 
Brooks,  D.D.)  Various  ways  in  which  the  way  of  the  Lord  lias  been  prepared: — 
Strangely,  too,  the  movements  of  science,  art,  and  commerce  seem  to  wait  oa 
ministerial  life.  Printing  had  just  been  invented  in  time  to  give  the  Bible  to  the 
people  in  the  period  of  the  Eeformation.  The  magnetic  needle  was  applied  ta 
navigation  to  send  that  Bible  and  its  preachers  to  all  lands.  The  spirit  of  explora- 
tion, which  has  sought  out  every  island,  and  is  now  engaged  iu  revealing  tht 


-812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

character  of  Central  Africa  and  the  steppes  of  Asia ;  the  study  of  all  languages  ; 
the  preparation  of  grammars  and  lexicons  ;  the  knowledge  of  the  currents  of  the 
air  and  the  water,  of  the  powers  of  steam  and  electricity — all  these  are  so  many 
voices  crying,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord !  "  They  are  so  many  indications 
that  when  man  will  carry  God's  message  aU  the  power  of  Omnipotence  waits  on 
his  service.  {M.  Simpson,  D.D.)  St.  John  the  Baptist : — How  shall  we  picture 
John  the  Baptist  to  ourselves  ?  Great  painters,  greater  than  the  world  seems  likely 
to  see  again,  have  exercised  their  fancy  upon  his  face,  his  figure,  his  actions.  We 
must  put  out  of  our  minds,  I  fear,  at  once,  many  of  the  loveliest  of  them  all ; 
those  in  which  Eaffaelle  and  others  have  depicted  the  child  John,  in  his  camel's- 
hair  raiments,  with  a  child's  cross  in  his  hand,  worshipping  the  Infant  Christ. 
There  is  also  one  exquisite  picture,  by  Annibale  Caracci,  if  I  recollect  rightly,  in 
■which  the  blessed  Babe  is  l.ving  asleep,  and  the  blessed  virgin  signs  to  St.  John, 
pressing  forward  to  adore  Him,  not  to  waken  his  sleeping  Lord  and  God.  But 
such  imaginations,  beautiful  as  they  are,  and  true  in  a  heavenly  and  spiritual 
sense,  are  not  historic  fact.  For  St.  John  the  Baptist  said  himself,  "I  knew  Him 
not."  The  best  picture  of  him  which  I  can  recollect  is  the  great  one  by  Guido,  of 
the  magnificent  lad  sitting  on  the  rock,  half  clad  in  his  camel's-hair  robe,  his 
stalwart  hand  lifted  up  to  denounce  he  hardly  knows  what,  save  that  things  are 
going  all  wrong,  utterly  wrong  to  him  ;  his  beautiful  mouth  open  to  preach  he 
hardly  knows  what,  save  that  he  has  a  message  from  God,  of  which  he  is  half 
conscious  as  yet — that  he  is  a  forerunner,  a  prophet,  a  foreteller  of  something  and 
Bome  one  which  is  to  come,  and  which  yet  is  very  near  at  hand.  The  wild  rocks 
are  around  him,  the  clear  sky  is  over  him,  and  nothing  more.  There,  aloft  and  in 
the  mountains,  alone  with  nature  and  with  God,  he  preaches  to  a  generation  sunk 
in  covetousness,  superstition,  party-spirit,  and  the  rest  of  the  seven  devils  which 
brought  on  the  fall  of  his  native  land,  and  which  will  bring  on  the  fall  of  every 
land  on  earth,  preaches  to  them,  I  say,  vrhat?  The  most  common,  let  me  say 
boldly,  the  most  vulgar — in  the  good  sense  of  the  old  word — the  most  vulgar 
morality.  He  tells  them  that  an  awful  ruin  was  coming  unless  they  repented  and 
mended.  How  fearfully  true  his  words  were  the  next  fifty  years  proved.  The  axe, 
he  said,  was  laid  to  the  root  of  the  tree;  and  the  axe  was  the  heathen  Koman, 
even  them  master  of  the  land.  But  God,  not  the  Boman  Csasar  only,  was  laying 
the  axe.  The  people,  the  farming  class,  came  to  him  with,  "  What  shall  we  do  ?  " 
He  has  nothing  but  plain  morality  for  them.  The  publicans,  the  renegades  who 
were  farming  the  taxes  of  the  Eoman  conquerers,  and  making  their  base  profit 
out  of  their  countrymen's  slavery,  came  to  him,  "Master,  what  shall  we  do?" 
He  does  not  tell  them  not  to  be  publicans.  He  does  not  tell  his  countrymen  to 
rebel,  though  he  must  have  been  sorely  tempted  to  do  it.  All  he  says  is,  "  Make 
the  bad  and  base  arrangement  as  good  as  you  can ;  exact  no  more,"  &c.  The 
eoldiers,  poor  fellows,  came  to  him.  Whether  they  were  Herod's  mercenaries,  or 
real  gallant  Roman  soldiers,  we  are  not  told.  Either  had  unlimited  power  under  a 
military  despotism,  in  an  anarchic  and  half-enslaved  country  ;  but  whichever  they 
were,  he  has  the  same  answer  to  them  of  common  morality,  "  You  are  what  yoa 
are ;  you  are  where  you  are.  Do  what  you  have  to  do  as  well  as  you  can.  Do  no 
violence  to  any  man,"  Ac.  Ah,  wise  politician,  ah,  clear  and  rational  spirit,  who 
knows  and  tells  others  to  do  the  duty  which  lies  nearest  them ;  who  sees  (as  old 
Greek  Hesiod  says)  how  much  bigger  the  half  is  than  the  whole  ;  who,  in  the  hour 
of  his  country's  deepest  degradation,  had  Divine  courage  to  say,  "  Our  deliverance 
lies,  not  in  rebelUon,  but  in  doing  right."  But  he  has  sterner  words.  Pharisees, 
the  separatists,  the  religious  men,  who  think  themselves  hoUer  than  any  one  else ; 
and  Sadducees,  materialist  men  of  the  world,  who  sneer  at  the  unseen,  the  un- 
known, the  heroic,  came  to  him.  And  for  Pharisee  and  Sadducee — for  the  man 
who  prides  himself  on  beUeving  more  than  his  neighbours,  and  for  the  man  who 
prides  himself  on  believing  less — he  has  the  same  answer.  Both  are  exclusive, 
inhuman,  while  they  are  pretending  to  be  more  than  human.  He  knew  them 
well,  for  he  was  born  and  bred  among  them,  and  he  forestalls  our  Lord's  words  to 
them,  "  0  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come?  "     {Charles  Kingsley,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  Every  valley  shall  be  filled. — TJie  King's  highway : — I.  Valleys  must  bk 
UETKLLBD  UP.  1.  Inattention.  2.  Apathy.  3.  Despondency.  II.  Eminences  mobs 
BE  LEVELLED  DOWN.  1.  The  mountain  of  pride  must  be  reduced,  (1)  The  pride 
that  will  not  make  full  confession  of  sin.    (2)  The  pride  that  will  not  receive  th« 


emp.  in.]  8T.  LUKE.  813 

kingdom  of  heaven  as  a  little  child.  (3)  The  pride  of  reason  that  will  not  accept 
ealvation  until  its  mysteries  are  comprehended.     (4)  The  pride  of  worldly  professors. 

2.  The  mountain  of  presumption  must  be  depressed.  (1)  Sinners  are  presumptuous 
when,  without  forsaking  their  sins,  they  attempt  to  beheve  for  salvation.  (2)  Pro- 
fessors are  presumptuous  when  they  expect  the  work  of  God  to  revive  in  the  Church 
without  exerting  themselves  to  promote  a  revival.  (3)  While  we  work  as  though 
everything  depended  upon  working,  we  must  trust  as  though  everything  depended 
upon  trusting.  3.  The  hills  of  ingratitude  must  be  brought  low.  III.  The  ckookbd 
PI.ACE3  MUST  BE  STRAIGHTENED.  1.  Prejudice.  2.  Jcalousy.  3.  Censoriousness.  4. 
Covetousness.  IV.  The  eoogh  places  must  be  smoothed.  1.  The  ugly  rock  of  Sab- 
bath desecration  must  be  removed.    2.  That  rut  of  drunkenness  must  be  filled  up. 

3.  Those  sinks  of  immorality  must  be  filled — lying,  cheating,  oppression,  unclean- 
ness.  4.  The  rough  places  of  instability  must  be  smoothed.  {Prof.  F.  W. 
Macdonald,  M.A.)  Preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord : — Before  John,  the  wilderness 
preacher,  the  mountains  of  Pharisaic  pride  were  levelled,  the  valleys  of  Saddueean 
unbelief  were  filled  up,  the  tortuous  vices  of  the  courtly  Judean  were  corrected, 
and  the  rude  ignorance  of  the  Galilean  smoothed  and  reformed.  (Canon  Liddon.) 
Road-makers : — (To  children.)  In  ancient  times,  especially  in  Eastern  lands,  when 
an  emperor  or  king  was  travelling  through  his  dominions,  men  were  sent  before 
them  to  prepare  the  way.  Sometimes  they  had  to  make  a  new  road  through  path- 
less wildernesses  and  rocky  passes,  hewing  down  trees,  cutting  a  level  way  along 
steep  or  rugged  bill-sides,  clearing  away  rocks,  and  making  embankments  across 
valleys,  and  bridges  over  streams.  Or  sometimes  the  old  road  was  overgrown  with 
bushes  and  brambles,  or  washed  away  by  floods,  or  covered  with  rubbish  which  the 
winter  storms  and  swollen  torreuts  had  brought  down  from  the  mountains.  In 
some  Eastern  lands,  even  at  this  day,  travellers  tell  us  how  the  roads  are  often  so 
destroyed  in  the  rainy  season,  that  before  a  governor  or  high  ofiScer  of  state  makes 
a  journey,  the  highways  must  be  mended  and  made  ready  for  him  to  travel  speedily 
and  safely.  So  when  the  prophet  Isaiah  was  speaking  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  he  foretold  that  some  one  would  be  sent  by  God  to  "  prepare  tbe  way,"  &o. 
Look  at  the  Gospels  and  you  will  see  that  the  messenger  whom  God  sent  to  prepare 
the  way  for  His  beloved  Son  was  John  the  Baptist.  Now,  how  did  John  prepare 
the  way  ?  There  were  four  things  which  he  taught  the  people,  in  order  to  main 
ready  their  hearts  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  I.  To  expect  Him.  II.  To  feeIj  their  nee» 
OF  Him  to  save  them  from  their  sins.  III.  To  repent  op  all  sin.  IV.  To  hearken 
TO  Him,  and  believe,  love,  and  obey  Him  when  He  came.  Now,  if  the  Lord  Jesus 
were  coming  to  the  place  where  you  live,  would  you  not  be  glad  if  you  were  invited 
to  help  to  prepare  the  way  for  Him  ?  Would  you  not  think  it  a  great  honour  and 
happiness  to  take  one  stone  out  of  His  way?  Oh  yesl  Your  heart  would  dance 
for  joy,  and  perhaps  your  feet  too.  Who  would  not  like  to  be  a  pioneer  for  Jesus, 
the  King  of  kings  ?  Well,  but  don't  you  know  that  He  really  wishes  to  come ;  not 
to  pass  along  the  streets,  but  to  come  into  the  homes  and  hearts  of  all  the  people, 
not  to  pay  a  visit,  but  to  dwell  there  ?  Then  what  hinders  His  coming  ?  Only  that 
people  are  not  ready  for  Him.  Do  you  know  what  God  calls  a  heart  that  does  not 
love  and  fear  Him  ?  He  calls  it  "  a  stony  heart "  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).  Well  then,  if 
you  do  not  love  and  trust  and  try  to  obey  the  Lord  Jesus  as  your  own  Saviour  and  King, 
don't  you  see  that  there  is  one  stone  to  be  taken  out  of  His  way  ?  How  ?  Just  by 
coming  to  Him  in  prayer  to  make  you  truly  His.  (E.  R.  Conder,  D.D.)  Valley 
and  mountain : — Evei'y  valley  shall  be  filled ;  that  the  people  might  know  what  our 
Lord  would  do,  to  exalt  the  mercy  of  God  to  undone  sinners,  who,  like  valleys,  lay 
very  low  under  despondency  of  spirit ;  John  bid  them  repent,  which  the  law  did  not 
admit  of.  This  word  repent  is  a  most  sweet  word,  and  tends  to  advance  mercy  and 
God's  free  grace,  and  so  to  fill  up  those  valleys,  I  mean  despairing  and  desponding 
sinners.  When  God  sends  a  messenger  to  rebels,  and  commands  them  to  repent 
and  believe,  a  sweet  pardon  be  sure  is  comprehended  therein  ;  and  this  tends  to  fill 
up  or  exalt  two  valleys.  1.  The  lowly  and  desponding  soul.  2.  The  mercy  of  God 
is  exalted,  which  was  one  grand  design  of  God  in  sending  His  Son  to  satisfy 
Divine  justice ;  for  mercy  and  Divine  goodness  could  not  be  raised  to  run  level  with 
justice,  until  our  Saviour  had  made  a  complete  satisfaction  for  our  sins.  I.  But 
before  I  proceed,  let  it  be  considt  red  (as  I  conceive)  that  the  grand  obstructions  or 
obstacles  which  lie  in  the  way  of  God's  being  reconciled  to  sinners,  and  of  sinners' 
reconciliation  unto  Him,  are  comprehended  by  these  metaphorical  expressions.  1. 
The  haughty  Jews  and  Pharisees,  who  were  swelled  with  pride ;  yea,  like  lifted  up 
high  mountains  and  hills ;  how  did  the  Pharisee  glory,  "  God,  I  thank  Thee  I  am 


814  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  m, 

not  as  other  men,  nor  as  this  publican  "  ?  2.  They  were  like  mountains,  in  respect 
had  to  their  legal  privileges,  being  God's  covenant  people,  boasting  "  They  had 
Abraham  to  their  father,  and  never  were  in  bondage  "  (John  viii.  33).  John  Baptist 
in  his  ministry  strove  to  level  these  mountains,  when  he  saw  them  coming  to  hia 
baptism,  "  O  generation  of  vipers,  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come  ?  "  8.  The  Jews  and  Pharisees  might  be  compared  to  mountains  and  hills, 
in  that  they  boasted  they  had  the  key  of  knowledge,  and  were  the  only  teachers 
and  masters  of  Israel,  and  that  all  besides  themselves  were  ignorant  and  foolish 
persons.  Do  but  read  what  holy  Paul  speaketh  of  them,  to  bring  them  down  level 
with  the  ground.  II.  Sin  (as  Mr.  Caryl  notes,  speaking  of  this  very  text)  may  be 
also  meant  by  these  mountains.  III.  By  mountains  here  also  may  be  meant,  or 
refer  unto  those  great  oppositions  our  Lord  Jesus  met  withal,  in  His  working  out 
our  salvation.  1.  From  men.  2.  From  the  devil.  These  stood  in  His  way  like 
mighty  mountains,  Uke  as  Sanballet  stood  as  a  mountain  in  the  way  of  Zerubbabel 
(a  type  of  Christ) :  "  And  who  art  thou,  great  mountain  ?  Before  Zerubbabel,  thou 
shalt  become  a  plain  "  (Zech.  iv.  7).  IV.  As  valleys  may  refer  to  despairing  sinners, 
60  mountains  and  hills  may  refer  to  haughty  and  presumptuous  sinners ;  I  speak 
not  here  of  self-righteous  persons.  V.  Valleys  may  refer  to  the  low  estate  of  man- 
kind, or  of  God's  elect,  as  considered  dead  in  the  first  Adam,  or  as  under  the  law  and 
curse  thereof.  {B.  Keach.)  The  crooked  shall  he  made  straight : — 1.  Crooked  may  refer 
to  men's  crooked  opinions ;  they  speak  not  right  of  God ;  they  do  not  judge  according 
to  the  straight  and  equal  glory  of  all  the  perfections  of  God's  holy  nature ;  nor 
according  to  the  straight  rule  of  His  holy  law,  but  magnify  the  glory  of  His  mercy, 
to  the  eclipsing  the  glory  of  His  justice ;  and  of  this  crooked  opinion  are  the 
Sociniaus,  and  all  that  magnify  the  pardoning  grace  of  God,  without  having  respect 
to  a  plenary  satisfaction,  made  to  the  justice  and  law  of  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  2. 
Crooked  things  may  refer  to  those  false  and  crooked  ways  of  worship  which  many 
walk  in ;  ways  which  Christ  never  instituted  or  appointed :  the  Word  of  God  is  the 
only  rule  for  worship,  and  administration  of  ordinances.  Now  all  pretended  ordin- 
ances and  Divine  worship,  that  doth  not  exactly  agree  with  this  rule,  but  vary  in 
matter  or  manner  from  it,  are  crooked  way.  3.  Crooked  may  refer  to  the  lives  and 
conversations  of  men ;  the  law  of  God  (as  it  is  in  the  hand  of  Jesus  Christ)  and  the 
glorious  gospel  is  the  only  rule  of  our  lives ;  and  all  whose  lives  and  conversations 
do  not  agree  with  that  rule,  are  crooked  ways.  4.  Crooked  may  also  refer  unto 
men's  crooked  spirits ;  how  cross  and  uneven  are  some  men's  hearts  and  spirits  to 
the  word  and  will  of  God.  "  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God,  it  is  not 
subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be  "  (Eom,  viii.  7).     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  The  salvation  of  God. — Salvation  all  of  God : — "We  are  to  be  saved,  not 
by  what  we  are  worth  ourselves ;  not  by  that  which  we  have  attained.  Looking  at 
ourselves  in  some  sense  as  a  piece  of  art,  a  picture,  a  statue,  or  an  exquisite  piece 
of  machinery,  we  are  not  worth  saving.  In  and  of  ourselves,  there  is  nothing  worth 
preservation.  And  all  the  work  that  we  have  ever  done  on  our  own  character  and 
nature  does  not  amount  to  any  considerable  value.  If  we  are  saved,  it  will  not  be 
because  of  that  which  we  have  succeeded  in  doing ;  it  will  be  because  of  that  which 
has  been  done  upon  us  and  in  us  by  another  and  higher  artist-hand.  If  we  inherit 
salvation  in  the  life  which  is  to  come,  if  we  enter  upon  a  hfe  of  immortality  in 
blessedness,  it  will  be  because  we  are  saved  by  grace.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  God'$ 
part  and  man's  part  in  sahmtion : — A  ship  is  stuck  on  a  mudbank,  and,  the  tide 
going  out,  it  careens  over,  and  there  it  lies,  like  many  discouraged  Christians. 
They  do  not  need  the  anchor.  The  anchor  is  out,  though.  By  and  by  the  tide 
begins  to  come  in,  little  by  little.  The  captain  calls  up  the  crew,  and  orders  them 
to  hoist  in  the  anchor.  It  is  hoisted  in  and  stowed  away.  "  Trim  the  sails,"  is 
the  next  command,  and  that  is  obeyed.  The  tide  is  still  coming  in,  coming  in, 
coming  in ;  and  by  and  by  the  vessel  floats  off;  and  the  crew  look  up  with  admira- 
tion, and  say,  "  What  a  captain  we  have  !  It  was  the  hauling  in  of  the  anchor  and 
the  trimming  of  the  sails  that  saved  us.  The  captain  gave  his  orders,  they  were 
obeyed,  and  then  she  floated."  No,  it  was  not  the  captain's  doings.  The  Lori 
God,  who  swings  the  stars  through  the  heavens  and  exerts  His  power  upon  the 
ocean,  did  it.  The  captain  merely  foresaw  the  coming  of  the  tide,  and  adapted  the 
circumstances  of  the  vessel  to  influences  which  existed  before.  (Ibid.)  Christ 
the  only  way  of  salvation : — Mrs.  Bennet,  wife  of  John  Bennet,  minister  of  an 
Independent  Church  in  Cheshire,  the  day  before  she  died,  raised  herself  into  a  very 
folemn  attitude,  and  with  most  striking  emphasis  delivered,  in  the  following  laa> 


OTAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  315 

guage,  her  dying  testimony  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus : — "  I  here  declare  it  before 
you  that  I  have  looked  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left — I  have  cast  my  eyes 
before  and  behind — to  see  if  there  was  any  possible  way  of  salvation  but  by  the  Son 
of  God ;  and  I  am  fully  satisfied  there  is  not.  No  !  none  on  earth,  nor  all  the  angela 
in  heaven,  could  have  wrought  out  salvation  for  such  a  sinner.  None  but  God 
Himself,  taking  our  nature  upon  Him,  and  doing  all  that  the  holy  law  required, 
could  have  procured  pardon  for  me,  a  sinner.  He  has  wrought  out  salvation  for  me, 
and  I  know  that  I  shall  enjoy  it  for  ever."  {Clerical  Library.)  O  that  all  flesh, 
that  is,  all  men  that  believe,  may — 1.  See  the  glory  of  God  s  wisdom  in  His  con- 
triving the  way  of  our  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  glory  of  His  infinite  love, 
mercy,  and  Divine  goodness.  3.  The  glory  of  His  infinite  justice  and  holiness,  in 
that  His  justice  is  as  much  exalted  in  and  by  Christ,  as  His  love  and  mercy.  Thos 
in  respect  of  all  the  glorious  attributes  of  God,  the  glory  of  God  is  in  and  by  Jesus 
Christ  revealed.  Take  the  glory  of  God  here,  for  His  glory  personally  considered, 
1.  How  doth  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  shine  forth  herein,  or  what  revelation  il 
there  of  it  in  the  gospel  I  2.  How  is  the  glory  of  God  the  Son  revealed  also  I  8, 
How  is  the  glory  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  likewise  revealed  and  magnified  I  And  all 
this  is  done  and  displayed  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Mediator.  And  all  flesh  shall  see  it; 
that  is,  not  the  Jews  only,  but  also  the  Gentiles,  or  all  nations  ;  •.«.,  some  in  idl 
nations ;  nay,  the  whole  world  at  last. 

Vers.  7|  8.  Then  said  he  to  the  mnltltade  that  eame  forth.  —  John  and  ike 
populace  : — It  is  a  matter  of  some  interest,  even  as  a  memoir  of  ancient  manners, 
to  conceive  the  various  and  strikingly  marked  aspect  of  the  multitude  that  now  fled 
to  John  in  the  desert.  There  stood  the  Pharisee,  covered  from  head  to  heel  with  the 
emblems  of  his  sanctity,  the  haughtiest  and  most  scornful  of  men ;  but  then,  for 
once,  divested  of  his  spiritual  influence,  and  asking,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
There  stood  the  splendid  and  voluptuous  scribe — the  man  of  affected  philosophy, 
for  once  feeling  that  he  had  a  soul  to  be  saved.  There  stood  the  grasping  and  the 
iron  hand  of  the  publican,  the  common  tribute  gatherer,  laying  his  accumulated  gains 
before  the  feet  of  the  prophet,  and  bowing  down  to  the  dust.  There  stood  the 
soldier,  subdued  and  hardened  by  the  barbarous  habits  of  his  life,  until  he  became 
a  merciless  murderer,  there  he  stood,  flinging  down  his  sword  at  the  feet  of  the 
prophet,  and  imploring  to  be  purified  from  blood  by  the  waters  of  baptism.  In  the 
tnidst  of  these  kneeling  and  humble  thousands  stood  the  prophet  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  utter  de6ance  of  human  power,  undaunted  by  the  voice  of  human  authority, 
and  undismayed  by  the  barbarism  of  the  multitude,  tendering  to  all  alike  the  words 
of  judgment :  "  Ye  men  of  sin,  ye  splendid  voluptuaries,  who  now  cry  out  for 
mercy,  show  not  by  your  words  but  by  your  deeds  that  you  have  abjured  sin  ;  and 
you,  ye  haughty  despisers  of  all  men's  virtue,  be  ye  holy.  Ye  jealous  and  perse- 
cuting Pharisees,  cast  off  your  self-righteous  praises,  rend  the  heart  and  not  the 
garment,  be  humble,  contrite,  and  holy."  (G.  Croby,  M.A.)  Necessity  of  warn- 
ing : — A  man  left  to  himself  will  go  to  the  devil.  If  he  turns  away  from  his  sin,  it 
is  because  of  some  outside  pressure.  The  attraction  of  gravitation  is  seen  in  souls 
as  well  as  in  all  material  things.  They  fall  by  their  own  weight.  If  you  see  them 
going  upwards,  you  may  be  sure  that  a  strong  hand  or  a  strong  wind  has  been 
under  them  to  start  them  in  that  direction.  Sinners  need  to  be  warned  of  their 
danger.  The  responsibility  is  on  us  to  warn  others,  and  to  heed  the  warnings  which 
come  to  us.  Who  has  warned  you?  Whom  have  you  warned?  {H.  C.  Trumbull.) 
Taking  warning : — Waldus,  a  rich  merchant  in  Lyons,  seeing  one  drop  down  dead 
in  the  streets,  went  home,  and  rej^ented,  changed  his  life,  and  became  a  preacher, 
and  was  the  father  and  founder  of  the  people  called  Waldenses.  'Tis  good  to  take 
warning  by  others'  harms,  and  by  the  sight  of  their  death,  to  look  after  our  own  life. 
{ Venning.)  Warnings  of  God : — As  the  mother  bird  shrieks  when  the  hawk  is  in 
the  sky,  that  her  young  ones  may  hide  themselves  under  her  wings,  so  God,  the 
P'ather  of  men,  utters  His  voice  of  warning  against  sinners,  that  they  may  rush 
to  His  mercy's  protection,  before  the  devouring  lion  of  hell  overtake  them  in 
destruction.  {John  Bate.)  The  Baptist's  heraldry : — Nor  is  it  diflicult  to  account 
for  this  widespread  and  profound  agitation.  In  the  first  place,  the  people  were 
chafing  under  the  yoke  of  pagan  Bome.  Bemembering  that  they  were  Jehovah's 
covenant-people,  their  yearning  for  deliverance  naturally  took  on  a  religious  form. 
Again,  there  was  at  this  time  among  the  Jews,  and  perhaps  throughout  the  East, 
tlie  expectation,  more  or  less  distinct,  of  one  who  was  to  be  a  heaven-sent  deliverer. 
Hearing  of  the  sanctity  of  Jui.Lea'8  hermit,  how  natural   that  the  Jews,  weary  ot 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

bondage  and  shame,  should  flock  to  John  in  the  hope  that  he  was  the  promised 
one.  Again,  there  is  in  asceticism  something  which  is  fascinating.  It  betokens  an  ex- 
ceptional, earnest,  character ;  and  men  are  ever  moved  by  the  exceptional,  especially 
when  it  takes  the  form  of  terrible  moral  earnestness.  And  John  was  a  terribly 
earnest  ascetic.  And  therefore  all  Israel  flocked  to  his  preaching,  feeling  the  thrall 
of  his  magnetism,  even  as  idolatrous  Israel  centuries  before  had  swayed  under 
stormy  Elijah,  and  as  voluptuous  Italy  centuries  afterward  bowed  before  stern 
Savonarola,  and  frivolous  France  centuries  still  later  grew  solemn  before  saintly 
Lacordaire.  Once  more,  John's  message  was  a  message  of  terror.  No  soothing 
words  were  his,  no  soporific  platitudes.  So  it  was  in  Assyria  when  heathen  Nineveh 
robed  herself  in  sackcloth  before  the  denunciation  of  Hebrew  Jonah.  So  it  was  in 
France  when  awakened  Europe  wept  and  groaned  before  the  Tartarean  oratory  of 
St.  Bernard.  So  it  was  in  New  England  when  Northampton  church-member  and 
and  Stockbridge  Indian  quailed  and  wailed  before  the  wrathful  eloquence  of 
Edwards.  How,  then,  came  such  persons  to  the  Jordan  to  listen  to  the  wrathful 
eloquence  of  the  stern  apostle  of  repentance?  Ah,  there  are  times  when  the 
proudest,  most  worldly  of  natures  are  stirred  to  their  very  depths.  There  are  times 
when  even  the  Pharisee  finds  that  his  rubric  id  too  narrow  and  icy,  and  that  he  has 
been  living  a  hollow  life.  There  are  times  when  even  the  Sadducee  feels  his  moral 
nature  asserting  itself  at  cost  of  every  barrier  of  unbelief  and  moral  petrifactionu 
There  are  times  when  conscience  speaks  louder  than  will  or  passion.  Thus  did  the 
desert-preacher  rightly  divide  the  word  of  truth,  giving  to  each  his  appropriate 
share,  not  demanding  of  the  publican  repentance  for  the  Pharisee's  self -righteous- 
ness, nor  of  the  Sadducee  penitence  for  the  soldier's  crime.  In  this  respect,  at  least, 
John  of  the  desert  was  a  model  preacher.  Would  God,  all  the  ministers  of  His 
word  were  as  faitbful !  (G.  D.  Board^nnn.)  Insincere  penitents  : — Fra  Eocco,  a 
Dominican,  preached  a  celebrated  penitential  sermon  on  one  occasion ;  when  all 
the  audience  were  in  terror  and  fell  on  their  knees,  showing  every  sign  of  contrition. 
Then  he  cried,  "  All  who  are  truly  penitent,  hold  up  your  hands  !  "  Every  man  in 
the  vast  multitude  held  up  his  hand.  Then  he  said,  "  Holy  Archangel  Michael, 
thou  who  standest  with  adamantine  sword  at  the  judgment-seat  of  God,  cut  me  off 
every  hand  which  has  been  held  up  hypocritically."  Every  hand  dropped.  {E.  P. 
Hood.)  Appropriate  preaching  : — It  is  related  of  John  Wesley  that,  preaching  to 
an  audience  of  courtiers  and  noblemen,  he  used  the  "generation  of  vipers"  text, 
and  flung  denunciation  right  and  left.  "  That  sermon  should  have  been  preached 
at  Newgate,"  said  a  displeased  courtier  to  Wesley  on  passing  out.  "No,"  said  the 
fearless  apostle ;  "  my  text  there  would  have  been, '  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  1 '  "  [Baxendale^s  "  Anecdotes")  Folly  of  arguing 
about  instead  of  escaping  from  coming  wrath: — "Many  have  puzzled  themselves," 
says  John  Newton,  "  about  the  origin  of  evil.  I  am  content  to  observe  that  there 
is  evil,  and  that  there  is  a  way  of  escape  from  it ;  and  with  that  I  begin  and  end." 
One  of  the  most  exquisite  mechanisms  of  torture  devised,  by  the  Hohenstaufen 
family,  during  the  height  of  their  despotic  control,  was  a  cell  which  gradually 
shrunk  in  upon  itself,  the  walls  day  by  day  contracting,  till  the  prisoner  was  finally 
crushed  in  the  pressure  of  their  embrace.  For  a  day  or  so  he  would  perceive  no 
alteration — at  first  he  would  doubt  the  evidence  of  his  senses ;  but  at  last  the 
fearful  truth  would  burst  upon  him  that  day  after  day  the  dimensions  of  his  cell 
became  smaller,  and  that  in  its  slow  but  certain  contraction  he  would,  if  he  remained, 
be  finally  destroyed.  Suppose  that  a  door  opened  to  him,  and  a  voice  said : 
"  Escape  for  your  life — now  is  the  time.  To-morrow  will  be  too  late."  Is  it  likely 
he  would  sit  down  and  say,  "  I  do  not  understand  the  principle  of  this  complex 
piece  of  mechanism.  I  prefer  investigating  it,  and  will  stay  behind  for  the  purpose  "  ? 
And  yet  what  does  the  man  around  whose  heart  sin  is  gradually  winding  itseU 
closer  and  closer  do  but  this  when  he  rejects  Christ's  gospel  ?  Human  reason  alone 
tells  him  that  a  heart  swathed  in  the  bandages  of  wrath,  or  pleasure,  or  passion, 
can  never,  until  released,  be  fit  for  the  peace  and  love  of  heaven.  Experience  tells 
him  that  the  terrible  thraldom  is  every  day  becoming  closer  and  closer,  so  that  soon 
he  must  be  crushed  in  its  folds.  The  gospel  tells  him,  escape  for  thy  life  1  And 
why,  oh,  reader,  when  thy  only  thought  should  be  about  such  escape,  wilt  thou  sit 
down  and  speculate  upon  the  causes  of  thy  imprisonment  ? — causes  unto  which, 
when  thus  confined,  thou  canst  never  penetrate.  Fly  through  the  open  door,  and 
in  the  omniscience  of  the  next  world  thou  wilt  know  why  sin  was  permitted  for 
time.  Take  heed  lest,  by  remaining  where  thou  art,  thou  findest  that  for  the 
impenitent  sin  is  the  portion  for  eternity.  Earnestness  isneeded  in  warning  other$  :-^ 


CHAP,  in.]  8T.  LUKE.  .  817 

The  energy  of  the  manner  of  the  late  Eowland  Hill  and  the  power  of  his  voice  are 
said  to  have  been  at  times  overwhelming.  While  once  preaching  at  Wotton-UDder- 
Edge,  his  country  residence,  he  was  carried  away  by  the  impetuous  rush  of  his  feel- 
ings, and  raising  himself  to  his  full  stature,  he  exclaimed,  "  Beware,  I  am  in 
earnest ;  men  call  me  an  enthusiast,  but  I  am  not :  mine  are  words  of  truth  and 
Boberness.  When  I  first  came  into  this  part  of  the  country,  I  was  walking  on 
yonder  hill ;  I  saw  a  gravel-pit  fall  in,  and  bury  three  human  beings  alive.  I  lifted 
up  my  voice  for  help,  so  loud,  that  I  was  heard  in  the  town  below,  a  distance  of  a 
milft :  help  came  and  rescued  two  of  the  poor  sufferers.  No  one  called  me  an 
enthusiast  then — and  when  I  see  eternal  destruction  ready  to  fall  upon  poor  sinners, 
and  about  to  entomb  them  irrecoverably  in  an  eternal  mass  of  woe,  and  call  on 
them  to  escape  by  repenting  and  fleeing  to  Christ,  shall  I  be  called  an  enthusiast  ? 
No,  sinner,  I  am  not  an  enthusiast  in  so  doing." 

Ver.  8.  Fruits  worthy  of  repentance. — Fruitfulness : — Every  living  fruit-tree  13 
in  some  measure  fruitful ;  though  some  bring  forth  more  fruit,  some  less,  yet  all 
bring  forth  some.  All  living  Christians  are  thriving  and  bearing  fruit ;  though 
some  are  more  eminent  for  growth  and  proficiency  in  grace,  yet  all  bring  forth 
"fruits  meet  for  repentance."  The  hypocrite,  like  a  dead  stake  in  a  hedge,  con- 
tinues at  a  stay,  is  without  good  fruit,  nay,  grows  more  rotten  every  month  ;  but 
the  true  saint,  like  the  living  tree,  the  longer  he  continues  rooted  in  Christ  the 
more  abundant  he  is  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  (George  Sicinnock.)  Fruit-bear- 
ing the  test  of  life : — When  we  see  the  efiSgy  or  portraiture  of  any  king  stand  stni 
without  motion,  exquisitely  graven  in  metal  or  painted  out  in  lively  colours,  we 
know  that,  for  all  the  eyes  and  mouth  and  nose  it  has,  there  is  no  life  in  it.  So, 
when  we  see  professors  of  religion  without  the  powerful  practice  of  godliness,  and 
supreme  of&cers  of  state  without  the  administration  of  justice,  we  can  safely  con- 
clude that  the  life  of  God  is  not  in  them  ;  that  they  are  not  actuated  by  any  Divine 
principle  within,  but  are  mere  idols  and  images  of  vanity.  ((7.  Leslie.)  Deceptive 
appearances : — Those  persons  who  practise  devotion,  and  who  fail  to  do  works  of 
faith  and  charity,  are  Uke  trees  in  blossom.  You  think  there  will  be  as  much  fruit 
as  flower,  but  there  is  a  great  difference.  (Vianney.)  The  life  must  accord  with 
the  profession : — His  religion  is  in  vain  whose  profession  brings  not  letters  testi- 
monial from  a  holy  life.  Sacrifice  without  obedience  is  sacrilege.  {W.  Gumall.) 
Thou  callest  thyself  Christian ;  but  we  question  whether  thou  hast  a  right  to  the 
title  ;  thy  conduct  is  too  contrary  to  that  sacred  name,  which  is  too  holy  to  be 
written  on  a  rotten  post.  (Ibid.)  Repentance  results  in  change  of  action : — Just 
as  the  whole  ship  turns  in  obedience  to  the  helm,  so  the  change  of  mind  produces 
a  change  of  life.  Here  comes  in  the  well-known  story  of  the  storekeeper  who  could 
not  recollect  the  sermon  ;  she  only  knew  that  after  it  she  went  straight  home  and 
destroyed  all  her  light  weights.  A  Hindu  candidate  for  Christian  baptism  was 
asked  what  evidence  he  had  to  offer  of  his  conversion.  "  Formerly,"  he  said,  "I 
was  proud,  and  delighted  in  evil,  but  since  I  heard  the  words  of  Jesus,  I  delight  in 
these  things  no  more."  (Sunday  School  Times.)  Repentance  shows  itself :— The 
real  thing  always  shows  itself.  Whether  it  is  love,  or  friendship,  or  generosity,  or 
gratitude,  or  trust,  or  repentance,  it  will  evidence  its  genuineness  in  something  mora 
than  profession.  There  are  shams  and  there  are  realities  in  all  these  spheres,  and 
the  differences  between  them  will  stand  out  in  the  long  run.  There  is  a  great  deal 
of  sorrow  over  sin  and  over  sinning  that  is  not  repentance.  The  guilty  prisoner  is 
sorry  that  he  got  caught.  The  guilty  man  who  has  not  got  caught  is  sorry  that  so 
much  of  evil  and  trouble  comes  of  his  wrong  doing.  There  is  sorrow  because  of  the 
results  of  sin,  in  every  sinner's  soul.  But  that  is  not  repentance.  Eepentance  is  the 
turning  away  of  the  soul  from  sin  as  sin  ;  it  is  the  turning  toward  something  better 
than  sin.  This  state  of  mind  will  show  itself  in  conduct  that  gives  proof  of  sincerity. 
Sinful  courses  wiU  be  abandoned.  Reparation  will  be  made.  A  new  course  of 
living  will  be  adopted.  In  word  and  in  action  there  will  be  fruits  worthy  of  the 
name  of  true  repentance.  (H.  C.  Trumbull. )  Change  of  mind  involves  change  of 
practice : — The  fruits  worthy  of  repentance  are  the  renunciation  of  formerly  indulged 
sins,  and  the  performance  of  formerly  neglected  duties.  We,  ourselves,  would  not 
give  credit  to  a  man  who  said  he  was  sorry  for  having  offended  us,  but  who  still 
went  on  repeating  the  same  offence :  as  little  need  we  suppose  we  are  penitents  if  we 
persevere  in  our  disobedience  to  God.  Eepentance  begins,  and  chiefly  consists  in  a 
change  of  mind ;  but  that  change  must  evidence  itself,  and  if  it  be  real  it  will 
•Tidence  itself  in  outward  reformation  and  in  an  exemplary  life.    John  called  oa 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHI*.  i& 

his  hearers  to  let  it  be  seen,  by  their  subsequent  conduct,  that  they  were  converti 
indeed.  [James  Foote,  M.A.)  Motives  to  repentance  : — Motives  to  repentance  are 
found  in,  1.  Divine  precepts.  2.  Penalty.  3.  Promises.  4.  The  danger  of  delay. 
Time  may  fail.  The  Spirit's  aid  may  be  refused  (John  iii.  27).  Habits  are  formed 
(Jer.  xiii.  23).  The  will  is  inefficient  (John  vi.  44).  The  flower  of  existence  spent 
in  sin ;  blind  and  lame,  a  mere  wreck  brought  at  last  to  God.  (W.  H.  Van  Doren^ 
D.D.)  Repentance  is  more  than  penance-doing  :  —  One  of  Luther's  happiest 
moments  was  when,  reading  in  his  Greek  Testament,  he  found  that  repentance 
meant  a  change  of  mind  rather  than  penance-doing.  A  captain  at  sea  discovers 
that  by  some  mistake  the  steersman  is  steering  the  ship  directly  for  the  rocks. 
How  is  the  danger  to  be  avoided  f  By  scrub'uing  the  decks  or  setting  the  men  to 
the  pumps  ?  No  I  these  things  are  good  enough  in  their  own  time,  but  if  the  ship 
is  to  be  saved,  one  thing  must  be  done — her  course  must  be  changed.  So  the 
captain  utters  a  few  quick  words,  and  the  ship  turns  and  speeds  away  from  the 
danger.  John's  preaching  was  in  like  manner.  A  call  to  men  to  turn  from  the 
dangerous  rocks  of  sin,  and  to  make  for  the  only  safe  haven.  {Sunday  School  Times.) 
Fruits  meet  for  repentance : — A  coal  merchant  in  one  of  our  American  cities  waa 
approached  by  a  minister  in  regard  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  The  merchant  declared 
it  an  impossibiUty  for  him  ever  to  become  a  Christian.  He  gave  as  a  reason  his  mode 
of  business.  For  a  long  term  of  years,  he  had,  according  to  a  too  general  custom, 
given  short  weight.  He  had  thus  grown  rich,  and  now  felt  the  inconsistency  of 
seeking  religion  without  restitution.  This  was  impossible :  many  of  his  customera 
were  dead,  others  beyond  his  knowledge.  The  thought  of  the  poor  who  had  paid 
for  coal  they  never  received  rested  heavily  on  him.  He  asked  the  minister  if  he 
thought  the  substitution  of  a  gift  to  the  poor  would  be  acceptable  to  God.  The 
minister  advised  him  to  try  it.  A  large  donation,  more  than  equal  in  amount  of 
his  unjust  gains,  was  accordingly  made,  and  the  merchant  sought  God  in  earnest. 
He  was  happily  converted,  and  is  to-day  a  prominent  member  of  the  Church. 
Proof  of  turning  from  sin : — One  of  two  infidel  companions  was  converted  to  God. 
He  went  to  tell  his  sceptical  friend,  who  was  surprised,  and  sneered  at  him.  "  Well," 
said  the  Christian,  "  I  have  a  duty  to  do  to  you,  and  I  have  scarcely  slept  two 
nights  for  thinking  of  it.  I  have  got  four  sheep  in  my  flock  that  belong  to  you. 
They  came  into  my  field  six  years  ago,  and  I  marked  them  with  my  mark.  They 
are  in  my  field  with  the  increase  of  them.  I  have  laid  awake,  groaned  over  it,  and 
I  have  come  to  get  rid  of  it.  I  will  do  what  you  will,  go  to  prison,  pay  the  money, 
or  restore  the  property."  The  infidel  began  to  tremble.  "If  you  have  got  them 
sheep  you  are  welcome  to  them ;  I  don't  want  nothing  of  you,  if  you  will  go 
away  ;  something  must  have  got  hold  of  you  I  don't  understand  1  Ton  may  keep 
the  sheep  if  you  will  only  go  away."  "No,"  said  the  Christian,  "I  must  settle 
this  up."  He  counted  out  the  value  of  the  four  sheep,  6  per  cent,  interest,  and 
then  put  double  the  amount  down.  This  was  turning  from  sin.  (6.  Bowden.) 
The  necessity  of  penitence : — I.  Penitence  is  necessary  for  the  sinner,  in  order 
to  be  reconciled  to  God.  1.  According  to  the  written  Word  of  God  (Luke  xiii.  5 ; 
John  iii.  5).  No  excuse.  No  grace  in  case  of  negligence.  2.  According  to  the 
example  of  all  the  saints.  David.  Magdalen.  Peter.  3.  Beason  teaches  its 
necessity.  (1)  As  satisfaction  for  the  guilt,  the  injury  against  God  (Matt.  v.  26). 
(2)  As  atonement  (Zech.  i.  3 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  21).  (3)  As  punishment.  Man  is  the 
author  of  sin.  The  Divine  Justice  owes  it  to  itself  to  resent  every  attack  upon  the 
moral  order  (Psa.  Ixxxviii.  33).  (4)  As  spiritual  remedy.  To  repair  moral  damage 
— the  balsam  to  heal  the  wound,  after  the  arrow  has  been  taken  out.  Exciting 
zeal,  conferring  grace,  setting  aside  the  occasions  of  sin.  II.  Penitence  m 
necessary  to  the  just.  1.  No  one  is  sure  of  justification.  2.  Every  one  offends 
daily  in  little  things,  and  for  every  sin  satisfaction  must  be  made.  3.  After  the 
remission  of  guilt  and  eternal  punishment,  there  remains  yet  temporal  punishment 
to  expiate.  Call  to  mind  the  rigour  of  the  ancient  Church,  of  her  penitential 
canons,  &c.  4.  Every  one  is  liable  to  fall,  while  he  lives.  "  Fruits  worthy  of 
repentance "  are  like  a  hedge  of  thorns  around  the  paradise  of  virtues.  (Valke.) 
The  ministry  of  John  Baptist: — 1.  Moral,  not  theological,  in  its  aim.  2.  Faithful, 
not  temporizing  in  its  appeal.  3.  Symbolic,  not  superstitious,  in  its  ritual.  4, 
Humble,  not  haughty  in  its  spirit.  (Dr.  Thomas.)  A  father  brought  to  repent- 
ance : — It  pleased  God  to  visit  one  of  the  daughters  of  a  wicked  father  with  mortal 
sickness ;  but  before  her  death  she  was  instrumental  in  exciting  the  attention  ol 
her  parent  to  the  concerns  of  his  soul.  "Father,"  inquired  the  dying  child,  can 
you  spell  "repentance"?    The  artless  question,  through  the  blessing  of  God.  wat 


CHAP,  in.]  ST.  LUKE.  81£ 

effeotnal  to  awaken  concern.  "  Spell  repentance  I  "  repeated  the  astonished  father ; 
"  why,  what  is  repentance  ?  "  Thus  he  became  desirous  of  knowing,  and  ultimately 
was  taught  its  sacred  meaning ;  and  discovered  that  he  had  been  a  stranger  to  it, 
both  in  theory  and  experience.  He  also  discovered  that  he  needed  repentance ; 
that  he  was  a  guilty  condemned  sinner,  deserving  God's  wrath  and  everlasting 
misery  ;  and  repentance  unto  life  was  granted  to  him.  He  spelled  out  his  Divine 
Import ;  and  obtained  an  acquaintance  with  that  Saviour  whom  God  has  exalted  to 
give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  ;  and  by  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness, he  in  afterhfe  supported  and  adorned  his  Christian  profession.  A  call 
for  John  the  Baptist : — John  had  a  word  and  a  sign.  The  word  was — Eepent ;  and 
the  sign  was — Baptism.  Word  and  sign  were  intimately  related.  His  was  the 
baptism  of  repentance.  The  word  commanded.  The  sign  accepted.  A  great 
moral  and  religious  impulse  swept  wave-like  over  the  people.  The  baptism  o£ 
repentance  became  the  order  of  the  day.  But,  unfortunately,  in  the  degree  that  the 
baptism  became  a  fashion  it  also  became  a  form.  John's  soul  was  too 
upright  to  be  blinded  by  what  looked  like  success.  His  language,  its  directness, 
and  the  form  with  which  he  clothed  his  ideas,  all  showed  how  radical  was 
the  thing  he  aimed  at.  The  axe,  winnowing,  uprooting,  fire-cleansing,  were 
the  symbols  that  naturally  expressed  his  violent  and  stormy  thoughts  and 
intents.  What  would  John  the  Baptist  say,  if  he  were  now  to  come  into  our 
churches  and  pulpits  ?  He  would  fiercely  denounce  all  shows  and  shams  in 
religion.  He  would  scathe  and  scatter  with  the  hghtnings  of  his  indignation  all 
moral  delusions.  He  would  demand  the  putting  away  of  all  unholiness.  He  would 
say,  *'  Let  us  have  soundness  and  solidness,  sincerity  and  spiritual  mindedness,  or 
nothing  at  all."  No  doubt  there  would  be  a  sensation.  Well-bred  people  would  be 
scandalized.  Prudent  men  would  say,  "  You  must  use  milder  language,  sir,  or  we 
BhaU  have  the  church  empty."  And  the  prophet  would  reply,  "  Exactly  ;  that  is 
what  I  have  come  for.  I  have  come  to  drive  either  the  sinners  or  their  sins  out  of 
the  churches."  The  great  truth  to  be  carried  home  is,  that  genuine  repentance 
must  always  precede  the  kingdom  of  God.  There  is  a  repentance  that  is  easy  and 
cheap,  and  is  worth  as  much  as  it  costs  or  a  little  less.  Bepentance  is — (1)  Not 
a  piece  of  ceremonialism  ;  (2)  more  than  an  emotion,  an  excitement ;  (3)  a 
resolve,  an  action  against  sin.  The  call  to  repent  is  a  call  to  action.  It 
means,  change  your  mind  about  wrong-doing  ;  change  your  whole  course  of 
moral  thought,  feeling,  conduct.  It  must  be  personal  and  spring  from  a  personal 
Bource.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,  and  it  is  as  full  of  promise  as  of 
judgment.      (W.    Hubbard.)  Reipentance  : — The  word  is  often   used  for  the 

compunction  with  which  one  may  reflect  on  a  particular  sin.  Whether  such  com- 
punction  procures  the  forgiveness  of  the  sin,  seems  to  me  a  question  which  it  is 
rather  too  bold  to  ask,  but  which  is  quite  unimportant  to  have  answered,  oixless 
forgiveness  of  sins  were  the  same  thing  as  forgiveness  of  sin.  They  are  entirely 
different,  and  there  is  an  equal  and  exactly  corresponding  difference  between 
repentance  in  the  sense  just  mentioned,  and  in  that  signified  by  the  word  which  in 
the  New  Testament  expresses  the  condition  to  which  forgiveness  of  sin  is  attached. 
The  Greek  word  denotesachangeof  mind,  heart,  or  disposition,  which  is  equivalent 
to  the  cessation  of  sin  as  a  habit  or  state.  Sins  may  be  repented  of  without  any 
Bach  annihilation  of  sin.  And  without  such  annihilation  I  venture  to  doubt 
whether  God  Himself  could  forgive  sin,  any  more  than  He  could  make  two 
contrary  propositions  identical,  or  the  same  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be  at  the 
eame  time.  (Bishop  Thirlwall.)  The  ministry  of  John  : — An  awful  ministry 
truly  1  The  gospel  concludes  with  benediction  but  it  invariably  begins  with 
Bword  and  fire.  One  of  the  first  things  that  a  true  minister  has  to  do  is 
to  destroy  false  hopes.  It  is  thus  that  John  did  when  he  broke  in  thus  rudely 
opon  the  traditional  hopes  of  those  who  heard  him.  They  were  living  securely 
in  the  facts  that  Abraham  was  their  father,  and  their  reasoning  was  that  rt 
Abraham  was  their  father  they  themselves  were  necessarily  good,  and  their  moral 
position  was  invincible.  John  takes  the  roof  off  tbis  house  of  refuge,  and  pours  the 
Divine  storm  upon  their  heads.  He  throws  down  the  walls  within  which  they  had 
enclosed  themselves,  and  sends  the  floods  of  Divine  judgment  along  the  courses  of 
their  foundations.  But  there  is  a  word  of  hope  even  in  this  storm  of  vengeance. 
John  declares  the  possibility  of  repentance  even  on  the  part  of  a  generation  of  vipers. 
The  Christian  teacher  ought  not  to  content  himself  with  mere  denunciation.  Let 
him  be  faithful  in  describing  the  real  character  of  those  who  hear  him  ;  but  wh<n 
be  has  done  so,  let  him  see  that  they  do  not  die  of  despair,  for  want  of  the  hopelui 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAJ.  m. 

■word  of  repentance.  A  severe  thing  this  to  say  abont  Abraham  was  it  not  ?  The 
meaning  is  that  hereditary  piety  is  of  no  use  ;  that  we  are  not  good  simply  because 
we  have  a  good  ancestry  ;  and  that  as  for  mere  history,  God  is  able  to  make  it  out 
of  the  very  stones  under  our  feet.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  parable  of  the  fig-trees  : — 
What  fruits  are  meet  for  repentance  ?  To  that  question  let  me  reply  with  a  parable. 
You  remember  that  as  our  Lord  went  from  Bethany  to  Jerusalem  He  saw  a  fig-tree 
by  the  wayside,  full  of  leaves,  and  came  to  it  that  He  might  eat  of  its  fruit.  But 
when  He  reached  it,  He  found  nothing  but  leaves  on  it.  The  conscious  tree 
withered  beneath  His  rebuke.  This  story  is  familiar  to  you  all :  but  perhaps  yon 
did  not  know  that  three  other  fig-trees  were  growing  hard  by,  near  enough  to  hear 
what  passed  between  Christ  and  the  fruitless  tree,  and  to  mark  how  it  withered 
beneath  His  curse.  Yet  there  were  such  trees,  or  we  shall  assume  that  there  were. 
And  being  observant  and  reflective  trees  they  were  very  much  alarmed  to  see  that 
"  the  axe  was  laid  to  the  roots  of  the  trees,"  and  that  "  every  tree  which  brought 
not  forth  good  fruit  would  be  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire."  They  said  among 
themselves  :  "  We,  indeed,  have  some  fruits  ;  but,  oh,  how  few!  We  will  do  better 
next  year,  lest  we  should  likewise  perish."  The  seasons  passed  ;  the  winds  blew, 
the  rains  fell,  the  sun  shone  ;  and  now,  at  last,  "  the  time  of  figs  "  has  come  round 
again.  We  take  the  road  to  Bethany,  to  see  how  these  three  trees  have  kept 
their  purpose  of  amendment.  1.  We  approach  the  first  tree  ;  and  looking  at  it 
attentively,  we  are  surprised  and  grieved  to  find  that,  though  it  is  thick  with  broad 
tender  leaves,  it  has  but  little  fruit,  and  that  but  poor.  We  say,  "  How  is  this  1 " 
And  the  tree  replies,  •'  I  waited  day  after  day,  month  after  month,  and  no  prophet 
passed  this  way.  Why  should  I  trouble  myself  ?  I  have  done  more  than  last  year. 
I  have  some  fruits  to  show,  and  many  leaves.  Why  should  I  not  be  content  ?  No 
prophet  will  ever  pass  this  way  again  ;  oi  if  a  prophet  should  come,  I  have  done 
enough  to  save  myself  from  his  curse."  This  tree  has  not  brought  forth  fruits  meet 
for  repentance  ;  for  it  has  done  nothing  from  love,  and  very  little  from  fear.  2. 
We  advance  to  the  second  tree  ;  and  on  this  also  we  find  only  a  few  figs  :  but  they 
are  very  large  and  good.  We  do  not  for  a  moment  mistake  it  for  a  cumberer  of  the 
ground  ;  its  few  but  large  fruits  show  plainly  through  the  leaves.  Yet  the  tree 
wears  an  aspect  of  sadness,  and  waits  with  some  apprehension  to  hep.r  what  we  have 
to  say  to  it.  Noting  its  aspect  of  settled  grief,  we  do  not  ask,  '•  Why  are  your  fruits 
so  few  when  your  purpose  was  so  earnest  ?  "  We  say,  "  Be  not  sad  and  discouraged, 

0  tree,  because  you  have  borne  but  little  fruit ;  rather  be  glad  that  your  fruit  is  so 
fine  and  sweet.  You  will  do  more  and  better  next  year,  if  you  hold  fast  to  your 
purpose  of  amendment,  and  soon  your  fruit  will  be  as  abundant  as  it  is  good." 
This  tree  has  brought  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance  ;  for  it  has  done  well,  and  ia 
sorry  that  it  has  not  done  better.  3.  We  pass  on  to  the  third  tree  ;  and  on  this  we 
find  much  fruit  indeed,  but  its  fruit  is  exceedingly  various  in  quality ;  some  of  the  figs 
are  large  and  sweet,  but  some  are  so  small  and  rude  that  there  is  little  chance  ol 
their  being  brought  to  perfection.  In  haste  to  prevent  us  from  giving  it  more  than 
its  due,  it  says,  "  It  grieves  me  that  my  fruit,  which  is  so  abundant,  is  yet  so  poor. 

1  have  discovered  in  myself,  since  I  resolved  to  amend,  both  a  power  that  I  knew 
not  of,  and  an  impotence  which  I  did  not  suspect.  I  did  not  know  I  could  do  so 
much  as  I  have  done  ;  but  I  did  think  that  what  I  could  do,  that  I  should  do  well. 
Power  is  mine  ;  alas,  that  I  should  so  have  wasted  it  !  but,  alas,  weakness  is  also 
mine  ;  and  though  I  can  do  much,  I  do  it  but  to  little  purpose  1  "  This  third  tree, 
like  the  second,  has  brought  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance  ;  for  it  has  done  much 
and  would  fain  have  done  better  :  and,  therefore,  we  bid  it  be  of  good  heart,  and 
leave  it  with  good  hope  that,  as  it  has  already  borne  much  fruit,  so,  in  due  time,  all 
its  fruit  will  become  perfect.  4.  But  here  some  humble  soul  may  cry  out,  "  Alas, 
sir,  I  am  no  fruit-tree  1  I  am  but  as  a  thorn  or  a  brier.  Have  you  no  word  of 
comfort,  or  promise  for  me  ?  "  Surely  I  have.  "  Instead  of  the  thcrn  shall  come 
up  the  fir-tree,"  &c.  In  the  kingdom  and  garden  of  Christ  strange  transformations 
take  place.  However  wild  and  barren  your  nature  may  be,  if  you  crave  comfort  and 
promise,  that  is,  if  you  honestly  desire  to  amend,  there  is  a  power  in  Christ  capable 
of  making  you  better.  You  are  repenting  of  the  past ;  and  He  will  show  you 
how,  in  the  future,  even  you  may  "  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance." 
(r.  T.  Lynch.)  Tests  of  religious  life  : — I.  False  tests  ake  found  in  the  pos- 
session OF  ADVANTAGES.  "  We  havo  Abraham,"  &c.  This  may  be  regarded — 1.  Aa 
a  sentimental  advantage :  related  to  the  past.  Their  Church  not  a  thing  of  yester- 
day. 2.  As  an  ecclesiastical  advantage  :  they  were  related  to  a  privileged  past.  8. 
Aa  a  moral  advantage  :  thej  were  related  to  a  worthy  past — had  a  noble  anoestijr. 


CHAP,  ra.]  ST.  LUKE.  821 

n.  The  true  test  FOtrND  in  the  manifestation  of  FRUiTFtrLNESS.  This — 1.  The 
demand  of  Scripture.  Insisted  upon  by — (1)  prophets  (Isaiah  and  Micah)  ;  (2) 
apostles  ;  (3)  the  Lord.  2.  The  demand  of  society.  In  relation  to — (1)  secular 
questions  ;  (2)  religious  questions.  The  test  is  applied  everywhere.  III.  How  may 
FBUiTFULNEss  BE  GAINED  ?  Only  by  union  with  Christ.  *'  Abide  in  Me,"  &c.  (John 
XV.  4,  5).  {W.  Glyde  Tarbolton.)  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father. — Pride  of 
anceatru : — Pride  of  ancestry  is  a  common  evil,  and  it  was  very  prevalent  among  ths 
Jews.  I.  Let  ds  attend  to  a  few  general  remarks  on  the  passage.  1.  It  must  be 
admitted  that  it  was  once  a  privilege  to  have  Abraham  for  a  father.  It  was  iu  con- 
sequence of  the  Israelites  being  the  children  of  Abraham,  that  unto  them  pertained 
the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  promises.  It  was,  therefore,  one  of  the  first  honours,  to 
belong  to  the  family  of  Abraham  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29  ;  Psa.  cv.  42  ;  Eom.  ix.  4).  2. 
It  was  no  unusual  thing  for  the  Jews,  in  their  most  degenerate  state,  to  boast  of 
their  descent  from  this  eminent  patriarch.  3.  To  be  descended  from  pious  parents 
is  still  a  privilege,  which  we  should  carefully  improve.  A  heathen  philosopher 
blessed  God  that  he  was  born  at  Athens  ;  and  have  we  not  greater  reason  to  bless 
Him  that  we  were  born  in  a  Christian  country,  and  descended  from  godly  ancestors. 
David  mentions  the  piety  of  his  mother  as  a  motive  for  devoting  himself  to  the  ser- 
vice of  God,  and  as  a  reason  of  his  having  obtained  mercy.  "  Oh,  Lord,"  says  he, 
"  truly  I  am  Thy  servant  ;  I  am  Thy  servant,  and  the  son  of  Thy  handmaid ;  Thou 
hast  loosed  my  bonds."  And  in  giving  a  solemn  charge  to  his  son,  he  uses  similar 
language,  "  Thou  Solomon,  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father  "  (2  Tim.  i.  5  ; 
Psa.  cxvi.  16).  4.  Though  it  is  an  honour  to  be  descended  from  pious  ancestors, 
yet  we  are  warned  against  trusting  in  it  as  a  substitute  for  personal  religion. 
"  Think  not  to  say  within  yourselves,  we  have  Abraham  to  our  father  " ;  for  so  had 
Ishmael  and  Esau  ;  and  yet  they  were  none  the  better  for  it.  Do  not  imagine  that 
this  will  be  any  excuse  for  sin,  or  a  sufficient  plea  for  mercy.  II.  Consider  the 
beasons  that  should  caution  us  against  placing  ant  dependence  on  natural 
DESCENT,  as  giving  us  a  title  to  eternal  life,  or  rendering  us  more  secure  from  the 
wrath  to  come.  1.  The  children  of  pious  parents  are  defiled  with  original  sin  as 
well  as  others,  and  therefore  have  the  same  propensities  to  evil.  Corruption  runs 
in  the  blood,  though  grace  does  not.  Though  the  Jews  themselves  were  circumcised, 
their  children  were  born  in  uncircumcision  ;  and  were  by  nature  children  of  wrath, 
even  as  others  (Psa.  li.  5  ;  Eph.  ii.  2,  3).  2.  In  too  many  instances,  the  children  of 
religious  parents,  like  the  prodigal  son,  have  grown  weary  of  restraint,  and  indulged 
in  those  criminal  excesses  which  are  common  to  the  most  abandoned  characters. 
What  were  the  sons  of  Eh,  and  the  sons  of  Aaron  ;  their  conduct,  and  their  end  ! 
Guilty  of  intemperance,  impurity,  and  profaneness,  they  died  under  the  visible 
marks  of  Divine  displeasure.  That  excellent  prince  Josiah  had  four  sons,  and  they 
all  proved  wicked.  Benjamin  was  so  called,  to  denote  that  he  was  the  son  of  his 
father's  right  hand  ;  and  yet  most  of  the  left-handed  men  we  read  of  in  Scripture 
were  Benjamites,  as  if  it  were  intended  to  show  that  the  course  of  events  and  the 
formation  of  character  are  oftentimes  the  reverse  of  what  we  had  reason  to  expect. 
3.  It  is  still  more  painful  to  observe,  that  some  of  the  best  of  men  have  had  the 
very  worst  of  children,  who  have  been  a  grief  and  a  dishonour  to  their  parents.  The 
sweetest  wine  makes  the  sharpest  vinegar,  and  the  most  promising  children  some- 
times turn  out  the  worst  of  characters.  Nabal  the  churl  was  of  the  posterity  of  the 
noble  and  disinterested  Caleb.  Absalom  who  murdered  Amnon,  and  Amnon  who 
defiled  his  sister,  were  the  sons  of  David,  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.  4.  Our 
being  the  children  of  pious  parents  merely  can  no  more  effect  our  salvation,  than 
our  being  the  children  of  wicked  parents  can  effect  our  destruction  ;  personal 
character  being  that  alone  by  which  our  future  state  will  be  determined.  5.  The 
futility  of  every  plea  arising  from  our  connection  with  pious  ancestors  is  also 
evinced  in  what  is  alleged  by  the  sacred  writer,  that  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to 
raise  up  children  unto  Abraham.  He  who  gave  Abraham  a  son  when  he  was  past 
age,  and  afterwards  raised  him  up  in  a  figure  from  the  altar,  can  be  at  no  loss  to 
give  him  a  spiritual  seed  as  numerous  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
Regeneration : — I.  Now  with  regard  to  these  stones.  I  shall  pass  Joshua  by  with  hia 
Btones,  and  the  heathen  soldiers  also,  and  give  you  a  Scriptural  proof  that  ruined 
sinners  with  stony  hearts  are  the  persons  really  meant — sinners  that  are  like  stones 
— and  I  will  give  you  a  passage  of  Scripture  that  confirms  this  statement  without 
the  poBsibiUty  of  contradiction,  because  it  is  God's  own.  If  you  tarn  to  the  seventh 
elupter  of  the  Prophet  Zechariah  you  will  find  what  God  says  about  them,  *'Th6f 

21 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  m. 

refused  to  hearken,  and  pnlled  away  the  shoulder  and  stopped  their  ears  that  they 
should  not  hear,  yea,  they  made  theTr  hearts  as  an  adamant  stone."  Why,  they 
are  as  incapable  of  feeling  as  stones — they  are  as  helpless  as  stones.  Bui 
mark  a  little  further,  for  I  want  you  to  have  a  right  and  an  humbling  view 
of  the  Fall,  he  is  worse  than  a  stone ;  find  a  stone  where  yon  will,  it  has  got 
no  enmity  in  it.  I  grant  it  is  hard  and  helpless,  and  immoveable,  but  it  haa 
got  no  enmity  in  it.  Now,  my  Bible  tells  me  expressly  that,  "  the  carnal  mind 
is  enmity  against  God."  II.  But  I  am  very  anxious,  having  said  thus  much  in 
as  concise  terms  as  I  could,  to  lead  on  your  attention  to  the  almighty  grace  put 
forth,  *•  God  is  able."  How  does  He  manage  to  raise  up  children  f  Does  He  do 
as  a  mason  would,  hew  out  the  stones  and  carve  them,  and  shape  them,  and  cut 
them  ?  That  is  the  way  men  make  Christians.  I  know  they  get  hold  of  thesa 
rough  stones,  and  they  say  they  are  very  rude  and  very  ignorant,  perhaps  very 
licentious,  perhaps  very  immoral,  perhaps  very  unjust  and  dishonest,  very  ugly 
rough  forbidding  stones,  such  as  one  hardly  likes  to  have  in  one's  sight ;  but  forth 
comes  one  of  these  skilful  masons,  and  cuts  them,  and  carves  them,  and  polishes 
them  very  nicely  with  the  tools  of  education  and  superstition.  Take  your  stone, 
and  carve  it  as  handsomely  as  you  can,  and  work  it  into  a  statue  as  tall  as  any  of 
you,  and  give  the  handsomest  features  that  any  of  you  possess,  and  throw  the  most 
graceful  robes  around  it  that  can  be  worn,  and  paint  it  what  colour  you  please,  it  ii 
a  stone  after  all — and  that  is  a  striking  emblem  of  thousands  who  pass  for  Chris* 
tians.  But  when  God  works.  He  puts  the  Spirit  of  life  from  God  into  a  poor 
sinner's  heart ;  it  is  another  and  a  new  principle  ;  a  holy  life  that  cannot  sin. 
And  observe  here,  that  He  invariably  exercises  His  own  absolute  sovereignty.  But 
just  mark  further.  This  new  life  which  God  Himself  imparts  and  bestows,  this 
quickening  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  according  to  the  sovereignty  of  His  own 
will,  is  nourished  and  trained  up  by  Him.  I  should  like  to  detain  you  a  moment 
longer  here  to  mark,  that  when  Jehovah  thus  exercises  His  absolute  sovereignty, 
and  quickens  sinners  to  newness  of  life,  He  excludes  all  vain  boasting,  all  creature 
pretensions.  lU.  Now  let  us,  for  a  moment  or  two,  glance  at  the  nature  thus 
bestowed.  Peradventure  you  will  say,  "  You  have  surely  taken  up  this  all  along." 
Well,  I  must  say  a  little  more  about  it.  And,  first  of  all,  it  is  relative,  and  claims 
relationship  with  Abraham — "children  unto  Abraham."  Well,  why  not  unto  some 
Gentile  parent?  Why  not  relationship  to  some  among  the  heathens  that  surrounded 
John  while  he  was  thus  speaking?  Why,  beloved,  if  you  will  consult  the  statement 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  the  apostle,  you  will  find  what  is  really  descriptive  of  all  the 
children  of  Abraham,  whether  Jews  or  Gentiles.  *'  So  then,"  he  says,  after  a 
lengthened  argument,  "  they  that  are  of  faith  are  the  children  of  faithful  Abraham." 
Now  this  is  the  relationship  that  is  bestowed  upon  them.  Come  a  little  closer 
into  apprehension  of  it.  Abraham's  faith  "  talked  with  God  as  a  man  talketh  with 
his  friend  "  ;  more  than  that, — ^Abraham's  faith  pleaded  with  God,  and  even  pro- 
posed terms  and  conditions  for  the  saving  of  Sodom,  because  his  brother  Lot  was 
there.  Abraham's  faith  was  such  as  constituted  him  "  the  father  of  the  faithful " ; 
consequently,  the  sons  must  be  something  like  him — they  must  be  partakers  of  Hke 
precious  faith."  [J.  Irons.)  False  reasoning  : — The  Pharisees  taught  that  no 
child  of  Abraham  could  perish.  His  name  was  thus  used  as  a  shield  to  turn  aside 
the  arrows  of  truth.  But  we  must  remember  that  ties  of  blood,  ancestral  piety,  or 
rites  of  the  Church,  cannot  save.  Abraham's  blood,  without  Abraham's  faith,  will 
avail  only  to  condemn.  The  Church  of  saints  and  martyrs  can  give  the  unrenewed 
no  passport  to  heaven.  Paul  in  the  pulpit  would  perish,  if  Paul  were  not  in  Christ. 
It  is  a  terribly  perilous  doctrine  among  the  Eomanists,  that  a  wicked  ♦'  Catholic  " 
(so-called)  is  more  certain  of  reaching  heaven  than  the  best  Protestant  who  ever 
lived.  {Various.)  False  reliance  : — It  was  not  that  the  Jews  were  to  disown  their 
descent  from  Abraham,  but  that  they  were  not  to  rely  on  that  descent  as  their 
means  of  salvation.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  this  looking  to  one's  stock  or  to  one's 
surroundings  as  a  hope  of  heaven.  One  thinks  that  his  mother's  prayers  will  save 
him.  Another,  that  his  Church-membership  is  a  fair  ground  of  confidence. 
Another,  that  his  being  included  in  a  good  congregation  will  sweep  him  over  danger. 
Every  expectation  of  this  sort  is  even  more  foolish  than  the  confidence  of  the  Jews 
in  their  earthly  parentage.  Begin  not  to  say  anything  of  the  kind  in  your  heart  as 
a  source  of  hope  ;  and  if  you  have  begun  to  say  it,  quit  it  forthwith,  and  find  some- 
thing to  rest  in  that  will  stand  the  test  to  which  year  faith  must  finally  be  subjected. 
(H.  C.  XmtnbuU.) 


«&p.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  821 

Ver.  9.  The  axe  Is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees. — Radical  and  seminal 
reform : — It  seems  to  me  a  total  mistake  to  apply  the  words  of  the  Baptist,  "  And 
now  also  the  axe,"  &o.,  to  any  work  ordained  for  man.  When  the  appointed  time 
comes,  God  does  indeed  show  forth  His  justice  by  sweeping  away  that  which  ia 
utterly  corrupt.  Yet  even  the  Son  of  God,  in  His  human  manifestation,  came  not 
to  destroy,  but  to  save.  Assuredly  this  is  the  only  part  of  His  office  which  we  are 
cafied  to  discharge.  As  His  ministers,  we  are  to  be  ministers  of  salvation,  not  of 
destruction.  The  evil  in  ourselves,  indeed,  we  are  to  pluck  up,  branch  and  root ;  but 
in  our  dealings  with  others,  unless  we  have  a  special  office  committed  to  us  by  the 
laws  of  family  or  national  life,  our  task  will  mainly  be  to  contend  against  evil  by 
sowing  the  seeds  of  good,  not  by  radical  reforms,  but  by  seminal.  The  satirist,  the 
rhetorician,  the  moralist,  will  indeed  try  the  former,  and  will  therefore  fail,  The 
Christian  has  a  higher  power  entrusted  to  him,  the  power  of  God's  goodness  and 
mercy,  the  gospel  of  redemption  and  salvation ;  not  the  woes  of  the  Trojan 
prophetess,  who  could  gain  no  credence,  but  the  glad  tidings  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  And  if  he  relies  on  this  power,  he  will  succeed  where  others  must  needs 
fail.  {A.  W.  Hare,  in  "  Guesses  at  Truth")  The  axe  lying  at  the  root : — We  may 
learn  from  it,  in  the  first  place — I.  The  kind  of  fbdit  which  God  bequibes  fbom 
us.  In  our  text  it  is  called  '•  good  fruit " ;  and,  in  the  eighth  verse,  "  fruits  meet 
for  repentance."  With  what  propriety,  my  brethren,  are  fruits  like  these  denomi- 
nated "  good."  They  are  the  result  of  a  good  principle,  even  of  that  "  godly  sorrow 
which  worketh  repentance  to  salvation,  not  to  be  repented  of  " ;  they  proceed  from 
a  good  source,  for  they  are  the  fruits  which  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself  produces  in  the 
heart  and  life  which  He  controls  ;  and  they  accord  with  the  Divine  revelation  and 
with  the  Divine  will,  "for  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good ;  and  what 
doth  the  Lord  thy  God  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk 
humbly  with  thy  Godf"     II.    The  means  which  God  emplots  to  bender  us 

PBODUCTIVB   OF   THIS  KIND   OF   FBDIT,    AND   WHICH   SHOW    HOW   BEASONABLB   IT   18   THAT 

He  should  expect  it  fbom  us.  In  the  first  place,  God  has  endowed  you  with  a 
capacity  to  produce  this  kind  of  fruit.  A  stone  is  not  capable  of  producing  the 
fruits  of  a  tree,  because  it  is  destitute  of  vegetable  life.  A  tree  is  not  capable  of 
producing  the  fruits  of  instinct  and  sagacity,  because  it  is  destitute  of  animal  life. 
And  the  beasts  of  the  field  are  not  capable  of  producing  the  fruits  of  reason  and  of 
conscience,  because  they  are  destitute  of  intellectual  and  moral  life.  Nor  are  such 
fruits  required  from  them,  God  never  requires  from  His  creatures  any  actions 
which  they  are  naturally  incapable  of  performing.  "  But  there  is  a  spirit  in  man, 
and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  hath  given  him  understanding."  He  has 
endowed  us  with  reason  and  with  affections.  You  retain  the  ability,  but  you  have 
lost  the  disposition,  to  exercise  the  mind  aright.  You  may  destroy  the  eye  by  which 
you  behold  the  surrounding  universe ;  you  may  destroy  the  link  that  binds  your 
spirit  to  your  mortal  flesh :  but  your  responsibility  to  God,  and  your  immortality  of 
existence,  you  cannot  destroy,  you  cannot  touch.  Secondly :  In  order  to  enable  you 
to  bring  forth  this  good  fruit,  God  has  supplied  you  with  the  gospel  of  His  Son. 
The  gospel  contains  also  the  motives  to  fruitfulness ;  and  these  motives  are  the 
most  powerful  that  can  be  presented  to  the  mind.  And  the  gospel  contains  also 
the  promise  of  that  Divine  influence  by  which  fruitfulness  is  infallibly  secured  | 
for  "  He  giveth  His  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  Him."  Thirdly  :  God  has  visited 
you  with  various  dispensations  of  providence,  and  with  various  convictions  of  con- 
science, all  of  which  have  been  intended  to  direct  your  attention  to  the  gospel,  that 
thereby  you  might  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance.     III.  The  continued 

UNFBUITFULNES8   OF   SOME    PERSONS,    NOTWITHSTANDING    ALL    THE    MEANS    WHICH    THE 

God  of  mebcy  has  employed.  1.  Some  of  these  unfruitful  persons  are  sensual 
and  profane.  Their  bodies  and  their  souls  are  given  to  sin.  2.  Some  of  these 
unfruitful  persons  are  intellectual,  and  moral,  and  amiable.  3.  Some  of  these 
unfruitful  persons  are  professors  of  the  gospel.  They  are  branches  in  the  vine, 
but  they  bear  no  fruit.  IV.  The  axe  which  is  ltino  at  the  boot  of  such 
UNFRUITFUL  PERSONS.  "  And  now  also  the  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees." 
This  "  axe  "  may  therefore  be  considered  as  emblematical  of  death,  at  which  period 
the  character  and  condition  of  the  fruitless,  as  well  as  of  others,  will  be  decided  and 
fixed  for  ever.  1.  The  axe  which  is  lying  at  your  root  reminds  you  of  the  patience 
and  long-saffering  of  God.  If  you  had  had  a  servant  in  your  family  who  had  cared 
as  little  for  yon  as  you  have  cared  for  God,  would  you  have  continued  him  in  your 
house  as  long  as  God  has  continued  you  r  No,  my  brethren,  yon  would  not.  Yoa 
would  have  oat  down  the  tree,  and  you  would  have  dismissed  the  servant.    8.  Tha 


^24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CMAT.  nt 

axe  which  is  lying  at  your  root  reminds  you  of  the  critical  circumstances  in  wh'oh 
you  are  placed.  Eemember  that,  though  you  have  not  yet  been  hewn  down,  the 
axe  is  actually  lying  at  your  root.  The  axe  has  not  to  be  prajDared;  it  has  been 
prepared,  and  sharpened.  The  axe  has  not  to  be  brought  to  you  from  a  distance ; 
it  has  been  brought,  and  is  now  lying  at  your  root,  3.  The  axe  which  is  lying  at 
your  root  has  sometimes  admonished  you  of  its  being  there.  You  have  seen  others 
fall  under  its  influence ;  but  have  you  never  felt  it  yourself  2  Has  the  cold  iron 
never  sent  its  chilling  influence  through  your  frame  ?  V.  Thk  awful  condition  to 
WHICH  BUCH  UNFRUITFUL  PERSONS  ARE  DOOMED.  "  Every  tree  that  bringeth  not 
forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down,  and  cast  into  the  fire."  The  nature  of  this  condi- 
tion is  indescribably  terrible.  There  is  an  awful  peculiarity  even  in  the  death  of  a 
fruitless  sinner.  '•  He  is  hewn  down."  And  the  language  intimates  at  once  his  own 
nnwillingness  to  die,  and  the  determined  and  penal  manner  in  which  his  death  is 
inflicted.  The  certainty  that  this  condition  will  be  incurred  by  the  finally  impeni- 
tent is  another  sentiment  which  our  text  conveys — a  certainty  so  sure  and  perfect, 
that  the  event  is  spoken  of  as  having  actually  taken  place.  •*  He  i$  hewn  down, 
and  cast  into  the  fire."  If  you  die  unfruitful,  your  destruction  is  as  certain  as  your 
death.     (J.  Alexander,  D.D.)  Little  value  set  on  trees  in  the  East: — The 

remarkably  broad  statement  implied  in  this  bold  figure  of  speech  must  strike  a 
European  as  somewhat  extraordinary  ;  and  yet  there  is  more  of  literal  truth  in  it 
than  one  would  at  first  thought  be  disposed  to  imagine.  The  fact  is,  in  Western 
Asia  trees,  as  trees,  are  but  httle  valued.  The  fruit-trees  are  preserved  and 
nourished  with  great  care  ;  but  nearly  all  other  trees  are  cut  down  for  fuel,  mineral 
fuel  being  exceedingly  scarce.  An  exception  is  made  in  favour  of  poplars.  These 
are  permitted  to  grow  to  their  full  height  for  the  sake  of  the  long  beams  they  supply. 
{Biblical  Things,  &c.)  The  destructive  axe  : — This  is  judgment — destruction. 

The  axe  is  not  for  planting,  or  pruning,  or  dressing,  or  propping,  or  protecting,  bat 
for  cutting  down.  The  axe  against  Israel  was  the  Roman  host,  and  many  such 
axes  has  God  wielded,  age  after  age.  Every  judgment  is  an  axe :  pestilence  is  God's 
axe ;  famine  God's  axe ;  adversity  God's  axe.  There  is  a  great  difference  between 
the  axe  and  the  pmning-knife.  Yet  some  of  God's  judgments  are  both  in  one — an 
axe  to  the  ungodly,  a  pruning-knife  to  the  saint.  It  is  God's  axe,  not  man's ;  its 
edge  is  sharp  ;  it  is  heavy ;  it  will  do  its  work  well.  {H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  axe 
laid  to  the  root  of  the  tree : — I.  Thb  boot.  That  which  bears  up  the  branches, 
and  on  which  the  trees  and  branches  stand  and  grow.  1.  The  root,  then,  was 
the  covenant  God  made  with  Abraham  and  his  natural  seed  or  offspring,  which 
covenant  did,  in  a  mystical  sense,  as  clearly  bear  up  the  national  church  of  Israel 
and  all  the  trees  (i.e.,  members  or  branches  thereof)  as  common  natural  root  doth 
the  tree  or  trees  growing  out  of  it.  2,  By  the  root  may  also  be  intended  the  founda- 
tion of  all  the  Jews'  hopes,  confidence,  and  outward  privileges.  3.  By  root,  in  a 
more  remote  sense,  may  be  meant  the  state  and  standing  of  every  ungodly,  unbe- 
lieving, and  impenitent  person.  II.  The  trees.  Men  and  women,  but  chiefly  the 
seed  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  according  to  the  flesh,  of  whom  the  national  church 
of  the  Jews  was  made  up,  and  did  consist ;  as  also,  all  wicked  and  unbelieving 
penoiis  whatsoever,  who  embrace  not  the  offers  of  grace  in  the  gospel,  or  believe 
not  in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  axe.  1.  The  dispensation  of  God's  providence,  or 
time.  Time  is  pictured  with  a  scythe,  but  then  man  is  compared  to  grass ;  but  it 
may  be  pictured  with  an  axe,  since  men  are  compared  to  trees ;  a  scythe  is  no  fit 
instrument  to  cut  down  trees.  2.  The  axe  also  may  refer  to  the  gospel :  the  Word 
of  God  is  an  axe  to  hew  and  square  some  persons  for  God's  spiritual  building,  and 
to  cut  down  others  also,  as  trees  that  are  rotten,  and  bear  no  good  fruit ;  "  There- 
fore," saith  the  Lord,  "  I  have  hewn  them  by  the  prophets  " ;  and  what  follows, 
mark  it,  "  I  have  slain  them  by  the  words  of  My  mouth  "  (Hos.  vi.  5).  3.  The  axe 
may  refer  to  men,  whom  God  makes  use  of,  as  instruments  in  His  hand,  to  cut 
down  and  destroy  a  wicked  and  God-provokirg  people ;  hence  wicked  rulers  and 
kings,  whom  God  raises  up,  as  instruments  in  His  hand,  to  chastise  and  out  down 
a  rebellious  people,  are  called  ♦♦  His  sword,  and  the  rod  of  His  wrath  and  indigna- 
tion "  (Psa.  xvii.  14).  4.  By  the  axe  may  in  general  be  meant  God's  wrath ; 
however  it  is,  or  may  be  executed,  or  upon  whom,  wrath  will  sooner  or  later  OQt 
down  all  the  ungodly,  both  false  Churches  and  tyrannical  powers  of  the  earth,  and 
all  who  continue  in  unbelief  and  in  rebellion  against  God.  The  laying  the  axe  to 
the  root  discovers  the  final  faU  and  ruin  of  sinners,  whether  considered  as  a  Charch 
or  as  particular  persons ;  dig  up  or  cut  down  the  root,  and  down  falls  the  body  and 
ftU  the  branches  of  the  tree.     Or  are  you  self-righteous  persons  t    Do  you  baud  ok 


ffSAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  S2S 

yonr  own  righteousness,  like  the  Jews  and  hypocritical  Pharisees  ?  If  so,  the  axe 
will  cot  you  down  also.  You  must  bring  forth  good  fruit,  every  soul  of  you,  or 
perish ;  and  this  you  cannot  do  till  your  hearts  are  changed,  and  so  you  become 
good  trees.  Make  the  tree  good,  and  then  the  fruit  will  be  good ;  "  an  evil  tree 
cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit,"  &o.  All  works  of  regenerate  persons — yea,  their 
religious  duties — are  but  dead  works,  not  good  fruits;  nor  can  they  bring  forth 
good  fruits  unless  they  are  planted  by  faith  into  Jesus  Christ.  Nay,  I  miist  tell 
you  that  gospel-holiness  will  not  save  us ;  it  must  be  the  righteousness  of  God  by 
faith.      (Benjamin  Keach.)  The   discovery   of   hypocrisy  : — 1.    It   cutteth   the 

Sabbath-breaker  to  hear  his  profaneness  still  cried  out  upon  ;  it  cutteth  the 
adulterer  to  hear  his  viciousness  continually  found  fault  with;  it  cutteth  the 
drunkard  to  hear  his  excess  so  often  threatened ;  it  cutteth  the  rioter  and  volup- 
tuous liver,  that  his  course  should  ever  and  anon  be  so  eagerly  reproved.  And  so, 
in  the  other  particulars,  it  doth  even  enrage  men's  hearts  that  the  Word  of  God 
doth  BO  meet  with  them,  as  it  were,  at  every  turn ;  and  it  caueeth  many  to  come  to 
hear  it  no  more  than  they  needs  must,  because,  though  they  set  a  face  upon  it,  and 
would  make  themselves  and  others  believe  that  it  is  not  so  ;  yet  this  same  sharp 
axe  of  the  Word,  when  the  edge  thereof  is  turned  towards  them,  doth  strike  some 
wound  or  other  into  them  almost  at  every  sermon.  So  that  as  Scripture  hath 
avouched  it,  so  common  use  will  not  suffer  it  to  be  untrue,  that  the  ministry  of  the 
Word  is  a  sharp  axe,  which  hath  a  biting  edge,  and  cutteth  and  pierceth  where  it 
goeth.  The  use  of  it,  in  a  word,  is  to  justify  and  to  maintain  to  the  faces  of  all 
gainsayers  that  that  very  Word  which  they  hear  daily,  and  which  they  would  fain 
make  themselves  and  others  believe  is  but  an  idle  word,  is  indeed  and  in  truth  the 
very  Word  of  God.  2.  Another  thing  in  the  axe  is,  that  as  it  cuts,  so  it  frameth 
and  fashioneth  the  hearers  to  a  place  in  the  spiritual  building  in  God's  Church. 
And  as  a  crooked  and  knobby  tree  must  first  be  hewn  and  squared,  and  cut  again 
and  again,  before  it  can  sort  with  the  rest  of  the  building,  so  must  we  also  be  even 
cast,  as  it  were,  in  a  new  mould,  and  transformed  into  a  new  shape,  before  we  can 
have  a  place  in  God's  spiritual  house.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  crookedness  and 
corruption  must  be  pared  from  us  ;  we  must  pass  under  the  workman's  tool  before 
we  can  be  an  habitation  of  God  by  His  Spirit.  Now,  the  means  to  frame  us  to 
become  fit  for  the  Lord's  building  is  the  public  ministry  of  His  Word.  By  it  the 
Lord  doth  lop  off  the  superfluity  of  our  corruption ;  thereby  He  doth  smooth  na 
and  make  us  plain  and  compact,  and  join  us  in,  as  it  were,  by  certain  mortices  and 
joints  with  the  rest  of  that  holy  frame,  that  being  once  fast  coupled  unto  it,  He 
may  preserve  us  ever  unto  Himself.  Therefore  we  find  in  Scripture  that  as  the 
Church  of  God  was  never  destitute  of  this  workmanship,  so  likewise  those  whom 
His  pleasure  was  to  bring  into  the  society  of  His  chosen — they  were  framed  thereby, 
and  first  felt  the  power  and  edge  of  the  Word  before  they  were  linked  together 
with  God's  people.  3.  It  followetb,  an  axe  put  to  the  root  of  the  trees ;  that  is  (as 
I  have  expounded  it),  urged  and  applied  to  men's  consciences,  laid  and  pressed  to 
the  hearts  of  the  hearers.  For  look  what  the  root  is  unto  the  rest  of  the  tree  ;  the 
same  is  the  heart  to  the  whole  man.  Nathan  the  prophet  laid  the  axe  to  the  root 
when  he  told  David,  "Thou  art  the  man."  So  did  Elias,  when  he  said  to  Ahab, 
"It  is  thou  and  thy  father's  house  that  have  troubled  Israel."  So  did  Amos,  when 
he  preached  at  Bethel,  the  king's  own  chapel,  the  destruction  of  the  king's  own 
house.  So  did  Hanani,  when  he  said  plainly  to  the  king  that  he  had  done  foolishly 
not  to  rest  upon  the  Lord.  So  did  Zachariah,  when  he  told  Joash  he  should  not 
prosper  if  he  forsook  the  Lord.  So  did  John  the  Baptist,  when  he  spake  directly  to 
the  rharisees,  and  called  them  a  viperous  generation,  and  when  he  told  Herod  to 
his  face  he  miglit  not  have  his  brother's  wife.  So  did  Christ,  when  He  preached 
woe  to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  "  Woe  to  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida."  So  did  Peter, 
when  he  told  the  Jews,  "  You,  I  say,  have  crucified  and  slain  the  Lord  of  life."  So 
did  Paul,  when  he  called  them  "  foolish  Galatians."  It  is  to  no  purpose,  as  it  were, 
to  stand  hacking  at  the  branches,  and  to  strike  here  and  there  upon  the  outward 
rind ;  but  a  man  must  go  to  the  root,  and  knock  at  the  door  of  every  man's  con- 
science, that  every  soul  may  tremble,  and  men  at  the  least  may  be  convinced 
against  the  day  of  reckoning.  •'  If  thou  doest  not  well,"  saith  God  unto  Cain,  "  sin 
lieth  at  the  door."  Sin  is  like  a  cruel  beast,  which  lieth  sleeping  at  the  door  of  every 
man's  heart.  It  must  be  awaked  and  stirred  up,  that  men  may  see  their  danger. 
(S.  Hieron.)  Unfruitful  trees  cut  down  : — "  The  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the 

trees  "  in  the  East  with  a  significance  which  we  can  hardly  understand  in  the  West. 
It  is  not  merely  because  the  tree  cumbers  the  ground  in  a  physical  sense ;  for  eveK 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oBkt.  XO^ 

ehade-trees — trees  of  any  sort — are  greatly  to  be  desired  throughont  the  Holy  Land. 
But  the  fruit-trees  are  all  taxed ;  and  if  unfruitful,  they  are  a  heavy  incumbrance. 
If  a  tree  bears  no  fruit,  it  brings  its  proprietor  in  debt,  and  that  to  the  most  meroi« 
less  of  creditors,  a  tax-farmer.  Some  four  years  ago,  when  the  taxes  were  heavy 
and  the  olive  product  light,  multitudes  of  oUve-trees  were  cut  down  on  the  spurs  of 
Lebanon.  It  was  cutting  off  the  owners'  means  of  support  in  the  future ;  but  that 
was  still  in  the  future,  and  uncertain.  In  the  immediate  present,  all  that  the  pro- 
prietor could  see  was  cruelty,  oppression,  and  taxes.  Future  starvation  was  not  a 
heavier  burden  than  present  hunger,  with  debt  as  a  load  above  it.  It  is  probable  that 
this  is  just  the  same  sort  of  cumbering  the  ground  which  was  the  troublesome  one  in 
old  times.  Space  could  be  spared  in  the  ground  for  a  tree  whose  only  use  was  orna- 
ment ;  wild  trees  are  still  allowed  for  that  purpose ;  but  a  fruit-tree  which  bore  a 
tax  is  quite  a  different  matter,  and  probably  was  so  then.  The  fruit-trees  paid 
a  religious  tithe  ;  and  the  secular  government  could  scarcely  have  been  less  exact- 
ing. The  tax  on  fruit-trees,  too,  is  a  heavy  one.  Read  any  recent  work  on  the 
political  condition  of  Egypt,  and  see  how  much  every  palm  must  pay.  Travellera 
are  often  surprised  at  the  extra  charges  which  they  have  to  pay — more  than  the 
natives — for  the  use  of  a  horse  or  a  boat ;  but  they  forget  that  the  Government  ia 
on  the  look-out  for  those  who  own  the  boat  or  the  horse,  and  is  apt  to  get  the  lion'a 
share  of  all  such  seeming  extortions.  [Professor  Isaac  H.  Hall.)  Sternness 
necessary  : — When  we  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree — when  we  hew  off  men's 
very  members,  when  we  snatch  them  like  brands  out  of  the  fire,  when  we  make 
them  to  see  their  own  faces  in  the  law  of  liberty,  the  face  of  a  guilty,  and  therefore 
cursed,  conscience — there  will  be  need  of  much  boldness.  A  surgeon  who  is  to 
search  an  inveterate  wound,  and  to  cut  off  a  putrified  member,  had  not  need  to  be 
faint-hearted,  or  bring  a  trembling  hand  to  so  great  a  work.     (Bishop  Beynolds.) 

Vers.  10-14.     What  shall  we  do  then?    Common  sense  applied  to  every-day. 
duties  : — I.  John  disoeiminates  between  the  ease-haedened,  selfish,  and  scarcely 

REACHABLE  PHARISEES  AND  HIGH-PLACED  REPRESENTATIVES  OP  OFFICIAIi  JUDAISM,  AND 
*'  THE  MULTITUDES  "  (Matt.  iii.  7).  II.  Hb  rises  ABOVE  THE  FBEJDDIOES  AND  ANTIPA- 
THIES OF  THE  PUBLIC  OPINION  OF  HIS  COUNTRYMEN  IN   A   REMARKABLE  WAT.      PublicanS. 

Soldiers.  III.  Hk  is  emineijtlt  reasonable  in  his  requirements.  Whilst  he 
counsels  the  owner  of  "  two  coats  "  to  show  the  reality  of  his  avowed  "  change  of 
character"  and  new-born  life,  of  which  repentance  is  the  sign,  he  still  leaves  him 
♦'  one  "  ;  and  the  man  having  food  he  would  not  have  starve  whilst  he  relieves,  or 
that  he  may  relieve  the  starving,  but  share  only.  There  was  no  communism,  no 
sinking  of  the  individual  in  the  mass,  or  rights  of  property  in  the  properties  of 
right.  Simply  a  proof  of  unselfishness,  of  caring  for  others,  is  set  before  the  first 
inquirers.  He  puts  his  finger  unerringly  on  the  besetting  sin.  When  I  was  in 
Palestine  and  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor,  and  the  dominions  of  Turkey  generally,  I  felt 
that  if  to-day  a  John  the  Baptist  were  to  have  the  old  question  asked  him  by  the 
pashas  and  other  tax-farmers,  his  answer  would  go  to  the  root  of  the  evils  that  are 
bleeding  to  death  the  entire  dominions  of  the  sultan.  One  gets  a  glimpse  herein  of 
how  far-reaching  really,  though  local  and  personal  seemingly,  was  the  Baptist'a 
answer  and  counsel,  "  Extort  no  more,"  Ac.  I  can  well  conceive  that  some  of  those 
who  had  asked,  "What  shall  we  do?  "  must  have  winced  under  the  plain-spoken 
answer.  The  answer  must  have  darted  like  a  lightning  bolt  across  the  inquirers' 
lives,  at  once  illumining  specific  acts,  and  by  the  immediate  encompassing  dark- 
ness and  silence,  as  John  passed  to  his  next  group  of  inquirers,  shutting  them  up  to 
self-examination  and  self-abasement.  The  same  observation  applies  to  the  counsel 
addressed  to  the  soldiers.  They,  too,  had  a  "  besetting  sin."  The  teacher  warna 
them  that  he  knows  all  about  them,  and  their  violent,  outrageous,  evil  ways,  when 
set  free  from  discipline,  and  on  semi-marauding  expeditions.  And  so  he  sends  home 
to  their  consciences  the  brave  and  needed  counsel,  "  Do  violence,"  &c.  The  last 
thing  demanded  all  John's  high-hearted  courage  and  fidelity  to  the  tmth,  to  put  it 
BO  unqualifiedly.  Here  again,  in  all  probabiUty,  if  not  certainty,  he  spoke  to  men's 
"  businesses  and  bosoms."  There  were  secret  or  more  audible  complaints,  mur- 
murs, accusations.  John  has  heard  these,  has  inquired  into  them,  has  come  to  a 
conclusion  on  the  matter :  and  so  they  get  it  articulately,  and  without  touch  of 
currying  favour  :  *'  Tour  wages  are  sufficient — you  are  well  paid  for  all  that  you  do — 
be  content."  Your  mere  enthusiast,  your  mystic,  your  man  preoccupied  about  hia 
functions  and  dignities,  never  would  have  been  thus  solid-sensed,  thus  practical, 
thus  reasonable.    lY.  Hb  is  ooNviNciNa  in  his  coomsbls.   As  with  onr  Lord  (gener- 


our.  m.]  BT.  LUKE.  82T> 

ally)  "  the  people,"  and  "  the  publicans,"  and  "  the  soldiers,"  gave  assent  and  con- 
sent by  silence.     To  us,  on  the  first  blush  of  it,  John's  advice  has  the  look  of  a 
come-down  from  the  molten  warnings  and  accusations  that  immediately  preceded, 
and  out  of  which  the  inquiries  were  born.    But  their  silence  showed  that  to  them 
the  counsels  were  adequate,  not  trivial ;  wentto  the  root  of  their  necessities.    They 
recognized — and  we  shall  do  well  to  follow  in  their  steps — that  Christian  life  is  not 
made  ap  o£  so-called  great  things,  or  evidenced  by  ecstasies,  and  high  and  higher 
emotion,  but  is  constituted  of  habitual  putting  into  our  "  walk  and  conversation,"^ 
in  DEEDS  which  we  profess  to  know  and  believe.    The  most  evangelical  preacher 
and  teacher  may  fearlessly  answer,  as  John  the  Baptist  did,  every-day  and  ordinary 
inquirers,  with  no  fear  of  not  thereby  "preaching"  or  "  teaching"  the  gospel.    Fot 
it  was  of  these  very  exhortations  that  it  is  written,  "  With  many  other  exhortations^ 
therefore,  preached  he  good  tidings  unto  the  people."    These  answers  enshrine 
living  principles  for  all  time.  To-day,  with  so  much  giving  out  of  what  we  can  spare 
and  never  feel  it,  when  the  very  thing  is  to  feel  it,  we  need  to  be  recalled  to  the  first 
answer,  to  the  gospel  fact  that  our  generosity  must  be  after  this  type,  of  taking  the- 
coat  off  our  back  (if  need  be)  to  let  our  brother-man  have  "  one,"  as  we  still  have ;. 
and  that  we  are  to  feed  others,  not  with  food  different  from  our  own,  by  paltry  gra- 
dation of  inferior,  inferiorer,  inferiorest,  and  a  mocking  thought,  "  It's  quite  good 
enough  for  the  like  of  them,"  but  with  our  very  own  food.    It  would  again  overtumi 
tables,  ay,  in  God's  own  house,  and  all  through  the  commercial  world  and  the 
learned  professions,  if  John's  second  answer  were  but  vitalized  by  present-day 
acceptance  and  influence,  "Extort  no  more,"  &o.    In  different  ways  and  degrees 
extortion — taking  advantage  of  opportunity  and  circumstance — is  a  still  wide-reach- 
ing sin.    You  that  call  yourselves  Christians,  and  haste  to  be  rich,  beware  1    Then» 
in  conclusion,  how  burning  and  high-hearted  was  the  third  answer — to  the  soldiers. 
As  Dr.  Eeynolds  put  it :  "  There  is  room  to  suppose  that  the  answer  previously  givenr 
to  the  publicans  might  be  regarded  by  the  soldiers  as  some  kind  of  justification  for 
their  own  high-handed  acts.    John  tore  off  the  cloak  which  their  professional- 
position  was  drawing  over  their  selfishness,  and  he  bade  them  terrorize  no  one,  and. 
bring  no  vamped-up  worthless  accusation.  The  professional  soldier  of  modern  times- 
might  be  offended  by  such  plain  speaking.     Armed  authority  is  always  open  to  the 
temptation  of  working  on  the  emotion  of  physical  fear."    {Dr.  A.  B.  Grosart.f 
Tlie  question*  of  conscience  and  the  answers  of  truth : — The  voice  crjing  in  the  wilder- 
ness had  awakened  an  answering  echo  in  the  breasts  of  the  multitudes.    The  axe 
which  God  was  already  laying  at  the  root  of  the  tree  was  the  Roman  Conqueror  of 
the  land,  and  the  tree  fell  when,  with  great  slaughter,  Jerusalem  was  taken,  and  oi 
her  goodly  temple  not  one  stone  was  left  upon  another.    Well  might  the  people 
tremble  as  their  consciences,  quickened  from  their  long  lethargy  by  the  stern  and 
powerful  preaching  of  this  Elijah  of  later  days,  awoke  to  the  sense  of  their  moral 
and  spiritual  degradation.    For  the  moment,  as  often  before  in  their  history,  this 
greatly-sinning,   though  highly-favoured  people  seemed  ready  to  repent.     They^ 
Sstened  to  John's  burning  words,  and  cried  out  to  him,  "  What  shall  we  do  then  ?  " 
It  was  the  right  question  to  ask,  if  only  they  had  been  possessed  of  the  abiding  spiritual 
conviction  and  the  strength  of  purpose  which  would  have  enabled  them  to  turn 
John's  answers  to  good  account.  It  was  the  question  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  of  the  Philip- 
pian  jailor,  of  the  multitude  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.    And  it  is  the  question  which 
every  awakened  soul  must  ask,  cannot  help  asking.    Three  classes  came  to  John 
with  this  question.    The  answers  which  he  returned  to  them  were  one  and  all 
directed  against  the  vices  and  temptations  peculiar  to  his  questioners  as  respective 
classes.    Doubtless  from  our  Christian  standpoint  there  is  something  defective  in 
these  utterances.    To  fulfil  all  these  behests  would  not,  it  will  be  said,  make  any 
man  a  Christian.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  John  himself  was  not  a  Christian. 
Great  though  he  was,  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  greater  than  he.    He 
was  a  preacher  of  righteousness.    Upon  him,  last  among  men,  the  mantle  of  the 
old  prophets  had  fallen.    And  his  words  are  the  echoes  of  those  which  had  been 
Bpoken  so  long  before :  "  Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen,"  &o.  (Isa.  Iviii.  6, 7). 
John's  preaching  of  repentance  was  intended  to  pave  the  way  for  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  the  righteousness  which  comes  by  faith.  And  when  at  length  Christianity 
did  come  and  preach  to  men,  it  had  something  more  to  say  than  either  John  or  any 
of  his  predecessors,  but  not  one  word  of  that  Old  Testament  inculcation  did  it  unsay^ 
lor  it  had  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.    John's  words  were  true,  though  they 
were  not  the  whole  truth.    And  the  world  has  not  yet  grown  so  wise,  or  generous, 
or  honest,  as  to  have  risen  abova  the  need  for  sach  moral  teaching  as  this.    Th« 


8S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAI.  Uk 

answers  of  John  to  these  conscience-stricken  inquirers  contain  underlying  principle! 
suitable  to  men  of  all  callings,  and  in  all  ages,  who  desire  to  lead  sober,  right> 
eons,  and  godly  lives.  I.  The  pursuit  of  one's  beculab  oaUiIno  and  dailtoccupatioii 

IS  NOT  incompatible  WITH  THE  DESIKE  TO  LEAD  A  EELIGIOUS  LIFE.    John  doCS  UOt  SftJ 

to  these  questioners,  "  Quit  your  callings  for  others  in  which  you  will  be  less  exposed 
to  difficulty  and  danger  "  ;  but  "  Do  the  right  thing  in  the  situation  in  which  yoa 
find  yourselves."  Even  as  Paul  wrote  to  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  vii.  24),  ••  Brethren, 
let  every  man,  wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God."  While  there  are 
some  perhaps  among  the  many  employments  which  obtain  amongst  men,  in  which 
no  Christian  man  can  consistently  engage,  for  most  of  us,  and  for  ordinary  circum- 
stances,  the  advice  is  good  and  sound,  "  Do  not  quit  your  occupation  or  grow  rest- 
less and  uneasy  in  it,  as  if  you  could  not  serve  God  honestly  in  it  as  in  another. 
But  see  to  it  tbat  you  serve  God  in  it,  and  that  meanest  duties  are  done  from  highest 
motives."  II.  Oub  religion  ought  to  enteb  into  and  find  one  or  its  obeat 
BPHERES  OF  ACTION  IN  OUB  DAiLT  LIFE  AND  BUSINESS.  If  business  is  not  incompa- 
tible with  religion,  it  is  only  because  it  is  possible  for  us,  and  demanded  of  na, 
that  we  infuse  the  spirit  of  religion  into  our  businesses.  The  difference  between 
our  Sundays  and  our  week-days  to  be  done  away,  or  at  all  events  lessened,  not  by 
degrading  Sunday  to  the  level  of  otber  days,  but  by  elevating  them  to  its  level,  in 
regard  to  the  spirit  we  breathe,  and  the  principles  that  govern  us,  and  the  consciooa- 
ness  of  God's  presence  with  us.  III.  We  must  being  the  spiritual  steength 
WHICH  God  gives  us  to  beab  chiefly  against  the  temptations  to  which  wb 
ARE  PECULUELT  EXPOSED.  Somo  of  our  temptatioDs  arise  out  of  our  own  evil  hearts. 
Others  are  incidental  to  existence  in  a  world  like  this.  Against  these  general 
onslaughts  we  have  all  in  common  to  strive.  But  there  are  temptations  peculiar  to 
us  as  individuals,  or  as  members  of  a  certain  class — arising  from  the  circumstances 
in  which  we  are  placed,  and  the  positions  we  hold.  It  was  so  with  the  publicana 
and  soldiers  who  came  to  John,  and  his  advice  to  them  was,  "  Oppose  yourselves 
with  all  your  might  to  the  besetments  which  assail  you  in  your  respective  calhngs. " 
And  what  is  true  of  the  peculiar  dangers  arising  from  position  and  circumstance  ia 
true  also  of  those  which  have  their  origin  in  personal  disposition  and  temperament. 
Let  us  all  strive  so  to  live  that  men  shall  not  be  able  to  point  to  glaring  inconsis- 
tencies in  our  lives — that  they  may  see  that  our  religion  is  no  mere  profession,  but 
a  living  power,  which  has  all  our  life  and  thought  and  conduct  under  its  sway, 
which  can  sanctify  the  trivial  round  and  common  task,  and  transmute  the  base 
metal  of  our  ordinary  acts  and  occasions  and  duties  into  the  gold  of  the  cheerful 
obedience  of  loving  hearts  and  consecrated  lives.  {J.  R.  Bailey.)  Preaching 
producing  discomfort : — I  remember  one  of  my  parishioners  at  Halesworth  telling 
me  that  he  thought  "  a  person  should  not  go  to  church  to  be  made  uncomfort- 
able." I  replied  that  I  thought  so  too ;  but  whether  it  ehould  be  the  sermon 
or  the  man's  life  that  should  be  altered  so  as  to  avoid  the  discomfort,  must 
depend  on  whether  the  doctrine  was  right  or  wrong.  {Archbishop  Whately.) 
The  proof  of  effectual  preaching  : — Do  you  not  know  that  a  man  maybe  preached 
to  liturgically  and  doctrinally,  and  never  be  touched  by  the  truth,  or  under- 
stand that  to  which  he  listens?  Suppose  I  were  to  preach  to  you  in  Hebrew, 
how  much  would  you  nnderstand  ?  Now,  when  I  preach  so  that  a  banker,  who 
has  all  along  been  sitting  under  the  doctrinal  preaching,  but  has  never  felt  ita 
appUcation  to  his  particular  business,  feels  the  next  day,  when  counting  his  coin,  a 
twinge  of  conscience,  and  says,  "  I  wish  I  could  either  practise  that  sermon  or  forget 
it,"  I  have  preached  the  gospel  to  him  in  such  a  way  that  he  has  understood  it.  I 
have  applied  it  to  the  sphere  of  life  in  which  he  lives.  When  the  gospel  is  preached 
60  that  a  man  feels  that  it  is  applied  to  his  own  life,  he  has  it  translated  to  him. 
And  it  needs  to  be  translated  to  merchants  and  lawyers,  and  mechanics,  and  every 
other  class  in  society,  in  order  that  all  may  receive  their  portion  in  due  season. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Powerful  preaching : — When  Massillon  preached  at  Versailles, 
Louis  XIV.  paid  the  following  most  expressive  tribute  to  the  power  of  his  eloquence. 
"  Father,  when  I  hear  others  preach,  I  am  very  well  pleased  with  them ;  when  I 
hear  you,  I  am  dissatisfied  with  myself."  The  first  time  he  preached  his  sermon 
on  the  email  number  of  the  elect,  the  whole  audience  were,  at  a  certain  part  of  it, 
Beized  with  such  violent  emotion,  that  almost  every  person  half  rose  from  his  seat, 
as  if  to  shake  off  the  horror  of  being  one  of  the  cast-out  into  everlasting  darkness. 
(Percy.)  Effect  of  true  preaching : — It  was  a  beautiful  criticism  made  by  Longi- 
nuB,  npon  the  e£fect  of  the  speaking  of  Cicero  and  Demosthmes.  He  says  the  peoplt 
wonld  go  from  one  of  Cicero's  orations,  exclaiming,  "  What  a  beautiful  speakerf 


eoir.  m.]  8T.  LUKE.  829 

What  a  rich  fine  voice !  What  an  eloquent  man  Cicero  is  I "  They  talked  of 
Cicero ;  but  when  they  left  Demosthenes,  they  said,  "  Let  us  fight  Philip  I "  Losing 
Bight  of  the  speaker,  they  were  all  absorbed  in  the  snbj  ect ;  they  thought  not  of  Demos- 
thenes, but  of  their  country.  So,  my  brethren,  let  us  endeavour  to  send  away  from 
our  ministrations  the  Christian,  with  his  mouth  full  of  the  praise— not  of  "our 
preacher,"  but  of  God ;  and  the  sinner,  not  descanting  upon  the  beautiful  figures 
and  well-turned  periods  of  the  discourse,  but  inquiring,  with  the  brokenness  of  a 
penitent,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  7  "  Giving  to  the  needy ; — A  man  doesn't 
need  to  be  rich  before  he  shows  whether  he  is  generous  or  not.  Nor  is  a  man's 
generosity  to  be  limited  to  one-tenth  of  his  income.  Dividing  one's  scantiest  store 
with  others  is  a  duty,  quite  as  clearly  as  giving  out  of  one's  abundance.  A  great 
many  wish  that  they  were  rich,  in  order  that  they  might  be  generous ;  but  unless 
one  gives  freely  while  he  has  little,  he  could  not  give  freely  if  he  had  much. 
Generosity  often  diminishes  with  one's  growing  wealth ;  it  never,  never,  never  increases 
with  one's  worldly  accumulations.  And  mark  you,  the  giving  which  tells  in  God's  ears 
is  giving  to  the  destitute ;  not  giving  to  friends  and  relatives  who  already  have  some- 
thing. Most  of  the  holiday  giving,  and  the  birthday  giving,  and  the  free-hearted 
and  open-handed  giving,  in  this  world,  is  to  those  who  are  already  well-to-do  in  life. 
That  is  all  very  well  in  its  way — as  a  means  of  pure  personal  enjoyment ;  but  it  ia 
not  charity,  not  any  sign  of  a  love  toward  God.  If  you  would  show  that  you  are 
God's  children,  and  would  do  your  duty  as  in  God's  sight,  let  him  tbat  hath  two 
coats  give  to  him  that  hath  none,  and  let  him  that  hath  meat  do  likewise.  {H.  C. 
Trumbull.)  Tioo  coats  : — The  Jews  of  the  first  century  always  wore  the  tunic  and 
mantle  or  robe.  These  were  the  two  indispensable  garments.  As  a  rule  the  Jew  had 
at  least  two  complete  suits  in  his  possession  that  he  might  be  able  to  change  often. 
A  man  must  be  very  poor  to  have  only  one  cloak ;  and  yet  this  is  what  Christ 
enjoined  on  His  disciples.  According  to  Luke's  Go?pel  He  said  one  day:  "If  any 
man  would  go  to  law  with  thee  and  take  away  thy  cloak,  let  him  have  thy  coat 
also."  This  precept  can  be  understood;  a  robber  would  naturally  lay  hold  first  of 
the  outer  garment.  But  Matthew  puts  it  the  other  way :  "  If  any  man  will  take  thy 
coat,  let  him  have  thy  cloak  also."  Under  this  form  it  is  harder  to  understand,  and 
we  may  well  suppose  that  in  transcribing  the  copyists  have  misplaced  the  two  words 
coat  and  cloak.  (E.  Stopfer,  D.D.)  A  self-denying  gift : — People  wondered  why 
George  Briggs,  Governor  of  Massachusetts,  wore  a  cravat  but  no  collar.  '•  Oh," 
they  said,  "  it  is  an  absurd  eccentricity,"  and  they  said,  "  he  does  that  just  to  show 
himself  off."  Ah  1  no.  That  was  not  the  character  of  George  Briggs,  Governor  of 
Massachusetts,  as  I  might  intimate  by  a  little  incident  which  occurred  at  Pittsfield, 
Mass.,  just  after  a  meeting  of  the  American  Board  of  Foreign  Missions.  My 
brother  was  walking  on  one  side  of  the  Governor,  and  on  the  other  side  of  the 
Governor  was  a  missionary  who  had  just  returned  from  India.  The  day  was  cold, 
and  the  Governor  looked  at  the  missionary  and  said,  "  Why,  my  friend,  you  don't 
seem  to  have  an  overcoat."  "  No,"  said  the  missionary,  "I  haven't  been  able  to 
purchase  an  overcoat  since  I  came  to  the  country."  Then  the  Governor  took  off  his 
great  cloak  and  threw  it  around  the  missionary  and  said,  "  I  can  stand  this  climate 
better  than  you  can."  Governor  Briggs  did  not  do  anything  just  to  show  off.  This 
was  the  history  of  the  cravat  without  any  collar.  For  many  years  before  he  had 
been  talking  with  an  inebriate,  trying  to  persuade  him  to  give  up  the  habit  of 
drinking,  and  he  said  to  the  inebriate,  "  Your  habit  is  entirely  unnecessary."  "  Ah  1  '* 
replied  the  inebriate,  "  we  do  a  great  many  things  that  are  not  necessary.  It  isn't 
necessary  that  you  should  have  that  collar."  "  Well,"  said  Briggs,  "I  will  never 
wear  a  collar  again  if  you  will  stop  drinking."  "  Agreed,"  said  the  other.  They 
joined  hands  in  a  pledge  that  they  kept  for  twenty  years,  kept  until  death.  Thatig 
magnificent.  That  is  gospel,  practical  gospel,  worthy  of  George  Brig£,'8,  worthy  of  you. 
Self-denial  for  others.  Subtraction  from  our  advantage  that  there  may  be  an  addition 
to  somebody  else's  advantage.  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Duty  of  helping  the  poor: — When 
a  Christian  lady  once  came  to  Carlyle  and  asked  what  she  should  do  to  make  her 
life  more  useful,  he  replied, "  Seek  out  some  poor  friendless  lassie  and  be  kind  to  her." 
The  blessedness  of  giving  : — One  of  the  best  things  said  by  the  late  George  Peabody 
is  this,  spoken  at  a  reunion  at  his  native  town  : — "It  is  sometimes  hard  for  one  who 
has  devoted  the  best  part  of  his  life  to  the  accumulation  of  money  to  spend  it  for  others  j 
bat  practise  it,  and  keep  on  practising  it,  and  I  assure  you  it  becomes  a  pleasure  '* 
The  pulpit  in  politics  : — "What  shall  we  do?"  each  asks  in  turn.  Observe  th» 
Baptist's  method  in  reply.  He  was  able  to  answer  that  question  because  he  had  » 
firm  hold  of  a  few  fundamental  principles — righteousness,  equity,  love.    That  waa 


•330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  to, 

his  charm,  bis  power,  his  resource.  He  was  not  political,  but  he  dealt  with  pollti* 
oians ;  nor  military,  but  he  dealt  with  soldiers ;  nor  mercantile,  but  he  dealt  with 
finance ;  hence  we  may  learn,  by  the  way,  the  relation  of  the  pulpit  to  politics, 
tinless  the  preacher  can  raise  politics  out  of  the  sphere  of  party  spirit,  let  him 
ieep  silence  ;  but  when  a  Government  policy  infringes  on  the  moral  plane,  when 
and  where  it  can  be  tested  by  common  principles  of  righteousness,  equity,  and  love, 
then  its  policy  is  as  much  the  preacher's  sphere  of  comment  as  murder,  theft,  or 
selfishness.  If  any  Government,  e.g.,  is  culpably  indifferent  for  years  to  the  state 
of  Ireland,  and  can  only  be  roused  to  activity  by  Parnellism  :  when  I  observe  that 
the  Indian  budget,  upon  which  hangs  the  well-being  of  distant  millions,  is  proverbi* 
ally  discussed  by  an  apathetic  group  in  an  empty  House :  when  I  see  the  men  of 
Parliamentary  authority  combine  to  crush  out  the  risings  of  freedom  in  Egypt  with 
brute  force,  simply  because  influential  speculators  want  a  high  rate  of  interest  for 
their  money  on  an  iniquitous  loan — why,  it  is  time  to  ask,  "  ought  the  pulpit  to 
ieep  silence  ?  "  Certainly  not.  The  policy  infringes  on  the  moral  sphere,  and  has 
to  be  judged  by  the  same  Divine  principles  to  which  the  Baptist  invariably  appealed. 
Aye,  and  I  will  go  further  and  say  that  the  temper  of  political  debate  is  also  a 
matter  for  pulpit  comment.  When  pubHc  time  is  wasted,  crises  at  home  and  abroad 
neglected,  and  the  whole  tone  of  the  House  lowered  because  two  political  gladiators 
want  to  have  a  stand-up  fight,  and  the  honourable  members  are  content  to  form  a 
ring,  is  such  wanton  fooling  as  that  in  high  places  not  to  be  arraigned  by  those  who 
profess  to  view  party  conduct  by  the  light  of  a  morahty  which  seems  unknown  to 
;party  politics?  (H.  B.  Haweis,  M.A.)  John's  counsels  to  inquirers: — John's 
touch  was  throughout  light  but  firm,  and  quite  infallible  in  particulars,  just  because 
lie  appealed  to  simple  and  universally  intelligible  principles  of  right  and  wrong, 
liisten  to  his  answer  to  the  people  generally.  *'  You  want  to  know  what  to  do  ?  Do 
the  right  thing  now.  There's  a  man  without  a  cloak,  the  sun's  going  down,  he's 
■over-heated,  he'll  catch  fever — you've  got  an  extra  wrap,  give  it  him.  That  woman 
yonder  is  fainting  for  a  little  food,  she  was  so  eager  to  be  baptized  she  forgot  her 
provision  basket — you  have  more  than  you  want,  give  her  some.  To  the  publican, 
or  portitor,  who  paid  so  much  to  the  Government  for  the  right  of  collecting  the 
taxes,  and  then  got  as  much  more  as  he  could  by  squeezing  the  people :  "  Yoa 
tyrants,  you  extortioners,  every  one  knows  your  trade,  and  is  willing  to  give  you 
jour  margin  of  profit ;  well,  don't  exact  more."  To  the  soldiers :  "  You  Jacks-in< 
office,  don't  levy  blackmail  by  threatening  to  accuse  innocent  persons.  Don't  ase 
the  prestige  of  the  Roman  arms  to  oppress  the  oivihan  in  the  provinces,  and  don't 
anutiny  and  keep  striking  for  higher  pay ;  respect  the  people  whom  you  ought  to 
protect,  and  the  master  whom  you  profess  to  serve."  This  was  pretty  smart  and 
practical  teaching.  The  man  of  the  crowd  could  not  go  home  and  say  that  the 
man  of  the  desert  knew  nothing  about  him.  He  could  go  home  and  "  repent "  1 
{Ibid.)  Do  what  you  can : — The  Baptist's  answer  to  the  question  of  the  people, 
*•  What  shall  we  do  ?  "  is  exceedingly  remarkable  if  we  consider  that  John's  mission 
was  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ.  If  this  question  were  put  to  many  amongst  our- 
selves, who  profess  to  lead  men  to  Christ,  they  would  answer — '•  You  can  do  nothing. 
All  works  of  men  in  your  unreconciled  state  are  displeasing  to  God.  You  can  in  no 
■way,  by  any  works  of  your  own,  further  your  own  salvation.  It  is  the  worst  of 
errors  to  think  so."  But  the  Baptist,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his  mother's 
■womb,  gives  an  answer  implying  the  very  reverse.  It  is — "  You  must  do  something. 
You  must  do  what  is  in  your  power.  You  can,  at  least,  give  food  and  raiment  to 
ihe  poor  starving  creatures  around  you.  Begin  with  this.  If  you  begin  thus  with 
denying  your  selfishness,  God  will  soon  show  you  a  more  excellent  way — the  way  of 
grace  in  His  Son.  But  till  that  Son  comes  and  reveals  Himself  to  you,  do  what 
your  hand  finds  to  do.  Do  some  good  to  your  fellow-creatures.  The  way  for  you 
to  obtain  mercy  is  to  be  merciful."  Now,  in  saying  this,  did  St.  John  in  the  least 
degree  swerve  from  his  mission  of  preparing  the  way  for  Christ  by  preaching  of 
repentance  7  No,  not  for  a  moment.  When  the  people  asked  him  what  they  were 
to  do  to  avoid  the  wrath  to  come,  it  was  a  plain  sign  that  God  had  touched  their 
hearts  with  some  degree  of  repentance,  and  this  repentance  was  no  repentance  at 
-all  unless  it  cut  at  the  root  of  their  selfishness,  and  every  unselfish,  self-denying  act 
^ould  deepen  it.  Notice,  also,  that  St.  John  said  this  to  the  masses.  Instead  of 
^saying  to  them,  "You  have  little  to  give,  and  so  God  will  excuse  you  from  contri- 
buting," he  says  to  them,  "  Whatever  you  have  that  you  do  not  absolutely  need, 
vgive  it."  Looked  at  in  this  light,  the  words  are  very  strong,  very  searching.  If 
itxej  make  such  a  demand  on  the  crowds,  what  do  they  make  on  the  few  who  hav« 


CHA».  in.]  fir.  LUKE.  83t 

abundance  of  this  wocld's  goods?  Of  course  such  words  as  these  of  the  Baptist  are 
to  be  understood  in  tte  light  of  common  sense  :  men  are  not  to  give,  to  enable  others 
to  be  idle.  The  best  commentary  on  the  passage,  according  to  Jerome,  is  2  Cor. 
▼iii.  13, 14.     (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  Is  appointed  yon — Oppression  and 
extortions  of  tax-gatherers  : — Present-day  conditions  of  Eastern  lands  painfully 
illustrate  the  continuance  of  some  of  the  most  demoralizing  customs  of  the  past. 
When  the  crop  is  reared,  and  while  the  winnowing  is  actually  going  on  upon  the 
tiireshing-floor,  the  tax-gatherer  stands  by  and  appropriates  one-tenth  as  soon  as 
the  work  is  completed.  The  Mahommedan  government  adopts  the  oppressive 
system  of  the  Romans,  sells  the  tithes  to  the  highest  bidder,  for  a  sum  of  money 
vhich  he  is  ready  enough  to  pay  in  advance.  This  purchaser,  or  farmer  of  the 
taxes,  has  then  to  make  his  profits  on  the  transaction  by  forcing  the  most  extrava- 
gant payments  from  the  people,  and  in  so  doing  he  is  armed  with  irresponsible 
authority.  The  tithe-gatherers  go  through  the  land,  employing  every  device  for 
the  purpose  of  overreaching  the  cultivators  of  the  soil,  and  obtaining  from  them 
more  than  their  dues.  The  farmers  are  strictly  ordered  not  to  thresh  their  grain 
before  the  tax-gatherers  are  ready,  which  is  the  means  of  additional  extortions. 
Crops,  therefore,  sometimes  remain  heaped  upon  the  threshing-floors  for  many 
weeks,  the  distressed  owners  not  daring  to  thresh  and  harvest  them,  and  being 
compelled  both  to  watch  them  by  day  and  night,  and  to  devise  means  to  protect 
them  from  being  wet  with  showers.  (Biblical  Things  not  generally  known.) 
Exacting  more  than  was  just : — In  the  Edinburgh  Weekly  Review  we  find  some 
anecdotes  relating  to  the  Eev.  William  Anderson,  D.D.,  more  than  fifty  years  pastor 
of  the  John  Street  United  Presbyterian  Church,  of  Glasgow,  who  died  some  time 
ago.  He  was  one  of  the  most  eminent  and  beloved  ministers  of  that  city.  He 
was  once  expounding  the  15th  Psalm,  and  had  come  to  the  word  "usury" — "He 
putteth  not  out  his  money  to  usury."  "  Does  that  mean,"  he  asked,  "  taking  ten 
per  cent,  or  more  ?  Not  entirely.  It  means  also  the  spirit  in  which  the  ten  per 
cent,  is  taken.  There  was  once  in  this  Church  a  poor  widow,  and  she  wanted  twenty 
pounds  to  begin  a  small  shop.  Having  no  friends,  she  came  to  me,  her  minister. 
And  I  happened  to  know  a  man — not  of  this  Church — who  could  advance  the  money 
to  the  poor  widow.  So  we  went  to  this  man — the  widow  and  I — and  the  man  said 
he  would  be  happy  to  help  the  widow.  And  he  drew  out  a  bill  for  £20,  and  the 
widow  signed  it,  and  I  signed  it  too.  Then  he  put  the  signed  paper  in  his  desk  and 
took  out  the  money  and  gave  it  to  the  widow.  But  the  widow,  counting  it,  said : 
•  Sir,  there  is  only  £15  here.'  '  It  is  all  right,'  said  the  man ;  '  that  is  the 
interest  I  charge. '  And,  as  we  had  no  redress,  we  came  away.  But  the  widow 
prospered.  And  she  brought  the  £20  to  me,  and  I  took  it  myself  to  the  office  of 
the  man  who  lent  it,  and  I  said  to  him :  •  Sir,  there  is  the  £20  from  the  widow.' 
And  he  said :  '  Here  is  the  paper  you  signed,  and  if  you  know  any  other  poor  widow 
I  will  be  happy  to  help  her  in  the  same  way.'  I  said  to  him :  ♦  You  help  the 
widow  !  Sir,  you  have  robbed  this  widow,  and  you  will  be  damned  ! '  And,  my 
friends,  I  kept  my  eye  on  that  man.  And  before  six  months  were  over,  God  smote 
him,  and  he  died."  We  can  still  recall,  after  many  years,  the  creep  of  soul 
with  which  we  listened  to  the  closing  sentences,  and  the  vivid  glimpse  we  got  of  a 
Divine  retribution  falling  suddenly  on  a  bad  man.  The  law  of  exaction : — It  gives 
ns  a  fresh  sense  of  the  greatness  of  that  reformer  who  makes  this  answer  to  see  in 
it  how  free  he  was  from  the  infirmities  of  his  class.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  see 
that  things  are  wrong,  and  that  they  ought  to  be  changed  and  righted.  It  is  less 
easy,  but  still  not  uncommon,  to  have  the  courage  that  denounces  wrong  and  that 
rebukes  its  perpetrators.  It  is  quite  another  thing  to  have  the  practical  insight 
and  the  patient  determination  that  can  discover  a  remedy  for  abuses  and  point  the 
way  to  its  successful  application.  There  are  wrongs  that  have  been  denounced  and 
then  forgotten,  as  though  their  denunciation  and  their  repression  were  identical. 
And  by  such  a  course  the  moral  sense  of  a  community,  of  a  man,  becomes  dulled, 
and  at  length  slumbers  and  is  inert.  People  see  that  behind  the  passionate  voice 
there  is  wanting  the  guiding  hand  ;  that  the  scream  of  indignation  somehow  ex- 
hausts the  impulse  of  reform,  and  that  men  who  are  eager  in  general  terms  to  teV 
other  men  what  they  ought  to  do  are  quite  powerless  often  to  tell  them  how  to  do 
it.  It  explains  the  confidence  with  which  men  followed  John  the  Baptist  that  he 
not  only  rebuked  their  vices,  but  that  he  showed  them  how  to  forsake  them. 
**  What  shall  we  do  ?  "    "  Do  1 "  said  John,  "  do  something  for  your  brother-man. 


339  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chaf.  m- 

Instead  of  hoarding,  spend.  Instead  of  accumnlating,  give.  It  is  not  mnch  to  do, 
but  it  is  a  beginning.  Get  your  shrunken  heart  enlarged  a  little  by  making  it 
sensible  of  the  needs  of  others.  Exact  no  more  than  that  which  is  appointed.  It 
is  a  law  for  aU  men,  and  of  manifold  application.  Let  us  see  this  morning,  as  the 
preacher  in  the  wilderness  turns  on  it  the  strong,  full  light  of  this  personal  appli< 
cation,  what  that  is  which  it  has  to  say  to  us.  At  the  base  of  every  man's  con^ 
sciousness  is  the  sense  of  his  relationship  to  God.  "While  we  are  arguing  about  the 
existence  of  such  a  Being,  the  deepest  convictions  of  men  are  more  or  less  candidly 
owning  it  as  beyond  argument.  Next  to  a  man's  relations  to  his  Maker  are  hia 
relations  to  his  fellows,  and  here  the  personal  consciousness  is  far  less  certain  or 
clear.  "What  each  one  of  us  owes  to  our  neighbour — in  what  spirit  we  shall  main- 
tain our  business  or  social  relations  with  our  fellow-men — what  is  human  brother- 
hood, and  how  men  shall  practically  illustrate  it — these  are  questions  concerning 
which  many  people  are  in  frequent  and  serious  perplexity.  If  you  are  a  capitalist, 
and  I  am  a  tradesman,  or  a  farmer,  or  a  labourer,  the  time  will  almost  inevitably 
come  when  in  one  way  or  another  you  will  have  me  in  your  power.  You  are 
stronger  than  I  am,  like  the  Hebrew  or  Boman  publicans.  You  may  do  with 
impunity  things  that  I  cannot.  Above  all,  owing  to  my  necessities,  it  may  easily 
be  that  you  have  obtained  a  knowledge  of  my  affairs,  which  gives  you,  in  our  busi- 
ness dealings,  an  overwhelming  advantage.  You  can  "  freeze  me  out "  after  one 
fashion  or  another.  You  can  foreclose  on  me,  if  I  am  a  little  behind  in  my  interest. 
"We  read  of  men  in  civic  place  who,  entrusted  with  the  care  of  the  stranger  and  the 
immigrant,  make  them  welcome  to  these  shores  by  robbing,  and  even  ruining  them. 
And  our  cheeks  flush  at  an  infamy  so  shameless  and  so  inhuman.  But  here  is  some 
imposing  personage  to  whom  men  bow  obsequiously  on  'Change,  and  who  finds  a 
hospitable  welcome  at  the  tables  of  eminent  Christian  citizens,  who  only  differs 
from  the  immigrant  runner  or  a  boarding-house  striker  in  the  bulk  and  the  bold- 
ness of  his  transactions  I  In  essence  these  are  of  precisely  the  same  nature,  for 
they  are  both  trading  upon  the  ignorance  of  the  unsuspecting  and  wringing  their 
profits  oat  of  the  poverty  of  the  poor  and  the  weakness  of  the  weak.  To  all  such, 
and  to  you  and  me,  just  in  so  far  as  we  are  tempted  by  their  success  to  descend  to 
their  methods,  the  gospel  speaks  in  plain  and  stern  rebuke,  "  Exact  no  more  than 
that  which  is  appointed  you. "  And  no  less  does  it  say  to  that  other  life  which  most 
of  us  Uve  in  homes.  Here,  as  between  man  and  woman,  parent  and  child,  master 
and  servant,  there  is  a  large  field  for  undue  and  unwarrantable  exactions.  How 
many  sweet  and  gracious  relationships,  begun  in  love,  and  cemented,  it  may  be.  by 
mutual  sympathies,  have  been  spoiled  at  length  by  a  temper  which  was  all  the  time 
throwing  itself  back  upon  its  wifely  or  husbandly  rights,  and  exacting  not  only  these 
but  more  than  these  with  a  petulant  impatience  and  peevish  and  fault-finding 
querulousness,  a  harsh  imperiousness,  which  thought  only  of  itself  I  In  every  such 
relation  there  is  one  who  is  stronger  and  one  who  is  weaker.  "  I  wish,"  said  a 
father  to  his  son's  teacher,  "  that  I  could  at  least  persuade  my  son  to  treat  me  like 
a  gentleman."  "  Suppose,"  replied  the  other,  "that  you  try  the  effect  of  treating 
him  like  a  gentleman  1 "  Does  it  ever  occur  to  some  of  us  that  because  God  haa 
constituted  the  family  as  a  Divine  institution  in  which  the  parent  is  king,  it  doea 
not  follow  that  our  sovereignty  is  to  be  an  absolute  despotism.  Few  of  us  are  in 
danger  of  working  seven  days  in  the  week.  Some  of  us  would  be  happier  if  we  did 
a  little  more  work  on  the  remaining  six.  But  this  at  least  we  can  do — we  can 
protect  on  Sundays  the  rights  of  those  who  work  for  us.     {Bishop  H.  C.  Potter.) 

Ver.  14.  And  the  soldiers  likewise. — The  lawfulness  of  arms: — The  common 
argument,  founded  on  this  for  the  lawfulness  of  the  military  profession,  seems 
unanswerable.  It  is  true  that  war  is  contrary  to  the  mild  spirit  of  Christianity, 
and  that  the  guilt  of  it  must  be  always  chargeable,  at  least  on  one  side.  But  there 
are  several  professions  for  which  there  would  be  no  use,  were  it  not  for  human 
depravity  and  injustice  ;  e.g.,  there  would  be  no  use  for  magistrates  or  for  civil  or 
criminal  law  at  all,  were  it  not  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient.  So,  though  it  is 
often  a  delicate  point  to  settle  when  war  becomes  just  or  necessary,  its  justice  and 
necessity  in  some  cases  are  beyond  dispute,  and  therefore  the  employment  of  the 
soldier  must,  generally  speaking,  be  a  lawful  one.  But,  to  look  no  farther  than  to 
the  authority  before  us,  when  soldiers  under  concern  about  salvation  and  the  path 
of  duty  applied  to  John  for  direction,  would  that  intrepid  teacher  have  hesitated  a 
moment,  if  their  profession  had  been  unlawful,  to  tell  them  so,  and  to  exhort 
them  to  quit  it  immediately,  whatever  might  have  been  the  consejaenee?    Instead 


SAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKS.  381 

of  this,  however,  He  tells  them  how  to  conduct  themselves  in  it.  (Jamet  Foote,  M.A.] 
Encouragement  for  soldiers: — Notwithstanding  the  too  general  prevsdence  of  im- 
piety and  immorality  in  the  military  life,  there  are  many  honourable  exceptions. 
We  read  of  the  believing  and  humble  centurion  of  Capernaum,  who  said  that  he  was 
not  worthy  that  Christ  should  come  under  his  roof,  and  that  if  He  would  but  speak 
the  word  his  servant  should  be  healed ;  which  led  our  Lord  to  declare,  that  He 
had  not  found  so  great  faith,  no,  not  in  Israel.  We  read,  too,  of  Cornelius,  a 
centurion  of  the  Italian  band,  a  devout  man,  who  feared  God  with  all  his  house, 
imd  gave  much  alms  to  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God  always,  and  to  whom 
?eter  was  sent,  more  fully  to  instruct  him.  There  is  something  peculiarly  inte- 
resting in  almost  every  case  in  which  genuine  religion  decidedly  influences  the 
mind  and  conduct  of  a  soldier.  These  principles  must  be  sincere,  and  of  con- 
siderable  strength,  which  enable  him  to  overcome  the  varied  temptations  with 
which  he  is  beset.  The  trials  of  his  physical  and  mental  courage  have  been 
severe,  and  his  opportunities  of  observation  have  been  extensive.  The  result  of 
all  this  is  the  obvious,  and,  in  the  eye  of  the  enlightened  Christian,  the  very 
adorning  and  engaging,  union  of  frankness  with  caution,  of  complaisance  with 
faithfulness,  of  meekness  with  manliness,  and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  world, 
from  which,  however,  he  is  separated,  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  in  which  he 
continues  to  grow,  and  under  the  influence  and  in  the  comfort  of  which  he  is 
prepared,  if  it  be  the  will  of  God,  to  live,  and  equally  prepared,  if  it  be  the  will  of 
God,  to  die.  Let  no  soldier  be  so  infatuated  as  to  imagine,  that  his  profession  wiU 
be  sustained  as  a  satisfactory  excuse  for  his  impiety,  when  he  comes  to  stand 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  God  :  for  whatever  be  the  difficulties  in  his  way,  he  is 
offered  Divine  aid  in  proportion  to  these  difficulties,  if  he  apply  for  it.  Let  no 
Boldier  imagine  that,  because  he  is  a  soldier,  irreligion,  or  profane  swearing,  or 
violence,  or  intemperance,  or  licentiousness  in  him,  can  possibly  be  passed  over, 
unless  he  exercise  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  towards  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
unless  he  be  actually  reformed  and  converted.  On  the  other  hand,  let  no  soldier 
who  is  in  earnest  about  his  salvation  be  discouraged.  Let  him  be  prepared  to  set 
at  nought  the  profane  and  unhandsome  sneers  with  which  he  may  expect  to  meet. 
Let  him  study  at  once  to  live  like  a  Christian,  and  to  be  exemplary  in  the  duties  of 
his  profession,  and  then  even  those  who  affect  to  despise  will  inwardly  respect  him, 
and  even  in  their  own  estimations  appear  small  before  him.  (Ibid.)  Outrages  by 
soldiers : — The  soldiers,  so  necessary  as  a  class  in  all  such  civil  constitutions  as 
those  of  the  East,  receive  advice  of  which  the  Zabtiehs,  or  Turkish  soldier-police, 
of  to-day  stand  in  great  need ;  especially  in  provinces  more  remote  from  the 
capital.  The  outrages  they  commit,  in  violence  done  to  men  and  women  ;  and  the 
false  accusations  which  they  bring  to  ruin  them,  would  scarcely  be  believed  here ; 
and  indeed  they  are  mostly  too  shocking  to  relate.  The  writer  remembers  a  case 
which  occurred  in  Cyprus  while  he  was  there,  where  the  Zabtieh  had  been  too 
brutal  and  fiendish  in  his  behaviour  in  the  house  of  a  newly-married  couple.  But 
not  daring  to  resist  him  openly,  the  wife  had  managed  to  cajole  him  into  drinking 
heavily,  and  when  drunk  the  husband  stabbed  him  to  the  heart.  The  soldier- 
policeman  is  an  object  of  dread  in  every  country  village.  His  coming  can  scarcely 
be  looked  upon  as  anything  but  a  calamity.  In  many  cases — always,  indeed,  in 
actual  service — it  would  be  hard  fare  for  him  to  be  content  with  his  wages,  or 
rations.  But  the  people  with  whom  they  are  quartered,  or  whom  they  come  to 
"  protect,"  would  doubtless  be  glad  to  give  peaceably  out  of  their  deep  poverty 
enough  to  support  the  soldiers,  if  they  might  thus  be  relieved  of  their  violence  and 
false  accusations.  {Professor  Isaac  U.  Hall.)  Disastrous  result  of  a  false 
report : — I  have  read  that  a    foolish    young  English    clerk — fond  of    practical 

jokes — once  said  to  a  friend,  "  Have  you  heard  that  E &  Co.,  the  bankers,  have 

stopped  payment  ? "  He  merely  meant  that  the  banking-house  had,  as  usual, 
closed  up  for  the  night.  But  he  amused  himself  by  seeing  how  he  had  startled  his 
friend.  He  did  not  stop  to  explain  his  real  meaning.  His  friend  mentioned  the 
alarming  report  to  another  :  the  rumour  spread.    Next  day  there  was  a  "  run  upon 

the  bank,"  and  Messrs.  E &  Co.,  were  obUged  to  suspend  payment.    The  silly 

youth  did  not  mean  to  bum  down  the  commercial  credit  of  a  prosperous  house :  he 
>nly  meant  to  amuse  himself  by  playing  with  fire.  And  a  kindred  mischief  to  his 
is  perpetrated  by  every  one  who  retails  contemptible  gossip,  or  gives  birth  to  a 
scurrilous  slander.  "  An  abomination  to  the  Lord  is  the  false  witness  who  speaketh 
lies,  and  he  that  soweth  discord  among  brethren."  (Dr.  Cuyler.)  Refusing  to 
act  unjustly :— While  Athens   was  governed  by  the  thirty  tyrants,  Socrates,  th« 


834  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  nt 

philosopher,  was  summoned  to  the  senate-honse,  and  ordered  to  go  with  soma 
other  persons,  whom  they  named,  to  seize  one  Leon,  a  man  of  rank  and  fortune, 
whom  they  determined  to  put  out  of  the  way,  that  they  might  enjoy  his  estate. 
This  commission  Socrates  positively  refused.  ♦'  I  will  not  willingly,"  said  he,  "assist 
in  an  unjust  act."  Chericles  sharply  replied,  •'  Dost  thou  think,  Socrates,  to  talk  in 
this  high  tone,  and  not  to  suffer  ?  "  "  Far  from  it,"  replied  he :  "I  expect  to  suffer  a 
thousand  ills,  but  not  so  great  as  to  do  unjustly."  Example  of  contentment : — John 
Wesselus  of  Groningen,  who  was  one  of  the  most  learned  men  in  the  fifteenth 
century,  and  was,  on  account  of  his  extensive  attainments,  called  "the  light  of  the 
world,"  having  been  once  introduced  into  the  presence  of  the  pope,  was  requested  by 
that  pontiff  to  ask  for  some  favour  for  himself.  "  Then,"  said  Wesselus,  "  I  beg 
you  to  give  me  out  of  the  Vatican  Library  a  Greek  and  a  Hebrew  Bible."  "  You 
shall  have  them,"  said  Sixtus ;  "  but,  foolish  man,  why  don't  you  ask  for  a 
bishopric,  or  something  of  that  sort?"  Said  Wesselus,  "Because  I  do  not  want 
such  things."  Cato  and   Marius  Curius  : — Cato,   a  pattern   of  moderation, 

was  very  early  taught  the  happy  art  of  contentment,  by  the  following  circum- 
stance : — Near  his  country  seat  was  a  cottage,  formerly  belonging  to  Marius 
Curius,  who  was  thrice  honoured  with  a  triumph.  Cato  often  walked  thither,  and 
reflecting  on  the  smallness  of  the  farm  and  the  meanness  of  the  dwelling,  used  to 
meditate  on  the  peculiar  virtues  of  the  man,  who,  though  he  was  the  most 
illustrious  character  in  Rome,  had  subdued  the  fiercest  nations,  and  driven  Pyrrhus 
out  of  Italy,  cultivated  this  little  spot  of  ground  with  his  own  hands,  and,  after  three 
triumphs,  retired  to  his  own  cottage.  Here  the  ambassadors  of  the  Samnites  found 
him  in  the  chimney-corner  dressing  turnips,  and  offered  him  a  large  present  of  gold; 
but  he  absolutely  refused  it,  remarking,  "  A  man  who  can  be  satisfied  with  such  a 
supper,  has  no  need  of  gold ;  and  I  think  it  more  glorious  to  conquer  the  possessors 
of  it,  than  to  possess  it  myself."  Full  of  these  thoughts,  Cato  returned  home ;  and 
taking  a  view  of  his  own  estates,  his  servants,  and  his  manner  of  life,  increased  his 
labour,  and  retrenched  his  expenses.  The  secret  of  contentment : — An  Italian 
bishop  struggled  through  great  difficulties,  without  repining  or  betraying  the  least 
impatience.  One  of  his  intimate  friends,  who  highly  admired  the  virtues  which  he 
thought  it  impossible  to  imitate,  one  day  asked  the  prelate  if  he  could  communicate 
the  secret  of  being  always  easy.  "  Yes,"  replied  the  old  man ;  ••  I  can  teach  you 
my  secret  with  great  facility ;  it  consists  in  nothing  more  than  making  a  right  use 
of  my  eyes."  His  friend  begged  of  him  to  explain  himself.  "Most  willingly," 
replied  the  bishop.  "  In  whatever  state  I  am,  I  first  of  all  look  np  to  heaven,  and 
remember  that  my  principal  business  here  is  to  get  there ;  I  then  look  down  upon 
the  earth,  and  call  to  mind  how  small  a  place  I  shall  occupy  in  it  when  I  die  and 
am  buried ;  I  then  look  abroad  into  the  world,  and  observe  what  multitudes  there 
are  who  are  in  all  respects  more  unhappy  than  myself.  Thus  I  learn  where  true 
happiness  is  placed ;  where  all  our  cares  must  end ;  and  what  little  reason  I  have 
to  repine  or  to  complain."  Two  sorts  of  blessings : — "  It  is  a  great  blessing  to 
possess  what  one  wishes,"  said  some  one  to  an  ancient  philosopher ;  to  which  the 
wise  man  immediately  replied,  "It  is  a  greater  blessing  still,  not  to  desire  what  one 
does  not  possess."  Contentment : — Those  who  preach  contentment  to  all,  do  but 
teach  some  how  to  dwell  in  misery ;  unless  you  will  grant  content  desire,  and  chide 
her  but  for  murmuring.  Let  not  man  so  sleep  in  content,  as  to  neglect  the  means 
of  making  himself  more  happy  and  blessed ;  nor  yet,  when  the  contrary  of  what  he 
looked  for  comes,  let  him  murmur  at  that  providence  which  disposed  it  to  cross  his 
expectation.  I  like  the  man  who  is  never  content  with  what  he  does  enjoy ;  but  by 
a  calm  and  fair  course,  has  a  mind  still  rising  to  a  higher  happiness.  But  I  like 
not  him  who  is  so  dissatisfied  as  to  repine  at  anything  that  does  befall  him.  Let 
him  take  the  present  patiently,  joyfully,  thankfully ;  but  let  him  still  be  soberly  in 
quest  of  better ;  and  indeed  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  life  so  happy  here,  as  that  we 
shall  not  find  something  we  would  add  to  it,  something  we  would  take  away  from 
it.  The  world  itself  is  not  a  garden,  wherein  all  the  flowers  of  joy  are  growing ; 
nor  can  one  man  enjoy  the  whole  of  those  that  are  there.  There  is  no  absolute 
contentment  here  below ;  nor  can  we  in  reason  think  there  should  be  ;  since  what- 
soever is  created,  was  created  tending  to  some  end,  and  till  it  arrives  at  that  end,  it 
cannot  be  fully  at  rest.  {Owen  Felltham.)  Content  with  hit  position : — Joe 
Martin,  an  Indian  chief,  residing  in  New  Brunswick,  was  interrogated  by  a  pro- 
fessional gentleman  who  held  an  important  office  under  Government,  whether  he 
would  accept  the  commission  of  a  captain  among  the  Indians,  which,  he  observed, 
it  was  in  bis  power  to  procure  for  nim  ;  to  which  the  Indian  made  the  following 


tHAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  835 

reply : — "  Now  Joe  Martin  love  God,  pray  to  God  ;  now  Joe  Martin  htimble ;  certain 
not  good  to  make  Indian  proud ;  when  Indian  proud,  him  forget  God :  for  this 
reason  Joe  Martin  never  must  be  captain  1  "  He  accordingly  declined  it.  Con- 
tentment : — It  is  not  so  much  the  large  stars  shining  on  a  dark  night  that  makes 
the  sky  luminous,  but  the  multitude  of  little  ones,  all  doing  their  best  in  tbeir 
separate  places.  There  are  comparatively  few  of  the  large  ones — not  enough  by 
any  means  to  light  up  the  infinite  reaches  of  space  between  us  and  them — and  so 
here  is  the  need  of  the  little  ones.  Are  you  pining  in  your  place  for  the  honour  of 
a  large  star  ?  Be  content ;  your  mission  is  just  as  high  a  one  as  that  of  the  largest 
orb  that  shines.  Though  not  equal  in  size,  you  may  yet  be  in  brightness.  Keep 
steadily  to  your  appointed  place,  making  all  the  light  you  can,  and  you  are  the 
largest  star  in  the  eyes  of  the  great  God  who  ruleth  over  all. 

Ver.  15.  Whether  he  were  the  Christ  or  not. — The  Baptist's  attitude  towardt 
Christ: — Observe  here— 1.  How  the  extraordinariness  of  the  Baptist's  person,  the 
earnestness  of  his  preaching,  the  acceptableness  of  his  doctrine,  and  the  exemplari- 
ness  of  his  conversation,  drew  all  persons  to  an  admiration  of  him ;  insomuch  that 
they  began  to  think  within  themselves,  whether  he  were  not  the  Messiah  Himself. 
He  plainly  tells  them  he  was  not,  but  only  His  servant,  His  harbinger,  and  fore- 
runner. 2.  The  high  opinion  which  John  had  of  Christ.  "  He  is  mightier  than 
I " ;  t.«.,  a  person  of  greater  authority,  dignity,  and  excellency,  than  myself.  3. 
The  humble  and  low  estimation  that  the  Baptist  had  of  himself.  "  The  latchet  of 
whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  unloose  "  :  a  proverbial  speech,  implying  that  he 
was  unworthy  to  do  the  lowest  offices,  and  meanest  services  for  Christ.  How  well 
does  humility  of  mind,  a  humble  estimate  and  low  opinion  of  themselves,  become 
the  messengers  and  ministers  of  Christ.  4.  John  does  not  only  declare  the  dignity 
of  Christ's  person,  but  the  excellency  of  His  office.  "He  shall  baptize  you  with 
the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."  As  if  he  had  said,  I  only  wash  the  body  with 
water,  but  Christ  cleanses  the  soul  by  the  operation  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  as 
fire  in  its  effects,  purifying  the  hearts  of  His  people  from  sin,  and  consuming  their 
lusts  and  corruptions ;  yet  at  the  same  time  having  fiery  indignation,  and  flaming 
judgments,  to  destroy  and  burn  up  impenitent  sinners  like  dry  stubble.  It  is 
observable  in  Scripture,  that  Christ  is  represented  by  one  and  the  same  metaphor 
of  fire,  in  a  way  of  comfort  to  His  children,  and  in  a  way  of  terror  to  His  enemies ; 
He  is  fire  unto  both.  He  sits  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  as  a  refiner's  fire ;  He  is 
amongst  His  enemies  as  a  consuming  fire :  a  fire  for  His  Church  to  take  comfort 
in,  a  fire  for  His  enemies  to  perish  by.  5.  The  Baptist  compares  Christ  to  a  hus- 
bandman, and  the  Jewish  Church  to  a  barn-fioor;  the  office  of  a  husbandman  is  to 
thresh,  fan,  and  winnow  His  corn,  separating  it  from  the  chaff,  preserving  the  one 
and  consuming  the  other.  (1)  The  Church  is  Christ's  floor.  (2)  This  floor  Christ 
will  purge,  and  that  thoroughly.  (3)  The  Word  of  Christ  is  the  fan  in  His  hand, 
by  and  vnth  which  He  will  thoroughly  purge  His  floor.  The  Church  is  compared 
to  a  floor,  because  of  the  mixture  of  good  and  bad  in  it,  saints  and  sinners,  hypo- 
crites and  sincere  Christians,  just  as  in  a  threshing-floor  there  is  straw  as  well  as 
grain,  chaff  as  well  as  corn,  tares  as  well  as  wheat,  cockle  and  darnel  as  well  as 
good  seed.  But  Christ  will  purge  His  Church  ;  purge  it  of  its  corruptions,  without 
destroying  its  essence  or  existence,  by  the  fan  of  His  Holy  Word,  accompanied  by 
the  wing  of  discipline.  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  No  true  teacher  can  suffer  himself 
to  live  upon  mistaken  impressions  : — The  people  mused  whether  John  were  the  Christ 
or  not.  An  unreal  and  self-seeking  man  would  have  turned  this  doubtfulness  to  his 
own  account.  This  was  John's  temptation.  Jesus  was  tempted  in  one  direction 
and  John  in  another ;  but  in  each  case  the  temptation  was  direct  and  real.  Every 
ministry  must  be  tempted,  as  must  every  Christian.  Have  you  ever  been  tempted 
to  regard  yourself  as  some  great  one  ?  Have  you  not  covered  up  your  poor  and 
withering  name  with  the  reputation  of  strong  and  brilliant  men  t  Have  you  not 
received  applause  for  originalities  which  you  have  but  quoted  from  others  ?  John's 
declaration  concerning  Christ  is  most  remarkable.  He  says  notbing  about  preach- 
ing the  gospel  or  dying  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  nor  about  the  great  evangeUcal 
mission ;  the  declaration  relates  solely  to  baptism,  and  to  the  discrimination  of 
character.  But  what  a  baptism  1  and  what  a  discrimination  I  There  can  be  no 
mistake  about  any  man  who  has  received  the  baptism  of  fire  ;  the  fire  will  either 
illuminate  or  consume  him,  so  that  he  will  be  either  a  light  shining  afar,  or  a 
scorched  and  barren  soul  that  has  quenched  the  Spirit.  Baptism  by  water  can  only 
be  initial  or  symbolical ;  baptism  hjjire  is  the  great  testimony  of  God  to  the  souI'a 


S8«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m, 

ptirification  and  aeeeptanoe.  John  points  to  two  distinct  nses  of  fire :  Jesna  will 
Saptize  with  fire,  and  witfi  fire  nnquenchable  will  He  burn  the  chaff.  This  is  pre- 
cisely what  the  gospel  does.  It  is  a  savour  of  life  onto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death. 
(/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver,  16.  I  Indeed  baptize  you  with  water. — Significance  of  John's  baptism : — 1. 
John's  baptism  was  a  carrying  on  of  the  office  of  the  law.  Neither  repentance 
avails  without  grace,  nor  grace  without  repentance ;  for  repentance  must  first 
condemn  sin,  that  grace  may  blot  it  out.  So  then  John,  becoming  a  type  of 
the  law,  baptized  to  repentance,  Christ  to  grace.  2.  John's  baptism  was  higher 
th&n  Jewish  rites,  but  imperfect.  Moses  baptized,  but  with  water,  and  before 
this,  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea ;  but  this  was  typically,  as  St.  Paul  also  pro- 
nounces the  sea  a  type  of  the  water,  the  cloud  a  type  of  the  Spirit,  the  manna 
a  type  of  the  bread  of  life,  the  drink  a  type  of  the  heavenly  draught.  John 
also  baptized,  and  he  no  longer  Judaically,  for  he  baptized  not  with  water  only, 
but  to  repentance ;  but  not  as  yet  altogether  spiritually,  for  it  is  not  added  "  with 
the  Spirit."  The  perfection  of  Christ's  Baptism,  which  John's  lacked,  is  that  it  is 
with  the  Spirit.  3.  John's  baptism  was  preparatory  and  initiatory  to  the  gospel. 
He  baptized  not  with  the  Spirit,  but  with  water ;  because,  unable  to  remit  sins,  he 
washed  the  bodies  of  the  baptized  with  water,  but  not  their  hearts  with  forgiveness. 
Why  then  did  he  baptize,  since  by  baptism  he  did  not  free  from  sin,  except  that 
maintaining  the  order  of  his  precursorial  office,  he,  who  by  his  birth  had  gone 
before  His  birth,  should  by  baptizing  also  go  before  the  Baptism  of  the  Lord  ?  And 
he  who  by  preaching  had  been  made  the  precursor  of  Christ,  should  by  baptizing 
also  be  His  precursor  through  the  image  of  His  Sacrament.  (E.  B.  Ptisey,  D.D.) 
I  indeed  baptize  you  with  water  : — The  symbol  must  be  interpreted  by  the  circle  of 
ideas  in  which  John  moved,  and  which  he  variously  expressed.  Its  suggestive 
cause  is  as  hard  to  determine  as  it  is  unimportant.  The  rite  may  have  formal 
affinities  with  the  lustrations  of  the  Essenes  or  the  ablutions  of  proselytes ;  but  it 
has  a  material  significance  of  its  own.  John  placed  it  in  a  relation  with  confession 
of  sin  and  repentance,  that  made  it  the  symbol  of  certain  spiritual  realities — evil 
recognized  and  repudiated ;  good  perceived  and  chosen.  In  this  connection  its  use 
may  have  been  suggested  by  such  words  as,  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean,"  or,  "  In 
that  day  there  shall  be  s  fountain  opened,"  &o.  {Zech.  xiiL  1).  But  his  baptism 
was  the  symbol  of  another  and  no  less  significant  fact ;  the  baptized  were  not 
simply  the  penitent,  but  the  expectant,  men  consecrated  to  a  great  hope.  And  so 
John  was  but  true  to  the  best  genius  of  his  people  when  he  made  his  baptism 
represent,  not  simply  an  individual  change,  but  a  social  fact — entrance  into  a 
society  prepared  for  the  kingdom  which  was  at  hand.  The  "  baptism  nnto 
repentance  "  was  also  a  baptism  unto  hope :  as  the  first,  it  was  the  sign  of  A 
renounced  past ;  as  the  second,  it  was  the  symbol  of  a  new  future.  The  Baptist's 
idea  of  this  new  future  was  embodied  in  the  phrase,  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
He  could  indifferently  say,  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand,"  and,  "  After  me 
Cometh  One  mightier  than  I."  He  loved  indeed  to  contrast  his  own  meanness  and 
the  King's  greatness.  He  was  not  worthy  to  bear  His  sandals,  to  loose  His  shoe's 
latchet.  He  was  but  the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom  ;  the  Bridegroom  was  to  come. 
He  only  baptized  with  water,  the  mighty  One  who  was  coming  would  "  baptize 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."      {A.  M.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)  Humility 

the  test  of  a  great  man: — I  believe  the  first  test  of  a  truly  great  man  is  hia 
humility.  I  do  not  mean  by  humility  doubt  of  his  own  power,  or  hesitation  of 
speaking  his  opinions  ;  but  a  right  understanding  of  the  relation  between  what  hs 
can  do  and  say,  and  the  rest  of  the  world's  sayings  and  doings.  All  great  men 
not  only  know  their  business,  but  usually  know  that  they  know  it ;  and  are  not 
only  right  in  their  main  opinions,  but  they  usually  know  that  they  are  right  in 
them,  only  they  do  not  think  much  of  themselves  on  that  account.  Arnolf  o  knows 
he  can  build  a  good  dome  at  Florence  ;  Albert  Diirer  writes  calmly  to  one  who  has 
found  fault  with  his  work,  "  It  cannot  be  better  done  "  ;  Sir  Isaac  Newton  knows 
that  he  has  worked  out  a  problem  or  two  that  would  have  puzzled  anybody  else ; 
only  they  do  not  expect  their  feUow-men,  therefore,  to  fall  down  and  worship  them. 
They  have  a  curious  under-sense  of  poweriessness,  feeling  that  the  greatness  is  not 
in  them,  but  through  them  ;  that  they  could  not  do  or  be  anything  else  than  God 
made  them — and  they  see  something  Divine  and  God-made  in  every  other  man 
they  meet,  and  are  endlessly,  foolishly,  incredibly  meroifol.  {John  Buskin.) 
Hvmility  beautifies : — A  just  and  reasonable  modesty  does  not  only  reoommend 


our.  m.)  iSr.  LUKE.  137 

eloquence,  bnt  seta  off  every  great  talent  which  a  man  can  be  possessed  of.  It 
heightens  all  the  virtues  which  it  accompauies.  Like  the  shades  in  paintings  it 
raises  and  rounds  every  figure,  and  makes  the  colours  more  beautiful,  though  not 
•0  glaring  as  they  would  be  without.  {Addison.)  Adult  and  infant  baptism:— 
K  river  of  baptism  ought  to  be  a  river  of  death.  Tou  are  baptized  in  the  Jordan. 
How?  Need  we  then  care  how?  As  antiquarians  we  would  like  to  know  how 
John  the  baptizer  dealt  with  those  who  came  to  him :  we  would  like  to  know 
whether  they  were  dipped  in  the  stream,  or  whether  water  was  poured  upon 
them  from  the  stream.  But  now,  ask  your  own  conscientious  affections  whether 
the  answer  to  this  question,  spiritually,  is  worth  one  sixpence  to  us,  or,  at  any 
rate,  of  special  importance  ?  It  is  not.  As  antiquarians,  it  is  very  interesting  to 
us,  and  we  feel  sure  that  if  we  knew  the  outward  literal  truth,  we  should  get  some 
suggestion  from  it.  But  we  know  at  least  this :  the  people  that  John  baptized,  and  that 
disciples  of  Jesus  baptized,  were  adults.  That  is  clear  enough.  Well,  then,  if  at 
that  time  adults  were  baptized,  surely  circumstances  may  occur  again  in  which  any 
rational  person  will  allow  that  adults  may  again  be  baptized.  The  truth  is,  that  it 
was  not  man  that  invented  infant-baptism,  but  through  the  Lord  God's  providence 
at,  as  we  think,  the  suggestion  of  His  Spirit,  that  it  arose.  When  people  had  been 
baptized,  and  children  were  born  to  them,  that  they  never  would  let  grow  up  into 
the  heathen  state  in  which  they  themselves  had  been  when  they  were  baptized,  how 
natural  that  they  should,  by  a  water-rite,  adapted  from  the  rite  with  which  they 
were  familiar,  hallow  these  children  to  the  Lord  God  I  What  are  we  baptized  for, 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  into  a  new  life,  but  that  our  old  life  may  perish 7  "I  wish  my 
old  life,"  a  man  may  say,  "  to  be  taken  from  me  by  the  Jordan  and  carried  down  to 
the  Dead  Sea  as  soon  as  possible.  Oh,  let  me  be  utterly  rid  of  it ;  let  my  God  save 
me  by  the  death  of  the  old  man  and  the  resurrection  of  the  new."  All  that  is  out- 
ward is  of  value  only  for  its  significance  and  its  suggestiveness.  (T.  T.  Lynch.) 
One  mightier  than  I  cometh. — Expectation : — And  what  is  the  man  who,  having 
no  expectations,  is  always  casting  back  his  thoughts  into  a  retrospect  ?  Almost 
universally  a  melancholy  man.  And  what  is  the  man  who  sees  nothing  but  the 
present?  A  drudge  in  his  work,  and  a  sensualist  in  his  pleasures.  But  what 
is  the  man  who  throws  himself  into  that  which  is  beyond  him  ?  At  least,  an 
energetic  man,  and,  if  he  be  a  Christian,  a  happy  one.  Have  you  never  observed 
that  every  one's  character  is  determined  by  what  he  is  living  up  to  ?  Why  is  the 
Mahommedan  an  idle  and  self-indulgent  man  ?  Because  he  lives  up  to  a  corporeal, 
and  indolent,  and  sensuous  heaven.  Why  is  the  Brahmin  a  man  of  apathy  ? 
Because,  after  all  his  transmigrations,  he  has  nothing  to  expect — according  to  his 
creed — but  annihilation,  absolute  annihilation.  Why  does  the  believer  grow  holy 
and  loving,  but  because  he  is  always  realizing  in  his  mind  the  heaven  of  holiness 
and  love  to  which  he  is  going?  Certainly,  expectation  is  a  duty.  But  God  has 
done  with  this  faculty  of  expectation,  what  He  has  done  with  all  the  natural  powers 
and  habits  of  the  human  mind — He  has  sanctified  it,  and  elevated  it.  And  this  is 
the  way  God  has  done  it — He  has  thrown  into  it  first,  truth,  then  affection,  and 
then  great  delight,  so  He  has  made  it  hope.  What  is  it?  Expectation  with 
desire.  It  is  quite  certain  that  God  intended  that  man  should  be  ruled  by  hope. 
"  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  Observe,^  at  once,  the 
mind  was  sent  off  into  the  future  for  its  comfort.  It  was  the  same  with  Abraham 
— he  had  nothing,  he  was  to  have  everything.  The  Jews  lived  by  their  prophecies. 
Nor  less,  but  rather  more,  it  is  the  key  of  the  New  Testament.  What  the  Messiah 
of  Bethlehem  was  under  the  former  dispensation,  Christ  made  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
His  disciples.  Wait,  wait  till  you  receive  the  promises.  And  now  what  is  the  aim, 
the  consolation,  the  theme,  the  life  of  the  whole  Church,  but  the  coming  back  of 
her  dear  Lord  ?  But  what  I  wish  you  to  notice  in  this  long  line  of  expectation  is, 
that  the  next  thing  in  the  succession  is  always  greater  and  better  than  that  which 
preceded  it.  David's  reign  was  one  appointed  in  the  prospective;  but  David's 
reign  was  only  the  shadow  of  the  higher  empire  of  Christ.  Zion's  power  and  beauty 
were  predicted  ;  but  chiefly  as  the  type  of  the  Church  of  the  gospel.  The  gospel 
itself  was  infinitely  greater  than  all  its  foreshowing  ;  Jesus  was  a  greater  prophet 
than  Moses.  And  we  have  Christ's  own  warrant  to  say  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  a 
larger  gift  to  the  Church  than  even  His  own  personal  presence — more  pervasive, 
more  effective.  And  then  higher  and  higher  still,  in  ranges  where  the  mind  loses 
itself  in  floods  of  glory,  the  swelling  tide  rolls  on  and  never  stops.  If  yon  coold 
read  it  so,  brethren,  whenever  anything  happy  comes  to  yoo — an  answered  prayer, 
a  gift  of  God — you  may  always  hear  it — saying,  "  I  am  only  a  pledge  of  something 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ni, 

else ;  there  is  something  better  than  I  am  behind."  "  One  mightier  than  I 
Cometh."  Why  it  should  have  pleased  God  to  place  everything  in  such  a  scale  of 
ever-ascending  grandeur  and  goodness,  we  can  only  faintly  glimpse.  But, 
assuredly,  it  is  always  exalting  Him  in  His  unapproachable  height,  while  it  ia 
always  humbling  us  in  our  sense  of  ignorance  and  preparation.  (J.  Vaughatif 
M.A.)  The  latchet  of  whose  shoes. — Loosing  the  shoe-latchet: — I.  No  fobm  of 
HOLT  SERVICE  IS  TO  BE  LIGHTLY  SET  BY.  1.  Little  woiks  foT  Christ,  little  shoe- 
hearings  and  latchet-loosings,  often  have  more  of  the  child's  spirit  in  them  than 
greater  works.  Outside,  in  the  streets,  a  man's  companion  will  do  him  a  kindness, 
and  the  action  performed  is  friendly ;  but  for  filial  acts  you  must  look  inside 
the  house.  There  the  child  does  not  lend  money  to  its  father,  or  negotiate  busi- 
ness, yet  in  his  little  acts  there  is  more  sonship.  Who  is  it  that  comes  to  meet 
father  when  the  day  is  over  ?  and  what  is  the  action  which  often  indicates  child- 
hood's love  ?  See  the  little  child  come  tottering  forward  with  father's  slippers, 
and  run  away  with  his  boots  as  he  puts  them  off.  The  service  is  little,  but  it  i» 
loving  and  filial,  and  has  more  of  filial  affection  in  it  than  the  servants  bringing 
in  the  meal,  or  preparing  the  bed,  or  any  other  more  essential  service.  It  gives  the 
little  one  great  pleasure,  and  expresses  his  love.  So  also  in  little  acts  for  Jesus. 
2.  In  little  acts  for  Christ  it  is  always  to  be  remembered  that  the  little  things  are 
as  necessary  to  be  done  as  the  greater  acts.  If  Christ's  feet  be  not  washed,  if  His 
sandals  be  not  unloosed.  He  may  suffer  and  His  feet  may  be  lamed,  so  that  a  journey 
may  be  shortened,  and  many  villages  may  miss  the  blessing  of  His  presence.  So 
with  other  minor  things.  We  remember  the  old  story  of  the  losing  of  the  battle 
through  the  missing  of  a  single  nail  in  a  horse-shoe,  and  peradventure  up  to  this 
moment  the  Church  may  have  lost  her  battle  for  Christ,  because  some  minor  work 
which  ought  to  have  been  done  for  Jesns  has  been  neglected.  Many  a  cart  cornea 
to  grief  through  inattention  to  the  linch-piu.  A  very  small  matter  turns  an  arrow 
aside  from  the  target.  Human  destiny  often  tutns  upon  a  hinge  so  small  as  to  be 
invisible.  Never  say  within  yourself,  "  This  is  trivial."  Nothing  is  trivial  for  the 
Lord.  Never  say,  "  But  this  surely  might  be  omitted  without  much  loss."  How 
knowest  thou  ?  If  it  be  thy  duty.  He  who  allotted  thee  thy  task  knew  what  He 
did.  Do  not  thou  in  any  measure  neglect  any  portion  of  His  orders,  for  in  all  His 
commands  there  is  consummate  wisdom,  and  on  thy  part  it  will  be  wisdom  to  obey 
them,  even  to  the  jots  and  tittles.  3.  Little  things  for  Christ  are  often  the  best 
tests  of  the  truth  of  our  religion.  Obedience  in  little  things  has  much  to  do  with 
the  character  of  a  servant.  In  small  things  lie  the  crucibles  and  the  touchstones. 
The  Goldsmiths'  Hall  mark  is  a  small  affair,  but  you  know  true  silver  by  it.  4. 
Mark  also  with  regard  to  little  works,  that  very  often  there  is  about  them  a  degree 
of  personal  fellowship  with  Christ  which  is  not  seen  in  greater  work.  The 
smallest  act  of  service  done  for  Christ  has  an  importance  all  its  own.  5.  God 
accepts  our  worship  in  little  things.  He  cares  no  less  for  the  turtledove  offering 
than  for  the  sacrifice  of  bullocks  and  rams.  II.  Odr  own  dnworthiness.  We  are 
sure  to  feel  this  when  we  come  practically  into  contact  with  any  real  Christian 
service.  Let  a  man  begin  earnestly  to  work  for  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  he  will  soon 
find  out  that  he  is  unworthy  of  the  meanest  place  in  the  employ  of  one  so  gracious. 
1.  When  we  recollect  what  we  used  to  be.  2.  When  we  recollect  what  we  are.  3. 
Have  we  not  to  confess,  in  looking  upon  what  we  have  done  for  Christ,  that  we  have 
far  too  much  eye  to  self  in  our  conduct  ?  4.  Because,  when  we  have  gone  to  the 
lowest,  Jesus  always  goes  lower  down  than  we  have  done.  III.  This  ought  to 
STIMULATE,  NOT  DISCOURAGE  US.  Siuce  I  do  BO  badly  when  I  do  my  best,  I  will 
always  do  my  utmost.  Since  it  comes  to  so  little  when  the  most  is  done,  I  will  at 
least  do  the  most.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Latchet : — The  sandals  were  of  hard 
leather,  and  were  fastened  on  with  straps;  the  leather  of  which  was  doubtless 
then,  as  now,  the  skin  of  the  camel  or  hyena.  {E.  Stapfer,  D.D.)  ,  He  shall 
baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire. — The  promise  of  a  baptism  of 
fire  : — When  John  the  Baptist  was  going  round  Judfea,  shaking  the  hearts  of 
the  people  wiih  a  call  to  repent,  they  said,  "  Surely  this  must  be  the  Messiah 
for  whom  we  have  waited  so  long."  "No,"  said  the  strong-spoken  man,  "I 
»m  not  ;  the  Christ  but  One  mightier  than  I  cometh  ;  He  shall  baptize  yon 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."  This  last  expression  might  have  conveyed 
some  idea  of  material  burning  to  any  people  but  Jews ;  but  in  their  minds  it 
would  awaken  other  thoughts.  It  would  recall  the  scene  when  their  father 
Abraham  asked  Him  who  promised  that  he  should  inherit  the  land,  "  Lord,  whereby 
fibuli  I  know  that  I  shall  inherit  it?  "     The  answer  came  thas:   he  was  standing 


CIAF.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  339 

under  the  open  sky  at  night,  watching  by  chosen  sacrifices,  when,  "  Behold  a 
smoking  furnace,"  &c.  (Gen.  xv.  17).  It  would  recall  the  fire  which  Moses  saw  in 
the  bush ;  the  fire  which  came  in  the  day  of  Israel's  deliverance,  as  a  light  on 
their  way ;  the  fire  which  descended  on  the  Tabernacle  ;  which  shone  in  the  She- 
kinah  ;  which  touched  the  lips  of  Isaiah ;  which  flamed  in  the  visions  of  Ezekiel ; 
and  which  was  again  promised  to  Zion,  not  only  in  her  public,  but  in  her  family, 
shrines,  when  "  the  Lord  will  create  upon  every  dwelling-place  of  Mount  Zion,  and 
upon  all  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining  of  a  flaming 
fire  by  night."  In  the  promise  of  a  baptism  of  fire  they  would  at  once  recognize 
the  approach  of  new  manifestations  of  the  power  and  presence  of  God ;  for  that 
was  ever  the  purport  of  this  appearance  in  "  the  days  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most 
High."  {W.  Arthur,  M.A.)  The  baptism  of  the  Spirit : — I.  Natche  of  the  bap- 
tism PROMISED.  John's  baptism  was  introductory  and  transitional ;  Christ's  was 
to  be  spiritual,  quickening,  and  searching.  Apparent  mixture  of  metaphors. 
"  Baptism  means  cleansing,  and  fire  means  warmth.  How  can  warmth  cleanse  ? 
No  heart  is  pure  that  is  not  passionate,  no  virtue  safe  that  is  not  enthusiastic. 
And  such  an  enthusiastic  virtue  (and  much  more)  Christ  came  to  introduce."  The 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  fire  comes  upon  all — either  for  sanctification  or 
destruction,  according  to  the  way  in  which  it  is  received.  II.  The  need  of  such  a 
BAPTISM.  1.  It  was  needed  in  the  time  of  John.  What  was  wanted  was  a  moral 
power  that  should  at  once  (1)  Enlighten ;  (2)  Convince ;  (3)  Convert ;  (4)  Inspire 
with  well-founded  hope.  2.  Such  a  baptism  is  needed  now.  (1)  In  the  Church  ; 
(2)    In  the  world.     III.  The  only  source  whence  such  a  baptism  could  comb. 

1.  From  heaven.  2.  Through  Christ.  IV.  The  baptism  bestowed.  On  the  day 
of  Pentecost  there  was  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  world  received  a  new 
life.  There  was  also  the  baptism  of  fire  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the 
overthrow  of  Bome.  Every  genuine  revival  a  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Every 
time  of  sore  national  distress  or  humiliation  a  baptism  of  fire.  V.  A  personai. 
question.    Have  we  been  baptized  by  the  Spirit  ?     Such  a  baptism  is — 1.  Needful. 

2.  Possible.  Test :  Are  we  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  ?  (Gal.  v.  22-23.) 
VI.  A  PRESSING  DUTY.  To  pray  for  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  on  ourselves,  on  the 
whole  Church  of  God,  and  on  the  world.  VII.  A  word  of  warning.  There  will  be  a 
baptism  of  fire  for  individuals  and  nations  that  despise  the  warnings  of  the  Spirit. 
(E.  W.  Wilson.)  The  Spirit's  Baptism: — Baptism  of  the  Spirit.  (1)  Of  truth, 
to  enlighten  us ;  (2)  of  power,  to  renew  ;  (3)  of  grace,  to  comfort ;  (4)  of  love,  to  unite. 
{W.  H.  Van  Daren,  B.D.)  Inward  fire : — ^For  us  to  be  baptized  with  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  to  be  baptized  with  fire.  The  existence  within  us  of  false  tendency  and  pro- 
clivity makes  it  a  flame.  Once  let  it  fall  on  us,  and  straightway  there  is  turmoil ; 
straightway  some  hot  work  begins.  Here  is  a  man  wholly  at  ease  and  quiet  in  a 
pleasant  paradise — though  it  be  a  fool's  paradise  of  self-content  and  free  self -gratifi- 
cation ;  but  a  breath  from  on  high  stirs  in  him  at  last,  a  breath  of  higher  impulse  and 
inspiration ;  and  now  a  struggle  sets  in,  in  which  the  soul  sways  to  and  fro,  and 
burnings  of  remorse  and  repentance  are  suffered,  with  daily  self-reprovings  and 
self -crucifixions.  The  man  is  no  longer  at  peace  with  himself,  but  in  a  great  heat 
of  controversy;  no  longer  a  tranquil  universe,  but  a  troubled  conjunction  of 
antagonisms.  His  life  becomes,  as  the  Scripture  represents  it,  "  a  battle,"  "  a 
warfare."  A  fire  of  discontent  is  kindled  within  him ;  there  rages  in  him  the 
flame  of  a  conflict  between  the  Spirit  and  the  flesh.  When  Christ  began  of  old 
to  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  was  a  baptism  of  fire.  And  even  so  is  it  stiU. 
The  stirring  within  man  of  the  better  self,  of  the  Spirit  from  above,  is  invariably 
more  or  less  with  "  confused  noise  and  garments  rolled  in  blood."  Our  God,  when 
H«  touches  us,  is  a  "  consuming  fire."  Not  out  of  Christ,  as  we  have  it  explained 
sometimes,  but  in  Christ ;  for  from  the  God  in  Christ  proceeds  the  Spirit ;  and 
where  the  Spirit  breathes  in  human  breasts  there  is  burning.  (S.  A.  Tipple.) 
Fire  purifies  everything : — Louis  XIV.  had  granted  a  pardon  to  a  nobleman  who 
had  committed  some  very  great  crime.    M.  Voisin,  the  Chancellor,  ran  to  him  in  hia 

closet,  and  exclaimed,  "  Sire,  you  cannot  pardon  a  person  in  the  situation  of  M ." 

"  I  have  promised  him,"  replied  the  King,  who  was  ever  impatient  of  contradiction ; 

"go  and  fetch  the  great  seal."  "But,  sire ."  "  Pray,  sir,  do  as  I  order  you."  The 

Chancellor  returns  with  the  seals ;  Louis  applies  them  himself  to  the  instrument  con- 
taining the  pardon,  and  gives  them  again  to  the  Chancellor.  "  They  are  polluted  now, 
aire,"  exclaims  the  intrepid  and  excellent  magistrate,  pushing  them  from  him  on  tha 
table;  "I  cannot  take  them  again."  "What  an  impracticable  manl"  cries  tha 
monaxch,  and  throws  the  pardon  into  the  fire.    "  I  wiU  now,  sire,  take  them  again," 


B40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

eaid  the  Chancellor;  "  the  fire,  yon  know,  purifies  everything."  {BaxendaWt  AneC' 
dotet.)  JohrCs  baptism  inferior  to  CkrisVs : — The  inferiority  of  the  baptism  of  John 
to  Christian  baptism  is  declared  by  the  holy  Baptist  himself.  This  difference  (water 
.  .  .  Holy  Ghost)  he  alleges  as  the  proof  of  his  own  inferiority  to  his  Lord,  and 
•B  resulting  from  it.  This  difference  our  Lord  also  inculcated  (Acts  i.  11),  when 
He  instituted  His  own  baptism.  The  baptism  of  John  was  preparatory,  the 
Baptism  of  Christ  perfective ;  the  baptism  of  John  invited  to  repentance,  the 
Baptism  of  Christ  gave  grace  upon  repentance ;  the  baptism  of  John  stood  on  the 
confines  of  the  promised  land,  was  allowed  to  see  it,  led  men  to  the  borders  of  it, 
guided  them  to  it,  but  itself  brought  them  not  into  it ;  higher  than  the  law,  as  he 
whose  baptism  it  was,  was  greater  than  any  born  of  the  sons  of  men,  yet  less  also 
than  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  greater  than  the  baptisms  of  the  law, 
as  being  nearer  to  the  Eedeemer,  but  yet  restrained  within  the  precursojrial  office, 
still  a  shadow  of  the  good  things  to  come,  not  the  reality  itself,  though  brought  so 
near  to  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  as  all  but  to  be  kindled  with  His  beams,  as  all 
but  to  convey  that  which  could  only  be  conveyed  by  Him  in  whom  alone,  as 
being  God  as  well  as  man,  we  could  be  reborn  as  sons  of  God ;  who  alone  shed  His 
precious  blood  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  and  in  baptism  washes  and  cleansei 
His  Church  with  it.     {E.  B.  Putey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Whose  fan  Is  In  His  hand. — Chrisfs  floor  and  fan : — I.  The  threshino- 

7LOOR  MAT  BE  PBOPEKLT  EEGARDED  AS  THE   ChTJECH,  INTO   WHICH  ALL  PE0FES30RS  ARE 

GATHERED ;  or,  cvcu  in  a  wider  sense  still,  it  may  include  all  those  who,  though  they 
have  made  no  public  prof-ession  of  faith  in  Christ,  yet  secretly  hold  some  theory  of 
Christianity  which  they  deem  sufficient  for  themselves ;  or,  even  a  step  further,  it 
may  and  does  include  those  who  respect  Christ  and  build  their  own  schemes  of 
salvation.  Indeed  it  includes  every  man  who  says,  "  By  this  creed,  or  by  this 
philosophy,  or  by  this  life,  I  will  abide  the  issue  of  eternity."  Thus  we  see  how 
wide  this  threshing-floor  is,  and  that  in  fact,  while  it  is  true  that  Christ  came  not 
to  condemn  the  world,  but  to  save  it,  the  very  salvation  that  He  brings  and  so 
freely  offers  to  all  condemns  and  blows  away  the  rejected  as  chaff.  II.  The  fan  in 
His  hand  mat  suggest  to  ds  the  instrument  by  which  He  purges  His  floor, 
separating  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  Christ  had  no  sooner  come  and  entered  upon 
His  public  ministry  than  He  began  to  "purge  His  floor."  1.  Hia  Word  acts  as  a 
fan.  Many  of  the  multitudes  that  followed  Jesus  took  offence  at  His  words,  as 
witness  John  ii.  60.  Many  who  approach  the  floor  of  Christ  are  swept  away  before 
they  fairly  come  by  His  words ;  one  cannot  bear  salvation  by  grace,  another  is 
blown  away  by  the  new  birth,  another  by  this  and  by  that  doctrine,  2.  But  there 
are  others  who  are  not  blown  away  by  the  Word.  When  you  hear  them  talk  you 
wonder  at  their  severe  and  unflinching  orthodoxy.  For  such  Christ  has  another 
fan.  It  is  one  that  tests  the  character  :  the  new  birth.  Many  a  chaffy  professor 
of  orthodoxy  is  blown  away  by  this  ;  for  even  if  they  do  not  recognize  it  them- 
selves, others  see  how  surely  they  are  separated.  3.  Still  this  is  brought  to  another 
trial.  Many  say  "  Oh,  yes  ;  I  know  even  the  day  and  the  hour  of  my  regenera- 
tion." Well !  if  it  is  so,  the  fruits  of  your  new  birth  will  be  seen  in  a  new  life. 
Salvation  means  separation  from  sin.  The  demand  for  a  holy  life  oftentimes  proves 
too  much  for  the  chaffy  professor  who  can  relate  a  glowing  experience,  and  he  is 
swept  from  the  floor  and  heaped  up  with  the  rest  of  the  chaff.  4.  Again,  the 
Master  comes  with  the  fan  of  affliction,  and  tries  His  wheat,  as  He  did  Job.  There 
is  much  meaning  in  the  words,  "  He  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall 
be  saved."  III.  Thus  it  is  that  this  purging  process  is  going  on  all  the  time,  and 
CONSTANTLY  WE  FIND  THE  CHAFF  BLOWN  AWAY.  How  many  drop  out  of  OUT  churches, 
and  go  we  know  not  where  1  But  still  much  chaff  remains  among  the  wheat,  and 
doubtless  will  remain  until  He  come  agun,  and  then  the  floor  will  be  thoroughly 
purged  ;  the  hail  of  that  day  will  sweep  away  every  refuge  of  lies,  every  hypocrite's 
cloak  will  be  rent  off,  every  self-deceived  one  will  be  undeceived,  and  the  sheep  shall 
be  separated  from  the  goats,  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  "  The  wheat  will  He  gather 
into  His  garner,"  &o.  Who  shall  abide  the  day  of  His  coming?  (G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 
Judaism  and  Christianity : — ^What  were  the  characteristics  of  the  revolution  which 
Christianity  wrought  in  the  world  ?  I.  It  was  destructive.  It  proclaimed  war  against 
the  principles  opposed  to  it.  There  are  certain  times  in  history  when  a  great  shock 
is  necessary,  and  those  are  the  greatest  men  who  can  see  this  and  boldly  risk  the 
danger.  There  are  times  when  it  is  too  late  to  expect  that  the  world  can  be  saved 
by  the  instillation  of  good,  times  when  the  chaff  is  so  multitudinous  and  so  rotten 


CHAP,  ni.J  ST.  LUKS.  841 

that  the  wheat  is  in  a  double  danger,  the  danger  of  being  lost,  the  danger  of  being 
corrupted.  The  only  thing  then  is  to  bum  up  the  chaff  at  once  with  a  fire  which 
will  not  touch  the  wheat.  Christ  saw  that  the  time  had  come,  that  the  whole 
world  of  Jews  and  heathens  was  so  choked  up  with  chaff  that  a  slow  process  would 
be  ruin.  He  seized  the  moment,  He  accepted  its  dangers,  and  He  sent  forth  ideas 
which  flew  along  like  flame,  consuming,  destroying,  but  also  assimilating.  II.  But 
if  Christianity  was  destructive  as  a  revolution  it  was  also  pbeservaxivb.  If  Christ 
sent  forth  ideas  which  consumed  the  chaff.  He  sent  them  forth  also  to  gather  the 
wheat  into  the  garner.  No  noble  feeling,  or  true  thought,  either  in  Judaism,  or 
heathenism,  perished.  They  were  taken  up  and  woven  into  the  new  fabric,  e.g., 
Bomanlaw,  culture,  architecture — religion.  III.  Its  third  element  was  a  crvnazixa 
powBB.  Neither  Greek  science  nor  Roman  culture  had  power  to  spread  beyond 
themselves.  It  was  of  the  first  importance  that  some  civilizing  influence  should 
arise  which  should  permit  of  free  development — which  should  save  the  world  from 
the  dilemma  of  being  made  altogether  in  the  Roman  pattern,  or  of  remaining  in 
barbarism.  This  was  the  work  of  Christianity,  and  it  was  done  by  its  ministers,  in 
the  first  place,  not  as  apostles  of  culture,  but  as  persons  who  spoke  to  the  common 
wants  of  the  spirit  of  man.  The  missionary  spirit  was  the  product  of  love  to 
Christ.  The  civilization  of  the  barbarians  was  the  product  of  the  missionary 
Bpirit.  We  also  have  our  revolutions.  That  which  is  true  about  the  great  move- 
ments of  the  world  is  not  without  its  personal  interest  to  us,  nor  without  its 
analogies  in  our  life.  The  inner  revolutions  also,  if  it  is  towards  God,  is  (1)  des- 
tructive ;  (2)  preservative ;  (3)  civilizing,  or  sanctifying  to  the  whole  man.  {Stopford 
A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  Christ's  winnowing  fan: — Christ  did  not  go  out  of  His  way 
to  choose  His  followers ;  the  call  itself  was  the  fan  He  bore  in  His  hand.  That  call 
imposed  upon  men  the  necessity  of  making  a  great  resolution,  of  sacrificing  a  good 
deaL  On  the  other  hand,  what  did  it  offer  ?  What  equivalent  could  be  expected  by 
those  who  made  the  sacrifice  ?  The  call,  which  had  acted  as  a  test  upon  some 
directly  by  requiring  from  them  an  effort  which  they  were  not  prepared  to  make, 
would  winnow  away  others  more  gradually  as  soon  as  it  was  understood  to  offer  no 
prospects  which  oould  tempt  a  worldly  mind.  In  this  way,  without  excluding  any, 
Christ  suffered  the  unworthy  to  exclude  themselves.  He  kept  them  aloof  by 
offering  them  nothing  which  they  could  find  attractive.  And  all  those  who  found 
Christ's  call  attractive  were  such  as  were  worthy  to  receive  it.  Such  a  winnowing 
of  men  as  He  accomplished  is  not  unique  in  its  kind.  Every  high-minded  leader 
who  gathers  followers  round  him  for  any  great  purpose,  when  he  calls  to  self- 
saorifioe  and  has  no  worldly  rewards  to  offer,  does  something  similar.  And,  there- 
fore, in  tracing  the  history  of  many  other  movements  which  have  agitated  great 
numbers,  we  are  often  reminded  of  those  parables  of  Christ  that  begin,  "  The 

kingdom  of  heaven  is  like ."    The  quality  which  carries  a  man  through  the 

ordeal  is  faith.  Such  then,  is  the  new  test,  and  it  will  be  found  the  only  one 
which  could  answer  Christ's  purpose.  Every  other  good  quality  which  we  may 
wish  to  make  the  test  of  a  man  implies  either  too  little  or  too  much.  (Ecce  Homo.) 
The  autumn-fire  : — A  hidden  fire  burns  perpetually  upon  the  hearth  of  the  world. 
Soientifio  men  call  it  by  the  hard  name  of  eremacausis,  which  means  quiet,  or  slow 
burning.  We  see  its  effects  in  the  fading  of  leaves,  in  the  rusting  of  iron,  and  in 
the  mantling  of  the  rosy  blush  upon  the  cheek  of  youth.  Every  treeis  a  burning 
bush.  In  autumn  this  great  conflagration  becomes  especially  manifest.  Every 
blade  of  grass  in  the  fields  and  every  leaf  in  the  woodlands  is  cast  into  the  great 
oven  of  nature ;  and  the  bright  colours  of  their  fading  are  literally  the  flames  of 
their  consuming.  By  this  autumn-fire  God  every  year  purges  the  floor  of  nature. 
AU  effete  substances  that  have  served  their  purpose  in  the  old  form  are  bnrnt  up, 
and  only  what  has  the  promise  of  life  and  usefulness  passes  scathless  through  the 
ordeal.  The  straw  and  the  chaff  are  consumed,  and  the  wheat  remains.  As  God 
thus  pnrges  His  floor  in  nature,  so  He  does  in  grace.  We  have  a  striking  example 
of  the  effect  of  this  antumn-fire  in  the  removal  of  the  effete  things  of  the  Levitical 
institution.  The  Mosaic  dispensation  had  become  dead  ripe.  Jesus  came  in  the 
autumn  of  the  world,  when  all  things  had  grovni  ripe  and  old,  and  all  growth  had  closed. 
He  came  to  gather  in  the  harvest  of  all  previous  dispensations.  He  came  to  cast  fire 
npon  the  earth,  to  bum  up  the  chaff  of  withered  and  effete  institutions.  His  was  a 
fiery  baptism,  which  thoroughly  purged  His  floor — which  consumed  the  stubble  and 
the  withered  foliage  of  the  old  growth  that  had  served  its  purpose  in  the  religioua 
enltore  of  a  former  age,  and  prepared  them  for  being  worked  np  into  the  new 
developments  of  the  springtime  of  grace.    The  baptism  of  John  was  a  prooeas  ot 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [out.  m. 

purification ;  bnt  it  was  only  a  baptism  of  water.  Water  can  only  remove  snper. 
ficial  impurities ;  it  cannot  take  away  what  is  ingrained ;  it  can  oleanse  surface  and 
accidental  or  temporary  stains,  but  it  cannot  change  the  nature  of  anything.  And 
80  the  baptism  of  John  could  produce  ceremonial  purity,  but  it  could  not  cleanse 
the  sinful  heart,  or  transform  the  erring  and  polluted  mind.  The  baptism  of 
Jesus,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  baptism  of  fire,  and  fire  penetrates  every  sub- 
stance submitted  to  its  action,  and  changes  it  into  its  own  nature.  The  fire  of  life 
in  nature  burns  up  all  its  decay  and  prepares  it  for  new  growth.  And  so  in  the 
fulness  of  time  Jesus  passed  like  an  autumn  fire  over  all  the  dead  products  of 
human  attainment,  thoroughly  purging  His  floor.  He  caused,  by  the  same  fire  of 
grace,  to  grow  in  spring  freshness  and  beauty  that  fruit  which  is  unto  hoUness,  and 
whose  end  is  everlasting  life.  But  not  once  only  in  the  end  of  the  world  did  Jesus 
come  to  purge  His  floor  with  this  sacred  Are.  He  is  coming  continually,  and  Hia 
fire  of  purification  is  unquenchable.  In  each  of  these  partial  and  temporary  con- 
Bumings  He  anticipates  and  foreshadows  what  He  will  do  in  the  great  and  final 
judgment.  In  each  human  heart  this  sacred  autumn  fire  of  purification  is  burn- 
ing as  a  vestal  flame.  To  each  human  being  the  apostolic  precept  is  uttered, 
••  Quench  not  the  Spirit,"  put  not  out  the  heavenly  fire.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Christ's  fan : — A  fan  is  a  certain  instrument  which  the  husbandman  uses  to 
cleanse,  or  purge  his  com  from  the  chaS,  evil  seeds,  and  all  filth  whatsoever. 
Now  John  Baptist  alludes  to  such  an  instrument  as  this.  1.  By  Christ's  fan  is 
meant  His  Word,  His  holy  gospel,  especially  the  doctrine  thereof ;  it  is  by  this  He 
cleanses  and  purges  His  floor.  "  Now  you  are  clean  through  the  word  I  have 
spoken  unto  you."  2.  The  dispensation  of  God's  providence :  for  this  was  also  a 
fan  in  Christ's  hand,  by  which  He  fanned  away  those  unbelieving  Jews,  and  so 
purged  His  floor  ;  I  mean,  the  time  was  now  come  that  their  national,  legal,  and 
external  church-state  must  be  pulled  down  and  dissolved,  the  dispensation  was 
changed,  the  priesthood  changed,  and  right  of  Church  membership  changed.  So 
that  unless  they  receive  Christ,  believe  in  Christ,  and  are  found  gracious  persons, 
fit  wheat  for  Christ's  spiritual  garner  or  gospel  Church  (which  is  built  up  of  lively 
stones),  as  chaS  the  gospel  dispensation  like  a  fan  purges  them  oat.  S.  Christ 
hath  also  another  fan  in  His  hand,  viz.,  the  fan  of  Church  discipline.  And  many 
persons  falUng  into  sin,  are  purged  like  chaff  out  of  His  floor  thereby.  (1)  Some- 
times some  evil  and  corrupt  persons,  who  get  among  God's  people  (or  into  Hia 
Church)  and  pass  awhile  for  wheat,  i.e.,  for  gracious  persons,  yet  in  time  God 
Buffers  them  to  fall  into  one  temptation  or  another,  by  which  means  they  are 
fanned  away.  The  holy  Jesus  by  His  wise  providence,  making  a  discovery  of 
them,  and  their  evil  tempers  and  dispositions.  (2)  Others,  whom  Christ  would 
have  purged  out  of  His  Church,  may  be  suffered  to  such  in  some  evil,  corrupt,  and 
dangerous  principle,  or  errors  in  fundamentals,  like  that  of  "  Hymeneus  and 
Alexander  "  (1  Tim.  i.  20) ;  whose  errors  being  discovered  are  purged  out.  (3)  Also 
many  fall  into  notorious  and  scandalous  sins,  and  are  purged  out  by  this  fan.  Also 
(4)  some  who  are  chaff,  or  unsound  Christians,  may  be  suffered  to  take  up  undue 
offences  against  the  Church,  or  Churches  to  whom  they  do  belong,  and  by  giving 
way  to  temptation,  they  may  become  unreconcilable,  magnifying  their  own  wisdom 
and  self-conceitedness,  so  by  a  secret  hand  of  God  be  discovered  and  purged  out. 
4.  Jesus  Christ  hath  also  another  fan  in  His  hand  to  purge  His  floor,  or  cleanse  His 
wheat  from  the  chaff,  filth,  and  defilement  of  sin,  namely  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and 
by  this  means  He  cleanses  and  purifies,  in  a  gracious  manner,  the  souls  of  His  own 
people :  "  Such  were  some  of  you ;  but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye 
are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God" 
(1  Cor.  vi.  11).  What  filthy  creatures  were  those  Corinthians,  before  the  Lord  Jesus 
by  His  Spirit  had  purged  and  sanctified  them.  Faith,  of  the  operation  of  God,  ia 
a  most  excellent  grace  ;  it  is  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ  that  we  come  to  be 
purged  from  the  guilt  of  sin ;  faith  applying  His  merits  and  righteousness  onto 
the  soul  in  justification ;  and  such  is  the  nature  thereof,  that  it  makes  holy  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  all  such  persons  in  whom  it  is  by  the  Spirit  wrought  or  infused 
in  sanctification ;  "  And  hath  pat  no  difference  between  them  and  us,  purifying 
their  hearts  by  faith  "  (Acts  XT.  9).  Yea,  it  cleanseth  them  "  from  all  filthiness  of 
flesh  andspirit,  that  they  may  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  Bat 
let  me  tell  you  tiiat  the  Spirit  and  grace  of  Christ,  in  this  respect,  is  as  a  fan, and  rather 
to  cleanse  the  saints,  by  purging  out  the  chaff  of  corruption,  which  naturally  is  in 
their  hearts  and  lives,  tiian  to  purge  hypocrites  and  false  professors  out  of  the 
Charoh,  and  to  that  I  principally  refer  here.    6.  Moreover,  Christ  hath  the  fan  ol 


auB.  m.]  ST,  LUKE,  84S 

peraeeotioD,  or  the  saflerings  of  the  cross,  and  all  other  afflictions  which  He  bring* 
upon  His  people,  which  He  uses  to  purge  and  purify  their  souls,  and  His  Churches 
too.  And  from  hence  afflictions  are  compared  to  a  refiner's  fire :  •'  He  shall  sit  as 
a  refiner's  fire,  and  purifier  of  silver."  He,  that  is,  the  Messiah,  i.e.,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  this  His  work,  viz.,  to  purge  His  people,  who  in  this  place  are  com- 
pared to  silver  and  gold,  that  is  refined;  as  in  my  text  they  are  likened  unto 
wheat.  In  this  He  is  compared  to  a  refiner,  and  hath  His  furnace ;  in  the  othet^ 
to  a  husbandman,  and  so  hath  His  fan.  Both  these  texts  allude  to  the  Sams' 
thing,  and  doing  the  same  work,  namely,  to  sever  and  separate  the  clean  from  the 
unclean,  the  gold  from  the  dross,  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.  {Benjamin  Keach.} 
The  fan  of  separation : — Scripture  abounds  with  comparisons  drawn  from  the 
various  occupations  of  the  husbandman,  e.g.,  threshing  and  winnowing  (Isa.  xxi. 
10;  Jer.  xv.  7).  The  visible  Church  may  be  considered  as  Christ's  floor  here. 
On  this  floor,  or  in  the  visible  Church,  there  is  a  mixture  of  wheat  and  chafl 
— of  really  believing  and  holy  people,  with  hypocrites  and  ungodly  persons. 
A  separation,  however,  will  be  made  between  them.  Christ  is  omniscient  to 
discriminate  character;  and  omnipotent  to  put  His  will  into  execution.  Ha 
distinguishes  and  separates  characters — (1)  by  the  doctrines  of  His  Word ;  (2) 
by  the  dispensations  of  His  providence ;  (3)  by  the  convictions  of  His  Spirit. 
By  these  means,  a  considerable  distinction  and  discovery  of  character  is  made 
even  now,  and  it  will  be  completed  at  the  Judgment.  (James  Foote,  M.A.) 
Only  Christ  can  use  the  fan : — How  well  it  fits  Him,  and  He  it  1  Could  Satan's 
clutches  snatch  the  fan,  what  work  would  he  make  1  He  would  winnow  in  a  tempest, 
yea,  in  a  whirlwind,  and  blow  the  best  away.  Had  man  the  fan  in  his  hand, 
especially  in  distracted  times,  out  goes  for  chaff  all  opposite  to  the  opinions  of  his 
party.  But  the  fan  is  in  so  good  a  hand  it  cannet  be  mended.  Only  His  hand 
who  knows  hearts  is  proper  for  that  employment.  {Thomas  Fuller. \  The  design 
of  the  gospel  is  to  separate  the  good  from  the  bad: — I.  'Tis  supposed  m  the  text,  that 
good  and  evil  are  really  different  in  kind,  absolutely  and  intrinsically,  essentially 
and  in  the  nature  of  things.  This  appears  in  the  similitude  under  which  good  and 
bad  men  are  here  represented,  of  wheat  and  chaff ;  which  are  not  mere  external 
arbitrary  denominations,  but  things  in  their  whole  nature  and  kind  really  and 
essentially  different.  The  whole  foundation  of  religion,  and  of  God's  governing 
the  world  at  all,  as  a  moral  governor,  relies  entirely  upon  this  principle — that  every 
man  is,  as  to  his  moral  character,  what  his  own  behaviour  and  practice  makes  him, 
really  and  intrinsically,  and  by  as  certain  and  determinate  a  distinction  ;  as  wheat 
and  chaff  are,  by  their  real  and  proper  natures,  different  from  each  other.  II.  A 
distinct  declaration,  that  the  great  design  of  God,  as  in  every  dispensation  of 
religion  in  general,  so  in  the  gospel  more  particularly,  is  to  separate  the  evil  from 
the  good  by  proper  trials  ;  and  that  this  design  will  be  effectually  accomplished  by 
Christ — in  the  present  life  partly,  and  to  certain  degrees ;  in  the  future  hfe  per- 
fectly, totally,  and  finally.  By  temptations,  therefore,  of  all  kinds,  is  the  sincerity 
of  men's  virtue  distinguished  in  the  present  life.    III.  From  hence  (I  say)  arises 

one  obvious  and  general  inference,  of  great  extent  and  of  the  highest  importance 

that  whatever  doctrine  in  religion  has  any  tendency  to  persuade  men,  or  make  them 
imagine  that  they  can  be  in  any  degree  the  better  for  their  profession  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  any  otherwise  than  as  their  knowledge  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  makes 
them  to  be  better  and  more  virtuous  men :  that,is,  in  the  language  of  my  text,  what- 
ever tends  to  persuade  men  that  chaff  may  pass  for  wheat,  while  it  continues  to  be 
only  chaff,  is  a  direct  mockery  of  God,  and  deceit  upon  themselves.  "Little 
children,"  says  the  apostle,  "  let  no  man  deceive  yon :  he  that  doeth  righteousness 
is  righteous."    (S.  Clarke,  D.D.) 

Vers.  18,  20.  He  shut  up  John  In  prison.— Herod  Antipas  .-—The  view  here  given 
of  the  character,  conduct,  and  history  of  Herod  Antipas  is  full  of  matter  for  awful 
reflection  and  serious  admonition.  1.  The  mysteriousness  of  the  ways  of  Provi- 
dence. That  a  man  so  worthless  should  be  permitted  to  cut  short  the  labours  and 
the  life  of  so  holy  and  useful  a  character,  and  that,  too,  in  order  to  gratify  the 
revenge  of  an  abandoned  adulteress,  and  to  reward  the  vain  exhibition  of  a  giddy 
damsel,  must,  no  doubt,  at  first  appear  strange.  Yet  the  anger  of  God  overtook 
the  persecutors  before  they  left  this  world;  and  as  for  the  holy  sufferer,  his  work 
was  done ;  and  it  was  easy  for  his  Lord  to  recompense  to  him  his  temporal  sorrowi 
a  hundredfold  in  the  world  of  glory.  2.  The  danger  of  power  without  grace.  It  ia 
eommon  to  wish  for  power,  and  to  envy  those  in  whose  hands  it  is ;  bat  when  it  !• 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHAP.  Uk 

held  withont  principle,  it  is  fraught  with  peril,  not  only  to  those  over  whom  it  ia 
exercised,  but  to  those  by  whom  it  is  possessed.  They  are  generally  borne  away  by 
the  temptations  which  it  presents  to  the  gratification  of  caprice,  luxury,  covetous- 
ness,  oppression,  revenge,  and  every  evil  passion ;  and  however  prosperous  their 
career  may  seem  for  a  season,  their  end  is  generally  destruction,  and  their  memory 
is  abhorred.  3.  What  is  sin  in  the  meanest  is  also  sin  in  the  highest.  The  judg- 
ment of  God  is  impartial,  and  in  every  case  He  will  render  to  each  according  to  hia 
deeds.  4.  An  awful  commentary  on  human  depravity.  5.  The  dreadful  con- 
sequences which  often  result  from  the  violation  of  the  seventh  commandment, 
and  from  intemperance.  6.  We  should  learn  to  take  reproof  in  good  part.  Well 
had  it  been  for  Herod  if  he  had  submitted  to  John's  rebuke  and  acted  on  it. 
7.  Sin,  when  pointed  out,  must  be  renounced.  This  man  reverenced  John,  and 
yet  lived  and  died  in  sin.  Let  us  not  do  as  he  did.  (Javies  Foote,  M.A.)  John's 
rebuke  of  Herod : — The  life  of  John  the  Baptist  divides  itself  into  three  distinct 
periods.  Of  the  first,  we  are  told  that  he  was  in  the  deserts  until  his  showing 
unto  Israel.  This  period  lasted  thirty  years.  The  second  is  a  shorter  one.  It 
comprises  the  few  months  of  his  public  ministry.  In  the  third  we  are  to  consider 
him  as  the  tenant  of  a  compelled  solitude,  in  the  dungeon  of  a  capricious  tyrant. 
A  rare  man,  one  of  God's  heroic  ones,  a  true  conqueror;  one  whose  life  and 
motives  it  is  hard  to  understand  without  feeling  warmly  and  enthusiastically 
about  them.  One  of  the  very  highest  characters,  rightly  understood,  of  all  the 
Bible.  In  the  verse  which  is  to  serve  us  for  our  guidance  on  this  subject  there 
are  two  branches  which  wUl  afford  us  fruit  of  contemplation.  I.  The  tetjth- 
STTiiNESS  OF  Chbistiah  chaeacteb.  "Herod  being  reproved  by  John  for  Herodias." 
There  are  three  things  we  remark  in  this  truthfulness  of  John.  1.  Its  straight- 
forwardness. 2.  Its  unconsciousness.  3.  Its  unselfishness.  U.  The  apparent 
fAiLUBB  OP  Cheistian  LIFE.  "  Shut  up  Johu  in  prison."  The  first  thought  which 
suggests  itself  is  that  a  magnificent  career  is  cut  short  too  soon.  At  the  very  outset 
of  ripe  and  experienced  manhood  the  whole  thing  ends  in  failure.  John's  day  of 
active  usefulness  is  over.  The  crowds  that  listened  to  hia  voice,  we  hear  of  them 
no  more.  Herod  heard  John  gladly,  did  much  good  by  reason  of  his  influence. 
What  was  all  that  worth  ?  The  prophet  comes  to  himself  in  a  dungeon,  and  wakea 
to  the  conviction,  that  his  influence  had  told  much  in  the  way  of  commanding 
attention,  and  even  winning  reverence,  but  very  little  in  the  way  of  gaining  souls — 
the  bitterest,  the  most  crushing  discovery  in  the  whole  circle  of  ministerial  experi- 
ence. All  this  was  seeming  failure.  And  this,  brethren,  is  the  picture  of  almost 
all  human  life.  In  the  isolation  of  John's  dying  hour  there  appears  failure  again. 
The  martyr  of  truth  dies  privately  in  Herod's  dungeon.  We  have  no  record  of  hia 
last  words.  There  were  no  crowds  to  look  on.  We  cannot  describe  how  he  received 
hia  sentence.  Was  he  calm?  Was  he  agitated?  Did  he  bless  his  murderer? 
Did  he  give  utterance  to  any  deep  reflections  on  human  life  ?  All  that  is  shrouded 
in  silence.  He  bowed  his  head,  and  the  sharp  stroke  fell  flashing  down.  We 
know  that,  we  know  no  more—  apparently  a  noble  hf e  abortive.  And  now — HL, 
let  as  ask  the  question — Was  all  this  indeed  faildbe?  No,  it  was  sublimest 
victory.  John's  work  was  no  failure.  He  left  behind  him  no  sect  to  which  he  had 
given  his  name,  but  his  disciples  passed  into  the  service  of  Christ,  and  were 
absorbed  in  the  Christian  Church.  Words  from  John  had  made  impressions,  and 
men  forgot  in  after  years  where  the  impressions  first  came  from,  but  the  day  of 
judgment  wiU  not  forget.  John  laid  the  foundations  of  a  temple,  and  others  built 
upon  it.  He  laid  it  in  struggle,  in  martyrdom.  It  was  covered  up  like  the  rough 
masonry  below  ground,  but  when  we  look  round  on  the  vast  Christian  Church,  we 
are  looking  at  the  superstructure  of  John's  toil.  There  is  a  lesson  for  us  all  in 
that,  if  we  will  learn  it.  Work,  true  work,  done  honestly  and  manfuUy  for  Christ, 
never  can  be  a  failure.  We  are  treading  upon  a  bridge  of  martyrs.  The  suffering 
was  theirs — the  victory  is  ours.  IV.  In  conclusion,  we  make  three  remarks.  1. 
Let  young  and  ardent  minds,  under  the  first  impressions  of  religion,  beware  how 
they  pledge  themselves  by  any  open  profession  to  more  than  they  can  perform.  2. 
We  get  from  this  subject  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection.  John's  life  was  hardness, 
his  end  was  agony.  Be  content  to  feel  that  this  world  is  not  your  home.  Homeleaa 
cpon  earth  ;  try  more  and  more  to  make  your  home  in  heaven,  above  with  Christ. 
8  Devotedness  to  Christ  is  our  only  blessedness.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  John 
Baptist's  imprisonment: — Josephus  gives  some  interesting  particulars  respecting 
the  imprisonment  and  murder  of  the  Baptist,  which  are  not  supplied  in  the  gospel 
histoiy.    Herod  Antipas,  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  was  at  that  time  tetraroh  of 


CHAT,  ra.]  8T.  LUKE,  US 

Galilee  and  Persea,  and  had  married  the  daughter  of  Aretas,  an  Arabian  king, 
■whose  territories  abutted  on  his  own.  When  he  was  at  Rome,  however,  he  stayed 
at  the  house  of  his  half-brother  Philip,  whose  wife  Herodias  be  conceived  a  passion 
for.  Antipas  made  known  his  passion,  and  Herodias  readily  enough  consented  to 
leave  Philip  and  go  with  him.  The  daughter  of  Aretas  was  divorced,  and  Herodias 
duly  installed  in  her  place.  John  the  Baptist  had  the  courage  to  denounce  this 
infamous  marriage  ;  and  by  and  by  Herod  Antipas,  under  pretence  that  he  feared 
John's  popularity  with  the  multitude  might  lead  to  disturbances,  apprehended  and 
imprisoned  him.  John  was  sent  to  Machaerus,  or  M'Khaur,  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Dead  Sea,  where  Herod  had  both  a  city  and  fortress.  The  site  and  ruina  of 
Machserus  were  identified  by  Canon  Tristram  in  his  visit  to  the  Land  of  Moab  in 
1872.  It  was  from  this  spot,  then,  that  John  sent  two  of  his  disciples  to  Christ  to 
ask,  "  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come  ?  "  And  it  was  here  that  Salome,  the  daughter 
of  Herodias,  danced  before  Antipas,  and  won  for  her  infamous  mother  the  head  of 
John  the  Baptist.  (Biblical  Things  Not  Generally  Known.)  John  like  Elijah : — 
Ab  the  first  Elijah  reproved  King  Ahab  for  the  murder  of  Naboth  and  the  seizure 
of  his  vineyard,  so  the  second  Elijah  rebuked  King  Herod  for  his  lost.  {W.  Bull.) 
Jteproving  a  king : — Dr.  Hickington,  chaplain  to  Charles  II. ,  used  to  preach  at  the 
long's  vices.  This  the  king  took  to  himself;  and  so,  one  day,  he  said,  "Doctor, 
yon  and  I  ought  to  be  better  friends;  give  up  being  so  sharp  on  me,  and  see  if  I 
don't  mend  on  your  hand."  "Well,  well,"  quoth  the  doctor,  "I'll  make  it  up 
with  your  Majesty  on  these  terms :  as  you  mend,  I'll  mend."  The  king 
reproved: — It  is  said  that  Henry  the  Great  of  France  took  much  pleasure  in 
conversing  with  an  honest  and  religious  man  of  low  situation  in  life,  who  used 
great  freedom  with  his  Majesty.  One  day  he  said  to  the  king,  "  Sire,  I  always  take 
your  part  when  I  hear  any  man  speaking  evil  of  you ;  I  know  that  you  excel  in 
justice  and  generosity,  and  that  many  worthy  things  have  been  done  by  you.  But 
you  have  one  vice  for  which  God  will  condemn  you,  if  you  do  not  repent — I  mean 
the  unlawful  love  of  women."  The  king,  it  is  said,  was  too  magnanimous  to  resent 
this  reproof,  but  he  long  felt  it  like  an  arrow  in  his  bosom ;  and  sometimes  said 
that  the  most  eloquent  discourses  of  the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  had  never  made 
Buch  an  impression  on  his  soul  as  this  honest  reproof  from  his  humble  friend. 
Excommunicating  a  prince: — William  IX.,  Duke  of  Aquitaine  and  Earl  of  Poictiers, 
was  a  violent  and  dissolute  prince,  and  often  indulged  himself  in  improper  behaviont 
at  the  expense  of  religion.  Though  he  had  contracted  a  very  suitable  marriage, 
and  one  with  which  he  was  satisfied  for  some  time,  he  parted  from  his  wife  without 
reason,  to  marry  another  who  pleased  him  better.  The  Bishop  of  Poictiers,  by 
name  Peter,  could  not  brook  so  great  a  scandal ;  and  having  employed  all  other 
means  in  vain,  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  excommunicate  the  duke.  As  he  began  to 
pronounce  the  anathema,  William  furiously  advanced,  sword  in  hand,  saying, 
"  Thou  art  dead  if  thou  proceedest."  The  bishop,  as  if  afraid,  required  a  few 
moments  to  consider  what  was  most  expedient.  The  duke  granted  it,  and  the 
bishop  courageously  finished  the  rest  of  the  formula  of  excommunication.  After 
which,  extending  his  neck,  "Now,  strike,"  said  he,  "I  am  quite  ready."  The 
astonishment  which  this  intrepid  conduct  produced  in  the  duke  disarmed  his  fury, 
and  saying,  ironically,  "  I  don't  like  you  well  enough  to  send  you  to  heaven,"  he 
contented  himself  with  banishing  him.  Moral  courage: — Dr.  Harris,  the  minister 
of  Hanwell,  during  the  Civil  Wars,  frequently  had  military  officers  quartered  at  hia 
house.  A  party  of  them,  being  unmindful  of  the  reverence  due  to  the  holy  name 
of  God,  indulged  themselves  in  swearing.  The  doctor  noticed  this,  and  on  the 
following  Sunday  preached  from  these  words — "  Above  all  things,  my  brethren, 
Bwear  not."  This  so  enragsd  the  soldiers,  who  judged  the  sermon  was  intended 
for  them,  that  they  swore  ihey  would  shoot  him  if  he  preached  on  the  subject 
again.  He  was  not,  however,  to  be  intimidated ;  and,  on  the  following  Sunday,  he 
not  only  preached  from  the  same  text,  but  inveighed  in  still  stronger  terms  against 
the  vice  of  swearing.  As  he  was  preaching  a  soldier  levelled  his  carabine  at  him ; 
but  he  went  on  to  the  conclusion  of  his  sermon,  without  the  slightest  fear  or 
hesitation. 

Ver.  21.  Jesus  also  hetog  baptized. — Meeting  of  Jesus  with  John: — The  people, 
I  read,  "mused,"  wondering  if  John  were  the  expected  Messiah.  John,  too, 
mused,  yre  may  be  sure.  "  Words !  words !  words !  "  at  the  end  of  each  long 
sultry  day,  as  he  laid  him  down  in  some  rocky  cave  what  time  the  sun  sanS 
■oddenly  and  the  stars  hung  like  balls  of  fire  in  the  purple  sky,  and  the  017  ol 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m 

the  wild  beast  was  heard  as  he  stole  forth  to  drink  at  the  fords  of  the  Jordan. 
•'  I  can  baptize  them  with  water.  I  can  tell  them  to  repent.  Poor  forlorn  sheep 
upon  the  moontains — where  shall  they  find  their  shepherd  f  I  am  the  voice 
crying  in  the  wilderness — where  is  the  Divine  Prophet  t  I  baptize  with  water — 
who  wUl  give  them  the  fiery  baptism  of  the  soul  7  Who  will  help  them  to  seek, 
and  nerve  them  to  act?  "  And  then  came  One  on  a  certain  still  morn,  early,  it 
may  be,  before  the  heat  of  the  day,  with  only  a  few  zealons  stragglers  abont, 
waiting  for  baptism,  and  John  met  Him  by  the  Jordan  river.  Needless  to  explain. 
Soul  met  soul.  John  knew  his  Master  as  surely  as  did  frail  Peter  when  he  cried 
out,  "Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man";  or  doubting  Thomas  when, 
heart-struck,  he  mnrmered,  "  My  Lord,  and  my  God ! "  "I  have  need,"  were 
John's  first  words — yea,  we  all  have  need  face  to  face  with  Jesus — "  I  have  need  to 
be  baptized  of  Thee."  And  then  came  the  first  words  of  Christ's  ministry,  they 
struck  the  keynote  of  the  gospel,  '*  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,  for  thus  it  becometh  ua 
to  fulfil  all  righteousness."  The  heart  of  Christianity  lies  there  ;  Christ  the  Com- 
panion of  man,  the  Example  of  man.  The  Saviour,  because  the  revelator  of  a 
Divine  union  between  God  and  man,  a  spiritual  life  in  man.  And  on  the  morrow 
the  Baptist  saw  Him  waDcing  by  the  river,  and  pointing  Him  out,  exclaimed, 
"Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  I "  Ac.  Message  to  the  Ages  I  Call  to  every 
PUgrim  of  the  night  1  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  help  is  nigh.  God  in  Christ  is  your 
Saviour,  because  Christ  in  human  nature  means  Christ  in  you,  the  Divine  power 
revealed  in  every  man,  as  he  is  able  to  receive  and  use  it.  Let  that  vision  remain 
with  us.  Blessed  gleam  of  the  morning  light  I  Behold  Jesus  going  down  into  the 
Jordan  to  be  baptized,  one  with  us,  never  more  to  be  separated  from  us — Great 
Elder  Brother,  dear  Friend  1  Close  to  us  in  the  waters  of  purification,  close 
to  OS  in  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  close  to  us  in  the  shadow 
of  our  Gethsemane,  close  to  us  in  the  Calvary  of  our  pain,  the  Lamb  of  God 
that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.  (H.  R.  Haweis,  M.A.)  Christ 
and  John: — The  relation  between  Jesus  and  John  resembles  two  stars  following 
each  other  at  a  short  distance,  both  passing  through  similar  circumstances.  The 
announcement  of  the  appearing  of  the  one  follows  close  upon  that  of  the  appearing 
of  the  other.  It  is  the  same  with  their  two  births.  This  relation  repeats  itself  in 
the  commencement  of  their  respective  ministries ;  and  lastly,  in  the  catastrophes 
which  terminate  their  lives.  And  yet,  in  the  whole  course  of  the  career  of  these 
two,  there  was  but  one  personal  meeting — at  the  baptism  of  Jesus.  After  thia 
moment,  when  one  of  these  stars  rapidly  crossed  the  orbit  of  the  other,  they  separ- 
ated, each  to  follow  the  path  that  was  marked  out  for  him.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.) 
Jes^s  baptized :— I.  1.  The  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist  was  the  sign  that  the 
active  ministry  of  the  Messiah  was  now  to  begin.  The  Incarnate  Word  had  been 
hidden  among  men.  His  presence  must  now  be  manifested  and  His  kingdom  set 
np.  2.  His  first  act  in  passing  from  His  hidden  to  His  active  life,  is  to  identify 
Himself  with  that  sinning  race  in  whose  likeness  He  had  come.  3.  This  humili- 
ation was  temporary  and  voluntary — "  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now,"  i.e.,  "  for  the  present 
time  ";"  for  thus  it  becometh  us  " — not  "it  is  necessary" — "to  fulfil  all  right- 
eousness." 4.  Notice  how  He  who  in  His  boyhood  "  must  be  about  His  Father's 
business,"  in  His  manhood  must  "  fulfil  all  righteousness."  II.  1.  There  is  a 
deep  sense  in  which  this  undergoing  the  baptism  of  John  was  a  fulfilling  all 
righteousness.  It  was  a  revelation  that  man's  nature  needs  not  merely  improve- 
ment but  renewal.  Baptism  represents  the  death  of  the  old  man  and  the  resor- 
rection  of  the  new.  2.  It  is  that  He  who  thus  humiliated  Himself  for  ua  may 
fulfil  all  righteousness  in  us  that  we  pray,  "  By  Thy  baptism,  .  .  .  good  Lord, 
deliver  na."  {Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  The  significance  of  Christ's  baptism  ,•— 
One  purpose  of  His  baptism  our  Lord  Himself  mentions,  in  order  to  satisfy  the 
scruples  of  the  reluctant  Baptist ;  "  Suffer  now,  for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all 
righteousness."  The  first  and  obvious  sense  of  this  is,  that  since  the  baptism  of 
John  was  of  God,  it  became  Him,  as  being  bom  in  the  people  to  whom  God  had 
given  it,  to  submit  Himself  to  it  as  the  ordinance  of  God.  But  then,  other  grounda 
might  be  included  in  this,  as  involved  in  the  character  and  person  of  Him  who  thua 
submitted  Himself.  The  words  may  have  been  left,  on  purpose,  undefined,  in  order 
to  comprehend  the  more.  "He  added  not,"  says  St.  Jerome,  " the  righteousnesa 
erf  the  law,  or  of  nature,  that  we  might  understand  both."  The  righteousness  ful- 
filled was  in  Him  humility  surpassing  all  thought,  in  that  while  God  He  received 
the  baptism  of  the  sinners  whose  nature  He  had  taken ;  in  Him  it  was  love,  which 
is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  in  that  He  received  that  which  He  needed  not,  that  they 


esAT.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  S47 

who  need  it  might  the  more  gladly  receive  it ;  and  so  it  may  be  also  that  He  waa 
baptized,  not  only  to  give  an  example  of  obedience,  or  healthfully  to  shame  those 
who  to  their  destruction  would  have  disdained  it,  but  in  it  to  fulfil  all  righteousness 
liy  cleansing  the  sinful  nature  in  the  likeness  whereof  He  had  come,  and  to  impart 
to  it  as  a  whole  the  righteousness  which  He  should  afterwards  communicate,  one 
by  one,  to  those  who  came  to  the  baptism  which  He  had  thus  consecrated.  And 
again,  all  righteousness  may  thereby  have  been  fulfilled  in  it,  in  that  an  everlasting 
righteousness  was  thereby  brought  in,  and  the  element  consecrated  whereby  the 
justifying  efficacy  of  His  meritorious  Cross  and  Passion  were  to  be  conveyed  to  all 
believers.  The  one  sense  will  not  exclude  the  other  ;  as  of  all  our  blessed  Saviour's 
actions  and  words,  it  is  to  be  believed  that  they  have  a  manifold  depth  and  mean- 
ing, of  which  each  application  brings  out  but  one  portion ;  these  gifts  are  a 
"precious  stone,"  "whithersoever  it  turneth,  it  prospereth."  (E.  B.  Putey,  D.D.) 
Christ  submitting  to  baptism : — In  presenting  Himself  for  baptism,  Jesus  had  to 
make,  as  others  did  (Matt.  iii.  6 ;  Mark  i.  7),  His  confession  of  sins.  Of  what  sins, 
if  not  of  those  of  His  people  and  of  the  world  in  general  T  He  placed  before  John 
a  striking  picture  of  them,  not  with  that  pride  and  scorn  with  which  the  Jews  spoke 
of  the  sins  of  the  heathen,  and  the  Pharisees  of  the  sins  of  the  publicans,  but  with 
the  humble  and  compassionate  tones  of  an  Isaiah  (chap.  Ixiii,),  a  Daniel  (chap,  ix.), 
or  a  Nehemiah  (chap,  ix.) ,  when  they  confessed  the  miseries  of  their  people,  as  if 
the  burden  were  their  own.  He  could  not  have  gone  down  into  the  water  after 
Buch  an  act  of  communion  with  our  misery,  unless  resolved  to  give  Himself  up 
entirely  to  the  work  of  putting  an  end  to  the  reign  of  sin.  He  did  not  content 
Himself  with  making  a  vow.  He  prayed,  the  text  tells  us;  He  besought  God  for 
all  that  He  needed  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  great  task,  to  take  away  the  sin 
of  the  world.  He  asked  for  wisdom,  for  spiritual  strength,  and  particularly  for  the 
solution  of  the  mystery  which  family  records,  the  Scriptures,  and  His  own 
holiness  had  created  about  His  person.  We  can  understand  how  John,  after  hear- 
ing Him  confess  and  pray  thus,  should  say,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  I  "     {F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Christ^s  baptism  gives  virtue 

to  ours  : — His  last  action,  or  rather  passion,  was  His  baptizing  with  blood ;  His 
first  was  His  baptization  with  water  :  both  of  them  wash  the  world  from  their  sins. 
Yea,  this  latter  did  not  only  wash  the  souls  of  men,  but  washeth  that  very  water 
by  which  we  are  washed ;  from  hence  is  that  made  both  clean  and  holy,  and  can 
both  cleanse  and  hallow  us.  {Bishop  Hall.)  The  scene  of  ChrisVs  baptism  : — A 
river  that  had  never  been  navigable,  flowing  into  a  sea  that  had  never  known  a 
port?  A  river  almost  equal  in  length  to  our  own  Thames,  bat  with  no  great  city 
gathered  upon  its  banks,  and  winding  through  no  grand  or  picturesque  scenery. 
Such  was  the  river  of  God,  of  which  the  Hebrew  psalmist  sung  ;  the  sacred  river  of 
Old  Testament  story,  upon  which  Lot,  the  wandering  emigrant,  once  lifted  up  his 
eyes  ;  which  Jacob,  returning  from  exile,  crossed  with  his  staff,  and  over  which  had 
passed  the  descendants  of  the  patriarch's  twelve  sons — a  mighty  nation,  emanci- 
pated, and  brought  from  afar,  to  inherit  the  land.  Since  then,  along  its  shores, 
the  tide  of  many  a  momentous  battle  had  rolled ;  its  waters  had  washed  the  leper 
clean  ;  and  among  its  pink  oleanders  and  yellow  marigolds,  prophets  had  lingered 
in  meditation,  or  listened  at  midnight  to  messages  from  heaven  that  made  their 
skin  creep.  It  was  while  standing  on  its  brink  that  Elijah,  the  chief  of  an  illus- 
trious line,  had  been  swept  up  in  the  chariot  of  the  whirlwind ;  and  by  the  sound  of 
its  waves,  David,  the  prince  of  kings,  had  both  thundered  in  victorious  fight,  and 
wept  in  misery.  But  now,  at  last,  there  is  a  new  thing — a  surprising  thing.  At 
one  of  the  upper  fords  of  this  ancient  river,  the  Eedeemer  of  the  wot  Id  appears :  not 
working  marvellous  works,  or  drawing  crowds  around  Him  by  the  magic  of  Hia 
gracious  words,  but  meekly  applying  to  receive  at  the  hands  of  the  reforming 
preacher  of  the  day,  who  had  been  pronouncing  the  nation  morally  unclean,  and 
calling  it  to  repentance — a  most  humiliating  rite  ;  a  rite  which  was  understood  to 
express  the  recipient's  conviction  of  sin,  and  his  need  of  purification.  {N.  R.  Wood.) 
The  baptism  of  Christ : — There  is  one  thing  for  us  to  remember,  in  conclusion : 
namely,  that  the  baptism  which  St.  John  preached,  but  which  he  hesitated  to 
administer  to  the  spotless  and  holy  Jesus,  had  its  meaning  most  fully  expressed 
only  when  it  became  administered  to  Him  ;  for  what  was  it  intended  to  set  forth  ? 
The  nation's  conscious  burthen  of  sin  1  And  who,  of  all  the  multitudes  that 
flocked  to  be  baptized,  felt  that  burthen  as  Christ  did  ?  Some  there  were,  doubt- 
less, among  the  throng,  who  mourned  truly  and  deeply  their  transgressions  and  the 
transgressions  of  the  time ;  devout  men,  like  the  greyhaired  Simeon,  who  had  long 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  nfc 

been  dissatisfied  with  themselves  and  with  the  existing  state  of  things ;  bnt  not 
one,  even  of  the  most  profoundly  stirred  and  quickened  of  these,  felt  the  uglinesi 
and  horror  of  their  sins,  and  of  Israel's  corruption,  as  He  felt  it.  He  not  only  con- 
fessed and  repented  with  the  people,  but  for  them ;  suffering  in  His  righteous  soul 
what  they  ought  to  have  suffered,  and  did  not,  nay,  could  not ;  offering  to  God 
what  they  ought  to  have  offered,  and  failed  to  offer,  nay,  were  unable  to  offer — an 
adequate  feeling  of  sin,  an  adequate  sorrow  and  atonement  for  it.  They  truly  con- 
fessed and  repented  only  in  Him  ;  in  Him  was  presented  the  perfect  confession  and 
repentance,  of  which,  at  their  very  best,  they  fell  far  short.  (Ibid.)  Jnhn'f 
baptism  reached  its  fullest  expression  in  Christ's  submiwon  to  it : — Seethe  mother, 
in  the  midst  of  a  group  of  little  ones,  mingling  her  tears  with  theirs,  at  the  father's 
grave.  They  feel  that  they  have  lost  something  precious  ;  but  it  is  she  alone  who 
feels,  as  she  stands  bowed  among  them,  how  much  they  have  lost.  They  all  kneel 
together  on  the  sod,  and  the  eyes  of  all  are  alike  swimming  with  grief :  but  what  is 
their  impression  of  the  bereavement  they  have  sustained,  in  comparison  with  hers  ? 
What  is  their  anguish  for  themselves,  compared  with  her  anguish  for  the  fatherlesB 
ones  ?  Weep  as  the  children  may,  the  full  bitterness  of  their  loss  is  borne,  not  by 
the  children,  but  by  the  mother  who  weeps  with  them.  So  when  Christ  joined 
with  the  multitude  in  their  baptism  of  contrition,  to  none  of  them  were  their  sina 
half  so  burdensome  and  oppressive  as  they  were  to  Him  ;  none  of  them  endured, 
nnder  their  deepest  convictions,  the  half  of  that  which  He  endured  for  them.  The 
meaning  of  St.  John's  baptism  reached  its  fullest  expression  in  Ht«  submission  to  it* 
upon  whom  there  was  laid  the  iniquity  of  all ;  who,  being  at  once  the  sinless  one 
and  the  loving  one,  saw  sins  and  sinners  with  God's  eyes,  and  felt,  in  reference  to 
them,  with  God's  heart.  (Ibid.)  The  baptism  of  Jesus  : — The  cry  of  John  the 
Baptist  was  :  Bepent ;  and  his  baptism  was  that  of  repentance.  ^Yhat,  then,  was 
the  meaning  of  our  Lord's  baptism  ?  It  could  not  signify  that  He  repented.  It 
was  a  symbolical  act  followed  by  that  of  which  it  was  the  symbol — the  baptism  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Learn — I.  The  impobtancb  of  the  obdinance  of  baptism.  That 
to  which  our  Lord  submitted  cannot  be  considered  indifferent  by  any  of  Hia 
disciples.  II.  Obdinances  of  God's  appointinq,  bevebently  and  intelligently  bub- 
MiTTED  TO,  ABB  OFTEN  THE  CHANNELS  OF  BLESSING.  "  Being  baptized  and  praying, 
the  heaven  was  opened,"  &c.  Bites  unintelligently  or  superstitiously  performed 
o^en  hide  the  truth  and  lead  into  dangerous  error ;  but  when  understood  as  symbo* 
liiing  or  declaring  a  living  truth  they  are  often  important  aids  in  teaching  truth, 
and  in  stimulating  to  the  acquiring  of  spiritual  blessing.  (Z).  Longwill.)  The 
baptism  of  Christ: — It  was — I.  The  pboclamation  of  His  human  belationship  to 
MAN  AND  TO  God.    II.  By  this  act  He  bound  together  in  submission  to  His  Father's 

WILL  THE  OLD  AND  NEW  DISPENSATIONS,  AND  BECOQNIZED  HiMSELF  AS  THE  OENTBAIi 
POINT  OF  HISTOBY.  III.  It  OONSECBATED  HiM  KiNQ  OF  THE  THEOCBATIO  KINGDOM, 
AND  PBOCLAIMED  TO  ALL  MEN    THAT   HiS   OBQANIZATION   OF   THAT   KINGDOM   HAD  BEGUN. 

IV.  How  DOES  Cheist's  BAPTISM  SPEAK  TO  US  ?  We  have  rites  of  consecration,  but  these 
are  not  the  parallels  in  our  lives  to  this  moment  in  the  life  of  Jesus.  There  are  hours 
of  consecration  in  our  lives  of  which  none  know  but  God  and  ourselves.  (Stopford 
A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  inauguraticm : — Christ's  example  shows  that  obedience 
to  the  Di\rine  Spirit  of  the  time  ever  brings  fuller  disclosures  and  attestations  of  the 
Divine  blessing.  The  heavens  are  opened  to  every  obedient  man,  and  the  Spirit  ot 
God  descends  on  the  last  as  on  the  first.  John's  baptism  had  gone  no  further  than 
repentance ;  but  Christ,  standing  with  the  dove  resting  upon  Him,  showed  that 
there  was  a  baptism  unto  holiness.  By  John's  baptism  men  were  put  into  a  right 
relation  to  the  past :  but  as  they  followed  Christ  they  were  put  into  a  right  relation 
to  the  future  ;  from  the  negative  condition  of  repentance  they  passed  to  the  affirm- 
ative attitude  of  holiness.  This  is  the  culmination  of  human  history.  We  have 
oome  through  man,  servant,  prophet,  messenger,  up  to  Son.  The  very  nomen- 
clature is  pregnant  with  subhme  moral  significance.  We  pass  from  "  made,"  to 
"  begotten,"  from  *'  upright "  to  "  beloved,"  from  the  '•  ns  "  of  the  creating  Trinity  to 
the  ••  my  "  of  the  benignant  Father,  from  the  "  very  good  "  of  the  first  Adam  to  the 
"  well-pleased  "  of  the  second.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  inauguration  of  Christ : — The 
baptism  of  Christ  was,  first  of  all,  the  public  announcement  and  inauguration  of  Christ 
to  His  work.  John  the  Baptist  had  come  "  to  bear  witness  of  the  Light,"  and  now  hia 
work  was  nearly  done.  One  last  act  remained  to  be  done,  the  solemn  setting  apart 
ci  the  Christ  to  His  redeeming  work.  The  baptism  closed  our  Lord's  private  life 
and  began  His  public  ministry.  He  who  had  gone  down  into  the  water  known  to 
as  "  the  Son  of  Mary,"  came  up  thence  declared  to  be  "  the  Son  of  Qod.'* 


CHIP,  m.]  ST.  LUKE,  849 

The  baptism,  with  the  opened  heavens,  and  the  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove,  and 
abiding  on  Jesus,  and  the  witness  borne  by  the  voice  of  God  Himself,  was  the 
sublime  inauguration  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world  to  His  great  mission.  From  that 
hoar  John's  prophetic  work  was  done.  It  expired,  to  use  Davison's  beautiful 
image,  as  Old  Testament  prophecy  had  expired,  with  *'  the  gospel  upon  its  tongue." 
(O.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  The  people  were  baptized  : — There  are  many  of  every  sort 
of  people — as  we  may  read — saved  in  the  gospel,  but  of  Pharisees  we  find  none  but 
one,  namely,  Nioodemus ;  no  sort  of  men  are  further  from  the  kingdom  of  God 
than  proud  justiciars.  For  as  a  vessel  fuU  of  one  liquor  is  not  capable  of 
another,  bo  the  soul  which  is  filled  with  a  vain  conceit  of  her  own  righteous- 
ness, is  not  capable  of  the  grace  of  Christ.  Grace  entereth  not  into  such  a 
eoul,  because  it  is  full,  neither  doth  grace  find  any  place  to  dwell  therein.  There 
ifl  no  place  for  grace  to  enter  in,  where  merit  hath  possession :  what  thou 
attributest  to  merits,  is  wanting  to  grace.  I  will  none  of  that  merit 
which  excludes    grace.     {Bishop    Gowper.)  The   Baptism   of   Christ: — 1,  He 

would  hereby  honour  the  ministry  of  man,  in  that  He  submits  Himself  unto 
it,  and  seeketh  to  it  with  much  pains  and  labour.  2.  As  He  was  baptized, 
not  by  an  angel  or  prince,  but  by  a  homely  man  that  lived  Like  an  hermit  in  an 
austere  manner  of  life  for  diet  and  clothing  ;  so  must  not  we  account  baser  of  the 
sacraments  for  the  meanness  of  the  man,  if  a  lawful  minister,  seeing  Christ  refused 
not  the  sacrament  at  John's  hands  ;  neither  must  we  from  the  meanest  minister, 
seeing  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  God  is  greater  than  John.  3.  Christ  was  content 
to  wash  in  a  common  water,  in  the  flood  Jordan ;  He  feared  no  infection  from  it, 
though  Naaman  the  leper  were  washed  there  ;  though  the  Pharisees  and  hypocrites 
washed  there :  yet  He  takes  no  exception,  contracts  no  uncleanness ;  so  the 
wickedness  of  another  communicant  doth  not  prejudice  him  that  is  rightly  prepared, 
though  he  communicate  with  him  in  the  sacrament,  yet  not  in  his  sin.  Although 
He  undertook  not  the  sacrament  as  a  sacrament  of  regeneration,  or  as  a  symbol  of 
new  life,  yet  He  did — (1)  As  it  was  a  sacrament  of  Christian  society  (1  Cor.  xii.  13), 
for  as  by  it  the  faithful  are  set  into  His  body,  so  would  He  by  it  be  set  into  the  body 
of  the  saints,  and  take  on  Him  the  common  mark  and  privilege  of  His  members  ; 
even  as  we  see  kings  and  princes,  by  whom  all  hold  their  freedom,  will  sometimes 
be  made  free,  and  so  receive  a  public  testimony  of  association  from  their  people ;  and 
lo,  here  our  Prince  in  the  colours  of  a  common  soldier.  (2)  As  baptism  is  a  symbol  of 
affliction,  so  He  would  undertake  it ;  so  (Mark  x.  38)  Christ  calls  His  cross  and 
death  by  the  name  of  baptism.  (3)  Christ  would  be  baptized,  not  to  wash  Himself, 
but  us ;  not  to  put  off  sin  as  we,  but  to  put  on  our  sin,  that  so  our  sin  in  SUm  might 
be  washed  away,  that  He  might  sanctify  this  sacrament.  Again,  this  is  for  our 
instruction,  to  note  the  excellency  and  dignity  of  this  sacrament,  and  what  esteem 
we  ought  to  have  it  in;  the  Lord  comes  to  the  servant  a  tedious  journey  to  seek  it ; 
yet  many  of  us,  when  it  is  brought  to  us,  turn  our  backs  upon  it.  What  price  set 
they  upon  it  who  flee  forth  of  the  Church  when  this  sacrament  is  to  be  admin- 
istered ?  Shall  Christ  that  needed  it  not,  come  to  it,  and  shall  we  that  need  it 
run  from  it  ?  This  I  will  add  to  what  I  have  elsewhere  largely  delivered,  that  who- 
soever do  not  present  themselves  with  due  reverence  and  meditation,  but  run  out 
carelessly  and  profanely  when  baptism  is  administered,  they  be  far  from  Christ's 
example,  and  little  comfort  can  they  have  of  their  baptism,  but  may  well  fear,  lest 
those  mysteries  and  benefits  offered  and  sealed  to  a  member  of  the  congregation 
belong  not  to  them ;  for  if  they  did  they  would  own  them,  and  not  run  contemp- 
tuously from  them ;  as  good  never  baptized,  as  never  meditate  on  it.  But,  were 
thyself  to  take  no  good  by  the  sacrament,  in  calling  to  mind  thine  own  covenant 
made  in  baptism,  with  the  fruit  in  thyself,  yet  good  order  requires  thy  presence. 
1.  Because  the  ordinance  belongs  not  only  to  the  infants'  parents  and  sureties,  but 
to  the  whole  congregation,  as  the  entering  of  a  free  man  into  a  corporation  is  by  the 
whole.  2.  God  looks  it  should  be  graced,  and  not  scorned  by  turning  thy  back 
upon  it.  Were  it  not  a  most  irreverent  contempt  to  run  out  from  the  Word  ?  and 
is  it  not  also  to  run  from  the  seal  ?  especially  the  blessed  Trinity  being  met  to  such 
a  purpose,  to  seal  such  benefits  to  a  member  of  that  congregation?  3.  Thy 
presence  is  requisite  to  help  the  infant  by  prayer,  to  join  with  the  congregation  in 
prayer  and  in  praise  for  the  ingraffing  of  a  member  into  Christ's  body.  But  what 
law  or  ordinance  was  there  for  baptism,  to  which  Christ  must  be  subjected?  It 
was  decreed  by  the  whole  Trinity.  1.  That  Christ  should  be  initiated  by  this  cere- 
mony,  wherein  also  He  must  manifest  Himself  the  Author  of  all  purity  and  clean* 
ness.     2.  John  had  preached  it,  and  showed  the  necessity  of   it  hj   Divine 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. 

aathoritj.  8.  He  wonld  not  only  subject  Himself  to  His  Father's  ordination,  but 
also  for  our  sakes,  the  virtue  of  whose  baptism  depends  upon  His,  as  also  give  u« 
help  by  His  example,  and  therefore  would  Himself  do  that  which  He  commanded 
others  to  do.  4.  Christ  as  Mediator,  and  in  our  stead,  was  to  be  made  our  right- 
eousness (1  Cor.  i.  30) ;  three  ways  :  (1)  In  being  made  an  offering  for  us,  by  which 
He  was  to  abolish  our  sin  and  curse,  and  by  His  most  perfect  obedience  satisfy  the 
whole  law  for  ub.  (2)  By  applying  that  righteousness  purchased  by  His  blood, 
which  else  we  could  never  have  had  benefit  by.  (3)  By  appointing  and  sancti- 
fying  means  and  instruments  for  that  application,  called  the  ministry  of  the  Spirit, 
whereof  one  branch  is  the  laver  of  water  in  the  Word.  And  thus,  as  in  our  stead. 
He  stood  in  the  general,  bound  by  the  will  and  ordinance  of  God,  in  Himself  to 
sanctify  baptism  for  us.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  baptism  of  Christ: — I.  St. 
Matthew  gives  us  the  beason  why  this  baptism  took  place.  "Suffer  it  to 
be  so  now,"  He  said  to  John,  "for  thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteous- 
ness." He  was  anxious  to  obey  every  Divine  law,  to  conform  to  every 
Divine  institution,  to  work  out  and  complete  a  righteousness  extensive  as 
the  Divine  commands.  And  this  answer  exhibits  the  Saviour  to  us  in  two  charac- 
ters, each  illustraticg  the  propriety  of  His  baptism.  1.  He  stands  here  as  the 
Representative  of  His  people.  Now  they  are  an  unclean  people.  We  argue  from  Hi« 
appearing  in  their  form,  that  He  was  the  Eepresentative  of  His  sinful  people ;  and 
then  we  argue  from  His  being  their  Bepresentative,  that  it  became  Him  to  be 
baptized.  2.  He  was  also  their  Head  ;  standing  in  the  relation  to  them  of  a  Leader 
or  Chief.  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  puts  on  Himself  the  garb  in  which  Ha 
arrays  His  soldiers.  The  Commander  submits  first  to  the  oath  that  He  enjoins  on 
His  followers.  II.  Let  us  look  now  at  His  baptism  itself.  1.  The  first  circum- 
stance that  strikes  us  in  it,  is  His  simple  obedience  to  the  Divine  law.  It  bids  yon 
obey  the  Divine  law,  not  scan  it.  It  bids  you  do  the  will  of  God,  not  criticise  it. 
The  will  of  God  must  be  done,  and  every  command  of  God  obeyed.  2.  And  notice 
the  humility  manifested  here,  the  amazing  condescension  of  Christ.  He  was  now 
coming  forth  among  men  to  make  known  His  high  pretensions.  And  how  does  He 
appear  ?  Working  miracles  and  doing  wonders  ?  Bursting  forth  like  the  sun  in  his 
brightness,  "  glorious  in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength  "  ? 
No  ;  "  He  cometh  from  Galilee  to  Jordan  unto  John  to  be  baptized  of  him."  We 
can  hardly  form  one  faint  idea  of  the  extent  of  this  degradation.  Not  indeed  a 
sinner,  but  appearing  as  one,  assuming  a  character  He  had  bidden  angels  and 
archangels  loathe.  The  manger,  the  stable,  the  carpenter's  hut  and  the  carpenter's 
toil — they  were  all  as  nothing ;  no  word  of  His  had  poured  contempt  on  any  one  of 
them  :  but  to  be  the  thing  He  had  branded ;  to  come  forth  into  sight  as  though  He 
were  the  character  He  abhorred ;  verily,  brethren,  this  was  the  infinite  abasement 
of  an  infinite  God.  3.  And  mark  also  the  devotion  the  Saviour  manifested  on  this 
occasion.  III.  We  come  now  to  our  third  subject — the  wondeepul  event  which 
attended  the  scene  of  humiliation  we  have  been  contemplatino.  "  It  eame 
to  pass,"  says  the  evangelist,  "  that  Jesus  also  being  baptized  and  praying,  the 
heaven  was  opened,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  like  a  dove 
npon  Him,  and  a  voice  came  from  heaven,  which  said.  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son  ; 
in  Thee  I  am  well  pleased."  1.  Observe  here  the  greatness  of  Christ ;  His  dignity. 
And  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  throughout  His  life,  whenever  we  see  Him  signally 
abased,  we  generally  see  His  Father  putting  on  Him  signal  honour.  He  is  bom  in 
a  manger,  but  a  star  in  the  heavens  proclaims  His  advent,  and  over  Him  are 
ringing  the  songs  of  angels.  2.  We  see  here  also  the  Messiahship  of  Christ.  First 
comes  the  voice  of  prophecy,  marking  out  the  future  Messiah  as  one  on  whom  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  to  descend  and  rest ;  one  who,  at  EUs  entrance  on  EUs 
office,  was  to  be  anointed  with  the  spirit,  just  as  earthly  monarchs  and  priests  were 
anointed  with  the  holy  oil.  Besides,  in  all  this  there  was  a  special  reference  to 
John  himself.  3.  But  this  event  establishes  another  point.  While  it  proves  the 
reality  of  our  Lord's  Messiahship,  it  declares  His  qualifications  for  the  discharge  of 
this  office.  The  Spirit  descended  on  Him  in  Jordan  to  qualify  Him  for  what  we 
may  call  the  moral  part  of  His  great  work ;  to  enable  Him  to  reach  the  mind  of 
man,  and  influence  and  rule  it.  He  Himself  tells  us  so.  Led  by  the  Spirit  He  had 
received,  He  first  goes  into  the  wilderness  to  have  His  own  faith  and  obedience  put 
to  the  test ;  and  when  He  had  been  taught  there  by  His  own  experience,  what  this 
Spirit  could  do  for  the  suffering  and  tempted,  He  begins  His  public  ministry  at 
Nazareth  by  declaring  the  quaUfioations  bestowed  on  Him  for  the  discharge  of  Hii 
office.    "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  He  says,   "is  upon  Me,  becaase  He  hatb 


eKAT.  m.]  8T.  LUKE,  Vtk 

anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ;  He  hath  sent  Me  to  heal  the  broken- 
hearted, to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captiyes,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the  bUnd ; 
to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised."  And  this  Spirit  abode  on  EUm.  St. 
Matthew  informs  as  that  the  dove  "  rested,"  as  vrell  as  descended  on  Him ;  and  St. 
Luke  speaks  of  Him  as  going  up  from  the  river  into  the  wilderness,  "full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  His  blessed  gifts  are  made  over  to  Him,  placed  at  His  disposal ; 
and  for  this  purpose,  that  He  may  communicate  them  to  whomsoever  He  will.  4. 
We  are  tanght  aJso  here  the  high  estimation  in  which  the  anointed  Saviour  is  held 
by  His  Father ;  the  complacency  and  delight  with  which  He  regards  Him.  From 
a  review  of  this  history  we  learn,  first,  the  importance  which  God  attaches  to  His 
own  ordinances,  the  honour  He  puts  on  them.  We  see  here  also  the  insufficiency 
of  ordinances.  Baptism,  though  administered  by  a  prophet  and  received  by  Christ, 
was  powerless  ;  or  if  it  had  any  efficacy,  that  efficacy  was  limited ;  it  evidently  left 
much  undone.  It  could  not  touch  the  soul  of  Jesus ;  it  did  not  qualify  Him  for 
His  mediatorial  work.  To  accomplish  these  ends,  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  down 
from  on  high,  rests  and  abides  on  Him^  (0.  Bradley,  M.A.)  And  praying:. 
Christ  praying : — To  most,  if  not  to  all  of  us,  the  fact  that  our  Saviour  prayed  is  ia 
itself  a  wonder.  This  does  not,  however,  seem  to  have  struck  the  gospel-writers. 
Prayers  of  Christ  precious,  as  showing  how  completely  human  He  became,  living 
like  ourselves,  a  Ufe  of  dependence,  of  conununion,  and  of  submission.  I.  Thb 
OCCASION  ON  WHICH  THB  Savioub  IB  HEBB  SAID  TO  HAVE  PRATED.  As  Undergone  by 
Christ,  the  rite  of  baptism  would  seem  to  have  had  a  twofold  meaning.  1.  It 
was  intended  to  be  symbolic  of  His  entire  oneness  with  the  race  He  came  to  save. 
2.  It  was  intended  to  be  emblematic  of  His  complete  consecration  to  the  salvation 
of  the  race  to  which  He  came.  II.  The  reasons  which  led  Him  to  prat.  1.  We 
are  not  to  suppose  that  Christ's  praying  on  this  occasion  (a)  arose  from  any  doubt 
in  His  mind  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  work  on  which  He  was  entering ;  (6)  sprang 
out  of  any  misgiving  as  to  His  own  appointment  to  it ;  (c)  was  due  to  any  uncer- 
tainty as  to  His  personal  fitness  for  it.  Ho,  but — 2.  Bearing  in  mind  the  meaning 
of  the  baptism  with  which  His  prayer  was  associated,  we  may  imagine  that 
His  prayer  on  this  occasion  would  spring — (a)  from  His  pure  passion  for 
the  glorification  of  the  Father ;  (6)  from  His  intense  longing  for  the  salvation 
of  the  world;  (c)  from  His  vivid  anticipation  of  the  difficulties  which  lay 
before  Him ;  (d)  from  His  keen  prevision  of  the  sorrows  that  awaited  Him.  III. 
The  response  which  came  to  our  Saviour's  prater.  1.  There  was  a  special 
communication  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  2.  There  was  a  special  assurance  of  the 
Divine  complacency.  Practical  lesson :  Prater  a  preparation  fob  service. 
IB.  Wilkitison,  F.G.S.)  For  the  first,  He  was  now  baptized,  and  in  regard  of  that 
He  prayed,  and  teacheth  us — 1.  In  that  He  first  was  baptized,  and  then  prayed, 
that  we  must  be  first  cleansed  and  sanctified,  and  then  pray :  men  must  hf t  pure 
hands  with  pure  hearts  in  every  place  (Isa.  1.  16).  In  receiving  the  sacrament  a 
holy  heart  knows  that  he  hath  to  do  with  God,  and  lifteth  itself  above  sensible 
elements  ;  it  labours  to  approve  itself  to  God,  and  looks  not  at  men,  but  at  God  and 
His  covenant,  and  renews  itself  with  faith,  repentance,  and  invocation.  2.  In  that 
Christ  goeth  to  God  for  a  blessing  upon  the  sacrament  received,  we  learn  that  all 
the  grace,  holiness,  and  efficacy  of  any  sacrament  is  to  be  obtained,  continued  and 
increased  by  the  means  of  prayer.  For  the  second,  Christ  prayed  in  respect  of  that 
He  was  to  do.  1.  He  was  now  to  be  declared  that  great  Prophet  of  His  Church 
(Deut.  xviii.  18).  And  the  whole  ministry  of  the  New  Testament  was  now  to  be 
delivered  and  consecrated  in  Him,  and  therefore  undertaking  this  great  work,  He 
goeth  to  His  Father  for  blessing  and  success  in  it.  2.  He  was  now  in  a  solemn 
manner  by  sundry  testimonies  from  heaven  to  be  set  apart  for  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion, and  the  salvation  of  man  being  lost :  a  ministry  which  men  and  angels  were 
all  too  weak  for ;  and  no  marvel,  if  He  pray  to  His  Father  for  sufficient  strength 
and  grace  to  undergo  the  same.  3.  He  knew  that  the  heavens  were  to  be  opened, 
and  therefore  He  will  be  in  prayer,  to  show  the  power  of  prayer,  that  it  pieroeth  the 
heavens,  and  entereth  the  presence  of  God,  and  prevaileth  for  a  blessing.  4.  The 
Spirit  was  to  descend  upon  Him,  and  therefore  He  would  be  in  prayer  to  teach  ua 
that  the  prayers  of  God's  children  are  of  that  force  that  they  bring  down  the  Holy 
Ghost  with  all  graces  upon  earth.  6.  That  faithful  prayer  doth  cause  God  to  give 
lome  evident  testimony  apon  those  with  whom  He  is  well  pleased.  6.  That  what* 
even  we  take  in  hand,  we  must  reverently  undertake  it  with  prayer,  but  especially 
two  things  above  others.  (1)  The  part  of  God's  holy  worship.  (2)  The  duties  of  our 
wlUngs.     2.  Such  is  our  weakness,  as  when  we  do  anything  the  best  we  can,  wa 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m- 

had  need  to  pray  to  do  it  better,  and  for  pardon  that  vre  have  done  it  no  betters 
which  if  it  be  true  in  external  things  and  duties,  wherein  we  are  better  acquainted ; 
much  more  in  spiritual,  wherein  our  ability  is  much  less.  3.  We  never  receive  so 
much  favour  from  God,  but  we  still  stand  in  need  to  crave  more ;  nor  never  so  little, 
but  that  we  have  much  to  be  thankful  for.  This  doctrine  serves  to  reprove  such  as 
content  themselves  with  the  work  of  God's  worship ;  that  come  to  the  word  and 
sacraments,  but  beg  not  a  blessing  of  God  beforehand ;  whereas  Christ  Himself 
contented  not  Himself  with  the  outward  means,  but  prayed  for  a  blessing.  And 
this  is  the  very  cause  why  men  find  so  little  taste,  strength,  and  power  in  these 
ordinances,  because  God's  blessing  goes  not  with  the  means  ;  and  therefore  it  is 
■undered  from  His  own  ordinances,  because  it  is  not  asked.  Is  it  any  marvel,  that 
when  men  come  carelessly,  carnally,  and  profanely,  without  reverence  and  religion 
to  the  exercises  of  religion,  that  they  go  away  as  brutishly  as  they  come  ;  and  the 
longer  they  thus  profane  God's  holy  things,  the  more  senseless  and  incurable  they 
grow  by  them,  more  hardened  and  hopeless.  What  good  hath  many  a  man  gotten 
by  customable  coming  to  the  word  and  sacraments  many  years  together  ?  for  their 
knowledge,  babes  may  pose  them  in  principles ;  for  their  conscience,  we  may  as 
soon  prevail  with  children  of  three  years  old,  to  sit  reverently  and  attentively,  as 
some  of  three  or  fourscore,  who  in  the  morning  are  so  sleepy,  as  it  were  fitter  they 
were  at  home  in  their  beds,  or  take  order  to  bring  their  beds  with  them :  and  for 
their  profitableness  in  their  places,  or  reformation  of  anything  in  public,  or  in  their 
private  families,  or  their  own  person,  God  nor  man  can  see  no  such  thing.  Now 
would  I  ask  these  men  as  old  as  they  be,  how  often  they  can  remember  they  have 
humbled  themselves  before  God,  that  He  would  bless  the  Word  unto  them,  and 
them  to  understand  it,  and  make  conscience  of  it,  to  reform  their  ways,  to  comfort 
their  consciences  ?  Alas,  dead  men !  this  is  a  strange  motion  to  them  ;  and  now 
we  conclude,no  blessing  asked,  none  obtained,  but  a  curse  accompanied  them  further 
to  harden  them  :  whereas  humble  and  feeling  prayer  would  have  opened  the  heavens 
and  fetched  down  the  Spirit  to  have  accompanied  the  ordinance ;  and  so  some 
testimony  would  have  been  seen,  that  God  had  been  better  pleased  with  them  and 
their  work.  3.  It  is  a  notable  fence  against  sin  :  for,  as  the  more  sin  prevails,  the 
less  can  a  man  pray  ;  for  the  more  he  prays,  the  less  is  he  overtaken  with  sin. 
When  the  true  man  is  assaulted,  if  he  cry  for  help,  the  thief  runs  away ;  and  so  doth 
sin  (a  thief  which  ever  doggeth  and  besetteth  us  to  rob  us  and  steal  away  grace)  if 
we  can  cry  mightily  to  God.  4.  Acquaint  thyself  with  God ;  for  the  times  come 
when  nothing  will  stand  by  thee  but  His  help ;  and  therefore  use  prayer,  to  be 
familiarly  acquainted  with  Him  :  know  Him  now  in  the  time  of  thy  prayer,  that 
He  may  know  thee  in  the  day  of  thy  distress.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Conduct 
without  prayer  : — He  knoweth  truly  how  to  live  well,  who  knoweth  how  to  pray 
well.  But  best  actions  without  prayer,  which  obtain  grace  to  them,  are  like 
bodies  without  spirits :  yea,  as  the  body  without  breathing  cannot  live  to  do  any 
work  eompetent  to  a  natural  life  :  so  the  soul,  without  prayer,  can  do  no  work  that 
truly  is  spiritual.  [Bishop  Cowper.)  The  heaven  was  opened. — Now  it  f oUoweth, 
that  we  speak  of  those  three  admirable  events,  which  followed  the  prayer  of  Christ. 
1.  The  sensible  opening  of  the  heavens.  2.  The  visible  descending  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
3.  The  audible  voice  of  God  the  Father,  witnessing  to  many  both  eye  and  ear- witnesses 
the  solemn  instalment  and  induction  of  Christ  into  His  office  and  work  of  mediation 
and  ministry.  Wherein  we  must  know,  that  as  there  never  was  in  all  the  world  so 
high  and  excellent  an  office  as  Christ's  was  (for  the  greatest  of  kings,  and  the  high 
priest,  who  yet  were  with  great  state  and  observation  anointed  and  deputed  to  their 
offices,  were  but  shadows  of  this),  even  so  God  would  have  Christ  entered  into  it 
with  such  magnificence  and  glory  as  never  man  was,  nor  creature  is  capable  of.  At 
the  coronation  of  a  prince,  with  what  glory,  pomp,  and  sumptuousness,  even  to 
admiration,  is  he  brought  forth  with  his  nobles  and  subjects !  But  all  this  is  but 
earthly  glory,  from  earthly  men  to  an  earthly  king.  But  now  at  the  coronation  of 
the  Prince  of  Peace,  God  sets  Himself  from  heaven  to  honour  it ;  and  for  this  pur- 
pose He  doth  more  familiarly,  and  yet  more  gloriously  reveal  Himself  unto  all 
mankind,  than  He  had  ever  before  done  from  the  creation  of  the  world  ;  and  never 
was  any  ceremony  in  all  the  world  so  honoured  as  this  baptism  of  Christ  was.  The 
ancient  sacrifices  of  God's  institution  were  honoured  by-  manifest  signs  of  His 
gracious  presence,  as  by  the  fire  which  came  from  heaven  continually  to  consume 
them  :  the  Ark  was  honoured  with  special  signs  of  His  glorious  presence,  sitting 
between  the  cherubims,  answering  by  oracle  and  voice  unto  cases  propounded  :  the 
Temple  itself  at  Jerusalem,  at  Solomon's  prayer  and  dedicatwn,  was  filled  with  the 


OHA».  m.]  ST.  LUKE,  363 

glory  of  God,  manifested  in  that  cloud  that  filled  the  House  of  the  Lord  (1  Kings 
viii.  10),  and  this  clood  still  watched  over  the  Tabernacle  (Exodus  xl.  34).  But 
these  were  all  but  shadows  to  this,  wherein  the  Lord  did  not  cloud  and  vail  His 
presence,  or  reveal  His  presence  in  some  sign  ;  but  the  Divine  Majesty  manifested 
itself  distinctly,  as  we  may  say,  in  person,  yea,  in  the  distinction  of  all  the  three 
Persons,  the  Father  testifying  His  delight  in  His  dear  Son,  the  Son  standing  in 
Jordan,  and  receiving  His  Father's  testimony ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  descending  in 
the  visible  shape  of  a  dove.  It  seemeth  therefore  to  be  true,  that  the  heaven  was 
sensibly  divided  and  rent  in  twain,  even  as  the  earth  was  when  Korah  and  his 
company  were  swallowed  up.  Now  the  reasons  why  the  heavens  were  opened  were 
sundry.  1.  To  manifest  the  truth  and  certainty  of  the  other  signs  which  followed, 
that  seeing  the  heavens  opened,  they  might  not  conceive  that  either  the  dove  or  the 
voice  came  from  any  other  place.  2.  To  show  that  howsoever  Christ  stood  there  aa 
a  weak  man,  and  in  similitude  of  sinful  flesh,  yet  He  was  the  Lord  from  heaven 
heavenly,  of  whom  was  verified  (John  iii.  31)  "  He  that  is  come  from  heaven  is 
above  all."  3.  That  as  His  person,  so  likewise  His  doctrine  was  Divine  and 
heavenly  (ver.  34).  He  whom  God  hath  sent,  speaketh  the  words  of  God :  and 
this  was  the  special  work  of  His  doctoral  oflBice,  to  reveal  the  will  of  His  Father. 
••  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom 
of  the  Father,  hath  declared  Him  "  (John  i.  18).  The  power  also  and  grace,  whereby 
He  wrought  miracles,  was  not  from  Beelzebub,  but  from  heaven.  4.  To  show  that 
His  office,  into  which  He  was  now  entered,  was  and  is  to  open  heaven  again  for  us, 
who  by  sin  had  shut  it  against  ourselves  ;  He  hath  made  our  way  unto  the  throne  of 
grace.  And  thus  this  second  Adam  standeth  in  opposition  with  the  first ;  He  shut 
us  oat  of  paradise,  a  token  that  we  were  shut  out  of  heaven  :  but  this  lets  us 
Into  the  paradise  of  God  again.  The  heavens  are  opened  by  His  passion,  not  by  His 
baptism  (Heb.  x.  19).  They  are  opened  by  His  death  as  by  a  common  cause,  which 
must  be  specially  and  singularly  applied,  and  that  is  by  baptism  :  therefore  it  is  said, 
••  We  are  baptised  into  His  death  "  (Eom.  vi.  3,  4),  that  is,  to  have  benefit  by  His 
death.  Note  hence,  that  Christ  by  fulfilling  all  righteousness,  hath  set  heaven  open 
nnto  us,  and  consequently  the  justification  of  a  sinner  is  not  only  by  the  obedience 
of  His  passion,  but  also  by  His  active  obedience  in  fulfilling  the  law.  (T.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Like  a  dove  upon  Him. — The  dove-like  descent  of  the  Spirit  on  Christ : — Hence  then, 
we  may  observe,  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  consists  in  a  dove-like  temper.  This 
observation  we  will  endeavour  to  illustrate.  That  we  may  proceed  with  safety,  we 
will  give  no  indulgence  to  imagination,  but  will  strictly  follow  the  allusions  which 
we  find  in  Scripture.  1.  The  dove  is  an  emblem  of  purity.  In  the  law  of  Moses 
this  was  reckoned  a  clean  bird,  and  it  was  selected  for  an  offering  in  the  ceremony 
of  purification.  His  precepts.  His  doctrines,  His  example  teach  us  to  be  holy, 
ondefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.  2.  Christ  directs  His  disciples  to  be  harmless 
as  doves.  The  same  meek  and  inoffensive  spirit  which  was  in  Him  must  also  be  in 
OS.  3.  The  dove,  in  the  book  of  Canticles,  is  an  emblem  of  cheerfulness  and  joy. 
"  Lo,  the  winter  is  past  and  gone,  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth  ;  the  time  of 
the  singing  of  birds  is  come ;  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land."  The 
dove-like  temper  of  the  gospel  is  sweet,  serene,  and  pleasant.  4.  Doves  are  dis- 
tinguished by  their  mutual  fideUty  and  love.  To  this  social  and  affectionate 
property  there  are  frequent  allusions  in  Scripture.  The  bridegroom,  in  the  book  of 
Canticles,  calls  the  bride  by  this,  among  other  endearing  names  :  •'  0  my  dove,  let 
me  see  thy  face,  and  hear  thy  voice,  for  thy  voice  is  sweet,  and  thy  face  is  comely." 
People  in  affliction  are  described  as  "  mourning  like  doves "  who  have  lost  their 
companions.  Mutual  love  is  the  temper  of  the  gospel.  5.  The  dove  is  a  defence- 
less bird.  Hence  she  is  described  as  "  dwelling  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  and  in 
the  secret  places  of  the  stairs  "  ;  and  as  "  flying  to  her  windows  "  in  times  of  danger. 
In  this  view  she  is  an  emblem  of  Christian  faith  and  humility.  True  believers, 
sensible  of  their  weakness,  and  of  the  dangers  which  attend  them,  trust  not  ia 
themselves,  but  in  the  power  and  grace  of  their  Saviour.  6.  The  excellent  glory, 
which  descended  like  a  dove  and  rested  on  Jesus,  might  be  intended  to  represent 
the  beauties  of  His  Church,  adorned  and  dignified  by  the  graces  of  His  Spirit.  The 
dove,  which  is  a  beautiful  bird,  is  a  natural  emblem  of  the  virtuous  and  good  works 
which  distinguish  the  Christian  character.  "  Though  ye  have  lien  among  the  pots, 
yet  ye  shall  be  as  the  wings  of  a  dove,  covered  with  silver,  and  her  feathers  with 
jellow  gold."  7.  The  dove,  which  is  a  fruitful  bird,  is,  by  Isaiah,  made  an  emblem 
of  the  increase  of  the  Church  in  her  happy  and  prosperous  periods.  Then  converts 
ihaU  fly  onto  God's   altar,  "  as  doves  to  their  windows."    (J.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 

23 


854  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [<«A».  m 

Tht  Spirit  likened  to  a  dove: — 1.  Our  subject  snggestB  to  as  that  the  Spirit 
of  Christ  usually  comes  to  the  soul  in  a  mild  and  gentle  manner.  His  opera-. 
tions  are  as  His  fruits,  dove-like,  sweet,  and  kind.  The  benevolent  and  friendly 
nature  of  the  dispensation  which  Christ  was  about  to  introduce,  was  intimated  in 
the  manner  of  the  Spirit's  descent.  The  law,  which  was  a  ministration  of  death 
and  condemnation,  was  delivered  to  the  people  with  circumstances  of  terror  and 
amazement.  As  His  manner  of  teaching,  so  the  doctrines  which  He  taught  were 
kind  and  gracious.  2.  Our  subject  farther  teaches  us,  that  they  only  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  are  of  a  dove-like  temper.  It  is  absurd  then  to  impute  to  an 
uncommon  influence  of  the  Spirit  any  error  of  conduct,  excess  of  passion,  extrava- 
gance of  zeal,  or  bitterness  of  censure ;  for  the  Spirit  oomes  like  the  dove.  3.  Our 
subject  reminds  us  of  our  obligation  to  adorn  with  good  works  our  Christian  cha- 
racter, and  to  recommend  to  the  choice  of  others  the  religion  which  we  profess.  We 
should  resemble  the  dove,  whose  wings  are  covered  with  silver,  and  her  feathers 
with  yellow  gold.  The  beauty  of  religion  much  depends  on  our  maintaining  the 
more  amiable  and  engaging  virtues ;  such  as  charity,  peaceableness,  humility,  and 
meekness.  4.  Our  subject  teaches  us  our  obligation  to  labour  for  the  increase  of 
Christ's  Church — not  only  to  enter  into  it  ourselves,  but  also  to  encourage  others 
to  come  and  join  themselves  to  it.  (Ibid.)  In  gemblance  of  a  dove : — I.  The 
Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  likb  a  dove.  1.  The  dove  was  a  bird  of 
purity.  You  know  it  was  used  by  the  poor  in  sacrifices,  and  therefore  was  con- 
sidered clean.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  like  a  dove  because  it  is  a  harmless  creature. 
The  dove  never  hurts  the  tiniest  bird  with  which  it  comes  into  contact.  The  Holy 
Spirit  is  not  compared  to  the  eagle,  nor  to  the  hawk,  nor  to  the  vulture — birds  of 
prey ;  but  to  the  dove — a  harmless  creature.  8.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  like  a  dov* 
because  the  dove  is  such  a  gentle  creature.  His  influences  are  most  benign.  4. 
The  Holy  Spirit  is  like  the  dove,  too,  because  the  dove  has  very  keen  eyesight.  In 
the  Book  of  Canticles  we  read,  "  Thou  hast  dove's  eyes."  Doves  are  remarkable 
for  great  keenness  of  vision.  The  Holy  Spirit  ••  searcheth  all  things."  5.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  like  the  dove  because  the  dove  was  an  emblem  of  peace  and  of 
spring.  The  dove  brought  the  olive  leaf  back  in  her  mouth,  indicating  to  Noah 
that  the  waters  had  subsided,  and  that  the  deluge  of  wrath  would  soon  be  gone. 
The  dove,  too,  is  mentioned  in  the  Canticles  as  being  a  herald  of  spring :  "  The 
time  of  the  singing  of  birds  is  eome,  and  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  the 
land."  And  whenever  the  Holy  Spirit  oomes  to  a  man's  heart,  there  is  a  sign 
that  that  heart  will  be  at  peace  with  God.  6.  The  Holy  Ghost,  lastly,  is  like  a 
dove  because  the  dove  was  given  to  mourning.  "  I  did  mourn  as  a  dove,"  says 
Isaiah.  "  The  Spirit  also  helpeth  our  inflrmities  " — takes  our  infirmities  upon 
Himself.  His  work  is  of  a  loving  nature.  II.  Secondly,  we  have  tbb  ohabao- 
TEBisTics  OF  Chbist.  Much  is  taught  in  the  connection  of  the  text  concerning 
the  mission  of  Christ,  while  our  text  itself  gives  the  chief  elements  of  His 
character.  First  of  all,  we  have  something  concerning  His  mission.  It  was 
divinely  ordained,  for  God  sent  the  Holy  Spirit  to  testify  to  the  world  that  He  was 
commissioned  by  Him  to  undertake  man's  redemption.  We  have  here  the  purpose 
of  His  mission.  Heaven  was  opened,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  descended.  It  was  the 
purpose  of  Christ  to  open  heaven.  The  first  Adam  closed  heaven  against  us.  But 
the  character  of  Christ  was  developed  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Jesus 
did  not  achieve  His  work  by  virtue  of  the  divinity  that  was  in  BUm  only,  but  by  virtue 
of  the  Spirit's  graces  upon  Him.  The  dove  was  harmless.  Christ  said,  **  I  am  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart."  The  dove  was  given  to  mourning.  Jesus  was  "  a  Man  of 
sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  The  dove  was  innocent.  Jesus  Christ  was 
purity  personified.  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  said  He.  He  was 
holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  in  an  emphatic  sense,  the  dove  was  emblematic  of 
Him.  III.  It  is  so  also  with  a  Chbistuh.  There  is  no  true  character  which  is 
not  built  up  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  dove  is  defenceless.  It  has 
nothing  to  protect  it  except  the  rocks,  and  when  pursued  its  only  refuge  is  to 
fly  thither.  The  Christian  has  nothing  to  protect  himself  against  the  wiles  of  the 
devil  and  the  allurements  of  the  world,  except  "  the  Bock  of  Ages."  The  dove 
keeps  to  its  own  company.  It  is  delighted  when  it  is  with  its  fellows.  So  the 
Christian  feels  at  home  when  he  gets  among  characters  of  like  nature.  The 
dove  mourns  in  the  absence  of  its  mate;  and  the  character  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  gives  to  us  is  such  as  to  make  us  mourn  when  our  Lord  Jesus  is 
away,  so  that  we  have  no  rest  if  we  be  separated  from  Him.  Ton  cannot 
have  this   character   except    by   the    personal  appHcation  of   the  Holy  Spirit 


our.  nt.*  8T.  LUKE,  85& 

to  your  heart.  {T.  OambU.)  The  Holy  Spirit  deieending  like  a  dove : — 
I.  First,  as  the  brooding  of  the  Spirit  of  God  npon  the  face  of  the  deep  pro- 
doced  order  and  life  in  the  beginning,  so  does  He  impart  new  life  to  the  soul, 
and  open  the  eyes  of  the  understanding,  that  we  may  behold  the  wonders  of  God's 
law.  IL  Again :  In  the  fact  that  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  the  Lord  Jesus 
in  the  form  of  a  dove,  we  are  reminded  that  quietness  is  often  essential  to  many  of 
the  operations  of  grace.  "  A  very  restless  person  will  never  be  very  godly,  and  a  very 
godly  one  will  never  be  very  restless. _  •  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God.* "  HI. 
Another  point  suggested  by  the  text  is,  that  as  the  dove  is  an  appropriate  emblem 
of  love,  so  the  soul  which  is  influenced  by  the  blessed  Spirit  will  abound  in  love  to 
God,  and  love  to  His  people.  The  steeple  of  an  old  vUlage  church  was  to  be  pulled 
down,  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  some  modem  improvements,  and  a  long  rope 
was  fastened  near  the  top  of  it,  that  it  might  be  kept  from  crushing  the  building  in 
its  fall.  Soon  everything  was  ready,  and  the  master-carpenter  shouted  aloud  to  the 
men  to  poll.  As  the  old  steeple  began  to  tremble,  and  sway  from  side  to  side,  a 
beautiful  white  dove  was  observed  to  fly  round  and  round,  not  daring  to  go  in  at 
its  accustomed  place,  and  yet  evidently  unwilling  to  depart.  She  seemed  to  be 
aware  that  a  great  calamity  was  about  to  happen,  while  a  hundred  voices  shouted, 
"  See  that  dove  1 "  "  Poor  thing !  "  the  head  carpenter  observed,  "  she  must  have 
young  ones  up  in  the  steeple."  Again  the  workmen  gave  a  vigorous  tug  at  the 
rope,  and  the  old  steeple  reeled  and  tottered.  The  distress  of  the  poor  dove  became 
BO  great,  that  every  one  felt  sorry  for  her,  and  not  a  word  was  spoken.  The  bird 
hovered  a  moment  on  her  wings,  and  at  the  instant  that  the  creaking  timbers  began 
to  topple  over,  she  darted  into  the  steeple  and  was  hid  from  view.  When  the 
rubbish  was  cleared  away,  she  was  found  lying  between  her  two  young  ones — all 
three  crushed  to  death  I  The  devoted  bird  was  willing  to  die  with  and  for  them, 
but  she  could  not  save  them.  There  was  a  spectacle  of  devoted  love — love  even 
unto  death  !  IV.  I  remark,  in  the  fourth  place,  that  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  the  form  of  a  dove,  should  remind  us  that  gentleness  is  a  distinguishing  mark  of 
Christian  character  in  which  most  of  us  have  very  much  to  learn.  Audubon,  the 
ornithologist,  relates  this  incident  in  his  autobiography:  "  A  man,  who  was  once  a 
pirate,  assured  me  that  several  times,  while  at  certain  wells  dug  in  the  burning, 
shelly  sands,  the  soft  and  melancholy  notes  of  the  doves  awoke  in  his  heart  feelings 
which  had  long  slumbered,  melting  his  heart  to  repentance.  So  deeply  was  he 
moved  by  them — the  only  soothing  sounds  he  had  ever  heard  during  his  life  of 
horrors — that  through  them  he  was  induced  to  escape  from  his  vessel,  abandon  his 
turbulent  companions,  and  return  to  a  family  deploring  his  absence,  and  he  now 
lives  in  peace  in  the  midst  of  his  friends."  "I  beseech  you  by  the  gentleness  of 
Christ,"  was  St.  Paul's  exhortation  to  the  Christians  of  Corinth  (2  Cor.  x.  1) ;  and, 
"  Gentleness,"  he  assures  the  Galatians  (v.  22),  is  one  of  the  prominent  fruits  of 
the  Spirit.  Henry  Martyn,  whose  temper  was  naturally  not  the  gentlest,  wrote  in 
his  journal,  "  I  walked  into  the  village  where  the  boat  stopped  for  the  night,  and 
found  the  worshippers  of  Cali  by  the  sound  of  their  drums  and  cymbals.  I  did  not 
speak  to  them  on  account  of  their  being  Bangalees  ;  but  being  invited  to  walk  in  by 
the  Brahmins,  I  went  within  the  railings,  and  asked  a  few  questions  about  the  idoL, 
The  Brahmin,  who  spoke  bad  Hindostanee,  disputed  with  great  heat,  and  his  tongue 
ran  faster  than  I  could  follow,  and  the  people  shouted  applause.  I  continued  to 
ask  my  questions,  without  making  any  remarks  upon  the  answers.  .  .  .  The  man 
grew  quite  mild,  and  said  it  was  "  good  words,"  and  asked  me  seriously,  at  last,  was 
idol-worship  true  or  false  ?  I  felt  it  a  matter  of  thankfulness  that  I  could  make 
known  the  truth  of  God,  though  but  a  stammerer ;  and  this  I  also  learned,  that  the 
power  of  gentleness  is  irresistible.  Once  more  :  the  dove  has  always  been  the  type 
of  purity,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  purifier  of  the  heart.  When  He  gains  an 
entrance  into  it,  sin  and  uncleanness  must  depart.  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  The  Holy 
Spirit  like  a  dove : — So  here  the  Spirit  would  appear  in  the  shape  of  a  dove,  to  note — 
1.  What  kind  of  Spirit  Christ's  was.  2.  What  kind  of  gifts  they  were  which  were 
collated  and  bestowed  upon  Him :  and — 3.  What  was  the  fruit  of  those  gifts. 
(2'.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  Divine  Spirit  in  the  ministry  : — Note,  as  Christ  was  set 
apart  both  by  the  ministry  of  msui,  and  by  the  Spirit,  by  the  visible  appearance  of 
which  God  would  manifest  that  He  was  fitted  thereunto  ;  so  in  all  those  that  are 
set  apart  by  man  to  the  ministry,  must  be  an  apparent  descending  of  the  Spirit, 
though  not  in  visible  shape,  yet  in  evident  gifts  and  graces.  (Ibid.)  The  Spirit 
of  God  like  unto  Himself: — The  Spirit  of  God  is  everywhere  like  to  Himself,  both 
in  the  head  and  members,  as  the  same  juice  ia  in  the  root  and  branches,  in  the  tree 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m, 

and  Irnits.  Look  what  were  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  Christ,  the  same  also  are  in  th« 
members  (Gal.  v.  23).  {Ibid.)  The  Divine  Trinity  engaged  in  redemption : — Here, 
then,  for  our  further  comfort,  we  have  to  consider  how  the  three  Persons  of  the  Blessed 
Trinity  concur  together  to  work  the  great  work  of  our  redemption ;  for  here  is  the 
Father  designing,  ordaining,  proclaiming  ;  here  is  the  Son  accepting,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  anointing.  (Bishop  Cowper.)  The  Holy  Ghost  as  dove : — The  Spirit  that 
descended  on  Jesus  like  a  dove  was  to  become,  and  became,  when  breathed  abroad 
by  Him,  a  consuming  fire  (ver.  16).  Why,  in  its  descent  upon  Him,  was  it  the  gentle 
brooding  of  a  dove  ?  May  we  not  answer  with  a  word,  that  in  Him  it  encountered 
no  sinful  force,  no  mass  of  evil  passion  or  unworthy  disposition,  to  contend  with; 
but  only  beautiful  germs  to  develope,  only  rights,  sympathies,  and  aspirations  to 
encourage,  and  direct,  and  intensify  ?  Yes ;  it  found  in  Him  only  that  which  was 
accordant  and  congenial ;  the  Holy  Child  to  be  expanded  into  the  Holy  Man ;  nothing 
contrary  to  it,  the  withstanding  of  which  would  have  struck  out  a  flame ;  nothing  to 
burn  against  and  burn  up,  in  order  to  His  perfecting ;  no  false  will  or  affections  to 
be  resisted  by  and  to  resist,  until  it  was  conquered.  The  Spirit  from  above  just 
lighted  and  spread  its  wings,  and  sat  brooding  upon  the  Divine  simplicity  of  the 
whole-hearted  Nazarene.  True,  He  had  to  endure  in  Himself  a  fiery  baptism,  aa 
the  result  of  the  descent  upon  Him  from  above.  But  it  was  through  His  contact, 
thus  Spirit-charged,  with  the  bad  element  surrounding  Him,  that  He  suffered  what 
He  suffered ;  not  through  the  contact  of  the  Spirit  with  any  bad  element  in  Him.  It 
met  with  nothing  in  Him  to  cause  a  painful  flame ;  touching  which  it  had  to  become  a 
purging  devouring  fire.  It  abode  upon  Him  like  a  dove  brooding  over  its  nest.  {S.  A. 
Tipple.)  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son,  in  Thee  I  am  -well  pleased. — The  voice  from 
heaven  : — I.  The  Person  whose  voice  it  was  is  God  the  Father  ;  for  He  saith,  **  Thoa 
art  My  beloved  Son."  Every  testimony  receives  validity  and  authority  from  the 
testator,  therefore  this  must  needs  be  sound  and  good.  God  had  given  testimony  to 
Christ  by  many  famous  men,  even  all  the  prophets,  and  now  lately  by  John  Baptist, 
who  was  greater  than  a  prophet,  that  Christ  was  greater  than  he;  yea,  more,  had 
given  testimony  of  Him  by  a  multitude  of  heavenly  angels  (Luke  i.  30  and  13).  But 
not  content  with  all  this,  He  gives  from  heaven  His  own  testimony  of  Him.  1.  To 
strike  us  with  reverence  in  receiving  this  testimony,  which  hath  this  privilege  above 
other  parts  of  Scripture,  that  it  was  uttered  by  God's  own  month,  not  by  men  or 
angels.  2.  To  confirm  us  in  the  truth  of  the  testimony,  proceeding  from  Him 
who  is  prima  Veritas,  truth  itself  (not  only  true)  in  His  essence,  and  much  more  in 
His  words  and  works,  who  cannot  be  deceived,  nor  deceive  ns.  8.  To  show  the 
necessity  of  believing  this  testimony,  being  the  first  and  only  principle  in  Christian 
religion,  without  which  foundation  laid  can  be  no  religion  nor  salvation,  as  we  see 
in  the  Jews  and  Turks.  That  we  might  more  firmly  believe  in  the  Son  of  God  for 
life,  God's  own  mouth  testifieth  so  honourably  of  Him.  4.  That  such  a  glorious 
commendation  of  this  testimony  might  stir  np  our  best  attention  and  affections  in 
the  unfolding  of  it,  we  have  here  the  word  of  a  King  which  was  never  stained,  and 
that  not  uttered  by  any  herald  or  a  lord  chancellor,  but  from  His  own  month, 
which  carrieth  more  weight  with  it.  If  God  speak,  woe  to  him  that  hears  not. 
II.  The  place  whence — from  heaven.  For  these  reasons :  1.  For  more  authority 
to  the  person  of  Christ,  whom  God  from  heaven  doth  honour.  And  if  God  thn» 
honour  Him,  how  ought  we  to  honour  Him  ?  (2  Pet.  i.  17.)  He  received  of  God 
the  Father  honour  and  glory,  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  Him  from  the  excellent 
glory,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son  "  ;  which  was  verified  not  only  in  the  time  of  His 
Transfiguration,  but  here  also.  2.  Because  the  testimony  contains  the  sum  of  the 
whole  gospel,  to  declare  that  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  which  Christ  delivered  to 
the  world,  was  from  heaven,  because  God  from  heaven  so  testifieth  it  to  be.  Wherein 
it  differs  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Law,  which,  although  God  renewed  from  heaven 
in  the  tables  of  stone,  yet  was  it  written  in  the  heart  of  man  by  natnre.  So  wsi 
not  the  gospel.  But  as  after  the  Fall  it  was  immediately  deUvered  by  God  to  Adam 
in  the  promise,  so  here  by  the  same  voice  from  heaven  confirmed  to  be  Divine  and 
heavenly.  3.  In  respect  of  us,  that  we  should  more  carefully  attend  to  the  testi- 
mony itself  proceeding  from  the  excellent  glory,  and  that  from  the  mouth  of  the 
God  of  glory  sitting  in  His  chair  of  estate,  seeing  the  word  of  a  King  in  that  place 
is  more  regarded.  The  contempt  of  the  Law  given  upon  Mount  Sinai,  in  the  hand 
of  angels,  was  required  at  their  hands ;  how  shall  they  then  escape  that  despise 
Fim  that  speaketh  from  heaven  7  (Heb.  ii.  2,  8.)  The  Law  being  transgressed,  the 
gospel  from  heaven  moderateth  and  pardoneth  a  man  •.  but  the  gospel  from  heaven 
being  despised,  what  can  plead  for  hun  ?    4.  To  show  the  extent  of  the  gospel,  that 


OTAP.  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  88T 

it  is  to  be  preached,  and  binds  to  the  faith  of  it  all  the  people  nnder  heaven.  And 
herein  it  was  not  to  be  inferior  to  the  Law,  which  God  would  have  acknowledged 
His  own  by  uttering  it  from  heaven,  and  that  not  before  He  had  sent  Moses  down, 
lest  it  should  have  been  thought  to  be  His,  although  it  was  so  loud  and  piercing, 
as  it  could  not  possibly  be  but  Divine,  not  human.  III.  The  mannkb  of  the  testi- 
MONT — BY  AN  AUDIBLE  AND  SENSIBLE  VOICE.  How  the  Father  uttcreth  this  voice  it  is 
needless  to  inquire,  seeing  we  know  that  He  who  made  the  tongue  can  either  speak 
without  a  tongue  or  by  secret  inspiration  and  revelation,  as  to  Isaiah  (2  Kings  xx.  4), 
or  frame  a  tongue  and  organs  of  voice  at  His  pleasure,  to  utter  and  make  known 
His  will  and  good  pleasure  to  His  creatures,  or  speak  by  creatures,  as  angels  in 
human  shape,  or  other  creatures — sensible,  as  Balaam's  ass  ;  or  insensible,  as  the 
bush  of  fire.  It  is  much  more  material  to  inquire  into  the  end  and  use  of  it,  which 
was  to  make  the  Son  of  God  known  unto  the  world,  that  the  faith  of  men  might  be 
fixed  on  Him  for  salvation.  1.  Hence,  note,  in  that  the  Lord  from  heaven  teacheth 
by  voice  His  wonderful  care,  that  will  not  suffer  us  to  want  any  means  to  help  ua 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  means  of  salvation.  He  had  taught  them  and  us  before, 
by  the  sense  of  sight,  seeing  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Spirit  visibly  descending; 
and  now  He  teacheth  the  ear  by  a  voice,  for  He  knows  our  dulness,  security,  slow- 
ness of  heart  to  believe,  and  applies  Himself  every  way  to  help  us.  He  setteth  out 
His  glory  by  His  works  and  creatures ;  He  addeth  His  Word  confirmed  by  many 
powerful  miracles ;  to  his  audible  Word  He  hath  annexed  His  visible  Word,  the 
sacraments ;  He  hath  set  up  a  constant  ministry  in  His  Church,  and  every  way 
fitted  it  to  the  edification  of  His  people,  as  so  He  may  now  say,  What  could  I  do  more 
for  thee,  O  Israel  ?  Is  God  thus  careful  of  our  profiting  every  way  ?  Then  how 
damnable  and  excuseless  shall  the  carelessness  of  the  most  be  in  the  matter  of 
their  salvation  !  In  which  regard  it  had  been  good  for  many  a  man  that  God  had 
never  made  His  will  known  to  him,  that  he  never  had  heard  the  Word,  or  received 
the  sacraments,  for  all  but  tend  to  his  deeper  condemnation,  because  of  his  neglect 
and  formal  use.  When  our  Saviour  said  of  Judas,  "  It  had  been  good  for  him  he  had 
never  been  bom,"  did  not  He  in  effect  say  the  same,  It  had  been  good  for  him  he 
had  never  been  a  disciple  of  Christ,  never  had  heard  Christ,  or  preached  Christ, 
because  the  more  excellent  means  he  had,  the  greater  was  his  sin  and  judgment  ? 
Again,  hereby  God  cleareth  His  righteous  judgment  in  the  just  damnation  of  the 
wicked  and  unbelievers.  0  Israel,  thy  destruction  is  of  thyself.  Say  not.  What 
can  I  remedy  it,  if  God  will  not  save  me  ?  Nay,  what  can  God  do  more  than  He 
hath  done  ?  He  hath  given  thee  strong  and  excellent  means,  and  preached  the 
gospel  from  heaven  by  His  own  mouth,  and  sent  it  to  all  nations  under  heaven  in 
their  own  language  in  an  audible  and  intelligible  voice.  If  thou  wilt  now  wilfully 
refuse  the  means,  thy  blood  be  upon  thy  own  head  ;  that  which  will  die,  let  it  die. 
Thou  art  in  the  sea  of  thy  sins,  ready  to  be  drowned,  good  help  is  offered,  but  thou 
refusest  it,  and  must  die  in  thy  sin.  Thy  case  is  that  of  Jerusalem:  "How  often 
would  I  have  gathered  thee,  and  thou  wouldst  not ! "  2.  Note,  that  it  is  God's  pleasure 
that  we  should  be  taught  the  matter  of  salvation  by  voice,  and  attend  to  that.  Here 
was  a  visible  opening  of  the  heavens,  a  glorious  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  shape 
of  a  dove  resting  on  Christ ;  but  when  the  Lord  will  have  Christ  published  and 
proclaimed  the  Messiah,  this  must  be  done  by  voice.  •'  Thou  heardest  a  voice,  but 
Bawest  no  image,  therefore  take  heed  to  thyself,  and  corrupt  not  thyself  by  any 
image  "  (Deut.  iv.  12,  14).  1.  Herein  His  mercy  hath  appointed  a  familiar  and  fit 
instruction,  meet  for  our  weakness,  not  coming  to  His  Church  in  His  own  Majesty. 
2.  Herein  He  advanced  our  nature,  teaching  us  great  mysteries  by  such  as  ourselves, 
sanctifying  the  tongues  of  men,  and  not  angels.  3.  Herein  He  magnifies  His  power, 
who  by  so  weak  means  worketh  salvation.  Earthen  vessels  are  used,  that  the  power 
may  be  seen  to  be  of  God  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  The  voice  of  men  by  God's  power  conquers 
the  world.  4.  Hereby  He  tries  our  obedience,  whether  we  will  yield  to  a  weak 
voice,  whereas  He  might  force  us  by  power.  Eeasons  :  If  God  look  on  us  in  our- 
Belves,  and  in  the  common  mass,  we  are  so  covered  over  with  sin,  as  He  must  need? 
pronounce  of  us  as  once  He  did  of  mankind,  "  It  repenteth  Me  that  I  have  made 
man."  He  must  needs  bring  the  curse  of  the  Law  on  our  necks.  But  looking  on 
ns  through  Christ,  He  changeth  His  voice,  that  as  when  we  behold  a  thing  through 
A  red,  or  green,  or  coloured  glass,  everything  looks  as  the  colour  of  the  glass.  So 
God  beholding  us  through  Christ,  we  receive  the  dye  and  tincture  of  His  blood  and 
obefence,  and  so  are  justified  and  accounted  innocent  and  pure.  And  tJius,  as  it  is 
eaid  of  the  Church  (Ezek.  xvi.  14),  we  recover  our  former  beauty,  which  is  made  perfect 
fhioagh  His  beauty.    {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)      Thirty  years  of  age. — Years  of  silence  and 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

preparation : — In  the  humble  home  at  Nazareth  Jesus  spent  thirty  years ;  most  mar- 
vellous in  this,  that  nothing  marvellous  is  recorded  of  them.  Goodness  was  so  perfect, 
duty  so  evenly  performed,  the  lustre  of  holiness  so  mild  and  steady,  that  brothers  and 
sisters  and  rude  Nazarene  neighbours  came  to  take  all  this  as  a  matter  of  course, 
Baw  in  it  nothing  superhuman  ;  and  when  at  last  the  disguise  was  laid  aside,  and 
the  prophet-king  of  Israel,  the  promised  Messiah,  stood  unveiled,  they  could  still 
only  stupidly  ask,  "  Is  not  this  Jesus,  the  carpenter  ?  "  Imagination  may  strive  to 
■withdraw  the  veil  which  inspiration  has  left  drawn  over  these  thirty  years — the 
precious  episode  of  the  visit  to  Jerusalem.  For  some  minds  the  attempt  will  have 
an  irresistibh)  fascination,  to  others  it  will  be  utterly  distasteful ;  and  neither  may 
judge  the  other.  But  faith  and  love  should  never  lose  sight  of  the  lessons  which 
Bpeak  in  the  very  silence  of  those  years.  Ten  times  as  much  of  life  as  our  Lord 
Jesus  occupied  in  public  ministry  He  spent  in  private  life,  preaching  no  sermon, 
initiating  no  public  movement,  working  no  miracle.  The  Divine  ideal  of  perfect 
holiness  in  childhood,  youth,  and  manhood  was  realized  during  thirty  years  in  ft 
life  of  obscure  privacy,  mechanical  toil,  and  home  affection  and  duty.  {E.  R. 
Conder,  D.D.)  Thirty  years  of  preparation,  and  about  three  y«ars  of  work  1  how 
contrary  to  our  notions  of  a  wise  economy  of  the  working  powers  of  a  human  life  I 
There  may  possibly  be  a  reference  to  the  age  at  which,  according  to  the  law,  the 
Levites  were  to  enter  upon  their  ministrations ;  but  when  we  consider  the  short  time 
during  which  the  actual  ministry  lasted,  we  may  certainly  draw  the  conolasion  that 
in  order  to  do  a  great  work  in  a  short  time  long  and  patient  preparation  is  necessary ; 
and  that  they  who  would  be  useful  ministers  of  the  Church  of  Christ  should  grudge 
no  time  and  no  amount  of  labour  to  fit  themselves  for  the  great  work  committed  to 
them.  (Bishop  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  author  of  the  "  New  Phoedo  "  considers 
thirty  years  of  age  the  epoch  for  the  departure  of  youth  ;  by  which  he  does  not,  of 
course,  intend  to  signify  incipient  decay,  our  frames  being  aa  young  as  they  were 
£ve  years  before,  while  the  mind  has  been  ripening ;  by  youth  he  means  the  growing 
and  progressive  season,  the  departure  of  it  being  visible  only  inasmuch  as  we  have 
become,  as  it  were,  fixed  and  stationary.  The  qualities  that  peculiarly  belong  to 
youth,  its  quick,  throbbing  fancies,  its  exuberance  of  energy  and  feeling,  cease,  by 
his  reckoning,  to  be  our  distinctions  at  thirty.  Maynard,  in  the  play,  speaks  of 
himself  as  almost  thirty — "warning  thirty."  "Warning  thirty?"  repeats  his 
companion,  half-mockingly,  half-inquiringly.  The  other  explains,  "  'Tia  half 
the  journey,  Tom.  Depend  on't,  after  thirty,  'tis  time  to  coimt  the  milestones." 
At  the  age  of  thiiiy,  according  to  Lord  Lytton,  the  characters  of  most  men  pass 
through  a  revolution ;  we  have  reduced  to  the  sober  test  of  reality  the  visions  of 
youth ;  we  no  longer  chase  frivolities  or  hope  for  chimeras ;  and  we  may  now  come 
with  better  success  than  Basselas  to  the  Choice  of  Life.  Ever  to  be  noted  is  the 
pregnant  fact  that  when  our  Lord  began  to  be  about  thirty  years  of  age,  then  began 
His  work  in  earnest.  His  ministry  in  public.  To  many  that  age  is  the  signal  for 
selfish  indulgence  in  regrets.  To  Him  it  struck  the  hour  of  hard  work — work  that 
should  cease  but  in  death.  {F.  Jacox.)  The  achievements  of  youth: — Almost 
everything  that  is  great  has  been  done  by  youth.  For  life  in  general  there  is  but 
one  decree.  Youth  is  a  blunder  ;  manhood  a  struggle  ;  old  age  a  regret.  Do  not 
suppose  that  I  hold  that  youth  is  genius  ;  aU  that  is  genius,  when  young,  is  Divine. 
Why,  the  greatest  captains  of  ancient  and  modem  times  both  conquered  Italy  at 
five-and-twenty  1  Youth,  extreme  youth,  overthrew  the  Persian  empire.  Don  John 
of  Austria  won  Lepanto  at  twenty-five — the  greatest  battle  of  modern  times.  Had 
it  not  been  for  the  jealousy  of  Philip,  the  next  year  he  would  have  been  Emperor 
of  Mauritania.  Gaston  de  Foix  was  only  twenty-two  when  he  stood  a  victor  on  the 
plain  of  Bavenna.  Every  one  remembers  Cond6  and  Bocroy  at  the  same  age. 
Gustavus  Adolphus  died  at  thirty-eight.  Look  at  his  captains:  that  wonderful 
Duke  of  Weimar,  only  thirty-six  when  he  died  ;  Banier  himself,  after  all  his 
miracles,  died  at  forty-five.  Cortes  was  little  more  than  thirty  when  he  gazed  upon 
the  golden  cupolas  of  Mexico.  When  Maurice  of  Saxony  died  at  thirty-two  all 
Europe  acknowledged  the  loss  of  the  greatest  captain  and  the  profoimdest  statesman 
of  the  age.  Then  there  is  Nelson,  Clive — but  these  are  warriors,  and  perhaps  you 
may  think  there  are  greater  things  than  war.  I  do  not ;  I  worship  the  Lord  of 
hosts.  But  take  the  most  illustrious  achievements  of  civil  prudence.  Innocent 
III.,  the  greatest  of  the  Popes,  was  the  despot  of  Christendom  at  thirty-seven. 
John  de  Medici  was  a  cardinal  at  fifteen,  and,  Guicoiardini  tells  UE,  baffled  with 
his  statecraft  Ferdinand  of  Arragon  himself;  he  was  Pope  as  LeoX.  at  thirty -seven, 
.liuther  robbed  e\eu  him  of  his  richest  province  at  thirty-five.     Take  Ignatius 


CHAP.  Ill,]  ST.  L€KE.  859- 

Loyola  and  John  Wesley ;  they  worked  with  young  brains.  Ignatius  was  only  thirty 
when  he  made  his  pilgrimage  and  wrote  the  "  Spiritual  Exercises."  Pascal  wrote 
a  great  work  at  sixteen,  the  greatest  of  Frenchmen,  and  died  at  thirty-seven.  Ah, 
that  fatal  thirty-seven  I  Was  it  experience  that  guided  the  pencil  of  Baphael  when 
he  painted  the  palaces  of  Bome  7  He  died  at  thirty-seven.  Bichelieu  was  Secretary 
of  State  at  thirty-one.  Then  there  were  Bolingbroke  and  Pitt,  both  Ministers  before 
other  men  leave  cricket.  Grotius  was  in  great  practice  at  seventeen,  and  Attorney- 
General  at  twenty-four.  And  Acquaviva — Acquaviva  was  general  of  the  Jesuits, 
ruled  every  Cabinet  in  Europe,  and  colonized  America  before  he  was  thirty-seven. 
What  a  career  1  It  is  needless  to  multiply  instances.  The  history  of  heroes  is  the 
history  of  youth.     {Lord  Beaconsfield. ) 

Vers.  23,  38.   Which  was  the  son  of  Adam,  which  was  the  son  of  God.— - 

Oenealogiet: — As  we  glance  through  the  list  of  names  given  in  these  chapters 
(Matt.  i.  and  Luke  iii.),  we  see  that  few  could  claim  a  higher  descent  than  could 
the  carpenter  Joseph  and  the  gentle  woman  to  whom  he  was  espoused.  They  were 
both  lineally  descended  from  the  ancient  kings  of  the  proud  tribe  of  Judah — from* 
Solomon  and  David — and,  going  further  back,  from  the  patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob — from  Shem,  from  Seth,  from  Adam.  Their  family  tree  in  one  place' 
covered  a  space  of  2,000  years ;  in  another  of  more  than  4,000  years.  Yet  they 
were  poor,  humble,  unrecognized.  In  the  lapse  of  time  there  are  fluctuations  and 
undulations.  While  some  families  have  their  flows,  others  have  their  abbs.  While- 
some  rise  in  wealth  and  consequent  honour,  others  glide  into  poverty  and  insig- 
nificance. The  old  stock  wears  out,  the  new  tree  takes  its  place.  The  world, 
constituted  as  it  is,  recognizes  lineage  only  when  it  is  accompanied  by  wealth.  By 
itself  it  is  a  voice  from  the  past,  and  nothing  more.  Could  we  read  the  history  of 
men's  lives,  and  trace  their  descent,  we  should  have  plenty  of  examples  of  this. 
We  see  it  in  our  own  times.  Examples  crowd  on  us  without  difficulty.  It  is  not 
long  since  the  gallant  son  of  an  emperor  died  as  a  simple  soldier  in  the  British' 
uniform.  It  is  asserted  that  the  last  scion  of  a  kingly  race,  sprung  from  the 
warrior  Cid,  eked  out  a  miserable  existence — neglected,  half-starved — in  London, 
where  he  died  a  few  years  ago.  The  descendants  of  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
men  of  the  sixteenth  century  are  a  poor  peasant  family  in  a  Midland  County 
to-day — decent  folk  enough,  but  certainly  '*  unhonoured  and  unsung."  ^  Such  was 
the  case  with  the  gentle  Mary  of  Nazareth.  Some  people  boast  of  their  patrician 
birth.  The  boasting,  at  least,  confers  no  merit  upon  them.  If  Mary  wished,  she 
might  with  reason  have  boasted  too.  Though  a  peasant,  she  sprang  from  kings ; 
though  poor,  her  ancestors  were  wealthy ;  though  humble,  one  of  her  forefathers 
was  the  wisest  of  men.  But  her  claim  to  honour  came  not  from  the  past — it  was 
reflected  back  from  the  future.  It  was  not  due  to  the  long  line  of  an  unbroken 
pedigree,  but  from  Him  she  was  to  bear.  .  .  .  With  the  exception  of  the  two  of  our 
Lord,  there  are  no  genealogies  in  the  New  Testament,  whereas  there  are  several  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Moreover,  St.  Paul,  himself  descended  from  Jacob's  youngest 
Bon,  wrote  this  counsel  to  Timothy,  "Neither  give  heed  to  endless  genealogies," 
and  to  Titus,  "Avoid  foolish  question  and  genealogies  ...  for  they  are  un- 
profitable and  vain."  Is  there  no  significance  in  this  ?  Family  records  were 
Bcrupulously  guarded  under  Judaism  ;  they  were  ignored,  even  condemned,  under 
Christianity.  Why  so  ?  Because  Christianity's  principle  sweeps  away  all  walls  of 
partition,  blots  out  all  records,  tears  down  all  red  lines  which  may  separate  man 
from  man.  Christianity  teaches  that  each  and  every  man,  whoever  he  be,  is  a 
brother;  and  each  and  every  woman  a  sister.  Christianity  abrogates  and 
denounces  whatever  tends  to  pride,  or  assumption,  or  superciliousness,  or  self- 
conceit.  It  teaches  that  in  God's  sight,  prince  and  beggar,  patrician  and  peasant, 
are  on  the  same  level.  It  teaches  gentleness  and  thoughtfulness  and  politeness 
towards  all.  It  teaches  that  the  highest  claim  to  descent  is  to  be  a  true  child  of 
God ;  the  highest  society,  true  membership  with  Christ ;  the  highest  inheritance,  that 
which  we  have  if  we  only  keep  it — the  kingdom  of  heaven.  {G.  E.  Drought,  M.A.) 
The  genealogies  in  Matthew  and  Luke  : — In  the  first  Gospel  the  genealogy  of  Jesus 
is  placed  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  narrative.  This  is  easily  explained.  From 
the  point  of  view  indicated  by  theocratic  forms,  scriptural  antecedents,  and,  if  we 
may  so  express  it,  Jewish  etiquette,  the  Messiah  was  to  be  a  descendant  of  David 
and  Abraham  (Matt.  i.  1.)  This  relationship  was  the  sine  qua  non  of  His  civil 
status.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  understand  why  Luke  thought  he  must  give  the 
genealogy  of  Jesus,  and  why  he  places  it  just  here,  between  the  baptism  and  th« 


BW  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

temptation.  Perhaps,  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  obsonrity  in  which,  to  the  Oreeks, 
the  origin  of  mankind  was  hidden,  and  the  absurd  fables  current  among  them 
about  autochthonic  nations,  we  shall  see  how  interesting  any  document  would  be  to 
them,  which,  following  the  track  of  actual  names,  went  back  to  the  first  father  of 
the  race.  Luke's  intention  would  thus  be  very  nearly  the  same  as  Paul's,  when  he 
eaid  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  26),  "  God  hath  made  of  one  blood  the  whole  human 
race."  But  from  a  strictly  religious  point  of  view,  this  genealogy  possessed  still 
greater  importance.  In  carrying  it  back  not  only,  as  Matthew  does,  ag  far  as 
Abraham,  but  even  to  Adam,  Luke  lays  the  foundation  of  that  universality  of 
redemption  which  is  to  be  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  picture  he  is 
about  to  draw.  In  this  way  he  places  in  close  and  indissoluble  connection  the 
imperfect  image  created  in  Adam  which  reappears  in  every  man,  and  his  perfect 
image  realized  in  Christ  which  is  to  be  reproduced  in  all  men.  But  why  does  Luke 
place  this  document  here  f  Because  now  Jesus  enters  personally  on  the  scene  to 
commence  His  proper  work.  With  the  baptism,  the  obscurity  in  which  He  has 
lived  until  now  passes  away ;  He  now  appears  detached  from  the  circle  of  persons 
who  have  hitherto  surrounded  Him  and  acted  as  His  patrons — viz..  His  parents 
and  the  forerunner.  He  henceforth  becomes  the  He  (ver.  23),  the  principal 
personage  of  the  narrative.  This  is  the  moment  which  very  properly  appears  to 
the  author  most  suitable  for  giving  His  genealogy.  The  genealogy  of  Moses,  in  the 
Exodus,  is  placed  in  the  same  way,  not  at  the  opening  of  his  biography,  but  at  the 
moment  when  he  appears  on  the  stage  of  history,  when  he  presents  himself  before 
Pharaoh.  In  crossing  the  threshold  of  this  new  era,  the  sacred  historian  casta  a 
general  glance  over  the  period  which  thus  reaches  its  close,  and  sums  it  up  in  this 
document,  which  might  be  called  the  mortuary  register  of  the  earlier  humanity. 
There  is,  further,  a  difference  of  form  between  the  two  genealogies.  Matthew  comes 
down,  while  Luke  ascends  the  stream  of  generations.  Perhaps  this  difference  of 
method  depends  on  the  difference  of  religions  position  between  the  Jews  and  the 
Greeks.  The  Jew,  finding  the  basis  of  his  thought  in  a  revelation,  proceeds 
synthetically  from  cause  to  effect ;  the  Greek,  possessing  nothing  beyond  the  fact, 
analyzes  it,  that  he  may  proceed  from  effect  to  cause.  But  this  difference  depends 
more  probably  still  on  another  circumstance.  Every  ofiBcial  genealogical  register 
must  present  the  descending  form ;  for  individuals  are  only  inscribed  in  it  as  they 
are  born.  The  ascending  form  of  genealogy  can  only  be  that  of  a  private  instru- 
ment, drawn  up  from  the  public  document  with  a  view  to  the  particular  individual 
whose  name  serves  as  the  starting-point  of  the  whole  hst.  It  follows  that  in 
Matthew  we  have  the  exact  copy  of  the  official  register ;  while  Luke  gives  us  a 
document  extracted  from  the  public  records,  and  compiled  with  a  view  to  the  person 
with  whom  the  genealogy  commences.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  double  genealogies 
of  Christ  as  the  Son  of  David  : — The  general  facts  are  these — 1.  The  genealogy  in 
St.  Matthew  descends  from  Abraham  to  Jesus,  in  accordance  with  his  object  in 
writing  mainly  for  the  Jews ;  whereas  St.  Luke's  ascends  from  Jesus  to  Adam,  and 
to  God,  in  accordance  with  his  object  in  writing  for  the  world  in  general.  2.  The 
generations  are  introduced  in  St.  Matthew  by  the  word  "begat"  ;  in  St.  Luke  by 
the  genitive  with  the  ellipse  of  "  son."  3.  Between  David  and  Zerubbabel  St. 
Matthew  gives  only  fifteen  names,  but  St.  Luke  twenty-one;  and  they  are  all 
different  except  that  of  Shealtiel  (Salathiel).  4.  Between  Zerubbabel  and  Joseph 
St.  Matthew  gives  only  nine  generations,  but  St.  Luke  seventeen  ;  and  all  the  namea 
are  different.  The  difficulty  as  to  the  number  of  the  generations  is  not  serious.  It 
is  a  matter  of  daily  experience  that  the  number  of  generations  in  one  line  often 
increases  far  more  rapidly  than  that  in  another.  Moreover  the  discrepancies  in 
these  two  lists  may  all  be  accounted  for  by  noticing  that  Matthew  adopts  the 
common  Jewish  plan  of  an  arbitrary  numerical  division  into  tesseradecads.  When 
this  system  was  adopted,  wholei  generations  were  freely  omitted,  for  the  sake  of 
preserving  the  symmetry,  provided  that  the  fact  of  the  succession  remained 
undoubted  (cf.  Ezra  vii.  1-5  with  1  Chron.  vi.  3-15).  The  difficulty  as  to  the 
dissimilarity  of  names  will  of  course  only  affect  the  two  steps  of  the  genealogies  at 
which  they  begin  to  diverge,  before  they  again  coalesce  in  the  names  of  Shealtiel 
and  of  Joseph.  A  single  adoption,  and  a  single  levirate  marriage,  account  for  the 
apparent  discrepancies.  St.  Matthew  gives  the  legal  descent  through  a  line  of 
kings  descended  from  Solomon — the  jus  succestionis  ;  St.  Luke  the  natural  descent 
— the  jtu  ianguinis.  St.  Matthew's  is  a  royal,  St.  Luke's  a  natural  pedigree. 
(Archdeacon  Farrar.'^  Our  Lord's  descent : — 1.  These  verses  completely  establish 
that  esflential  point  in  the  evidence  of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesas,  viz.,  His  descent 


m.]  8T.  LUKE.  8fi^ 

from  David,  Judah,  and  Abraham.  Let  this  confirm  our  faith  in  His  Divine 
mission ;  let  us  give  our  careful  attention  and  firm  adherence  to  the  exact  and 
particular  doctrines  which  He  teaches  ;  and  show  a  ready  obedience  to  the  precepts 
irhich  He  enjoins.  2.  Among  the  ancestors  of  our  Lord,  there  are  found  persons 
»f  various  descriptions  and  characters.  (1)  Though  His  line  frequently  runs  through 
the  elder  brother,  it  also  often  runs  through  a  younger  brother  of  the  family,  which 
shows  that  God  follows  His  own  sovereign  will,  and  in  the  course  of  His  providence 
often  makes  the  first  last  and  the  last  first,  putting  down  the  great  and  exalting 
those  of  low  degree.  (2)  In  this  genealogy,  too,  are  found  some  who  were  originally 
Gentiles,  and  strangers  to  the  covenants  of  promise,  as  Kahab  and  Ruth ;  a  circum- 
stance which  gave  early  proof  that  in  Jesus  Christ  there  was  to  be  neither  Greek 
nor  Jew,  and  that  the  blessings  of  His  salvation  were  to  be  proposed  to  every  nation 
under  heaven.  (3)  In  His  pedigree  there  are  found  some  individuals  who  were 
of  abandoned  character,  and  yet  He  was  not  thereby  disgraced.  (4)  It  shows  that 
grace  does  not  run  through  families,  but  is  the  special  gift  of  God  to  individuals. 
(5)  Oar  Lord's  condescension  in  accepting  such  a  descent.  3.  A  glance  at  these 
generations  which  have  passed  away,  naturally  suggests  a  variety  of  reflections — 
plaintive,  humble,  and  instructive.  (1)  All  must  die.  (2)  The  sad  consequences  of 
sin.  (8)  The  vanity  of  the  world.  Some  few  of  these  obtained  celebrity,  but  how 
little  it  avails  them  now !  Of  how  many  the  memory,  and  even  the  name,  has 
utterly  perished  1  How  miserable  are  they  who  have  no  name  but  that  which  is 
written  in  the  earth,  and  no  portion  but  for  this  life  1  Let  us  seek  to  gain  a  mora 
substantial  honour.  (Jameg  Foote,  M.A.)  A  binding  corner-stone  : — See  what  a 
binding  corner-stone  the  Lord  Jesus  is,  knitting  together  not  man  to  man  only. 
Gentiles  with  Jews,  but  man  with  God  also ;  and  that  not  by  a  personal  union 
only,  which  He  hath  perfected  in  Himself,  but  by  a  spiritual  union  also  by  which 
He  unites  all  the  members  of  His  mystical  body  in  a  blessed  peace  and  fellowship 
with  God ;  and  this  hath  He  now  begun,  and  shall  perfect  in  the  end.  (Bishop 
Cowper.)  From    Christ  according  to  the    Spirit : — Then  our  instruction  is, 

that  though  neither  our  names  nor  our  fathers,  be  in  the  catalogue  of  Christ's 
progenitors ;  yet  if  we  be  in  the  roll  of  His  children  and  brethren,  we  shall  have 
comfort  sufficient  :  though  He  be  not  come  of  us  according  to  the  fiesh,  if  we  be 
come  from  Him,  according  to  the  Spirit,  as  His  sons  and  daughters  by  regeneration, 
■we  shall  be  blessed  in  Him,  even  as  they  were.  (Ibid.)  The  genealogical  table  : — 
A  mournful  yet  instructive  study.  Take  a  few  of  the  reflections  arising  from  such 
a  study.  1.  Every  individual  life  belongs  to  the  great  whole — the  solemn  ever- 
rolling  stream  of  human  being.  No  man  liveth  unto  himself ;  we  transmit  power, 
weakness,  even  depravity.  2.  Though  the  individual  dies,  the  race  moves  on ;  no 
one  being  is  essential  to  the  continuance  of  the  world ;  the  greatest  dies,  yet  the 
world  hardly  misses  the  service  of  his  industrious  hand ;  the  most  eloquent  ceases 
his  speech,  yet  the  roar  in  the  living  air  is  none  the  less.  3.  How  few  men  of 
surpassing  reputation  there  have  ever  been,  considering  the  innumerable  hosts  of 
human  generations ;  how  few  of  these  names  do  we  know  anything  about — only 
one  here  and  there,  as  David,  Abraham,  Enoch  ;  but  of  the  mass,  who  knows  any- 
thing ?  4.  Yet  there  may  be  great  usefulness  where  there  is  no  renown ;  our  names 
will  perish  when  we  cease  to  live,  yet  within  the  limits  of  our  day,  how  much  good 
may  we  do  !  6.  Even  though  a  great  succession  may  seem  to  be  interrupted,  or  to 
have  died  out,  it  may  revive  again.  In  this  table  we  come  to  very  low  points,  yet 
how  the  life  rises,  how  the  glory  returns  !  "  Cast  down,  but  not  destroyed."  It  is 
often  thus  with  the  spiritual  seed  of  the  Messiah,  yet  there  has  ever  been  a  seed  to 
serve  Him,  and  a  remnant  to  uphold  the  honour  of  His  name.  {/.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  genealogy  of  Christ : — We  learn  :  I.  God's  fidelity  to  His  pkomisb.  II.  Thb 
Eternal  neveb  wobks  hurriedly.  III.  The  human  race  is  vert  closely  inter- 
related. IV.  The  universality  op  death.  V.  The  all-inclusiveness  of  Christ's 
MISSION.  VI.  Christ  thb  apex  op  this  pyramid  and  the  Crown  and  glory  of  the 
RACE.  (J.  Ossian  Davies.)  Sacred  and  secular  Jewish  names  : — The  following 
possible  explanation  of  the  divergencies  between  the  two  genealogies  of  our  Lord  is 
deserving  of  consideration.  The  Jews,  like  other  nations,  gave  more  than  one  name 
to  each  individual.  The  life  of  a  Jew  was  essentially  twofold  :  he  was  a  member 
of  a  civil  state,  and  he  was  at  the  same  time  a  member  of  a  theocracy ;  his  life  was 
both  political  and  religious.  This  distinction  seems  to  have  been  preserved  in  the 
giving  of  names.  Traces  of  the  double  name  are  found  throughout  the  course  of 
Scripture  history.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  sacred  name  imposed  at  birth 
would  be  entered  in  a  different  list  from  the  common  name  by  which  a  man  waa 


«6a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  m. 

known  in  his  civil  relationships.  The  conclusion  to  which  we  are  brought  is  that 
we  have  before  us  two  such  registers,  one  drawn  from  public,  and  the  other  from 
private  sources ;  or,  as  is  conjectured  above,  one  from  a  civil  genealogy,  the  other 
from  writings  laid  up  in  the  Temple.  In  support  of  this  view,  we  may  note  that 
in  the  genealogy  in  Luke — the  evangeUst  whose  opening  chapters  show  a  close 
familiarity  with  the  interior  of  the  Temple,  and  what  took  place  there — the  names 
appear  to  have  a  sacred  character.  Even  an  English  reader  may  remark  at  a 
glance  the  different  aspect  of  tlie  two  lists.  That  in  Luke  contains,  with  striking 
frequency,  the  familiar  names  of  distinguished  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  priests, 
and  thus  confirms  the  impression  that  his  genealogy,  rather  than  that  of  a 
Matthew,  is  of  a  purely  religious  character.  This  hypothesis  receives  a  remarkable 
confirmation  by  a  comparison  of  the  dates  of  the  two  lists  with  the  dates  of  the 
first  building,  the  destruction,  and  th«  second  building  of  the  Temple.  What,  then, 
is  the  relation  between  the  two  genealogies  before  Solomon's  time,  when  there  waa 
no  Temple  ?  and  during  the  lives  of  Salathiel  and  Zorobabel,  who  flourished  at  the 
time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity,  when  again,  for  seventy  years,  there  was  no 
Temple  f  It  is  precisely  at  these  periods  that  only  one  list  exists.  The  divergence 
in  Luke's  genealogy  from  that  of  Matthew  is  exactly  coincident  with  the  periods 
during  which  the  Temple  was  standing.  What  explanation  of  this  striking  fact  can 
be  more  natural  than  that  at  the  point  where  the  two  genealogies  unite  there  wag 
but  one  list  to  refer  to,  and  that  the  absence  of  entries  in  the  sacred  register 
required  it  to  be  supplemented  by  a  reference  to  the  state  chronicles  ?  (Biblical 
things  not  generally  known.)  Luke  carefully  guards  against  the  notion  of  this 
being  the  real  descent,  by  introducing  the  words  '•  as  was  supposed  "  ;  it  was  the 
legal  descent,  Joseph  being  legally  the  Lord's  father  ;  and  from  Joseph  as  the  sup- 
posed  father,  St.  Luke  carries  up  the  pedigree  to  the  commencement  of  all  things, 
that  is,  the  creation  of  the  man.  Matthew  brings  down  the  descent  from  Abraham  ; 
Luke  carries  it  up  to  Adam  and  so  to  God  ;  and  as  the  descent  from  Abraham  was 
the  most  important  for  those  children  of  Abraham  who  were  looking  for  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promises  made  to  their  forefathers,  so  the  possibility  of  ascending  to  Adam 
and  to  God  was  the  most  important  fact  for  the  race  of  mankind  at  large,  who  had 
all  fallen  in  Adam,  and  all  looked  for  redemption  through  Christ.  Dry  as  the  long 
list  of  names  in  Luke  may  seem,  it  may  truly  be  said  that  no  passage  of  Scripture 
contains  more  of  the  essence  of  the  gospel ;  Jesus  is  the  true  second  Adam,  because 
He  is  linked  with  the  first ;  Jesus  and  Adam  are  the  two  heads  of  the  human  race, 
and  they  are  both  of  them  sons  of  God,  Adam  by  creation,  Jesus  Christ  by  eternal 
generation ;  and  so  it  may  be  said  that  the  genealogical  chain,  by  which  Luke 
Unked  the  first  Adam  and  the  second  Adam  together,  is  that  chain  upon  which  the 
redemption  of  mankind  and  all  human  hopes  depend.  (Bishop  Harvey  Goodwin.) 
Why  have  we  Joseph's  genealogy,  not  Mary's  ? — If  Joseph's  genealogy,  as  presented 
in  either  of  the  Gospels,  determines  our  Lord's  birth  as  the  lineal  descendant  of 
David,  and  the  legal  heir  to  the  throne,  his  genealogy  is  all-important ;  while  that 
of  Mary,  as  it  would  not,  according  to  Hebrew  law,  have  decided  the  question  of 
descent,  would  have  been  invaUd  as  a  document.  " Familia  matris  nonfamilia"  is  an 
ancient  maxim  among  the  Jews,  and  it  has  Divine  sanction  (see  Numb.  i.  26).  The 
law  that  descent  is  reckoned  on  the  father's  side  only,  "Filius  sequitur  patrem" — a 
law  recognized  by  all  civilized  nations — is  not  contradicted  by  the  one  or  two 
exceptional  instances  in  which  the  name  of  a  woman's  ancestor  was  adopted  by  her 
husband  and  transmitted  to  her  offspring  (Numb,  xxxii.  41 ;  comp.  1  Chron.  ii. 
21-23  ;  Ezra  ii.  61).  A  descent  of  this  kind  was  not  counted  a  true  descent  in  any 
case  in  which  the  genealogy  was  sought  (see  Ezra  ii.  62),  and  gave  no  legal  claim. 
Joseph  is  distinctly  honoured,  in  the  Scripture,  with  the  recognition  of  his  legal 
parentage  of  Jesus.  (G.W.  Butler,  D.D.)  The  Divine  root  of  the  human  pedigree  :— 
The  pedigree  of  our  Lord,  as  given  by  the  Evangelist  of  the  Gentiles,  ends  with  a 
wonderful  leap,  a  leap  from  earth  to  heaven.  Noah  was  the  son  of  Lamech,  <fcc.,  &c. 
EnoB  was  the  son  of  Setb,  Seth  was  the  son  of  Adam,  Adam  was  the  son  of — 
<Tod.  There  is  no  bolder  word  in  Scripture,  none  that  strikes  us  with  a  deeper 
surprise  and  awe.  Most  of  us  have,  doubtless,  wondered  at  times  why,  when  space 
was  so  valuable,  Luke  should  have  inserted  in  his  Gospel  "this  barren  list  of 
names."  But  the  pedigree  is  of  immense  value,  if  for  nothing  else,  yet  for  this,  that 
It  connects  the  second  Adam  with  the  first,  that  it  places  a  son  of  God  at  either  end 
.of  the  list ;  that  it  makes  us  out  to  be  the  children  of  God  both  by  nature  and  by 
grace,  by  birth  and  by  second  birth.  For,  of  course,  if  Adam  was  the  son  of  God, 
we  are  all  the  children  of  God,  since  we  are  all  children  of  Adam ;  there  is  a  Divine 


4HAP.  in.]  ST.  LUKE.  86? 

element  in  onr  nature  as  well  as  a  human  element,  a  capacity  for  life  and  holinesa 
as  well  as  a  liability  to  sin  and  death.     In  the  light  of  our  text — I.  Even  the  most 

PEBPLEXING    EACTS    OF   OTJB   INWAKD   EXPERIENCE    GROW   A    LITTLE    MORE    CLEAR    TO    US. 

Double  or  divided  nature  of  which  every  man  is  conscious.  In  worst  of  men 
Bomething  good ;  something  bad  even  in  best.  That  which  is  good  we  derive  from 
God,  our  true  Father,  the  sole  source  and  fountain  of  good  ;  that  which  is  evil  in 
ns  we  inherit  not  from  Adam  only,  but  from  all  our  earthly  parents.  II.  So  does  the 

DEEPEST  TEACHING  OF    THE  NeW  TESTAMENT    BECOME  CLEABEB  TO  US  !    the  philoSOphj 

which  underlies  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  and  of  the  two  greatest  of  His  interpreters, 
St.  Paul  and  St.  John.  That  teaching  may  be  briefly  summed  up  thus  :  Christ  is 
the  Eternal  Word  by  whom  all  things  were  created,  by  whom  therefore  Adam,  or 
man,  was  created.  Hence  Christ  is,  as  St.  Paul  calls  Him,  the  Head  of  every  man. 
It  is  in  Him  that  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being.  Then,  too,  we  begin  to 
understand  all  those  difficult  and  perplexing  passages  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul, 
which  declare  our  essential  oneness  with  Christ.  The  second  Adam  was  before  the 
first  Adam,  and  called  Him  into  being.  Hence  He  could  die  for  all.  Hence  He 
lives  for  all,  and  we  all  Live  in  and  by  Him.  In  short,  all  the  sentences  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  have  sounded  most  mystical  and  obscure,  and  which  may  have 
seemed  too  good  to  be  literally  true,  become  true  and  plain  to  ns  so  soon  as  we 
understand  that  Adam  was  the  son  of  God,  and  that  Adam  was  made  by  Him  with- 
out whom  nothing  was  made,  and  apart  from  whom  nothing  can  subsist.    III.  Thb 

PRACTICAL  OUTCOME  OF   THESE  THOUGHTS   IS   MOST   WELCOME  AND   MOST   PRECIOUS   tO   aS 

many  of  us  as  love  hfe  and  desire  to  see  good.  For,  however  weak  and  sinful  we 
may  be,  we  have  not,  as  we  sometimes  fear,  to  persuade  God  to  enter  into  a  fatherly 
relation  to  us,  and  to  begin  to  love  ns.  He  i$  our  Father ;  He  does  love  us.  Nor 
have  we,  as  we  still  oftener  fear,  to  ask  Him  to  redeem  us  from  the  yoke  and 
tyranny  of  our  sins.  He  has  redeemed  both  ns  and  all  men,  once  for  all,  by  the 
incarnation  and  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Maker,  our  Head,  and  therefore  our 
Representative.  We  have  only  to  recognize  existing  and  accomplished  facts.  We 
have  only  to  believe  that  He  is  our  Father,  has  been  our  Father  ever  since  we  had 
any  being,  and  can  never  cease  to  be  our  Father.  We  have  only  to  accept  the 
salvation  He  has  wrought,  and  which  stands  waiting  for  us  and  urging  itself  upon 
OB.  There  need  be,  there  can  be,  no  change  in  God,  or  in  the  Son  of  God ;  it  is 
ice  in  whom  a  change  is  wanted.  They  are,  tbey  have  done,  they  are  doing,  all 
that  we  can  desire  them  to  be  or  do.  And  so  soon  as  we  know  that,  and  believe  it, 
we  shall  become  all  that  we  desire  to  be,  and  receive  all  that  we  long  to  enjoy. 
{S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  two  genealogies  of  Jesus  Christ : — And  yet  in  these  very 
genealogies  of  Jesns  Christ  there  are  hinted  profound  truths  well  worthy  of  our 
most  serious  consideration.     Let  us  rapidly  glance  at  some  of  them.    I.  And,  first, 

SHE  FACT  THAT  THERE  IB  ANT  GENEALOGY  AT  ALL  IS  SIGNIFICANT.      For  it  is  COnceivable 

that  the  Son  of  God  might  have  descended  into  the  world  an  unborn  Gabriel,  or  a  full- 
grown,  unmothered  Adam.  The  Word  has  indeed  become  flesh,  bone  of  our  bones 
and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  II.  Again,  observe  the  pedigree  itself.  How  many  and 
striking  its  vicissitudes  1  How  thrilling  some  of  its  names  I  How  momentous 
some  of  the  events  it  recalls  I  Glance  for  a  moment  at  some  of  these  peculiarities. 
For  example,  how  profound  the  obscurity  and  hinted  shame  which  rested  over 
Bethlehem's  manger,  as  suggested  by  the  evangelist's  comment :  *'  Being,  as  was 
supposed,  the  son  of  Joseph."  How  homely  His  descent,  as  indicated  by  the  fact 
that  eighteen  of  His  immediate  ancestors  are  unknown  except  by  name  I  How 
illustrious  His  descent,  as  indicated  in  such  names  as  Zerubbabel,  Josiah,  Hesekiah, 
Jehoshaphat,  Solomon,  David,  Boaz,  Jacob,  Abraham,  Noah,  Enoch,  Seth,  Adam  I 
What  dark  scenes  in  Hebrew  history  are  recalled  by  such  names  as  Jeboiachin, 
Amon,  Manasseh,  Ahaz,  Jehoram,  Kehoboam,  Bathsheba,  Tamarl  How  thrilling 
the  vicissitudes  of  David's  line,  as  vibrating  in  the  stories  of  Rehoboam,  Joash, 
Esther,  the  Maccabees,  the  Virgin  Mary  1  Verily,  the  genealogy  of  Jesus  Christ  is 
a  book  of  startling  providences.  And  it  is  a  significant  fact  that,  since  the  birth  of 
the  Divine  Man,  the  Davidic  pedigree  has  been  hopelessly  lost,  bo  that  none  bat 
Jesus  of  Bethlehem  can  claim  from  the  Hebrew  genealogical  tables  to  be  David's 
promised  Son,  and  so  David's  Lord,  even  Jehovah's  very  Christ.  But  Jesus  Christ 
was  not  only  the  Son  of  David  and  the  Son  of  Abraham,  He  was  also  the  Son  of 
Adam— even  that  seed  of  the  woman  who,  as  had  been  foretold  by  the  gates  of 
Eden,  would  crush  the  serpent's  head.  Thus,  the  genealogy  of  Jesns  Christ 
includes  all  extremes  and  all  vicissitudes,  so  that  he  is  in  very  truth  the  Son  of 
man.    And  not  only  is  He  the  Son  of  man,  He  is  also  the  Son  of  God.  IIL  Lastly, 


864  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

THB  OBNEAiiOGT  OF  Jbscs  Chbist  IS  THB  OLDEST  IN  THE  woBtD.  Men  think  it  s  great 
thing  to  have  an  ancient  lineage.  But  here  is  a  lineage  which  is  older  than  that  of 
William  of  Normandy,  or  Bomolns,  or  Priam,  or  Nimrod,  or  Adam.  Verily,  Hi9 
goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old — from  the  days  of  eternity.  Verily,  here  is  the 
Ancient  of  Days.  Ah !  the  true  heraldry  is  the  device  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world ;  the  true  shield  is  the  crimson  escutcheon  of  the  Cross. 
Dost  thou,  0  friend,  belong  to  the  lineage  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  If  so,  thy  name  has 
already  been  entered  in  the  heavenly  register,  even  the  Lamb's  roll  of  life.  Live,  then, 
worthily  of  thy  sonship.  (O.  D.  Boardman.)  Thoughts: — I.  There  is  much  in  good 
LiNEAOH.  Virtues  and  vices  are  borne  along  on  the  current  of  blood  from  gene- 
ration  to  generation.  Such  is  the  energy  of  moral  qualities  that  they  may  be 
modified  but  rarely  eradicated  by  transmission  from  parent  to  child.  As  surely  as 
the  blood  of  the  racer  tells  in  its  fleet-footed  offspring,  the  virtues  and  vices  o! 
David  are  felt  down  the  line  of  his  generation.  II.  Sin  has  tainted  the  blood  ov 
THE  best  EACE8  OF  MEN,  and  frequently  makes  itself  manifest.  All  have  sinned  and 
have  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  There  is  no  exception.  III.  God's  qeace  can 
FLOW  THEOUGH  VERT  CROOKED  HUMAN  OHANNILB.  Men  who  are  Spiritually  dwarfed 
and  ill-shaped  can  be  made,  in  God's  providence,  to  help  along  very  strait  principles 
and  policies.  God  makes  manifest  His  great  wisdom  and  power  by  the  vastness  of 
the  results  He  works  out  through  weak  human  instrumentalities.  What  could  be 
meaner  and  more  cruel  than  the  murder  of  Uriah  by  David  ?  Yet  God  made  the 
wife  of  this  murdered  man  the  channel  through  which  the  blood  of  Abraham 
flowed  into  the  veins  of  Joseph.  IV.  No  man  stands  alone.  We  are  all  parts  of  a 
vast  organism.  Asa  and  Jothan  and  Solomon  each  saw  the  life  which  he  lived 
from  his  birth  to  his  grave  ;  but  this  was  not  the  most  important  part  of  his  life. 
That  which  followed  his  death,  that  which  he  lived  in  his  descendants,  was  more 
far-reaching  and  wrought  still  greater  results.    [American  Homiletic  Review.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Veb.  1.  And  Jesus  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  returned  from  Jordsn,  and  was 

led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness. — The  temptation  of  Christ : — How  is  the 
temptation  of  Christ  to  be  understood  ?  As  a  history,  a  parable,  a  myth,  or  an 
undesigned,  though  not  accidental,  compound  of  the  three  ?  Let  us  begin — 1.  With 
what  ought  to  be  a  self-evident  proposition.  As  Jesus  was  a  moral  being,  whose 
nature  had  to  develop  under  the  limitations  necessary  to  humanity,  we  must  con- 
ceive  Him  as  a  siibject  of  moral  probation.  He  could  not  escape  exposure  to  ite 
perils.  But  again — 2.  We  must  here  conceive  the  temptable  as  the  tempted.  In  the 
person  and  life  of  Jesus  there  was  no  seeming,  A  real  humanity  cannot'escape  with. 
a  fictitious  temptation.  Though  our  narrative  may  be  termed  by  pre-eminence 
The  Temptation,  it  was  not  simply  then,  but  always,  that  Jesus  was  tempted.  The 
devil  left  Him  only  "  for  a  season  " ;  returned  personified  now  as  Peter,  now  as 
Judas,  and  again  as  the  Jews ;  met  Him  amid  the  solitude  and  agony  of  Geth- 
semane,  in  the  clamour,  mockery,  and  desertion  of  the  cross.  But — 3.  How 
eould  Jesus  be  "  tempted  in  all  things,  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin  "?  Is  not 
temptation  evil  ?  We  must  consider — I.  How  the  tempted  could  be  the  sinless 
Chbist.  And — 1.  What  is  temptation  ?  Seduction  to  evil.  It  stands  distinguished 
from  trial  thus  :  trial  tests,  seeks  to  discover  the  man's  moral  qualities  or  character  ; 
temptation  persuades  to  evil,  deludes,  that  it  may  ruin.  God  tries  ;  Satan  tempts. 
2.  The  forms  of  temptation.  It  may  be  either  sensuous,  imaginative,  or  rational ; 
perhaps  it  is  never  so  powerful  as  when  its  forces  approach  the  mind  together,  and 
at  once  through  the  senses,  the  imagination,  and  the  reason.  3.  The  sources  of 
temptation.  It  may  proceed  either  (1)  from  self,  or  (2)  from  without  self.  If  the 
first,  the  nature  must  be  bad,  but  not  of  necessity  radically  bad;  if  the  second  it 
may  be  innocent,  but  must  be  capable  of  sinning.  If  now  the  temptation  comes 
from  without,  three  things  are  possible — it  may  speak  either — 1.  To  still  fluid 
evil  desires  and  make  them  crystallize  into  evil  action  ;  or — 2.  To  innocence,  and 
change  it  into  guilt ;  or — 3.  Supply  it  with  the  opportunity  of  rising  into 
holiness.     Illustrations  :  of  (1)  Macbeth ;  of  (2)  Hubert,  in  "  King  John  " ;  of  (3) 


CHAP,  rr.]  ST.  LUKE.  36S 

IsabellA,  in  "Meaaoie  for  Measare,"  the  play  that  bo  well  ezponnds  its  own 
saying-— 

'*  Tis  one  thing  to  be  tempted,  Esoalns, 
Another  thing  to  fall." 

Isabella,  lovely  as  pure,  most  womanly  in  her  anoonscious  strength,  stainless  among 
the  stained,  loving  her  doomed  brother  too  well  to  sin  for  him,  triumphs  over  his 
tears  and  entreaties,  the  wiles  and  threats  of  the  Deputy,  and  emerges  from  her 
great  temptation  chaster,  more  beautiful  in  the  blossom  of  her  perfect  womanhood, 
than  she  had  been  before.  4.  We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  the  temptation 
of  Christ  in  relation  to  His  sinlessness.  Temptation  implies  (1)  abihty  in  the 
tempted  to  sin  or  not  sin.  Jesus  had,  to  speak  with  the  schoolmen,  the  posse 
non  peccare,  not  the  non  pnsse  peccare.  Had  He  possessed  the  latter,  He  had 
been  intemptable.  (2)  Evil  must  be  presented  to  the  tempted  in  a  manner  dis- 
guised, plausible,  attractive.  (3)  The  tempter  must  be  sinful,  the  tempted  may  be 
innocent.  Our  discussion  conducts,  then,  to  bat  one  conclusion  ;  temptation  was 
not  only  possible  to  the  sinlessness,  but  necessary  to  the  holiness,  of  Christ.  "  II. 
The  flaob  whkbe  the  temptation  happened  is  not  without  significance.  Into 
which  wilderness  Jesus  was  led  we  do  not  know — whether  the  wild  and  lonely  soli- 
tudes watched  by  the  mountains  where  Moses  and  Elijah  struggled  in  prayer  and 
conquered  in  faith,  or  the  steep  rock  by  the  side  of  the  Jordan  overlooking  the 
Dead  Sea,  which  later  tradition  has  made  the  arena  of  this  fell  conflict.  Enough, 
the  place  was  a  desert,  waste,  barren,  shelterless,  overhead  the  hot  sun,  underfoot 
the  burning  sand  or  blistering  rock.  No  outbranching  trees  made  a  cool  restful 
shade ;  no  spring  upbursting  with  a  song  of  gladness  came  to  relieve  the  thirst ;  no 
flowers  bloomed,  pleasing  the  eye  with  colour,  and  the  nostril  with  fragrance ;  all 
was  drear  desert.  Two  things  may  be  here  noted — the  desolation,  and  the  soUtude. 
The  desolation  must  have  deepened  the  shadows  on  His  spirit,  increased  the 
burden  that  made  Him  almost  faint  at  the  opening  of  His  way.  And  He  was  in 
Bolitude — alone  there,  without  the  comfort  of  a  human  presence,  the  fellowship  of 
a  kindred  soul.  Yet  the  loneliness  was  a  sublime  necessity.  In  His  supreme 
moments  society  was  impossible  to  Him.  Out  of  loneliness  He  issued  to  begin  His 
work ;  into  loneliness  He  passed  to  end  it.  The  moments  that  made  His  work 
Divinest  were  His  own  and  His  Father's.    III.  But  much  more  significant  than 

THE   SCENE   OF  THE   TEMPTATION   IS   THE   PLACE  WHERE  IT  STANDS   IN   THE    HISTORY   OF 

THE  LIFE  AND  uiND  OF  Jebus.    Just  after  the  baptism  and  before  the  ministry; 
just  after  the  long  silence  and  before  the  brief  yet  eternal  speech ;  just  after  the 
years  of  privacy,  and  before  the  few  but  glorious  months  of  publicity.     We  must 
study  the  temptation  through  the  consciousness  of  Jesus.     The  temptation  and  the 
assumption  by  Jesus  of  the  Messianic  character  and  office  are  essentially  related 
The  one  supplies  the  other  with  the  condition  and  occasion  of  its  existence.     Whe 
He  was  driven  into  the  wilderness  three  points  must  have  stood  out  from  the  tumnl 
of  thought  and  feeling  pre-eminent.   1.  The  relation  of  the  supernatural  to  th 
natural  in  Himself ;  or,  on  the  other  side.  His  relation  to  God  as  His  ideal  huma 
Son.    2.  The  relation  of  God  to  the  supernatural  in  His  person,  and  the  official  i 
His  mission ;  and  3.  The  nature  of  the  kingdom  He  had  come  to  found,  and  the 
agencies  by  which  it  was  to  live  and  extend.     And  these  precisely  were  the  issues 
that  emerged  in  His  several  temptations.     They  thus  stood  rooted  in  the  then  con- 
sciousness of  Christ,  and  related  in  the  most  essential  way  to  His  spirit.     {A.  M. 
Fairbaim,  D.D.)        The  temptation  of  the  King  : — You  may  expect  me  to  begin 
with  warning  you  not  to  think  of  the  temptation  as  Dante  and  the  men  in  the 
Middle  Ages  thought  of  it,  or  as  Luther  and  the  men  at  the  time  of  the  Bef  ormation 
thought  of  it,  or  as  Milton  and  the  Puritans  thought  of  it.     I  shall  do  no  such 
thing.     I  beUeve  they  all  thought  of  it  imperfectly  ;  that  they  impaired  the  beauty 
of  the  clear,  sharply-chiselled  marble,  by  colouring  bom  from  their  own  fancy  and 
the  fancy  of  their  times.    But  they  have  shown  with  what  intense  reality  this 
record  has  come  to  them  in  the  most  terrible  momenta  of  their  existence.     If  they 
have  seen  it  through  a  mist,  it  has  not  created  the  mist ;  it  has  done  more  than  all 
other  lights  to  dispel  the  mist.     We  may  learn  something  from  each  teacher  which 
the  other  could  not  tell  ns.     Their  mistakes  may  warn  us  of  those  into  which  we 
are  likely  to  fall.    If  God  gives  us  grace  to  enter  heart  and  hand  into  the  conflict 
which  He  has  appointed  for  us  and  our  time,  we  shall  read  this  passage  of  St.  Luke 
more  dmply  than  those  read  it  who  have  gone  before  na.    1.  He  was  led  by  the 
SrntiT.    That  is  the  characteristic  of  the  acts  of  the  Son  in  all  we  read  from  thig 


S6«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  rr. 

time  onwards.  He  has  been  baptized  with  His  Father's  Spirit.  He  is  guided  by 
that  Spirit  whithersoever  He  goes.  He  does  not  choose  for  Himself  whether  He  shall 
be  in  the  city  or  the  wilderness.  Here  is  the  secret  of  His  power.  2.  The  wilderness 
into  which  He  went,  says  Il6nan  ["  Life  of  Jesus  "],  "  was  HiUNTED,  AccoBDmo  to 
POPOiAK  BELIEF,  BY  DEMONS."  We  surcly  do  not  want  the  authority  of  a  learned 
man  to  endorse  so  very  probable  a  statement.  No  doubt  popular  belief  filled  Jewish 
deserts,  as  it  fills  all  deserts,  with  demons.  The  curious  fact  is,  that  this  being 
the  case,  the  evangelists,  who  are  supposed  to  have  been  the  victims  of  all  popular 
beliefs,  do  not  suggest  the  thought  of  demons  in  this  desert.  They  say  much  of 
demons  elsewhere.  That  which  they  speak  of  here  is  far  more  serious  and  awful. 
3.  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devil.  The  difference  is  all-important.  We 
are  not  in  the  region  of  dark  forms  which  haunt  particular  spots.  We  have  been 
brought  into  the  spiritual  region.  4.  "  In  those  days  He  did  eat  nothing,"  &c. 
Another  exhaustion  of  outward  circumstances.  Hunger  may  be  the  tempter's  in- 
strument quite  as  much  as  food.  Is  there  no  gospel  in  the  annonncement  that  the 
anguish  of  hungry  men  has  been  felt  by  the  Son  of  Man — the  King  of  Men  ?  6. 
"  And  the  devil  said  unto  Him,  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,"  Ac.  Now  we  begin  to 
perceive  the  principle  of  the  temptation,  its  real  force.  A  stone  may  serve  as  the 
instrument  of  solicitation  ;  the  natural  craving  for  food  may  be  all  that  is  spoken 
to;  but  this  is  the  speech:  "If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  "The  words  at  Thy 
baptism  cannot  be  true,  if  Thou  art  not  able  to  exercise  this  power  for  the  relief  of 
Thy  own  necessities."  He  must  do  something  of  Himself  and  for  Himself.  What 
is  His  name  worth  otherwise  ?  6.  His  name  is  worth  this :  "  It  is  wbitten, 
MAN  SHALL  NOT  LIVE  BY  BREAD  ALONE,"  &c.,  1.6.,  "  I  claim  the  words  becausc  they  are 
written  of  man."  He  can  depend  upon  the  Word  of  God.  7.  A  Kino  ideally, 
PEBHAP3.  But  actually  is  the  world  His  ?  Is  it  His  Father's  ?  "  And  the  devil 
taketh  Him  up  into  an  high  mountain,"  <feo.  How  was  He  taken  to  the  mountain  T 
Did  He  see  with  His  eyes  or  only  with  His  mind?  I  know  these  questions  occur  to 
us  aU.  They  have  occurred  to  me.  And  I  can  only  find  this  answer  to  them  :  I 
am  reading  of  a  temptation  presented  by  a  spirit  to  a  spirit.  If  Christ  saw  all  those 
kingdoms  with  His  bodily  eye,  still  it  must  have  been  His  spirit  which  took  in  the 
prospect.  The  devil  is  reported  to  have  said  something  which  seems  most  plausible. 
All  appearances  in  that  time  confirmed  his  words.  The  most  religious  men  in  times 
since  have  thought  that  he  spoke  truly.  They  have  said  that  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world  and  all  the  glory  of  them  are  his.  I  want  to  know  if  there  is  One  whom  I 
can  trust  who  declared  that  they  were  not  his,  who  would  not  do  him  service.  I 
read  these  word :  8.  "  Get  thee  behind  Mb,  Satan,"  &c.  Did  One  in  human 
flesh  indeed  say, "  Adversary,  get  thee  behind  Me.  All  these  things  are  the  Creator's, 
not  thine."  Then  is  not  this  a  gospel  to  us  all  ?  9.  "  And  he  brought  Him  to 
Jebusalem,  and  bet  Him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,"  Ac.  I  need  not  discuss  the 
question  how  He  was  brought  to  Jerusalem,  how  He  was  set  on  a  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  I  should  say  the  temptation  was  the  most  real  that  could  be.  He  wa« 
actually  tempted  to  try  whether  G6d  would  bear  Him  up,  if  He  cast  Himself  down. 
He  was  actually  tempted  by  a  text  of  Scripture  to  give  that  proof  of  His  Sonship 
and  of  His  Father's  faithfulness.  Whatever  were  His  circumstances,  that  thought 
was  presented  to  His  spirit  by  the  evil  spirit.  And  so  we  know  that  He  was  tempted 
like  as  we  are.  Every  man  hears,  at  some  time  or  other,  a  voice  whispering 
to  him,  •'  Go  out  of  the  place  in  which  you  are  put.  Do  something  extraordinary. 
Do  something  wrong.  See  whether  God  will  not  help  you.  Can  you  not  depend 
upon  His  promise  that  He  will?  "  Is  Scripture  false  ?  I  accept  this  story.  I  believe 
that  voice  is  the  voice  of  the  tempter.  And  therefore  I  want  to  know  if  the  argument 
from  Scripture  has  been  answered,  and  how  we  may  treat  that  and  like  arguments. 
10.  Hear  and  consider  this :  "  And  Jesus  answering,  said,  Thou  shalt  not  TBMPt 
the  Lobd  thy  God."  The  Son  of  God  once  more  claims  the  right  to  obey  a  com- 
mandment —the  right  to  trust  and  to  depend.  Once  more  He  claims  that  right  for 
us.  We  may  abide  where  we  are  placed,  for  our  Father  has  placed  us  there.  If  He 
were  not  the  Lord  our  God  we  might  make  experiments  on  that  which  He  would 
do  for  us  supposing  we  broke  His  law.  Because  He  is  we  may  submit  to  it  and 
rejoice  in  it.  11.  We  are  told  that  "  the  devil  departed  from  Him  fob  a  season." 
Such  seasons  of  rest,  of  freedom  from  doubt,  of  joyful  confidence,  are,  I  suppose, 
vouchsafed  to  the  soldiers  of  Christ  after  periods  of  terrible  confiiot,  as  they  were 
to  the  chief  Captain.  But  the  inward  battle  was  to  prepare  Him,  as  well  aa  them, 
for  battles  in  the  world.  The  enemy  in  the  wilderness  must  be  encountered  there. 
{F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)        The  temptation  of  Christ : — If  we  would  understand  this 


eskT.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  367 

narrative,  and  profit  by  it,  we  mast  accept  it  as  the  record  of  a  spiritnal  conflict  of  the 
most  intense  severity.  The  baptism,  with  its  accompanying  sign,  brings  Jesua  for 
the  first  time  under  the  full  burden  of  His  life's  work,  as  the  Messiah.  This  is  the 
key  to  the  temptation.  The  question  is,  How  did  Jesus  Himself  understand  His 
MesBiahship  at  the  time  of  the  temptation  and  afterwa)  ds  ?  Evidently,  in  His  view, 
it  involved  these  two  things  at  least — Power,  and  suffering.  Here,  in  the  wilder- 
ness, there  is  opened  out  to  Him,  for  the  first  time,  in  full  perspective,  the  thorny 
path  of  suffering,  closed  by  the  ignominious  death  of  the  cross ;  and,  along  with 
this,  the  consciousiness  of  power  infinitely  vaster  than  was  ever  wielded  by  mortal 
man  either  before  Him  or  since.  The  ideal  of  Messiahship  is  set  before  Him  ;  will 
He  shrink  from  it,  or  will  He  embrace  it  ?  Will  He  try  to  pare  it  down  to  something 
easier  and  less  exacting,  or  will  He  accept  and  embrace  it  in  all  its  rugged  severity  ; 
never  employing  the  superhuman  power  which  is  involved  in  it,  to  smooth  His  path, 
to  mitigate  a  single  pang,  or  to  diminish  by  one  atom  the  load  of  suffering  imposed 
upon  Him  ?  Yes ;  the  ideal  of  Messiahship,  the  perfect  pattern  of  Messiahship, 
how  to  realize  it  ?  how  to  embody  it  in  noble  action,  and  yet  more  noble  suffering  ? 
— that  is  the  question  of  the  wilderness  ;  that  is  the  key  to  the  temptation  ;  that 
has  to  be  debated  and  resolved  upon  there,  and  then  pursued,  firmly  and  fixedly,  in 
ipite  of  all  the  tempter's  assaults,  until  He  can  Bay  upon  the  cross, "  It  is  finished  " ; 
•*  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  (I).  J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Temp' 
tation  assails  even  the  holiest : — Temptation  does  not  cease  as  we  rise  in  the  scale 
of  moral  elevation.  Even  Jesus,  the  highest,  the  holiest,  the  Messiah,  was 
tempted ;  as  truly  as  the  vilest  drunkard  or  profligate  amongst  ourselves  is  tempted, 
though  in  a  very  different  way.  Temptation  never  ceases,  but  it  alters  its  form.  As 
we  rise  in  the  moral  scale  by  victory  over  it,  it  rises  also,  becomes  more  refined,  takes 
a  subtler  and  (if  we  may  say  so)  a  nobler  form ;  so  that  to  know  what  a  man's 
temptations  are,  is  to  know  what  the  man  himself  is.  We  may  be  known  by  our 
wishes,  our  hopes,  our  fears ;  and  we  may  be  known  also  by  our  temptations.  To 
fall  short  of  the  ideal  of  the  Messiahship  was  the  Messiah's  temptation.  It  was 
gin  in  its  most  refined  and  subtle  form  of  shortcoming,  failure,  fnissing  the  mark. 
With  Him  it  was  no  question  of  transgression ;  He  was  far  above  that ;  it  was 
missing  the  ideal,  nothing  more,  nothing  worse,  a  mere  trifle,  we  might  think  ;  yet 
to  Jesus  Himself  this  to  us  seeming  trifle  was  agony.  And  is  there  not  an  ideal  for 
every  one  of  us  ?  Is  it  not  in  ns  to  be  something,  which  we  are  not  yet ;  to  fill  our 
place  in  the  world,  however  small  it  be,  in  a  higher,  better,  nobler  way  than  we  have 
yet  learned  to  fill  it  7    (Ibid.)         Lessons  from  the  temptaton : — I.  The  holiest 

NATITBKS  ABB  NOT  EXEMPT  FROM  TEMPTATION.  II.  TiMES  OP  GLADNESS  AND  SPIBITUAIi 
ELEVATION  MAT  BE  EOLLOWED  IMMEDIATELY  BT  SEASONS  OF  CONFLICT  AND  TRIAL.  III. 
OOB   BBLATION    TO   GoD    DOES   NOT    DEPEND     UPON   THE     CHANGES    OF    OUB    SPIRITUAl 

■xpsBiENOxs.  IV.  Solitude  is  no  safeguard  against  temptation.  (HomUetie 
Magazine.)  Our  Saviour's  temptation : — I.  The  first  reflection  which  this  great 
fact  excites  in  my  mind  is,  that  I  have  a  Saviour  whose  life  is  bound  to  mine  bt 
BYMPATHT  IN  TEMPTATION,  as  Well  Bs  in  sorrow,  and  all  the  kind  affections  of  the 
heart.  Even  His  holiness  did  not  escape  trial.  It  attained  its  perfection  through 
trial.  The  path  of  human  virtue  must  always  lie  through  many  temptations  ;  and 
even  then  it  is  not  left  without  its  great  Exemplar  and  Guide.  In  the  desert  I  have 
a  Companion,  and  it  is  my  Master.  His  example  could  not  instruct  me  how  to  over- 
eome  temptation,  unless  He  also  had  struggled  with  it ;  for  the  conquest  necessarily 
supposes  the  struggle.  There  is  no  victory  without  warfare.  II.  I  am  next  led  to 
inquire  bt  what  means  oub  Satioub  triumphed  over  His  temptation,  that  so  I  may 
learn  how  to  triumph  also,  in  the  evil  time,  over  the  evil  one.  I  find  that  He  triumphed 
by  the  power  of  religious  principle,  by  the  force  of  piety,  by  bringing  the  most  holy  of 
all  holy  thoughts,  that  of  obedience  to  God,  in  direct  opposition  to  every  solicitation  of 
sense,  and  every  suggestion  of  self-interest.  On  every  side  from  which  He  was  assailed, 
this  was  His  ready  and  sure  defence.  Then  temptation  took  another  shape.  Jesus 
was  placed  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  was  urged  to  cast  Himself  down,  on 
the  specious  plea,  perverted  from  Scripture,  that  God  would  send  angelic  aid  to  His 
own  Son,  to  prevent  His  suffering  any  harm.  Thy  duty  is  obedience,  and  not  display. 
The  trials  i^hieh  God  appoints.  He  will  give  thee  His  aid  to  bear,  and  His  grace  will 
be  sufficient  for  thee  ;  but  how  canst  thou  look  for  His  aid  in  trials  which  thou  hast 
rashly  invited,  and  the  issue  of  which  thou  hast  dared,  not  for  His  glory  but 
tor  thine  own  f  One  earnest,  trusting,  patient  thought  of  God,  would  have  saved 
many  a  man  from  destruction,  who  once  thought  himself  quite  safe,  and  was 
Ihonght  so,  too,  by  the  world,  and  yet,  in  the  encounter  with  temptation,  has  miserablj 


t68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  rr. 

perished.  Why  was  be  not  safe?  Becsnsehe  placed  his  safetyinhimself,  and  notin  God, 
and  only  discovered  his  mistake  when  it  was  too  late — perhaps  not  even  then,  but 
went  down  to  ruin  darkly.  Why  does  not  the  thought  of  God  come  in  the  straits 
of  temptation  ?  Because  it  is  not  a  familiar  thought ;  because  we  do  not  make  God 
our  friend,  and  admit  Him  into  the  daily  counsels  of  our  bosom.  {F.  W.  P.  Chreenwood. ) 
From  heights  to  depths : — From  the  Jordan  of  glorification  to  the  wilderness  of 
temptation.  This  is  the  way  of  God ;  as  with  Christ,  so  with  the  Christian  ;  and 
moreover — 1.  An  old,  and  yet  an  ever  new  way.  2.  A  hard,  and  yet  a  good  way, 
3.  A  dark,  and  yet  a  light  way.  4.  A  lonesome,  and  yet  a  blessed  way.  {J.  J. 
Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  Christ  an  example  in  temptation : — For,  as  commentators  on 
Aristotle  observe  that  his  rule  many  times  lies  hid  and  is  wrapped  up  in  the 
example  which  he  gives,  so  we  need  scarce  any  other  rules  for  behaviour  when 
we  are  tempted,  than  those  which  we  may  find  in  this  story  of  our  Saviour's 
combat  with  our  enemy.  And  our  Saviour  may  seem  to  bespeak  His  brethren, 
even  all  Christians,  as  Abimelech  doth  his  soldiers :  "  What  you  have  seen  me  do, 
make  haste,  and  do  likewise  "  (Judges  ix.  48).  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Temptation 
renders  virtue  possible : — "  Take  away  this  combat  with  our  spiritual  enemy,  and 
virtue  is  but  a  bare  naked  name,  is  nothing."  If  there  were  no  possibility  of  being 
evil,  we  could  not  be  good.  What  were  my  faith,  if  there  were  no  doubt  to  assault 
it  ?  What  were  my  hope,  if  there  were  no  scruple  to  stagger  it  ?  What  were  my 
charity,  if  there  were  no  injuries  to  dull  it  ?  Then  goodness  is  fairest  when  it 
shines  through  a  cloud ;  and  it  is  difficulty  which  sets  the  crown  upon  virtue's 
bead.  Our  Saviour  was  made  glorious  by  His  temptations  and  sufferings ;  so  must 
we  [be]  by  ours.  {Ibid.)  The  temptation  of  Christ  in  the  wildemet$: — The 
first  thing  that  strikes  us  here  is  that  Jesus  was  not  master  of  His  ovm  movements. 
An  unerring  voice,  which  He  knew  to  be  from  heaven,  sent  Him  into  the  lonely 
wilderness — the  place  where  no  society  or  communion  could  disturb  the  law  of 
development  of  His  character — in  order  to  be  tempted  in  that  solitude.  He  could 
not  have  gone  thither  Himself,  aware  of  the  trial  before  Him,  without  tempting 
God.  The  next  thing  which  arrests  our  attention  and,  at  first,  our  wonder,  is  that 
He  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  What  a 
fearful  and  solemn  glimpse  is  here  given  to  us  of  the  moral  agencies  of  the 
universe.  Good  and  evil,  infinite  good  and  absolute  evil,  good  and  evil  in  personal 
Bubstance,  with  that  intense  antipathy  to  one  another  that  souls  of  the  largest  grasp 
and  depth  must  feel,  are  in  restless  action  around  a  human  soul.  And  if  such 
parties  were  concerned  in  the  temptation  something  of  importance  must  have 
depended  on  the  result.  But  in  what  form,  it  may  be  asked,  did  this  tempter  place 
himself  in  the  way  of  Jesus  ?  Did  he  keep  to  his  spiritual  incorporeal  nature,  or 
take  a  body,  and  become  visible  to  eyes  of  flesh  ?  Was  the  temptation  transacted 
before  the  mind  of  Christ,  or  was  its  sphere  more  outward,  concerned  with  bodily 
phenomena  and  human  language  ?  In  the  first  place,  the  agency  of  Satan  else- 
where, in  the  New  Testament,  is  that  of  a  spiritual  being,  and,  so  far  as  I  am 
aware,  corporeal  form  is  never  ascribed  to  him.  In  the  second  place,  suppose  the 
Saviour  to  be  carried  to  an  exceeding  high  mountain,  yet  the  spherical  form  of 
the  earth  would  allow  the  eye  to  take  in  but  a  very  minute  portion  of  the  kingdoms 
of  the  world  and  of  their  glory.  We  must,  then,  either  dilute  the  narrative,  as 
many  do,  by  understanding  these  expressions  in  a  hyperbolical  sense  of  the  little 
tract  of  country  around  Palestine,  or  must  resort  to  a  second  miracle,  in  order  to 
conceive  of  the  broad  earth  spread  outward  and  upward  before  our  Lord's  eye. 
What  need,  then,  of  the  high  mountain,  and  why  might  not  the  same  sight  bo 
obtained  without  leaving  the  wilderness  ?  In  the  third  place,  it  is  noteworthy  that 
the  narrative  makes  no  mention  of  the  return  of  Jesus  from  the  temple  and  from 
the  mountain,  just  as  if,  in  some  sense,  He  had  gone  there  while  He  remained  in 
the  desert  in  another.  And,  in  the  fourth  place,  if  the  temptation  was  addressed 
to  the  bodily  senses  of  the  Lord,  it  loses  its  insidious  character,  and  becomes 
easier  to  be  resisted.  I  am  constrained,  therefore,  to  believe  that  the  transaction 
was  a  spiritual  one,  a  conflict  between  light  and  darkness  in  the  region  of  the  mind, 
in  which  a  real  tempter  assailed  Christ,  not  through  His  eyes  and  ears,  but  directly 
through  His  feelings  and  imagination.  After  the  same  manner,  the  prophets  of 
the  Old  Testament  passed  through  events  in  vision,  of  which  they  speak  as  we 
should  speak  of  realities.  Thus  Jeremiah  must  have  been  in  prophetic  vision 
when  he  took  the  linen  girdle  to  Euphrates  to  hide  it  there  and  went  again  in 
f  aest  of  it,  as  also  when  he  took  the  cup  of  wrath  from  God's  hand  and  gave  it  to  the 
feations  to  drink.     So,  too,  Ezekiel  was  transported  from  Ghaldea  to  Jerusalem  in 


«KAP.  tv.]  ST.  LUKE.  869 

that  remarkable  vision,  the  narrative  of  which  oocnpiea  the  chapters  of  his  pro- 
phecies from  the  eighth  to  the  eleventh.  Hosea,  again,  it  is  commonly  believed, 
narrates  only  a  symbolical  vision,  where  hff  speaks  of  himself  as  marrying  an 
adulteress  at  the  command  of  God.  The  martyr  Stephen,  also  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  saw  Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  not  in  bodily  shape,  but  in  a 
form  presented  to  the  mind's  eye,  and  yet  expressive  of  a  great  reality.  If,  now, 
the  Scriptures  allow  us  to  interpret  the  events  of  the  temptation  in  this  way,  we 
can  see  that  greater  strength  is  thereby  given  to  the  suggestions  of  Satan  than  if 
they  had  been  addressed  to  the  bodily  organs.  The  power  over  the  mind  of  a 
highly  endowed  being  through  the  imagination,  may  indefinitely  exceed  that  which 
is  exerted  through  the  sight.  Multitudes  have  been  seduced  by  that  faculty,  which 
paints  absent  or  distant  objects  in  colours  of  its  own,  whom  no  beauty  or  pleasant- 
ness lying  in  objects  of  sight  could  have  led  into  sin.  The  world  of  imagina- 
tion is  more  fascinating  to  their  elevated  mind  than  this  outward  world  with  all 
its  shows  and  riches.  The  phantom,  which  has  something  heavenly  in  it,  cheats  and 
betrays  them,  while  they  turn  aside  from  the  obvious  snares  of  visible  things.  But 
we  pass  on  from  this  point,  to  a  more  important  and  indeed  to  an  essential  remark, 
that  the  temptations  were  intended  not  for  Jesus  in  His  nature  as  a  man,  but  for  Jesus 
in  His  official  station  as  the  Messiah.  God  was  not  putting  it  to  the  test,  whether 
a  certain  good  man  or  good  prophet  would  yield  to  evil  or  conquer  it,  but  whether 
Jesus  was  qualified  for  His  office — whether  He  would  remain  true  to  the  spiritual 
idea  of  the  Messiah,  or  would  fall  below  it  under  temptation.  Nor  was  the  tempter 
in  this  case  anxious  simply  to  lead  a  good  man  into  sin,  but  he  was  striking  at  the 
root  of  salvation ;  his  aim  was  to  undermine  the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  This  thought  is  the  key  to  the  story  of  the  temptation.  It  explains  why 
the  temptation  occurred  when  it  did,  at  the  commencement  of  Christ's  pubUo 
work,  and  shows  the  greatness  of  the  crisis.  The  question  whether  Jesus  would 
be  made  to  adopt  the  worldly  idea  of  the  Messiah's  kiugdom  was  one  of  life  and 
death  for  mankind.  And  again,  had  Christ  followed  the  suggestions  of  the 
tempter,  Ee  could  not  have  taken  on  Him  the  work  of  our  salvation.  The  form  of 
a  servant,  which  He  freely  assumed,  involved  subjection  to  all  the  physical  laws 
which  control  our  race,  and  the  endurance  of  all  sufferings  which  the  Father  should 
lay  upon  Him.  But  if,  by  His  inherent  power.  He  had  now  relieved  His  own 
hunger,  He  would  have  escaped  from  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  even  from  subjec- 
tion to  the  Divine  will ;  and,  on  the  same  principle,  He  never  could  have  been 
obedient  to  death — even  the  death  of  the  cross.  But  to  the  sophistry  of  the 
tempter  Christ  had  a  ready  reply.  "  It  is  written.  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord 
thy  God,"  that  is,  "  I  may  not,  because  entitled  to  His  protection,  appeal  to  it 
against  the  laws  of  His  providence,  to  rescue  me  from  dangers  into  which  I  have 
entered  unbidden."  As  thus  viewed,  our  Lord's  reply  is  given  in  the  same  spirit 
with  His  former  one  during  the  first  temptation.  He  subjected  Himself  freely  to 
physical  law,  and  His  Messiahship  depended  on  His  self-chosen  humiliation.  His 
choice  of  means,  however,  for  securing  His  kingdom  would  in  the  end  amount  to  a 
choice  between  two  kingdoms,  the  one,  severely  spiritual,  introduced  by  moral  and 
rehgious  forces  only,  the  other  becoming  worldly  by  its  alliance  with  the  world  of 
outward  influence  and  temporal  glory.  The  instinctive  shrinking  from  harm  and 
difficulty,  wliich  belongs  to  ua  all,  would  lead  Him  to  choose  the  worldly  way  of 
doing  good,  would  prejudice  His  mind  in  favour  of  the  easier  and  quicker  method. 
But  He  held  on  to  His  spiritnel  conception  of  His  office,  kept  His  obedience,  and 
triumphed.  Satan  approached  Christ  in  the  belief  that  He  was  capable  of  taking 
false  views  of  His  office,  through  which  He  might  be  led  into  sin.  Another  remark 
which  we  desire  to  make  is,  that  the  narrative,  as  interpreted,  shows  the  subtlety 
and  insinuating  character  of  the  temptation.  The  acts  to  which  Christ  was  solicited 
were  not  sins,  so  much  as  misjudgments  in  regard  to  the  means  to  be  used  for 
gaining  the  highest  and  noblest  ends.  And  these  misjudgments  would  consist,  not 
in  the  use  of  means  plainly  and  boldly  sinful,  but  of  such  as  involved  a  departure 
from  the  true  idea  of  the  Messiah's  earthly  mission.  But  it  is  more  important  to 
remark,  that  the  narrative  is  too  refined  and  too  full  of  a  somewhat  hidden,  but 
consummate  wisdom,  to  grow  out  of  the  imaginings  of  the  early  Church.  It  is  no 
rude  picture  of  assaults  which  might  befall  a  holy  man  in  solitude,  but  an  intellec- 
tual and  moral  struggle,  which  put  it  to  the  proof  whether  Christ  would  be  true  to 
the  spiritual  idea  of  the  Messiah.  It  involves  a  conception  of  the  Messiah's 
kingdom  which  the  early  Church  did  not  entertain  until  some  time  after  the  death 
of  our  Lord ;  how  then  could  it  be  elaborated  by  crude  GalUean  disciples  of  Christ, 

24 


S70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

whose  viewB  were  full  of  that  earthly  mixture  which  the  narrative  condemns? 
(T.  B.  Woolsey,  D.D.)  Christ's  temptation  a  help  to  us : — For  as  He  hath  taught  as 
both  by  His  word  and  ensample  to  prepare  ourselves  to  the  battle,  and  bestir  our- 
selves Uke  those  who  fight  under  His  colours ;  so,  in  the  next  place,  there  is  a  kind 
of  influence  and  virtue  derived  from  His  combat,  which  falls  as  oil  upon  us,  to  sup- 
ple our  joints,  and  strengthen  our  sinews,  and  make  each  faculty  of  our  souls  active 
and  cheerful  in  this  exercise.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Full  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — 
The  back  strengthened  for  the  load: — It  was  in  the  prospect  of  His  temptation  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  received  this  fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Tni,^  presents  a  new 
aspect  of  the  bestowment  of  the  Spirit.  He  was  not  only  filled  wi;h  the  Holy 
Ghost,  but  it  was  in  the  very  crisis  of  need  He  was  so  anointed.  The  back 
will  be  strengthened  for  the  lead,  the  heart  nerved  for  the  blow.  I  fear  we  all 
deplorably  fail  to  realize  this,  and  so  impoverish  ourselves  of  the  Spirit.  It 
was  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  being  thus  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  that  He  was 
tempted.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye,"  my  fellow-believers,  from  that.  It  is 
when  a  child  of  God  is  fullest  of  grace;  when  he  has  been  declared  to  be  a 
"son,"  even  a  "beloved  son"  of  God;  when  he  has  made  a  public  profession  of 
Christianity,  that  he  is  most  of  all  exposed  to  temptation.  (A.  B.  Grosart,  D.D.) 
Returned  from  Jordan. — Baptism  does  not  exempt  from  temptation : — The  temptation 
of  the  Lord  having  followed  His  baptism,  tells  us  not  to  trust  to  baptism  for  escape 
from  temptation.  (Ibid.)  Spiritual  favour  a  time  of  trial: — That  our  enter* 
ing  upon  a  special  service  for  God  or  receiving  a  special  favour  from  God,  are 
two  solemn  seasons  which  Satan  makes  use  of  for  temptation.  Though  this  may 
seem  strange,  yet  the  harshness  of  such  a  providence  on  God's  part,  and  the  bold- 
ness of  the  attempt  on  Satan's  part,  may  be  much  taken  off  by  the  consideration  of 
the  reasons  hereof,  1.  On  Satan's  part.  It  is  no  great  wonder  to  see  such  an 
undertaking,  when  we  consider  his  fury  and  malice.  The  more  we  receive  from  God, 
and  the  more  we  are  to  do  for  Him,  the  more  doth  he  malign  us.  So  much  the 
more  as  God  is  good,  by  so  much  is  his  eye  evil.-  2.  There  are  in  such  cases  as  these 
several  advantages,  which,  through  our  weakness  and  imperfection,  we  are  too  apt 
to  give  him ;  and  for  these  he  heth  at  the  catch.  (1)  Security.  We  are  apt  to  grow 
proud,  careless,  and  confident,  after  or  upon  such  employments  and  favours ;  even 
as  men  are  apt  to  sleep  or  surfeit  upon  a  full  meal,  or  to  forget  themselves  when 
they  are  advanced  to  honour.  Enjoyments  beget  confidence ;  confidence  brings  forth 
carelessness ;  carelessness  makes  God  withdraw,  and  gives  opportunity  to  Satan  to 
work  unseen.  And  thus,  as  armies  after  victory,  growing  secure,  are  oft  surprised ; 
BO  are  we  oft  after  our  spiritual  advancements  thrown  down.  (2)  Discouragement 
and  tergiversation  is  another  thing  the  devil  watcheth  for.  By  his  assaults  he 
represents  the  duty  difficult,  tedious,  dangerous,  or  impossible,  on  purpose  to 
discourage  us,  and  to  make  us  fall  back.  (3)  The  fall  or  miscarriage  of  the  saints 
at  such  times  is  of  more  than  ordinary  disadvantage,  not  only  to  others — for  if  they 
oan  be  prevailed  with  to  lay  aside  their  work,  or  to  neglect  the  improvement  of  their 
favours,  others  are  deprived  of  the  benefit  and  help  that  might  be  expected  from 
them — but  also  to  themselves.  A  prevailing  temptation  doth  more  than  ordinarily 
prejudice  them  at  such  times.  3.  As  we  have  seen  the  reason  of  Satan's  keenness 
in  taking  those  opportunities,  so  may  we  consider  the  reasons  of  God's  permission, 
which  are  these : — (1)  Temptations  at  such  seasons  are  permitted  for  more  eminent 
trial  of  the  upright.  (2)  For  an  increase  of  diligence,  humility,  and  watchfulness. 
^3)  For  a  plentiful  furniture  of  experience.  Temptation  is  the  shop  of  experience. 
(R.  Gilpin.)  Temptation  after  privilege  : — After  high  favours  showed  to  God's 
children,  come  shrewd  pinches,  as  after  warm,  growing,  comfortable  weather  in  the 
spring  come  many  cold  pinching  frosts  :  what  a  sudden  change  is  this  1  Is  this 
He,  of  whom  erewhile  the  Lord  said,  "  This  is  My  Son,"  and  doth  He  now  send,  and 
set  his  slave  upon  Him  to  vex  and  bait  Him  f  (D.  Dyke.)  Temptation  after 
baptism : — The  history  of  our  Lord's  temptation  ought  never  to  be  contemplated 
apart  from  that  of  His  baptism.  We  shall  miss  much  of  its  significance,  if  we  dis- 
sociate it,  even  in  thought,  from  the  solemn  recognition  of  the  Son  by  the  Father, 
the  salutation  of  Him  from  heaven,  and  the  full  consciousness  of  His  Divine  nature 
into  which  He  was  thus  brought.  The  Church  of  old  did  not  shrink  from  calling 
her  Lord's  baptism  His  second  nativity.  In  that  baptism  He  received  His  heavenly 
armour,  and  now  He  goes  forth  to  prove  it,  and  try  of  what  temper  it  is.  Having 
been  baptized  with  water  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  He  shall  now  be  baptized  with  the 
fire  of  temptation  ;  even  as  there  is  another  baptism,  the  baptism  of  blood,  in  store 
for  Him :  for  the  gifts  of  God  are  not  for  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  any  mora 


CHA*   IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  871 

than  for  His  followers,  the  pledge  of  exemption  from  a  conflict,  but  rather  powers 
with  which  He  is  furnished,  and,  as  it  were,  inaugurated  thereunto.  With  regard 
to  the  temptation  :  it  is  quite  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  the  victory 
then  gained  by  the  second  Adam,  or  the  bearing  which  it  had,  and  still  has,  on  the 
work  of  our  redemption.  The  entire  history,  moral  and  spiritual,  of  the  world 
revolves  around  two  persons,  Adam  and  Christ.  To  Adam  was  given  a  position  to 
maintain  ;  he  did  not  maintain  it,  and  the  lot  of  the  world  for  ages  was  decided. 
All  is  again  at  issue.  Again  we  are  represented  by  a  Champion,  by  One  who  is  in 
the  place  of  all,  whose  standing  shall  be  the  standing  of  many,  and  whose  fall,  if 
that  fall  had  been  conceivable,  would  have  been  the  fall  of  many,  yea  of  all.  Once 
already  Satan  had  thought  to  nip  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the  bud,  and  had  nearly 
succeeded.  If  it  had  not  been  for  a  new  and  unlooked-for  interposition  of  God,  for 
the  promise  of  the  Seed  of  the  woman,  he  would  have  done  it.  He  will  now  prove 
if  he  cannot  more  effectually  crush  it,  and  for  ever ;  for,  should  Christ  fail,  there 
was  none  behind,  the  last  stake  would  have  been  played — and  lost.  (Archbishop 
Trench.)  Washed  and  not  soiled: — Then,  when  He  was  washed,  did  the  devU 

attempt  to  soil  Him.  {A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Satan's  malice : — His  malice  is  so 
great  that  he  is  never  at  rest.  He  watcheth  every  good  thing  in  its  bud,  to  nip  it ; 
in  its  blossom,  to  blast  it  ;  in  its  fruit,  to  spoil  it.  (Ibid.)  The  power  of  habit  to 
resist  temptation: — What  we  are  surely  possessed  of,  we  can  hardly  lose.  And  such 
a  possession,  such  an  inheritance,  is  true  piety,  when  we  are  once  rooted  and  built 
up,  and  established  in  it.  It  is  a  treasure  which  no  chance  can  rob  us  of,  no  thief 
take  from  us.  A  habit  well  confirmed  is  an  object  the  devil  is  afraid  of.  Oh,  the 
power  of  an  uninterrupted  obedience,  of  a  continued  course  in  the  duties  of  holiness  1 
It  is  able  to  puzzle  the  great  sophister,  the  great  god  of  this  world.  (Ibid.)  Was 
led  by  the  Spirit. — Led  by  the  Spirit : — We  are  to  consider  the  leader.  He  was  led 
by  the  Spirit.  1.  That  the  state  of  a  man  regenerate  by  baptism  is  not  a  standing 
still.  We  must  not  only  have  a  mortifying  and  reviving,  but  a  quickening  and 
stirring  spirit  (1  Cor.  xv.  45).  2.  As  there  must  be  a  stirring,  so  this  stirring 
must  not  be  such,  as  when  a  man  is  left  to  his  own  voluntary  or  natural  motion ;  we 
must  go  according  as  we  are  led.  For  having  given  ourselves  to  God,  we  are  no 
longer  to  be  at  our  own  disposition  or  direction.  (Bishop  Andrewes.)  The  Divine 
leading  a  security  in  temptation : — The  Children  of  Israel  made  no  scruple  to  pitch 
their  tents  within  the  borders  of  their  enemies  if  the  pillar  of  cloud  did  remove  before 
them ;  so  wheresoever  the  grace  of  God  doth  carry  a  man,  God's  glory  being  his 
undoubted  end  (without  all  vain  delusions,  and  carnal  reservations)  he  may  be 
bold  to  venture.  (Bishop  Hacket.)  Tempting  the  Tempter : — Have  you  seen 
little  children  dare  one  another  which  should  go  deepest  into  the  mire  7  But  he  is 
more  childish  that  ventures  further  and  further,  even  to  the  brim  of  transgression, 
and  bids  the  devil  catch  him  if  he  can.  I  will  but  look  and  like,  says  the  wanton, 
where  the  object  pleaseth  me  ;  I  keep  company  with  some  licentious  persons,  says 
an  easy  nature,  but  for  no  hurt,  because  I  would  not  offend  our  friendship.  I  will 
but  bend  my  body  in  the  house  of  Rimmon,  when  my  master  bends  his,  says 
Naaman  ;  I  will  but  peep  in  to  see  the  fashion  of  the  mass,  holding  fast  the  former 
profession  of  my  faith.  Beloved,  I  do  not  like  it  when  a  man's  conscience  takes  in 
these  small  leaks ;  it  is  odds  you  will  fill  faster  and  faster,  and  sink  to  the  bottom  of 
iniquity.      (Ibid.)  Led  by  the  Divine  Spirit : — The  grounds  upon  which  I  will 

insist  are  these.  1.  We  must  be  led  by  the  Spirit  before  we  can  work  anything 
which  is  good.  2.  I  will  unfold  how  we  are  led  by  initiating  or  preventing  grace, 
when  we  are  first  made  partakers  to  taste  of  the  hopes  of  a  better  life.  3.  I  will 
show  how  we  are  led  by  preparatory  grace,  which  goes  before  the  complete  act  of 
our  regeneration.  4.  With  what  great  and  mighty  power  the  Spirit  doth  lead  us 
in  conveiting  grace.  5.  How  we  are  led  by  subsequent  grace  and  sanctification, 
which  co-operates  and  assists  us  after  our  conversion.  (Ibid.)  Temptation*  not  to 
he  sought  : — In  that  the  evangelists  do  not  say  that  Christ  cast  Himself  upon  a 
temptatiohi  neither  did  go  to  undertake  it  till  He  was  led  to  it,  we  note,  that  what- 
ever may  be  the  advantage  of  a  temptation  by  the  Spirit's  ordering  of  it,  or  what 
security  from  danger  we  may  promise  to  ourselves  upon  that  account,  yet  must  we 
not  ran  upon  temptations;  though  we  must  submit  when  we  are  fairly  led  into 
them.  The  reasons  of  this  truth  are  these : — 1.  There  is  so  much  of  the  nature  of 
evil  in  temptations  that  they  are  to  be  avoided  if  possible.  2.  To  run  upon  them 
would  be  a  dangerous  tempting  of  God ;  that  is,  making  a  bold  and  presumptuous 
trial,  without  call,  whether  He  will  put  forth  Hia  power  to  rescue  us  or  not.  When 
do  men  run  anoalled  and  unwarrantably  upon  temptation  7    (1)  When  men  engage 


in  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHl».  rr. 

themselves  in  sin  and  apparent  wickedness,  in  the  works  of  the  flesh.  For  it  oan 
never  be  imagined  that  the  holy  God  should  ever  by  His  Spirit  call  any  to  sach 
things  as  His  soul  abhors.  (2)  When  men  run  upon  the  visible  and  apparent  occa> 
sions  and  causes  of  sin.  This  is  like  a  man's  going  to  the  pest-house.  (3)  When 
men  unnecessarily,  without  the  conduct  either  of  command  or  urging  an  unavoidable 
providence,  do  put  themselves,  though  not  upon  visible  and  certain  opportunities, 
yet  upon  dangerous  and  hazardous  occasions  and  snares.  (4)  Those  run  npon 
temptation,  that  adventure  apparently  beyond  their  strength,  and  put  themselves 
upon  actions  good  or  harmless,  disproportionably  to  their  abilities.  (5)  They  are 
also  guilty  that  design  an  adventure  unto  the  utmost  bounds  of  lawful  liberty.  (6) 
Those  also  may  be  reckoned  in  the  number  of  such  as  rush  upon  their  danger,  wno 
go  abroad  without  their  weapons,  and  forget  in  the  midst  of  daily  dangers  the 
means  of  preservation.  (E.  Gilpin.)  Led  by  the  Spirit: — The  devil  was  the 
instrument  of  the  temptation,  but  God  ordained  it.  (G.  S.  Barrett.)  The 
Divine  purpose  in  the  temptation  : — It  was  the  last  act  of  His  moral  education ;  it 
gave  Him  an  insight  into  all  the  ways  in  which  His  Messianic  work  could  possibly 
be  marred.  If,  from  the  very  first  step  in  His  arduous  career,  Jesus  kept  the  path 
marked  out  for  Him  by  God's  will  without  deviation,  change,  or  hesitancy,  this 
bold  front  and  steadfast  perseverance  are  certainly  due  to  His  experience  of  the 
temptation.  All  the  wrong  courses  possible  to  Him  were  thenceforth  known;  all 
the  rocks  had  been  observed  ;  and  it  was  the  enemy  himself  who  had  rendered 
Him  this  service.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  God  apparently  delivered  Him 
for  a  brief  time  into  his  power.  This  is  just  what  Matthew's  narrative 
expresses  so  forcibly  :  "  He  was  led  up  by  the  Spirit  to  be  tempted."  When  He  left 
this  school,  Jesus  distinctly  understood  that,  as  respects  His  person,  no  act  of  His 
ministry  was  to  have  any  tendency  to  lift  it  out  of  His  human  condition  ;  that,  as 
to  His  work,  it  was  to  be  in  no  way  assimilated  to  the  action  of  the  powers 
of  this  world ;  and  that,  in  the  employment  of  Divine  power,  filial  liberty  was 
never  to  become  caprice,  not  even  under  a  pretext  of  blind  trust  in  the  help  of 
God.  And  this  programme  was  carried  out.  His  material  wants  were  supplied 
by  the  gifts  of  charity  (chap.  viii.  3),  not  by  miracles  ;  His  mode  of  life  was 
nothing  else  than  a  perpetual  humiliation — a  prolongation,  so  to  speak,  of  His 
Incarnation.  When  labouring  to  establish  His  kingdom.  He  unhesitatingly  refused 
the  aid  of  human  power — as,  e.g.^  when  the  multitude  wished  to  make  Him  a  King 
(John  vi.  15) ;  and  His  ministry  assumed  the  character  of  an  exclusively  spiritual 
conquest.  He  abstained,  lastly,  from  every  miracle  which  had  not  for  its  immediate 
design  the  revelation  of  moral  perfection,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  glory  of  His  Father 
(Luke  xi.  29).  These  supreme  rules  of  the  Messianic  activity  were  all  learned  in  that 
school  of  trial  through  which  God  caused  EQm  to  pass  in  the  desert.  {F.  Godet,D.D.) 
Into  the  wilderness. — The  danger  of  solitude  : — As  a  deer  that  is  struck  knows  by 
instinct  what  a  danger  it  is  to  be  single,  and  therefore  will  herd  himself  if  he  can ; 
so  do  not  separate  yourself  from  the  face  of  men  upon  temptation,  that  is  the  way 
to  betray  your  soul,  but  unite  your  force  against  the  tempter  by  mixing  yourself 
with  good  men.  {Bishop  Racket.)  Christ's  a  lonely  life : — But  I  reduce  all  to  this 
head.  The  solitude  of  the  wilderness  did  best  befit  Him  in  this  work,  because  He 
began,  continued,  and  ended  the  work  of  the  Mediatorship  by  Himself,  and  by  no 
other  assistance.  (Ibid.)  Humility  : — Much  better  it  is  to  be  humble  with 
Christ  in  a  barren  desert,  than  to  be  proud  with  Adam  in  a  delicious  paradise. 
{Ibid.)  Man  sociable : — God  hath  made  man  a  sociable  creature,  if  the  contagion 
of  the  world  doth  not  make  him  unsociable.  (Ibid.)  Solitude  favourable  to 
temptation : — Solitude  affords  a  great  advantage  to  Satan  in  the  matter  of  tempta- 
tion. This  advantage  ariseth  from  solitude  two  ways :  1.  First,  As  it  doth  deprive 
ns  of  help.  They  can  mutually  help  one  another  when  they  fall ;  they  can  mutu- 
ally heat  and  warm  one  another ;  they  can  also  strengthen  one  another's  hands  to 
prevail  against  an  adversary.  2.  Secondly,  Solitude  increaseth  melancholy,  fills 
the  soul  with  dismal  apprehensions ;  and  withal  doth  so  spoil  and  alter  the  temper 
of  it  that  it  is  not  only  ready  to  take  any  disadvantageous  impression,  but  it  doth 
also  dispose  it  to  leaven  and  sour  those  very  considerations  that  should  support, 
and  to  put  a  bad  construction  on  things  that  never  were  intended  for  its  hart. 
{R.  Gilpin.)  Spiritual  victory  in  spite  of  disadvantage: — Here  we  have  an 
image  of  the  conflicts  betwixt  Ishmael  and  Amalek,  the  seed  of  the  woman  and 
the  seed  of  the  serpent.  God,  to  gain  the  greater  glory  to  Himself,  gives  all  the 
advantages  that  may  be  to  the  enemies  of  His  Church.  How  unequal  was  th« 
combat  and  contention  betwixt  Luther  a  poor  monk,  and  the  Pope,  and  so  nuuij 


«HAP.  IT.3  ST.  LUKE.  373 

legions  of  his  creatures?  They  had  the  sword  of  most  magistrates  to  sway  at 
their  pleasure,  great  power,  and  great  authority,  yet  Luther  took  the  prey  out  of 
their  teeth,  as  poor  David  overthrew  the  great  GoUath.  (D.  Dyke.)  Christ  in  the 
loildemess : — What  a  contrast  between  that  gracious,  noble  Form  and  the  scene  in 
which  it  is  set  1  The  Bible  delights  in  contrasts.  On  Calvary,  e.g.,  it  shows  us  the 
cross,  and  One  hanging  on  it,  the  very  incarnation  of  beauty  and  patient  love  and 
geotleness — the  perfect  Man,  the  perfect  God — and  there  all  around  Him  surge  the 
angry  crowds  full  of  hate  and  wickedness  and  every  corruption.  So  here  we  behold 
that  same  Holy  Being  standing  in  the  midst  of  the  picture  of  desolation — oh,  how 
desolate  that  desert  even  in  the  light  of  the  noonday  1 — how  much  more  desolate 
at  night,  when  the  imagination  filled  it  with  its  own  fears  and  mysteries  and  terrors ! 
But  more  horrid  than  the  darkness,  more  terrible  than  wild  beasts,  than  any  earthly 
terror,  is  the  dark  presence  of  Satan.  There  they  stand  alone  together,  the  Son  of 
God  and  the  spirit  of  evil ;  and  we  know  that  they  are  to  be  the  figures  in  some 
great  transaction.  What  was  the  mighty  event?  It  was  the  greatest  event  that 
has  ever  occurred  on  earth  except  the  Incarnation,  Crucifixion,  and  Kesurrection  of 
our  Lord.  It  was  to  be  the  greatest  battle  ever  fought  on  the  earth — the  battle 
between  Satan,  the  personification  of  hate  and  vileness  and  all  that  is  repulsive, 
and  the  incarnation  of  purity  and  holiness.  (F.  G.  Ewer,  D.D.)  Retirement 
preparatory  to  action: — It  has  been  said  that  Christ  by  His  example  sanctioned  the 
eremitical  life,  the  retirement  into  the  deserts  of  the  old  hermits,  to  spend  their 
lives  in  contemplation.  To  some  extent  only  is  this  true.  Christ  sanctioned  retire- 
ment, but  He  made  retirement  from  the  world  preparatory  to  active  mission  work 
in  the  world.  Where  the  old  hermits  misread  His  teaching  was  in  this,  that  they 
retired  to  the  deserts  and  did  not  leave  the  deserts  again— they  made  that  a  cul-de- 
sac  which  should  have  been  a  passage.  The  example  of  our  Lord  seems  to  as  in 
this  age  of  high  pressure  to  be  of  special  importance.  We  look  too  much  to  the 
amount  of  work  done,  rather  than  to  the  quality  of  the  work.  This  is  the  case  in 
every  branch  of  life,  in  every  industry,  in  every  profession  ;  and  it  cannot  be  denied 
that  in  the  present  day  the  hurry  of  Ufe  is  so  great  that  men  have  not  the  patience 
to  study  and  to  appreciate  good  work ;  so  long  as  it  has  a  specious  appearance  of 
being  good,  it  is  sufficient.  But  in  spiritual  work,  we  must  consider  that  the  eye 
of  God  is  on  us,  and  that  we  are  labouring  for  Him,  not  for  men,  and,  by  His  retire- 
ment for  prayer  and  fasting  into  the  solitude  of  the  desert,  Christ  puts  into  our 
hands  the  key  to  the  door  of  all  thorough  and  efficacious  work  in  the  spiritual 
sphere, — it  must  be  well  considered,  well  prayed  over,  and  well  prepared  for.  Every 
plant  has  its  hidden  life  that  precedes  its  visible  and  manifested  life  ;  the  seed,  or 
bulb,  or  tuber  spends  a  time  in  accumulating  to  itself  vital  force  or  energy,  during 
which  period  it  appears  to  be  dormant.  Then,  when  it  has  taken  the  requisite  time, 
it  begins  to  grow,  it  throws  up  its  leaves  and  flowers.  The  leaves  and  flowers  are 
no  spontaneous  development  out  of  the  root,  they  have  been  long  prepared  for  in 
the  hidden  life  and  apparent  sleep  of  the  seed  or  root  underground.  All  life  is 
initiated  by  a  hidden  period  of  incubation.  And  all  healthy  human  activity  has  also 
its  still  unperceived  phase  of  existence.  Christ  shows  us  that  it  is  the  same  in  the 
spiritual  life.  The  forty  days  and  nights — I  may  say  the  whole  of  the  hidden  life 
at  Nazareth — was  the  seed  germinating,  and  the  three  years'  ministry  was  the 
manifestation  of  the  life.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  Scene  of  the  temptation: — 
The  scene  of  the  temptation  was  the  wilderness.  What  wilderness  we  are  not  told ; 
and  all  which  it  imports  us  to  note  is  that  it  was  a  wilderness,  in  which  this  en- 
counter of  the  good  and  the  evil,  each  in  its  highest  representative,  took  place. 
There  could  have  been  no  fitter  scene,  none  indeed  so  fit.  The  waste  and  desert 
places  of  the  earth  are,  so  to  speak,  the  characters  which  sin  has  visibly  impressed 
on  the  outward  creation ;  its  signs  and  its  symbols  there  ;  the  echoes  in  the  out- 
ward world  of  the  desolation  and  wasteness  which  sin  has  wrought  in  the  inner  life 
of  man.  Out  of  a  true  feeling  of  this,  men  have  ever  conceived  of  the  vnlderness 
as  the  hannt  of  evil  spirits.  In  the  old  Persian  religion,  Ahriman  and  his  evil 
spirits  inhabit  the  steppes  and  wastes  of  Turan,  to  the  north  of  the  happy  Iran,  which 
stands  under  the  dominion  of  Ormuzd ;  exactly  as  with  ttie  Egyptians,  the  evil 
Typhon  is  the  lord  of  the  Libyan  sand- wastes,  and  Osiris  of  th,e  fertile  Egypt. 
This  sense  of  the  wilderness  as  the  haunt  of  evil  spirits,  one  which  the  Scripture 
more  or  less  allows  (Isa.  xiii.  21,  xxxiv.  14;  Matt.  xii.  43  ;  Kev.  xviii.  2),  would  of 
itself  give  a  certain  fitness  to  that  as  the  place  of  the  Lord's  encounter  with  Satan ; 
bat  only  in  its  antagonism  to  paradise  do  we  recognize  a  still  higher  fitness  in  the 
appointment    of   ^e  pUoe.    The   garden  and  the  desert  are   the  two  most 


B74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ohat.  XT, 

opposite  poles  of  natural  life ;  in  them  we  have  the  highest  harmonies  and  the 
deepest  discords  of  nature.  Adam,  when  worsted  in  the  conflict,  was  expelled  from 
the  garden,  and  the  ground  became  cursed  for  his  sake.  Its  desert  places  represent 
to  us  what  the  whole  of  it  might  justly  have  been  on  account  of  sin.  Christ  takei 
up  the  conflict  exactly  where  Adam  left  it,  and,  inheriting  all  the  consequences  of 
his  defeat,  in  the  desert  does  battle  with  the  foe ;  and,  conquering  him  there,  wins 
back  the  garden  for  that  whole  race,  whose  champion  and  representative  He  was. 
{Archbishop  Trench.)  The  world  a  wilderness  : — "  The  earth  a  wilderness  I  "  yon 
will  say.  "  Oh,  but  it  is  full  of  scenes  of  beauty;  has  it  not  its  running  streams, 
and  flowery  leas,  and  wooded  slopes,  and  leaning  lawns  ?  How  glorious  its  sunsets  f 
How  fair  its  gardens,  all  filled  with  fragrant  flowers  1 "  Yes,  the  earth  has  its 
beauties,  but  they  are  not  the  true,  the  essential  beauties.  Go  you  toQuarantania: 
there  you  shall  find  also  a  certain  beauty — the  beauty  of  wild  sublimity — the  moun- 
tain peak,  the  trenchant  rock,  the  dark  ravine  with  its  rugged  sides ;  yet  it  is  a 
howling  wilderness.  Quarantania  has  a  certain  beauty,  and  so  has  earth.  But 
compare  the  desert,  stern,  barren,  desolate,  with  the  fair  gardens  of  Italy,  and  great 
as  is  the  gulf  between  these,  it  is  not  so  vast  as  the  gulf  between  this  world  that  we 
call  BO  fair  and  the  Golden  Jerusalem,  of  which  we  are  citizens.  All  that  is  most 
bright  and  glorious  here  is  dull  and  harsh  and  pale  compared  with  what  God  ia 
keeping  for  us  there.  Is  not  the  earth  filled  with  mountains  of  disappointments  f 
with  snares,  sufferings,  griefs,  ingratitudes  ?  Oh  1  the  wilderness  of  this  world. 
What  a  contrast  with  the  paradise  of  God  I  {F.  C.  Ewer,  D.D.)  The  forty  day* 
in  the  wilderness : — We  make  a  mistake  when  we  think  that  those  forty  days  were 
all  days  of  temptation  and  sorrow.  They  must  have  been,  on  the  contrary,  days,  ai 
first,  of  peaceful  rest,  of  intense  joy.  Alone  with  God,  driven  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
wilderness,  the  Saviour  dwelt  in  the  peaceful  thought  of  His  union  with  His  Father. 
The  words  spoken  at  the  baptism,  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit's  power  within  Hiitt 
had  filled  His  human  heart  with  serene  ecstasy.  He  went  into  the  wilderness  to 
realize  it  all  more  fully.  It  was  then  in  this  spiritual  rest  and  joy  that  we  may 
reverently  conceive  the  beginning  of  the  wilderness  life  was  passed.  As  such,  it 
was  the  first  pure  poetry  of  the  perfect  union  which  was  to  arise  between  the  heart 
of  man  and  the  Spirit  of  God ;  the  springtime  of  the  new  life ;  the  first  clear 
music  which  ever  flowed  from  the  harmony  of  a  human  spirit  with  the  life  of  the 
universe.  But  now  we  meet  the  question,  "  How  did  this  become  test,  temptation?  " 
To  understand  this  we  must  recall  the  two  grand  ideas  in  His  mind :  1.  That  He 
was  at  one  with  the  Father — that  gave  Him  His  perfect  joy.  2.  That  He  was  the 
destined  Eedeemer  of  the  race.  To  the  first  peaceful  days  had  now  succeeded  days 
when  desire  to  begin  His  redemptive  work  filled  His  soul.  And  the  voice  in  ffia 
own  Boul  was  echoed  by  the  cry  of  the  Jewish  people  for  their  Messiah.  He  waa 
urged,  then,  by  two  calls,  one  within,  and  one  without.  But — and  here  is  the 
point  at  which  suffering  and  test  entered — these  two  voices  directly  contradicted 
one  another.  As  soon  as  Christ  turned  to  the  world  with  the  greeting  of  His  love, 
He  heard  coming  from  the  world  an  answering  greeting  of  welcome,  but  the  ideas 
which  lay  beneath  it  were  in  radical  opposition  to  His  own.  The  vision  of  an 
omnipotent  king  and  an  external  kingdom  was  presented  to  His  Spirit  as  the  ideal 
of  the  Jewish  people.  It  came  rudely  into  contact  with  the  vision  in  His  own 
heart  of  a  king  made  perfect  by  suffering,  of  a  kingdom  hidden  at  first  in  the 
hearts  of  men.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  the  depth  and  manifoldness  of  the  tests 
which  arose  from  the  clashing  of  these  two  opposed  conceptions.  (Stopford  A. 
Brooke,  M.A.)  The  solitary  place : — No :  we  must  be  led  into  some  secret  and  solitary 
place,  there  to  fast  and  pray,  to  fit  and  prepare  ourselves  for  the  work  which  we 
have  to  do,  there  to  taste  how  sweet  the  Word  of  God  is,  to  ruminate  and  chaw 
upon  it  as  it  were  and  digest  it,  to  fasten  it  to  our  very  soul  and  make  it  a  part 
of  as,  and  by  daily  meditation  so  to  profit  that  all  the  mysteries  of  faith  and 
precepts  of  holiness  may  be,  as  vessels  are  in  a  well-ordered  family,  ready  at  hand 
to  be  used  upon  any  occasion.  (A .  Farindon,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-4.  Being  forty  days  tempted  of  the  devU.  And  in  these  days  He  did  eat 
nothing. — The  temptation  of  Christ : — A  great  part  of  the  force  and  power  of 
Christ's  example  here  is  lost  upon  men,  through  their  slipping  it  aside,  by  secretly 
imagining  that,  after  all.  His  case  and  theirs  are  wholly  different.  They  read  of 
His  being  tempted  ;  and  as  they  do  not  disbelieve  the  Scriptures,  they  admit  in  a 
certain  way  that  He  was — that  is,  they  never  question  it.  But,  practically  speaking, 
and  meaning  by  temptation  such  temptations  as  they  yield  to,  they  do  not  believe 


«HAV.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE,  87S 

that  He  wai  tempted  ;  they  have  a  secret  reserve — "  Christ  was  tempted,  as  far  as 
He  could  be  tempted  ;  but  how  could  He  who  was  God  as  well  as  man  be  really 
tempted f  What  was  there  in  Him  to  tempt?"  By  such  questions  the  practical 
example  of  our  Lord  is  set  aside  ;  and  men  lose  the  benefit  designed  for  them  in 
Scripture,  in  its  narrative  of  these  awful  struggles  of  the  prince  of  darkness  with 
the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  1.  To  be  truly  tempted,  Christ  must  be  truly  man. 
Unless  His  temptations,  sufferings,  and  death  were  all  wrought  in  appearance  only, 
there  must  be  that  nature  truly  in  Him  which  is  capable  of  these  accidents.  And 
this,  in  its  fullest  significance,  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Catholic  Church.  And  to  the 
full  perception  of  this  truth,  it  must  be  noted,  that  the  nature  He  took  was  the 
human  nature  as  it  was  in  His  mother  ;  not,  as  some  have  fancied,  the  nature  of 
Adam  before  his  fall  ;  for  how  should  He  have  obtained  that  nature  from  the 
Virgin  Mary,  who  herself  possessed  it  not  ?  and  if  He  had,  how  could  He  have 
been  "  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  sin  only  excepted  "  ?  for  we  know  not 
that  in  Adam's  body  were  all  those  sinless  infirmities  which  dwell  in  ours,  and 
which  indeed  we  acknowledge  in  our  Lord's.  Before  the  fruit  of  the  forbidden  tree 
had  poisoned  the  currents  of  his  blood,  we  know  not  that  pain,  and  weariness,  and 
sickness  could  have  invaded  that  body  which  from  God's  hand  bad  come  forth 
'•  very  good,"  and  which,  we  doubt  not,  by  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life  was  to  have 
been  strengthened  till  it  could  not  taste  of  death.  But  the  body  which  Christ 
assumed  was  subject,  like  our  own,  to  those  infirmities  which  have  not  in  them  the 
nature  of  sin,  and  yet  which  sin  has  brought  into  our  nature.  The  contrary  opinion 
has  arisen  from  the  pious  but  mistaken  fear,  lest  in  allowing  that  Christ  took  the 
very  nature  of  His  mother,  we  should,  unawares,  allow  that  He  took  what  was  sin- 
ful ;  but  the  true  answer  to  this  apprehension  is,  that  the  Eternal  Son  took  to 
Himself  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  not  a  human  person,  but  humanity — humanity, 
which,  if  it  had  been  impersonated  in  one  of  us  would  have  been  sinful,  but  which 
could  not  be  sinful  until  it  was  a  person,  and  was  never  a  person  till  it  was  in  the 
Christ.  "  To  His  own  person  "  (says  Hooker)  "  He  assumed  a  man's  nature."  The 
flesh,  and  the  conjunction  of  the  flesh  with  God,  began  at  one  instant.  And  that 
which  in  Him  made  our  nature  uncorrupt,  was  the  union  of  His  Deity  with  ous 
nature.  2.  These  two  natures,  though  thus  conjoined  in  one  person,  were  not  con- 
founded the  one  with  the  other  ;  neither  was  the  proper  Godhead  of  the  Son 
diminished  by  inferior  admixture,  nor  the  humanity  swollen  out  of  the  true  limits 
of  its  essential  properties  by  the  alliance  of  Deity.  To  it,  indeed.  Deity  added  that 
infinite  worth  which  made  it  a  fit  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  to  it  that  grace  of  unction  un- 
measured, by  which  it  was  held  up  ever  without  spot  of  iniquity ;  but  still  each  nature 
was  separate  and  unconfused  ;  and  thus,  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  could  Christ 
declare  on  earth  that  the  Son  of  Man  was  in  heaven  ;  thus  could  He  truly  suffer 
and  die  in  His  human  body,  though  the  Godhead  is  impassable  and  immortal ; 
thus  could  He,  in  His  human  soul,  be  "  in  an  agony,"  though  Deity  can  never 
suffer  ;  thus  could  He  pray,  "Father,  not  My  will,  but  Thine,  be  done,"  while  He 
could  declare,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  Here,  then,  was  the  provision  made  for 
the  reality  of  His  temptation :  for  in  whatever  way  Satan  can  approach  us  from  with- 
out, by  the  influences  of  a  spiritual  presence,  as  suggesting  to  the  imagination,  and 
throwing  into  the  mind,  that  which  is  at  once  temptation,  and  becomes  sin  as  soon 
as  the  will  has  given  to  it  the  first  beginnings  of  assent ;  in  this  same  way  are  we 
enforced,  by  the  verity  of  His  human  soul,  to  believe  that  the  Son  of  God  could  be 
approached  by  Satan.  So  that  to  make  His  exposure  to  temptation  perfect,  we 
must  suppose  no  sinless  avenues  to  its  approach,  which  in  us  are  open,  closed  in 
Him.  The  fiery  darts,  indeed,  found  in  that  most  true  loyal  soul  no  sinful 
tendencies  on  which  to  fall  ;  they  were  cast  back  at  once  from  the  confines  of  His 
imagination  by  a  will  truly  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  dwelt  in 
beyond  measure  by  the  present  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  all  grace.  So  that,  with  a 
perfect  exposure  to  temptation,  spot  of  sin  there  could  be  clearly  none.  (Bishop  S, 
Wilberforce.)  The  reality  of  our  Lord's  contest  with  Satan  : — When  we  read  of 
the  tempter  approaching  with  his  wiles  Him  whom  we  know  to  be  the  Lord 
incarnate,  God  the  Maker  of  all  being,  we  have  something  of  the  feeling  with  which 
we  read  of  those  imaginary  conflicts  in  which  man  is  supposed  to  strive  with  beinga 
of  a  higher  order  :  we  feel,  that  is,  as  if  there  could  be  no  real  contest ;  that  it  is  but 
the  apparent  acting  out  of  what  would  be  naturally  impossible.  When  we  compare 
the  paltry  baits  with  the  infinite  worthiness  of  Him  to  whom  they  were  proffered, 
we  feel  so  sure  of  the  conclusion,  that,  knowing  the  craft  and  subtlety  of  the  tempter, 
Ve  cannot  believe  that  he  could  thus  attempt  to  turn  aside  the  perfect  uprightness 


878  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBsr.  it. 

of  God's  only  Son.  Here,  then,  we  need  the  recollection,  that  to  him  had  not  been 
made  the  revelation  we  possess  of  Christ's  eternal  power  and  Godhead  ;  that  from 
him  was  kept  secret  the  virginity  of  Mary  and  Him  who  was  born  of  her,  as  also 
the  death  of  our  Lord — three  of  the  mysteries  the  most  spoken  of  in  the  world,  yet 
done  in  secret  by  God  ;  that  all  he  knew  was  that  this  was  the  champion  of  man, 
the  Holy  One  of  God,  the  Second  Adam,  with  whom,  as  with  the  first,  was  to  be  his 
great  struggle  for  the  dominion  of  the  world.  He  knew  that  he  had  triumphed 
once,  by  like  temptations,  over  the  same  nature  unfallen  ;  and  how  should  it  fare 
better  now  ?  .  •  .  When  we  look  at  the  temptation  in  this  light,  how  strikingly 
does  it  fall  in  with  the  whole  course  of  God's  revealed  dealings  !  Throughout  the 
Old  Testament  Satan  is  scarcely  mentioned ;  and  in  the  New  he  is  less  emphatically 
the  enemy  of  God  than  of  Christ,  as  if  between  the  prince  of  this  world  and  the 
Son  of  Man  must  be  the  mighty  struggle.  The  devil  (says  Augustine)  was  to  be 
overcome,  not  by  the  power  of  God,  but  by  His  righteousness.  (Ibid.)  Lessons 
from  our  Lord's  temptation : — As  this  subject  will  yield  both  motives  and  measures 
for  obedience,  so  too  will  it  supply  us  with  directions  for  the  due  resisting  of 
temptation.  The  Commander  suffered  Himself  to  be  tempted,  that  He  might 
teach  His  soldier  to  contend,  says  Augustine ;  He  taught  thee  to  bear,  and  He 
taught  thee  by  bearing.  A  broad  light  is  thrown  by  it  on  every  part  of  temptation. 
1.  We  see  the  need  of  watching  alway.  No  height  of  piety  is  a  sufficient  safeguard 
against  danger.  We  must,  therefore,  be  prepared  for  conflict,  not  merely  with  the 
principle  of  evil,  but  with  an  actually  Uving,  subtle,  and  most  powerful  enemy. 
The  principle  of  evil  can  mean  nothing  else  than  our  own  inward  inclinations  to  it. 
By  this  our  Master  could  not  have  been  tempted,  for  He  had  no  evil  inclination  ; 
either,  therefore.  He  could  not  be  tempted,  or  it  must  be  by  a  spirit  external  to 
Himself,  and  having,  therefore,  truly  a  separate  existence.  2.  We  see  the  sort  of 
wiles  against  which  we  must  watch.  The  evil  which  seems  farthest  off  is  often  the 
nearest.  The  fast  of  forty  days  had  surely  shown  the  absolute  dominion  with  which 
the  flesh  was  curbed  in  Him  to  whom  the  tempter  came  ;  yet  is  His  flrst  tempta- 
tion a  suggestion  that  He  should  turn  the  stones  around  Him  into  bread.  8.  We 
see,  too,  with  how  prompt  a  readiness  the  forms  of  temptation  are  exchanged.  It 
is  not  one,  and  then  rest.  From  sensuality  and  doubt,  how  easily  did  Satan  turn 
to  presumption,  and  from  that  pass  over  to  the  baits  of  earthly  glory,  as  instru- 
ments wherewith  to  beguile  that  human  heart  which  only  was  for  ever  proof  against 
his  snares  1  And  so,  when  we  have  resisted  the  coarser  temptations  of  sensuality 
or  a  thirst  for  worldly  advancement,  how  readily  do  self-applauding  thoughts  spring 
up  to  poison  the  purged  soil  of  the  heart ;  or,  when  we  have  shut  out  the  louder 
solicitations  of  evil,  are  we  drawn  unawares,  and,  if  need  be,  by  the  very  words 
of  Holy  Writ,  into  an  attempt  to  worship  God  in  some  new  way,  and  so  to 
approach  His  altar  with  an  abominable  offering  of  a  party-zeal  or  self-taught  ser- 
vice  I  Conclusion :  And  so,  all  through  the  struggle,  how  full  of  teaching  is  our 
blessed  Lord's  example  1  With  what  a  perfect  patience  did  He  endure  the  struggle 
to  the  end  ;  not,  as  we  are  wont  to  do,  fretting  under  it,  and  peevishly  longing  for 
the  "rest  of  the  gamer,"  while  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  still  be  "planted  in 
the  field."  And  yet,  with  this  entire  patience,  how  prompt  was  His  resistance, 
never  yielding  for  a  moment  to  that  which  He  endured  to  the  end.  How  directly 
was  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  raised  against  each  following  temptation,  and  how  did 
it  pierce  through  the  fraud  1  And  as  there  is  here  full  instruction  how  to  resist  the 
evil  one,  so  is  there,  too,  a  sure  earnest  of  our  victory.  Satan  dared,  indeed,  to 
assault  our  Lord,  but  He  did  not  triumph  over  Him.  He  overcame  the  devil  in  oar 
nature,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  His  triumph.  From  us  He  took  flesh,  that 
we  from  Him  might  have  salvation.  In  Him  we  were  tempted ;  in  Him  we  vanquish 
Satan.  He  has  passed  through  the  battle  ;  but  He  will  not  forget  those  whom  He 
has  left  to  follow  Him.  He  is  God  over  all ;  but  He  has  not  ceased  to  be  the 
Virgin's  Son.  Let  us  trust  more  in  His  sympathy,  and  cast  ourselves  more  on  His 
•are.  (Ibid.)  The  hour  of  triumph  is  the  hour  of  temptation : — There  was  at 
college,  in  my  day,  a  young  man  whose  career  ran  side  by  side  with  mine.  We 
matriculated  at  the  same  time,  and  at  the  same  time  took  our  degree.  This  young 
man  was  like  unto  him  of  whom  we  read  in  the  Gospel,  "  the  only  son  of  his  mother, 
and  she  was  a  widow."  To  his  undying  honour  be  it  said  he  remembered  that  his 
mother  was  a  vddow,  and  that  she  looked  to  him  then  as  she  had  once  looked  to  hifl 
father.  Most  careful  was  he  never  to  spend  more  than  was  needful,  knowing  that 
•aoh  shilling  he  spent  left  so  much  less  in  that  widow's  purse.  Most  indefatigable 
was  he  in  his  reading,  knowing  that  it  depended  on  his  position  in  the  cl»HH-lirt 


CHAP.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  87» 

•whether  he  oonld  secure  his  fellowship  and  so  provide  a  home  for  that  widowed 
mother.  Day  after  day  would  he  sit  over  his  books  ;  and  night  after  night,  when 
all  else  was  shrouded  in  darkness,  the  flickering  lamp  in  that  student's  room  would 
tell  of  the  midnight  reader.  Throughout  the  whole  of  that  university  career,  never 
was  known  a  more  earnest  nor  a  more  frequent  worshipper  in  the  house  of  God, 
Regularly  as  the  hour  for  Divine  service  came  round,  so  regularly  was  that  widow's 
son  seen  to  enter  that  house  of  prayer.  Days,  and  months,  and  years,  rolled  on, 
and  at  length  the  eventful  day  arrived,  when — examinations  passed,  successfully 
passed — the  tidings  went  rapidly  round  from  mouth  to  mouth  that  the  pattern  son 
and  student  had  nobly  won  his  class,  his  first  class.  That  evening  I  sought  my 
fiiend,  yea,  and  I  found  him  ;  but  where  ?  in  what  condition  ?  There,  on  the  floor 
of  his  room,  almost  senselessly  drunken,  lay  the  dutiful  son,  the  pattern  student,  the 
frequent  and  earnest  worshipper.  Alas  I  alas  I  how  truly  had  the  tempter  marked 
his  time  ;  the  hour  of  that  young  man's  triumph  was  the  hour  of  his  fall.  (D. 
Parker  Morgan,  M.A.)  The  existence  of  evil  spirits: — It  is  one  of  the  most 
ruinously  successful  artifices  of  the  great  adversary  of  men,  to  persuade  them  that 
he  has  no  existence  ;  for  thus  he  throws  them  off  their  guard,  and  makes  them 
believe  that  from  him,  at  least,  they  have  nothing  to  fear ;  and  thus  the  very  senti- 
ment which  would  appear  to  them  to  annihilate  his  being,  completely  establishes 
over  them  the  plenitude  of  his  power.  The  doctrine  of  Scripture  in  reference  to  the 
fallen  angels  has  been  most  usually  opposed  by  the  weapons  of  ridicule — a  mode  of 
attack  which  says  little  for  the  goodness  of  the  cause  in  which  it  is  employed  ;  for 
why  resort  to  an  expedient  so  very  low,  and  so  far  from  pious,  if  solid  argument 
were  at  command  ?  In  opposition,  however,  to  the  commonly-received  opinions  on 
this  subject,  reason  is  sometimes  appealed  to,  not  only  by  declared  infidels,  but, 
what  is  far  more  strange,  by  some  who  assume  the  Christian  name.  But  why 
should  these  opinions  be  reckoned  improbable,  or  absurd  ?  So  far  is  the  existence 
of  beings  only  spiritual  from  being  improbable,  that  when  it  is  considered 
that  the  Creator  Himself  is  a  pure  spirit,  it  is  in  itself  more  probable  and 
more  easy  to  be  supposed,  that  He  should  form  creatures  purely  spiritual,  than 
creatures  partly  spiritual  and  partly  material.  Nor  is  it  at  all  improbable  that 
angels  should  fall,  any  more  than  that  man  should  have  fallen.  Nor,  again,  is  it 
improbable  that  both  the  holy  and  the  fallen  angels  should  be  employed,  or  per. 
mitted,  to  take  some  part  in  the  affairs  of  men  ;  that  they  do  so  is  at  least  quite 
capable  of  proof,  though  not  an  original  dictate  of  reason.  Were  it  in  our  power  to 
•visit  distant  worlds,  we  should,  without  question,  occasionally  do  so  :  and  we 
Bhould,  on  these  visits,  not  be  altogether  unconcerned  spectators  of  what  is  going 
on,  but  should  in  some  cases  interfere,  properly  or  improperly,  according  to  our 
different  views  and  dispositions.  The  same  thing,  then,  may  be  considered  as  pro- 
bable with  regard  to  angels,  both  good  and  bad.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  they  do 
thus  visit  us  and  act  among  us,  unless,  indeed,  they  be  positively  prohibited  by 
God.  Nor  is  there  any  impossibility,  or  improbability,  in  the  nature  of  things,  that 
spirits  should  communicate  to  us  thoughts  both  holy  and  sinful.  We  communicate 
thoughts  to  each  other,  in  various  ways,  of  which,  if  we  had  not  been  constituted 
exactly  as  we  are,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  us  to  form  any  conception. 
Hence  it  follows  that  there  may  be  other  ways  of  communication  still  which  we 
cannot  conceive.  It  will  not  be  disputed  that  angels  communicate  their  thoughts 
to  each  other,  and  yet  we  cannot  comprehend  how  they  do  so  ;  why,  then,  should 
our  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which  they  ascertain  oar  thoughts,  and  communi- 
cate thoughts  to  us,  be  viewed  as  a  proof  that  no  such  intercourse  can  exist  ?  It 
may,  indeed,  be  objected,  that  when  men  hold  such  intercourse  with  men,  they  are 
conscious  of  the  presence  and  actings  of  each  other ;  whereas  they  are  not  conscions 
either  of  the  presence  or  of  the  communications  of  good  or  bad  spirits,  and  therefore 
ought  to  conclude  against  such  presence  and  such  communications.  To  this  we 
reply,  that  if  such  consciousness  be  demanded,  there  are  many  well-authenticated 
instances  of  it,  in  which  men  have  been  sensible  of  the  presence  and  words  and 
actings  of  these  spirits.  Notice,  however,  to  what  an  extreme  of  impiety  and 
atheism  it  would  lead,  to  say  that  ideas  cannot  be  conveyed  to  us  by  any  being  of 
whose  presence  and  acts  we  are  not  conscious  ;  for  this  would  exclude  the  great 
Creator  Himself  from  all  access  to  the  souls  he  has  made.  Both  reason  and  Scrip- 
tare  lead  us  to  believe  that  God  does  direct  our  minds,  though  we  are  not  sensible 
of  His  presence  and  agency.  Why,  then,  may  not  the  same  thing  hold  substantially 
with  regard  to  the  holy  and  fallen  angels  7  Thus  the  objection,  by  proving  too 
maob,  proves  nothing.    Is  there  not  then,  on  the  whole,  something  rational  in  the 


ffI8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHlP.  n 

idea  that  good  angels  may  promote  man's  holiness,  and  evil  angels  his  disobedienoel 
On  the  supposition  of  that  agency  being  equal  on  both  sides,  man  would  be  ne 
loser.  On  the  supposition  of  the  favourable  influence  being  at  least  more  general 
than  the  unfavourable,  man  would  be  obviously  a  gainer.  It  is  possible,  too,  that 
the  permission  of  some  unfavourable  interference  might  serve  important  purposes 
to  man,  and  be  overruled  for  the  greater  glory  of  God.  Thus  the  subject  has  a  very 
different  aspect  in  the  eye  of  reason,  from  what  some  profane  witlings  and  self-con- 
ceited  objectors  pretend.  Viewed,  again,  in  the  light  of  revelation,  though  many 
points  are  left  obscure,  there  are  many  points  cleared  up,  on  the  subject  of  the 
fallen  angels.  We  are  told  that  they  were  originally  holy  and  happy  in  heaven, 
like  those  who  are  now  confirmed  in  blessedness  ;  that  one  of  them  of  high  rank, 
now  called  Satan,  or  the  devil,  by  way  of  horrid  eminence,  instigated  by  pride  and 
ambition,  rebelled  against  God,  and  was  joined  in  his  rebellion  by  a  great  multitude 
of  the  heavenly  host  ;  that  they  were  banished  from  heaven  ;  that  no  means  are 
appointed  for  their  recovery ;  that  they  are  reserved  under  chains  of  darkness  unto 
the  judgment  of  the  great  day  ;  that  though  they  are  in  general  confined,  they,  and 
especially  their  chief,  are  permitted,  at  times,  to  go  a  certain  length  in  their  en- 
deavour to  extend  the  dominion  of  sin  to  which  they  are  prompted  by  their  malice 
and  wickedness  ;  that  the  devil  was  the  successful  tempter  of  our  first  parents  ; 
that  he  has  been  instrumental  in  many  of  the  crimes  and  calamities  of  mankind  ; 
that  he  opposed  the  Son  of  God,  and  excited  to  His  crucifixion  ;  that  he  and  his 
associates  have  habitually  acted,  as  far  as  they  could,  as  the  deceivers  and 
destroyers  of  men  ;  that  they  will  continue  in  the  same  desperate  course  till  the  end 
of  time  :  and  that  then  their  power  will  be  crushed,  and  they  will  be  left  to  lie  for 
ever  under  the  load  of  guilt  and  misery  which  they  have  brought  upon  themselves. 
(James  Foote,  M.A.)  Christ  tempted,  yet  sinless  : — There  is  a  difficulty  connected 
with  our  Lord's  temptation,  which  has,  I  suppose,  more  or  less  clearly  presented 
itself  to  every  one  who  has  sought  at  all  to  enter  into  the  deeper  significance  of  this 
mysterious  transaction.  The  difficulty  and  dilemma  may  be  stated  thus  :  Either 
there  was  that  in  Christ  which  more  or  less  responded  to  the  temptation — how  then 
was  He  without  sin,  seeing  that  sin  moves  and  lives  in  the  region  of  desires  quite  aa 
really  as  in  that  of  external  acts  ?  or  there  was  nothing  in  Him  that  responded  to 
the  suggestions  of  the  tempter — where  then  was  the  reality  of  the  temptation,  or 
what  was  the  significance  of  that  victory  which  in  the  wilderness  He  won  ?  The 
secret  of  the  difficulty  which  these  alternatives  present  to  our  minds,  so  that  some- 
times it  appears  to  us  impossible  that  Christ's  temptation  should  have  had  anything 
real  in  it,  leaving  Him  as  it  did  wholly  unscathed,  lies  in  the  mournful  experience 
which  we  in  our  own  spiritual  life,  have  made,  namely,  that  almost  all  of  our 
temptations  involve  more  or  less  of  sin,  that  the  serpent  leaves  something  of  his 
trail  and  slime  even  there  where  he  is  not  allowed  to  nestle  and  make  his  home. 
Conquerors  though  we  may  be,  yet  we  seldom  issue  from  the  conflict  without  a 
scratch — a  hurt  it  may  be  which  soon  heals,  but  which  has  left  its  cicatrice  behind 
it.  The  saint,  if  he  shine  as  a  diamond  at  last,  yet  it  is  still  as  a  diamond  which 
has  been  polished  in  its  own  dust.  For  we  may  take  up  arms  against  the  evil 
thought,  we  may  rally  the  higher  powers  of  our  souls,  and  call  in  the  might  of  a 
Mightier  to  put  the  evil  and  its  author  to  flight,  yet  this  we  seldom  do  till  it  has 
already  found  some  place  within  ua.  Our  acquiescence  may  have  been  but 
momentary  1  yet  even  the  moment  during  which  the  evil  was  not  abhorred  and 
loathed  is  irreconcilable  with  the  idea  of  an  absolute  holiness,  which  is  as  a  mirror 
whose  perfect  brightness  no  lightest  breath  has  ever  troubled  or  tarnished  for  an 
instant.  The  reconciliation  of  an  entire  sinlessness  in  Christ  with  the  reality  of 
the  temptations  to  which  He  was  exposed  lies  in  this,  that  there  was  never  in  Him 
this  momentary  delectation  ;  even  as  there  need  not  be  in  us  ;  and  would  not  be,  if 
we  always  were,  and  had  always  in  time  past  been,  upon  our  highest  guard.  (ATch- 
bishoTp  Trench.)  Christ's  conflict  and  ours  : — The  temptation  in  tixe  wilderness 
is  the  image  of  the  oonfliot  of  the  Christian  hfe.  1.  The  temptation.  2.  The 
«nemy.  3.  The  attack.  4.  The  weapon.  5.  The  victory.  6.  The  crown.  Finally, 
the  question  :  If  you  fight  against  Christ,  how  can  you  still  have  courage  ;  if  you 
£ght  under  Christ,  how  can  you  still  be  anxious?  (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.) 
Typical  temptations : — The  three  temptations  of  the  Lord  typify  those  employed 
Against  men  by  Satan  at  the  different  stages  of  life.  Sensuahty  is  especially  the 
ein  of  the  youth,  ambition  especially  that  of  the  man,  avarice  especially  that  of  the 
old  man.  Whoever  has  overcome  the  first  of  these  three  temptations  must  count 
upon  the  second  ;    whoever  sees  the  second  behind  him  will  soon  be  oovertlj 


OHA*.  IV.]  8T.  LUKE.  878 

approached  by  the  third.  But  in  all  temptations,  we  are  more  than  conquerora 
through  Him  who  loved  us.  Over  against  forty  days'  temptation  in  the  first  stand 
the  forty  days'  peace  and  joy  in  the  second  life  of  the  Lord.  {Ihid.)  Comfort 
from  Christ's  temptation  : — Christ  was  tempted  even  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin. 
This  word  is — 1.  A  light  for  our  blindness.  2.  A  spur  for  our  slackness.  S.  A 
staff  for  our  weakness  {Rautenberg.)  Temptation  : — There  is  no  sin  in  being 
tempted:  for  the  t:-  ^ct  Jesus  "was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are," 
Temptation  does  '  ot  i  e  essitate  sinning  :  for  of  Jesus,  when  tempted,  we  read — 
"yet  witho!.*  «!in  '  N  ■'  even  the  worst  forms  of  it  involve  sin  :  for  Jesus  endured 
without  sin  L  '' i'' "t  nf  temptations,  from  the  evil  one  himself.  1.  It  may  be 
needful  for  -  •  •      ted — (1)  For  test.   Sincerity,  faith,  love,  patience,  are  thus 

put  to  proo-.  ^   ^.owth.    Temptation  develops  and  increases  our  graces.  (3) 

For  usefulness  .  become  able  to  comfort  and  warn  others.     (4)  For  victory. 

How  glorious  ■•  •  overcome  the  arch-enemy.  (5)  For  God's  glory.  He  vanquishes 
Satan  by  feeble  men.  2.  Solitude  wiU  not  prevent  temptation.  (1)  It  may  even 
aid  it.  Jesus  was  tempted  in  the  wilderness.  (2)  Nor  will  fasting  and  prayer 
always  keep  off  the  tempter  ;  for  these  had  been  fully  used  by  our  Lord.  (C.  H, 
Spurgeon. )  The  fasting  and  temptation  of  Jesus  : — What  is  Christ  doing  in  this 
long  solitude  and  silence  of  the  wilderness  7  To  say  that  He  is  fasting  does  not 
satisfy  our  inquiry.  "Who  has  not  wished  many  times  that  he  could  have  the  record 
of  these  forty  days  ?  We  know  that  He  is  not  bewailing  His  sins  ;  nor  afflicting 
Himself  purposely  in  penances  of  hunger  and  starvation  ;  nor  wrestling  with  the 
question  whether  He  will  undertake  the  work  to  which  He  is  called.  But  these  are 
jiegations  only,  and  I  think  we  shall  be  able  to  fix  on  several  important  points 
where  we  know  sufficient  in  the  positive  to  justify  a  large  deduction  concerning  the 
probable  nature  of  the  struggle  through  which  Jesus  is  here  passing.  1.  He  has 
a  nature  that  in  part  is  humanly  derived.  But  now  it  is  opened  to  Him  that  He  is 
here  not  as  here  belonging  ;  that  He  is  sent,  let  down  into  the  world,  incarnated  into 
human  evil.  2.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  He  had  internal  struggles  of  a  different 
nature,  growing  out  of  His  hereditary  connection  with  our  humanly  disordered  and 
retributively  broken  state.  I  refer,  more  especially,  to  what  must  have  come  upon 
Him  under  the  law  of  bad  suggestion.  3.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  His  human 
weakness  made  a  fearful  recoil  from  the  lot  of  suffering,  and  the  horrible  death  now 
before  Him.  4.  There  comes  upon  Him  also,  at  the  point  of  His  call  or  endowment, 
still  another  and  vaster  kind  of  commotion,  that  belongs  even  to  His  Divine  nature. 
The  love  He  had  before  to  mankind  was  probably  more  like  that  of  a  simply  perfect 
man.  Having  now  the  fallen  world  itself  put  upon  His  love,  and  the  endowment 
of  a  Saviour  entered  consciously  into  His  heart,  His  whole  Divinity  is  heaved  into 
such  commotion  as  is  fitly  called  an  agony.  5.  Once  more,  the  mind  of  Jesus,  in 
His  forty  days'  retirement  and  fasting  must  have  been  profoundly  engaged  and 
powerfully  tasked  in  the  unfolding  of  the  necessary  plan.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 
Satan  adapts  his  temptations : — Whensoever  he  tempteth  he  taketh  this  advantage, 
if  he  can  discover  or  obtain  it.  He  is  wiser  than  to  set  sail  against  wind  and  tide, 
to  row  against  the  stream ;  therefore  he  labours  all  he  can  to  find  which  way  the 
stream  of  man's  affections  runs  ;  and  to  what  sins  his  relations,  his  calling,  or  his 
opportunities  lay  him  most  open  and  obnoxious ;  accordingly  he  lays  his  snares, 
and  spreads  his  net.  When  he  meets  with  a  proud  man,  him  he  tempteth  with  high 
thoughts :  when  he  meeteth  with  a  covetous  man,  him  he  tempteth  to  the  love  of 
the  world  ;  he  lays  a  golden  bait  of  profit  before  his  eyes :  the  adulterous  he  leads 
to  the  harlot's  house.  For  howsoever  it  be  true,  that  every  man  hath  in  him  a 
principle  suiting  to  every  sin ;  yet  it  is  a  truth  too,  that  every  man  is  not  equally 
active  for,  or  disposed  unto  every  sin ;  and  every  man  hath  not  every  particular  sin 
predominant  in  him  :  now  Satan,  when  he  seeth  what  is  predominant  in  any  man, 
then  he  fashioneth  and  frameth  a  temptation  suitable.    {Caryl.)        Temptations  in 

?outh : — The  temptations  assail  you  most  fiercely  now,  at  the  outset  of  your  life, 
on  are  like  those  who  have  to  build  the  breakwater  against  the  sea.  And  the 
great  struggle  with  the  waves  is  for  the  foundation ;  every  stone  laid  is  laid  in 
fiercest  struggle;  after  the  foundation,  the  work  can  proceed.  Now,  you  are  laying 
the  foundation.  Yield  once  to  temptation,  let  but  once  the  tempter  be  your  master, 
and  be  may  lead  yon  for  evermore  in  chains.  Be  strong  and  be  very  courageous. 
*•  Take  to  yourself  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  stand  in  this 
evil  day,  and  having  done  all  to  stand  1 "  {H.  Wonnacott.)  Christ  not  harmed 
hy  temptation : — His  purity  will  not  be  sullied  by  temptation.  Temptation  cannot 
defile.    The  nnclean  bird,  as  he  flaps  his  black  wings  in  flight,  may  throw  bis 


S80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

shadow  on  the  whiteness'of  the'motintain  snow.nbut  it  is  not  stained.  Tba  clear  bine 
of  highland  lake  may  be  darkened  by  overshadowing  blackness,  but  the  lucid  depth 
is  undefiled.  Christ  may  be  tempted,  but  temptation  harms  only  as  it  is  enter- 
tained, and  dallied  with,  and  obeyed.  {Ibid.)  Face  to  face  with  Satan : — 
Perhaps  very  few  of  you  know  how  a  man  feels  when,  for  the  first  time,  he  finds 
himself,  as  I  remember  finding  myself,  within  a  few  inches^of  a  serpent — when  he 
sees  the  cobra  di  capello  rearing  its  head  ready  to  strike,  and  knows  that  one  stroke 
of  those  fangs  is  death — certain  death.  That  moment  he  experiences  a  varied 
passion,  impossible  to  describe.  Fear,  hatred,  loathing,  the  desire  to  escape,  the 
desire  to  kiU,  all  rush  into  one  moment,  making  his  entire  being  thrill.  Now,  take 
two  men  :  one  is  in  the  face  of  that  serpent ;  the  other  is  in  the  presence  of  the 
old  serpent  called  Satan,  the  devil ;  one  is  in  danger  of  the  sting ;  the  other  is  in 
danger  of  committing  sin.  Which  of  the  two  has  most  reason  to  flee? 
(W.  Arthur,  D.D.)  The  best  of  men  not  exempt  from  temptation  :—Fe]ix  Neff 

was  often  heard  singing  praises  to  God,  when  alone  in  his  room.  Worldly  men 
said  of  him :  "  What  a  singular  being  I  he  seems  unhappy,  and  yet,  when  he  is 
alone,  he  is  always  singing  !"  It  was  because  Neff  rejoiced  in  the  Lord.  Yet  his 
friends  relate  that  he  had  also  great  spiritual  trials.  He  said  that  he  was  some- 
times so  assailed  by  the  adversary  of  souls,  that  he  seemed  to  himself  to  be 
surrounded  with  ruins,  and  he  lost  for  a  moment  even  the  hope  of  being  saved. 
But  soon  he  resumed  courage.  "  He  who  has  taken  me  into  fellowship  with  Himself 
is  faithful,"  said  he  ;  "  and  if,  on  account  of  my  many  unfaithfulnesses,  He  hides 
for  a  moment  His  face,  I  hope  ever  in  Him  :  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed  I  " 
Meaning  of  "  tempt " ; — The  word  "  tempt,"  in  the  simple  notion  of  it,  signifies  to 
try,  to  experiment,  to  prove,  as  when  a  vessel  is  pierced,  that  the  nature  of  the 
liquor  it  cfntains  may  be  ascertained.  Hence  God  is  said  sometimes  to  tempt,  and 
we  are  commanded  as  our  duty  to  tempt,  or  try,  or  search  ourselves  to  know  what 
is  in  us,  and  to  pray  that  God  would  do  so  also.  So  temptation  is  like  a  knife  that 
may  either  cut  the  meat  or  the  throat  of  a  man ;  it  may  be  his  food  or  his  poison, 
his  exercise  or  his  destruction.  {J.  Owen,  D.D.)  Sata7i  is  sometime  ijicessant  in 
tem.'ptations,  and  nets  upon  us  with  continued  importunities: — Here  we  may 
note  a  distinction  of  temptations,  besides  that  of  invisible  and  visible : 
that  some  are  movable  and  short  fits,  and  as  it  were  skirmishes,  in  which 
he  stays  not  long,  and  others  are  more  fixed  and  durable.  We  may  caU  them 
solemn  temptations,  in  which  Satan  doth,  as  it  were,  pitch  down  his  tents,  and 
doth  manage  a  long  siege  against  us.  {R.  Gilpin.)  Christ  tempted  with  good : — 
If  any  one  say  He  was  not  moved  by  any  of  those  temptations,  he  must  be  told 
that  then  they  were  no  temptations  to  Him,  and  He  was  not  tempted ;  nor  was  His 
victory  of  more  significance  than  that  of  the  man  who,  tempted  to  bear  false  witness 
against  his  neighbour,  abstains  from  robbing  him  of  his  goods.  For  human  need, 
struggle  and  hope,  it  bears  no  meaning;  and  we  must  reject  the  whole  as  a  fantastic 
folly  of  crude  invention,  a  mere  stage  show ;  a  lie  for  the  poor  sake  of  the  fancied 
truth.  But  asserting  that  these  were  real  temptations  if  the  story  is  to  be  received 
at  all,  am  I  not  involving  myself  in  a  greater  difficulty  still  ?  For  how  could  the 
Son  of  God  be  tempted  with  evil  ?  In  the  answer  to  this  Ues  the  centre,  the 
essential  germ  of  the  whole  interpretation :  *'  He  was  not  tempted  with  evil,  but 
with  good  "  ;  with  inferior  forms  of  good,  that  is,  pressing  upon  Him,  while  the 
higher  forms  of  good  held  themselves  aloof,  biding  their  time,  that  is,  God's  time. 
I  do  not  believe  that  the  Son  of  God  could  be  tempted  with  evil,  but  I  do  believe 
that  He  could  be  tempted  with  good — to  yield  to  which  temptation  would  have  been 
evil  in  Him — to  the  universe.  ((?.  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  The  three  temptations  : — 
In  these  three  characteristic  temptations  we  are — 1.  To  look  for  the  central  princi- 
pies  of  Christ's  work  brought  to  the  test  at  the  outset  of  His  career.  2.  To  discern, 
in  some  degree  at  least,  the  central  points  of  the  trial  of  all  human  souls  which 
our  Lord  felt  in  all  its  intensity.  {H.  Wace,  D.D. )  We  will  consider — I.  Thb 
TEMPTED.  I  would  Bay  here  that  I  believe  in  one  malignant  powerful  spirit.  I 
believe  the  devil  has  a  personal  existence.  He  must  have  influenced  the  mind  of 
Christ  in  one  of  two  ways  ;  either  immediately,  or  by  means  of  external  agency. 
Which  was  it?  Judge  ye.  II.  The  tempted.  Notice  three  things.  1.  The  fact 
that  pure  human  nature  should  have  been  tempted  thus  at  all.  Jesus  had  no 
sympathy  with  evil,  yet  here  we  find  evil  coming  in  contact  with  Him.  2.  This 
temptation  assailed  Him  immediately  after  His  investiture  with  singular  glory. 
3.  These  temptations  came  to  Christ  just  as  He  was  beginning  His  great  work  ol 
mediation  on  earth.    III.  The  temptation.    Notice — 1.  The  scenes.    (1)  In  th« 


CBAP.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  88J 

•wilderness ;  (2)  in  the  holy  mountain ;  (3)  in  the  holy  city.  2.  There  is  an 
appropriateness  between  each  of  these  temptations,  and  the  scenes  where  they 
occurred.  (1)  The  first  is  the  temptation  of  poverty.  (2)  The  second  to  greatness 
and  officialism.  (3)  The  third  to  ostentation.  3.  In  each  temptation,  Christ  was 
either  tempted  to  use  a  wrong  end  or  to  use  wrong  means  to  secure  His  end,  and 
this  is  the  whole  of  temptation.    Application  :  You  who  are  tempted,  rem  amber— 

1.  That  the  only  pure  Being  on  earth  was  tried  by  three  dreadful  temptations. 

2.  That  our  nature  has  vanquished  temptation.  3.  That  He  who  was  tempted  and 
overcame  is  our  Friend  and  Brother,  and  High-priest.  {Caleb  Morris.)  The 
general  elements  of  the  temptations : — I.  Abuse  op  power.  II.  Pebvebbioit  ov 
TBUTH.  "  It  is  written,"  said  the  tempter.  III.  Making  peesent  happiness  the 
END  OF  life.  (Ibid. )  The  nature  of  the  three  temptations  : — I.  In  the  fibst, 
to  convert  stones  INTO  BREAD,  Christ,  if  He  had  yielded  to  it  would  have  sinned 
against — 1.  The  law  of  spiritual  self-government.  2.  The  laws  that  govern  natural 
life.     3.  The  law  of  miracles.    II.  In  the  temptation  to  fall  down  and  worship. 

1.  The  essence  consisted  in  the  giving  up  of  spiritual  power  to  worldly  grandeur. 

2.  The  tempter  sinned  (1)  against  the  spirit  of  the  Bible  ;  (2)  against  the  unity  of 
the  Bible ;  (3)  against  the  authority  of  the  Bible.  III.  In  the  temptation  to  cast 
Himself  down  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  Christ  was  tempted  to  do 
THREE  things.  1.  To  Seek  personal  applause.  2.  To  use  unnatural  means  to 
secure  it.  3.  In  doing  all  this,  falsely  to  trust  to  God  for  protection.  (Ibid.)  The 
aecret  of  victory : — The  history  of  these  temptations  furnishes  us  with  the  principles 
on  which  they  may  be  vanquished.  Not  by  fasting ;  for  He  was  tempted  while  He 
was  fasting.  Not  by  retiring  from  the  world  ;  for  He  was  tempted  while  He  was 
alone.  But  by  the  deep  indwelling  of  truth.  Not  by  outward  truth,  but  by  truth 
in  us.  A  man  may  have  truth  in  his  book,  and  his  book  in  his  pocket.  He 
may  have  it  in  his  creed,  and  have  it  in  his  brain,  and  yet  not  possess  one 
truth  that  will  enable  him  to  conquer  a  single  temptation.  CJirist  repelled 
temptation  by  indwelling  truth,  Christ  repelled  temptation  by  a  threefold 
statement:  "Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone";  "Thou  shalt  worship 
the  Lord  thy  God  "  ;  "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  These  words 
may  be  summed  up — man  by  God  ;  man  for  God  ;  man  according  to  God.  {Ibid.) 
The  design  of  the  three  temptations  : — 1.  To  arouse  in  Jesus  a  painful  sense  of  the 
contrast  between  the  abundance  due  to  His  Divine  greatness  and  the  miserable 
destitution  in  which  He  found  Himself.  2.  To  provoke  Him  to  win  universal  empire 
by  a  sudden  exhibition  of  Divine  power  rather  than  by  a  patient  manifestation  of 
the  Divine  character.  3.  To  lead  Him  to  presume  on  the  favour  and  love  of  which 
the  voice  from  Heaven  had  just  assured  Him.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Tempted  like 
as  we  are  : — There  is — I.  An  appeal  to  appetite.  It  is  here  that  temptation  first 
and  most  strongly  besets  a  youth.  The  great  turning  question  of  life  is,  "  Am  I  to 
be  ths  body's;  or  is  the  body  to  be  mine,  and  mine  for  God's?  "  He  only  can  be 
truly  said  to  live  who,  by  faith  in  God's  Word  and  obedience  unto  Him,  seeks  con- 
stantly to  serve  the  Lord.  II.  An  appeal  to  ambition.  The  same  insidious  tempta- 
tion is,  in  one  form  or  another,  repeated  in  the  case  of  every  man ;  and  for  the 
most  part,  in  the  commencement  of  his  career,  he  has  to  fight  the  battle,  or  to 
yield  himself  a  captive.  God's  way  to  honour  and  power  and  wealth  is  still  steep, 
and  arduous  and  rugged  ;  and  to  the  man  who  is  wearifuUy  exerting  himself  to 
overmaster  its  difficulties,  Satan  comes,  offering  his  short  and  easy  road  to  the 
summit  of  his  ambition — in  how  many  cases,  alas  1  with  the  most  complete  success. 
Avoid  the  devil's  short  outs,  and  make  the  words  of  our  Lord,  "  Thou  shalt  wor- 
ship," Ac,  the  motto  of  your  Uves.  Listen  to  the  words  of  Haveloek  when  told 
that  there  were  prejudices  against  him  in  certain  quarters  on  account  of  his  religion : 
**  I  humbly  trust  that  in  that  great  matter  I  should  not  change  my  opinions  and 
practice,  though  it  rained  garters  and  coronets  as  the  reward  of  apostasy."  III. 
An  appeal  to  faith.  This  as  insidious  as  the  rest.  Jesus  had  already  repelled 
the  tempter  by  expressing  His  confidence  in  Qod,  and  allegiance  to  His  Father ; 
and  to  that  very  principle  which  had  before  foiled  him,  he  addresses  himself  now; 
fts  if  he  had  said,  "  Dost  thou  trust  God  1  come,  and  I  will  place  thee  in  circom- 
stances  snch  as  will  make  manifest  to  all  His  guardian  care  of  Thee."  The  prinoi 
pie  of  Christ's  answer  is  this :  We  are  never  to  be  guilty  of  tempting  Providence  by 
Betting  either  His  natural  or  spiritual  laws  at  defiance.  If  we  are  in  danger,  in 
Ck>d'B  service,  we  may  rely  that  He  wiU  be  with  UB.  But  we  have  no  right  to 
imagine  that  He  will  suspend  the  law  of  gravitation,  whenever  we  choose  to  leap 
over  » precipice ;  or  that  He  will  suspend  the  spiritual  laws  which  regulate  the 


y 


389  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  it. 

actions  of  our  souls,  whenever  we  put  onrselves  in  the  way  of  temptation. 
Application:  You  may  overcome  every  temptation  by  giving  up  the  fortress  of 
your  soul  to  this  same  Jesus,  who  vanquished  Satan  here.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  devil's  real  character  disclosed: — We  learn  much  of  Satan,  our  great  adversary, 
from  the  different  ways  in  which  he  attempted  to  lead  our  Lord  astray.  I.  Thk 
povEEn  OP  Satan.  How  little  he  has  to  offer  Christ — not  so  much  as  bread,  only 
stones.  II.  His  impudence.  Bepelled  once,  he  returns  to  the  attack,  and  asks  fot 
adoration  to  be  given  him,  a  lost  and  fallen  angel,  by  the  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth.  III.  His  weakness.  He  did  not  cast  our  Lord  down  :  not  even  bind  Him  ; 
no  power  to  force — he  can  only  try  to  persuade.  Sin  is  not  so  strong  as  it  is  often 
represented.  IV.  His  ckaft.  1.  He  attacks  the  Lord's  weakness  by  fasting.  As 
the  general  surveys  the  most  likely  time  to  raise  the  siege  of  a  beleaguered  city,  so 
the  devil  always  watches  his  opportunity.  2.  He  pretends  to  ask  a  most  simple 
request,  when  it  is  really  hard  and  most  difficult.  3.  He  graduates  his  tempta- 
tions. In  the  first  temptation,  he  places  himself  before  man ;  then,  before  an 
angel ;  lastly,  in  the  place  of  God.  All  sin  is  graduated.  V.  His  lies.  He  pro- 
mises— 1.  That  which  he  has  not  to  give.  2.  That  which  he  has  no  intention  of 
giving.  Conclusion:  1.  Fear  not  this  devil.  2.  Ever  watch  for  him.  3.  Meet 
him  boldly,  and  you  will  overcome  him.  {M.  Faber.)  The  devil  the  architect  of 
evil : — The  devil  is  the  great  architect  of  wickedness,  as  Christ  is  the  Prince  of  life 
and  righteousness.  The  devil  the  accuser  and  defamer  of  God  : — Here  in  this 
chapter  the  devil  doth  "  strive  to  put  out  the  very  eye  of  God's  providence,"  that 
he  might  shake  Christ's  faith,  as  it  were,  and  drive  Him  to  distrust.  He  accuseth 
His  wisdom  in  our  retirement  and  secret  sins,  and  that  with  some  scorn  :  "  Tush, 
God  doth  not  see  it :  nor  is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High  "  (Psa.  Izxiii.  11). 
He  accuseth  His  justice,  and  puts  stout  words  into  our  mouths  when  we  deny  our 
obedience  :  "  It  is  in  vain  to  serve  the  Lord :  and  what  profit  is  there  that  we  have 
kept  His  ordinances  ?  "  (Mai.  iii.  14.)  He  defames  His  mercy,  when,  remembering 
our  sins,  we  fall  under  them,  as  a  burden  too  heavy  for  us  (Psa.  xxxviii.  4),  and  as 
if  God  had  "forgotten  to  be  merciful"  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  9).  He  roars  loud  against 
His  very  power  in  the  mouth  of  a  Kabshakeh,  and  would  persuade  the  Israelites 
that  to  say  God  should  deliver  them  was  nothing  else  but  to  deliver  themselves  up 
to  famine  and  thirst  (2  Kings  xviii.  30).  He  casts  his  venom  upon  all  the  Divine 
attributes,  and  makes  them  the  inducements  to  sin,  which  are  the  strongest 
motives  to  goodness.  He  never  presents  God  to  us  as  He  is,  but  in  several  forms 
and  all  such  as  may  drive  us  from  one  attribute  to  run  us  on  another.  He  pre- 
sents Him  without  an  eye,  that  we  may  do  what  we  list ;  without  a  hand,  that  we 
may  trust  in  a  hand  of  flesh  ;  without  an  ear,  that  our  blasphemies  may  be  loud. 
He  makes  us  favourable  interpreters  of  Him  before  we  sin,  and  unjust  judges  of 
Him  when  we  have  sinned.  He  makes  Him  a  libertine  to  the  presumptuous,  and 
a  Novatian  to  the  despairing,  sinner ;  being  a  liar  in  all,  whose  every  breath  is  a 
defamation.  Nulla  apud  eum  turpis  ratio  vincendi,  as  was  said  of  king  Philip : 
"He  is  not  ashamed  of  any  lie  that  may  lead  us  from  the  truth."  And  as  he 
defameth  God  unto  us,  so  in  every  sin  almost  he  accuses  us  unto  ourselves.  In  the 
heat  of  our  zeal  he  accuseth  us  of  madness,  that  we  may  be  remiss ;  and  in  our 
meekness  he  chargeth  us  with  folly,  that  we  may  learn  to  be  angry.  In  our  justice 
he  calls  us  tyrants,  that  we  may  yield  it  up  unto  unnecessary  pity ;  and  in  oor 
compassion  he  urgeth  the  want  of  justice,  that,  to  put  on  the  new  man,  we  may 
put  off  all  bowels  of  mercy.  He  accuseth  our  faith  to  our  charity,  and  persuades 
ns  that  for  all  onr  good  works  we  are  none  of  the  faithful ;  and  our  charity  to  our 
hope,  as  if  it  were  so  cold  it  could  kindle  no  such  virtue  within  us.  From  religion 
he  drives  us  on  to  superstition,  and  from  the  fear  of  superstition  into  that  gulf  of 
profaneness  which  will  swallow  us  up.  And  then,  when  he  hath  us  in  his  nets, 
when  he  hath  by  accusing  us  unto  ourselves  made  us  guilty  indeed,  when  by  accus 
ing  our  virtues  he  hath  brought  us  to  sin,  he  draws  his  biU  of  accusation,  and  for 
one  sin  writes  down  a  hundred.  (A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Why  it  he  called  the 
devil } — The  word  signifies  a  slanderer  or  accuser.  And  he  accuseth — 1.  To  God  ; 
2.  To  man.  1.  To  God  he  accuseth  man ;  hence  called  the  accuser  of  the  brethren 
(Eev.  xii.).  And  thus  he  accused  Job  (Job  i.  and  ii.).  2.  To  man.  He  accuses — 
(1)  God  Himself,  as  to  our  first  parents,  as  envying  their  felicity,  and  over-hardly 
dealing  with  them  in  their  restraint  of  that  fruit,  and  so  stiU  he  doth  in  the  matter 
of  reprobation  and  the  commandments  of  the  law.  (2)  He  accuses  or  slanders  the 
graces  of  God,  he  brings  an  ill  name  upon  them  to  discredit  them  with  us.  Thus  he 
slanders  zeal  to  be  ra^mess,  justice  to  be  cruelty,  wisdom  to  be  craft,  meroy  to  ba 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  883 

fond  softness,  hamility  to  be  baseness.  (3)  He  slanders  the  servants  of  God,  that 
they  are  hot,  fiery,  furious,  factions,  enemies  to  Caasar,  curious,  proud,  &o.  (4)  His 
neighbours,  and  such  with  whom  he  hath  to  deal,  by  suggesting  false  suspicions 
and  surmises  against  them.  (5)  His  own  self,  by  enraging  his  conscience  against 
him.  Now  Satan  especially  is  an  accuser,  in  accusing  us  to  God  and  our  own  con- 
sciences. And  he  doth  this  specially — (a)  After  the  committing  of  some  grievous 
sin  which  he  tempted  us  unto.  Before  he  seemed  our  friend,  and  put  upon  sin  a 
goodly  vizor,  but  now  he  plucks  it  off,  and  urges  us  to  desperation,  {b)  In  some 
more  grievous  trial,  and  specially  at  the  hour  of  death,  (c)  At  the  day  of  judg- 
ment. 1.  It  being  the  devil's  office  to  be  an  accuser  or  slanderer,  let  us  take  heed 
of  doing  such  ill  offices.  Let  the  devil  have  his  own  office,  let  us  not  go  about  to 
take  it  out  of  his  hands.  2.  Since  the  devil  is  an  accuser,  it  must  make  us  wary 
over  our  ways,  as  we  are  wary  in  our  worldly  estates  of  the  promoter,  of  piok- 
thanks,  and  tale-bearers.  He  will  accuse  falsely  when  there  is  no  cause,  much 
more  then  will  he  accuse  when  we  give  him  cause  by  our  sins.  Howbeit,  even 
here  will  he  be  a  false  accuser  and  slanderer,  by  making  that  to  be  treason  which 
is  but  petty  larceny,  and  sins  of  infirmity  to  be  the  unpardonable  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost.  (D.  Dyke.)  Let  us  Tiot  aid  our  accuser : — Let  us  then  say  with 
Joseph,  "  '  How  can  I  commit  this  wickedness,  and  sin  against  God '  (Gen.  xxxiz.  9), 
who  would  save  me  ?  and  how  can  I  commit  this,  and  help  the  devil,  my  enemy, 
to  accuse  me  ?  "  In  the  affairs  of  this  world  we  are  very  sly  and  cautelous,  and 
will  not  give  any  advantage  to  those  whom  we  suppose  to  be  no  well-willers  unto 
Ds.  Hay,  many  times  we  abstain  from  things  not  unlawful,  in  the  presence  of 
those  we  do  not  love,  because  we  fear  whatsoever  we  do  will  be  misinterpreted, 
and  can  expect  no  better  gloss  than  that  which  malice  will  make.  And  shall  we  be 
60  confident  on  the  greatest  enemy  of  mankind  as  to  help  his  malice,  and  to  further 
and  promote  the  desire  which  he  hath  of  our  ruins  ?  Shall  I  fill  this  accuser's 
mouth  with  arguments  against  myself,  and  even  furbish  and  whet  the  sword  of  my 
executioner  f  This  is  a  folly  which  we  cAnnot  but  be  ashamed  of ;  and  yet  in  every 
sin  we  commit,  we  commit  this  folly.  But  yet,  in  the  last  place,  as  St.  John  saith, 
"  li  we  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  "  (1  John  ii.  1) ;  so  say  I,  If  we  sin,  and  the 
devil  put  up  his  bill  of  accusation  against  us  (as  most  certainly  he  will),  let  us 
learn  to  accuse  ourselves  ;  and  that  will  make  his  accusation  void,  and  cancel  his 
bill.  From  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart  let  us  say,  "  We  have  sinned,"  and  he 
hath  nothing  to  say.  Let  us  confess  our  sins,  and  we  have  put  the  adversary  to 
silence.  {A.  Farindon,  D.D.)  Why  was  Christ  tempted  f — 1.  That  we  might  see 
the  horrible  rage  and  senseless  madness  of  the  devil  against  God  and  our  salva- 
tion. 2.  That  we  should  know  how  fit  it  is  there  should  be  trials  of  ministers 
before  they  enter  into  their  functions.  3.  That  ministers  might  know  who  will  be 
their  special  adversary  they  must  conflict  with  in  their  ministry.  4.  That  we 
might  see  how  fit  it  is  that  ministers  and  men  of  great  callings  should  be  fitted 
and  prepared  for  the  good  discharge  of  them  by  temptation,  and  by  their  own  ex- 
perience might  learn  to  relieve  others  (2  Cor.  i.  4).  5.  To  give  us  warning  to  look 
to  ourselves.  If  Satan  durst  set  upon  Christ,  who  was  as  green  wood,  and  had 
abundance  of  moisture  to  quench  the  heat  of  his  fire,  what  then  will  he  do  to  qb 
that  are  dry,  and  quickly  set  on  fire  ?  6.  To  overcome  our  temptation  with  His  as 
He  did  our  death  with  His.  For  as  death  lost  his  sting  lighting  on  Christ,  so  also 
Satan's  temptations,  and  the  foil  He  gave  Satan  was  for  us.  7.  That  by  suffering 
that  which  was  the  desert  of  our  sins,  his  love  towards  us  might  appear  the  more. 
8.  That  there  might  be  some  answering  to  the  Israelites  being  forty  years  in  the 
desert  in  many  trials  and  temptations.  A  day  answering  a  year,  as  there  was 
before  in  Christ's  going  into  Egypt.  9.  That  our  Lord  might  the  better  know 
how  to  pity,  and  tender,  and  relieve  us  with  comforts,  when  we  are  in  temptation. 
They  pity  us  most  in  our  sicknesses,  that  have  felt  the  same  themselves.  (D.  Dyke.) 
Why  Christ  would  submit  to  be  tempted : — 1.  Thus  was  Christ  evidenced  to  be  the 
second  Adam,  and  the  seed  of  the  woman.  His  being  tempted,  and  in  such  ft 
manner,  doth  clearly  satisfy  us  that  He  was  true  man.  2.  This  was  a  fair  pre- 
Indium  and  earnest  of  that  final  conquest  over  Satan,  and  the  breaking  down  of 
his  power.  3.  There  was  a  more  peculiar  aim  in  God  by  these  means  of  temptation 
to  quaUfy  Him  with  pity  and  power  to  heIp(Heb.  ii.  18;  iv.  15).  4.  The  consequence 
d  this  experimental  compassion  in  Christ  was  a  further  reason  why  He  submitted 
to  be  tempted,  to  wit,  that  we  might  have  the  greater  comfort  and  encouragement 
in  the  expectancy  of  tender  dealing  from  Him.  6.  A  further  end  God  seemed  to 
have  in  this,  viz.,  to  give  a  signal  and  remarkable  instance  to  us  of  the  natore  ct 


B84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  rr. 

temptations ;  of  Satan's  subtlety,  his  impudency.  That  neither  height  of  privilege, 
iior  emineney  of  employment,  nor  holiness  of  person,  will  discourage  Satan  from 
tempting,  or  secure  any  from  his  assaults.  The  best  of  men  in  the  highest  attain- 
ments may  expect  t-emptations.  Grace  itself  doth  not  exempt  them.  1,  For  none 
of  these  privileges  in  us,  nor  eminencies  of  grace,  want  matter  to  fix  a  temptation 
upon.  The  weaknesses  of  the  best  of  men  are  such  that  a  temptation  is  not 
lendered  improbable,  as  to  the  success,  by  their  graces.  2.  None  of  us  are  beyond 
the  necessity  of  such  exercises.  It  cannot  be  said  that  we  need  them  not,  or  that 
there  may  not  be  holy  ends  wherefore  God  should  not  permit  and  order  them  for 
our  good.  Temptations,  as  they  are  in  God's  disposal,  are  a  necessary  spiritual 
physic.  The  design  of  them  is  to  humble  us,  to  prove  us,  and  to  do  us  good  in  the 
latter  end  (Deut.  viii.  16).  Nothing  will  work  more  of  care,  watchfulness,  diligence, 
and  fear  in  a  gracious  heart,  than  a  sense  of  Satan's  designment  against  it.  8. 
The  privileges  and  graces  of  the  children  of  God  do  stir  up  Satan's  pride,  revenge, 
and  rage  against  them.  This  is  also  of  use  to  those  that  are  apt  to  be  confident 
upon  their  successes  against  sin  through  grace.  Satan,  they  may  see,  will  be  upon 
them  again ;  so  that  they  must  behave  themselves  as  mariners,  who,  when  they 
have  got  the  harbour,  and  are  out  of  the  storm,  mend  their  ship  and  tackling,  and 
prepare  again  for  the  sea.  That  there  may  be  temptations  without  leaving  a  touch 
of  guilt  or  impurity  behind  them  upon  the  tempted.  It  is  true  this  is  rare  with 
men.  The  best  do  seldom  go  down  to  the  battle,  but  in  their  very  conquests  they 
receive  some  wound  ;  and  in  those  temptations  that  arise  from  our  own  hearts, 
we  are  never  without  fanlt ;  but  in  such  as  do  solely  arise  from  Satan,  there  is  a 
possibility  that  the  upright  may  so  keep  himself,  that  the  wicked  one  may  not  so 
touch  him  as  to  leave  the  print  of  his  fingers  behind  him.  But  the  great  difficulty 
is.  How  it  may  be  known  when  temptations  are  from  Satan,  and  when  from  our- 
selves ?  To  answer  this  I  shall  lay  down  these  conclusions :  1.  The  same  sins 
which  our  own  natures  would  suggest  to  us,  may  also  be  injected  by  Satan.  2. 
There  is  no  sin  so  vile,  but  our  own  heart  might  possibly  produce  it  without 
Satan.  3.  There  are  many  cases  wherein  it  is  very  difficult,  if  not  altogether  im- 
possible, to  determine  whether  our  own  heart  or  Satan  gives  the  first  life  or 
breathing  to  a  temptation.  4.  Though  it  be  true,  which  some  say,  that  in  most 
cases  it  is  needless  altogether  to  spend  our  time  in  disputing  whether  the  motions 
of  sin  in  our  minds  are  firstly  from  ourselves  or  from  Satan,  our  greatest  business 
being  rather  to  resist  them  than  to  difference  them ;  yet  there  are  special  cases 
wherein  it  is  very  necessary  to  find  out  the  true  parent  of  a  sinful  motion,  and 
these  are  when  tender  consciences  are  wounded  and  oppressed  with  violent  and 
great  temptations,  as  blasphemous  thoughts,  atheistical  objections,  <fec.  As 
Joseph's  steward  hid  the  cnp  in  Benjamin's  sack,  that  it  might  be  a  ground  of 
accusation  against  him,  so  doth  the  devil  first  oppress  them  with  such  thoughts, 
and  then  accuseth  them  of  all  that  villainy  and  wickedness,  the  motions  whereof 
he  had  with  such  importunity  forced  upon  them ;  and  so  apt  are  the  afflicted  to 
comply  with  accusations  against  themselves,  that  they  believe  it  is  so,  and  from 
thence  conclude  that  they  are  given  up  of  God,  hardened  as  Pharaoh,  that  they 
have  sinned  again-st  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  finally  that  there  is  no  hope  of  mercy  for 
them.  All  this  befalls  them  from  their  ignorance  of  Satan's  dealings,  and  here  ia 
their  great  need  to  distinguish  Satan's  malice  from  their  guilt.  5.  We  may  dis- 
cover if  they  proceed  from  Satan,  though  not  simply  from  the  matter  of  them,  not 
from  the  suddenness  and  independency  of  them,  yet  from  a  due  consideration  of 
their  nature  and  manner  of  proceeding,  compared  with  the  present  temper  and 
disposition  of  our  heart.  As — 1.  When  unusual  temptations  intrude  upon  us  with  a 
high  impetuosity  and  violence,  while  our  thoughts  are  othewise  concerned  and 
taken  up.  2.  While  such  things  are  borne  in  upon  us,  against  the  actual  loathing, 
strenuous  reluctancy,  and  high  complainings  of  the  soul,  when  the  mind  is  filled 
with  horror  and  the  body  with  trembling  at  the  presence  of  such  thoughts.  3.  Our 
hearts  may  bring  forth  that  which  is  unnatural  in  itself,  and  may  give  rise  to  a 
temptation  that  would  be  horrid  to  the  thoughts  of  other  men.  4.  Much  more 
evident  is  it  that  such  proceed  from  Satan,  when  they  are  of  long  continuance  and 
constant  trouble.  Application :  The  consideration  of  this  is  of  great  use  to  those 
that  suffer  under  the  violent  hurries  of  strange  temptations.  1.  In  that  sometime 
they  can  justly  complain  of  the  affliction  of  such  temptation,  when  they  have 
no  reason  to  charge  it  upon  themselves  as  their  sin.  Satan  only  barks  when  he 
suggests,  but  he  then  bites  and  wounds  when  he  draws  ns  to  consent.  2.  Thatno* 
CttJly  the  sin  but  the  degree  also,  by  just  consequence,  is  to  be  measured  by  th« 


«iap.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  885 

consent  of  the  heart.  {R.  Oilpin.)  The  design  of  Christ's  temptation : — 1.  For 
faith,  that  the  temptations  of  Christ  have  sanctified  temptations  unto  as :  that 
whereas  before  they  were  curses,  like  unto  hanging  on  a  tree ;  now,  since  Christ 
hath  been  both  tempted  and  hanged  on  a  tree,  tliey  be  no  longer  signs  and  pledges 
of  God's  wrath,  but  favours.  A  man  may  be  the  child  of  God  notwithstanding, 
and  therefore  he  is  not  to  receive  any  discouragement  by  any  of  them.  2.  Besides 
the  sanctifying,  it  is  an  abatement,  so  that  now  when  we  are  tempted,  they  have 
not  the  force  they  had  before :  for  now  the  serpent's  head  is  bruised,  so  that  he 
is  now  nothing  so  strong  (as  he  was)  to  cast  his  darts.  Also  the  head  of  his  darts  are 
blunted.  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  Tempter  and  accuser : — And  therefore  if  we  be  wise, 
let  us  resist  him  in  the  first,  give  no  place  to  him  when  he  is  a  tempter,  so  shall  we 
not  fear  him,  when  he  is  an  accuser,  nor  feel  him  as  a  tormentor.  {Bishop  Cowper.) 
The  wicked  free  from  temptation  : — So  Satan  troubles  not  such  as  are  under  his 
power  already ;  such  as  are  empty  of  grace  he  desires  not  to  winnow,  for  what  have 
they  in  them  to  be  sifted  out  ?  The  dog  barks  not  at  the  dumb  sticks,  but  at 
strangers  :  when  the  door  is  wide  open,  and  there  is  free  ingress  and  egress,  there 
is  no  knocking ;  but  if  once  shut  up,  then  still  one  or  other  is  rapping  and  bounc- 
ing. The  wicked  have  the  doors  of  their  hearts  set  wide  open  to  Satan,  therefore 
he  raps  not  there  by  tentation,  but  at  the  godlies,  that  shut  and  bar  up  this  door 
against  him.  They  then  that  brag  they  were  never  troubled  with  Satan's  tempta- 
tions, do  thereby  profess  their  want  of  grace.  If  they  had  any  spiritual  treasure, 
this  thief  would  be  dealing  with  them.  If  they  had  been  taken  out  of  the  hands  of 
Satan  by  the  power  of  Christ,  he  would  have  raged,  and  took  on,  labouring  with  all 
his  might  to  recover  his  prey.  A  lion  scorns  to  meddle  with  a  mouse,  and  so  doth 
this  roaring  lion  with  thee  that  hath  no  booty  for  him.  While  Jacob  continued 
under  Laban's  tyranny,  and  would  be  made  his  drudge,  and  his  pack-horse,  all  was 
well ;  but  when  once  he  began  to  fly,  he  makes  after  him  :  and  so  doth  the  devil ; 
when  any  one  parts  from  him  to  Christ,  then  he  is  as  a  bear  robbed  of 
her  whelps.  (D.  Lyke.)  Good  Christians  tempted  most : — All  good  Christians, 
then,  must  be  tempted.  But  if  any  of  them  be  of  better  graces  than  other,  or 
calleth  forth  to  higher  place  and  service  than  other,  they  are  specially  eye- 
sores to  Satan,  they  are  a  fair  mark  for  the  arrows  of  his  tentations.  {Ibid.) 
The  nature  of  Satan's  temptation : — 1.  In  these  temptations,  we  may  note  there 
were  external  objects  as  well  as  insinuated  suggestions.  2.  These  temptations 
were  complex,  consisting  of  many  various  designs,  like  a  snare  of  many  cords  or 
nooses.  When  he  tempted  to  turn  stones  to  bread,  it  was  not  one  single  design,  but 
many,  that  Satan  had  in  prosecution.  As  distrust  on  one  hand,  pride  on  another, 
and  so  in  the  rest.  The  more  complicated  a  temptation  is,  it  is  the  greater.  3. 
These  were  also  perplexing,  entangling  temptations.  They  were  dilemmatical, 
such  as  might  ensnare,  either  in  the  doing  or  refusal.  4.  These  temptations  pro- 
ceeded upon  considerable  advantages.  His  hunger  urged  a  necessity  of  turning 
stones  into  bread.  5.  These  temptations  were  accompanied  with  a  greater 
presence  and  power  of  Satan.  6.  The  matter  of  these  temptations,  or  the  things 
he  tempted  Christ  to,  were  great  and  heinous  abominations.  7.  All  these  tempta- 
tions pretended  strongly  to  the  advantage  and  benefit  of  Christ,  and  some  of  them 
might  seem  to  be  done  without  any  blame  ;  as  to  turn  stones  to  bread,  to  fly  in  the 
air.  8.  Satan  urged  some  of  them  in  a  daring,  provoking  way — "  If  thou  be  the 
Son  of  God  ?  "  9.  These  temptations  seem  to  be  desij^ned  for  the  engagement  of 
all  the  natural  powers  of  Christ ;  His  natural  appetite  in  a  design  of  food ;  Hia 
senses  in  the  most  beautiful  object,  the  world  in  its  glory ;  the  affections,  in  that 
which  is  most  swaying,  pride.  10.  Some  of  these  warranted  as  duty,  and  to  supply 
necessary  hunger,  others  depending  upon  the  security  of  a  promise — "  He  shall 
give  His  angels  charge,"  &c.  {R.  Gilpin.)  Satan  a  tempter : — There  are  three 
distinct  names  given  to  him  in  these  temptations.  1.  His  name  "  Satan  "  shows 
his  malice  and  fury,  which  is  the  ground  and  fountain  whence  all  that  trouble  pro- 
ceeds which  we  meet  with  from  him.  2.  He  is  styled  "  the  tempter,"  and  that 
signifies  to  us  how  he  puts  forth  this  malice,  his  way  and  exercise  in  the  exertion 
of  it.  3.  He  is  called  "  the  devil  "  or  accuser,  expressing  thereby  the  end  and 
issue  of  all.  From  this  name,  then,  here  given,  we  may  observe  : — That  it  is 
Satan's  work  and  employment  to  tempt  men.  Implying  (1)  That  though 
there  be  never  so  many  tempters,  yet  Satan  is  the  chiet  (2)  That  he  makes 
temptation  his  proper  employment.  That  Satan  doth  so,  I  shaU  evidence 
by  these  few  notes :  1.  Temptation  is  in  itself  a  business  and  work.  2.  Satan 
gives  ap  himself  onto  it,  is  wholly  in  it.    3.  He  takes  a  delight  in  it,  not  only  from 

25 


398  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA*.  it. 

a  natural  propensity,  which  his  fall  put  upon  him,  whereby  he  cannot  but  tempt — 
as  an  evil  tree  cannot  but  bring  forth  evil  fruits — but  also  from  the  power  of  a  habit 
acquired  by  long  exercise,  which  is  accompanied  with  some  kind  of  pleasure.  4. 
All  other  things  in  Satan,  or  in  his  endeavours,  have  either  a  subserviency,  or 
some  way  or  other  a  reference  and  respect  to  temptation.  His  power,  wisdom, 
malice,  and  other  infernal  qualifications,  render  him  able  to  tempt.  6.  He  cares 
not  how  it  goes  on,  so  that  it  go  on  ;  as  a  man  that  designs  to  be  rich,  cares  not 
how  he  gets  it ;  which  shows  that  tempting  is  general  in  his  design.  (1)  He  sticks 
not  to  lie  and  dissemble.  (2)  He  will  tempt  for  a  small  matter ;  if  he  can  but  gain 
a  little,  or  but  molest  us,  yet  he  will  be  doing.  (3)  He  will  not  give  over  for  a  foil 
or  disappointment.  (4)  He  is  not  ashamed  to  tempt  contradictory  things:  he 
tempted  Christ  against  the  work  of  redemption.  (5)  Any  temptation  that  he  sees 
will  bold,  he  takes  up.  (6)  He  will  sometime  tempt  where  he  hath  not  probability 
to  prevail,  even  against  hope.  The  use  of  the  observation  is  this.  If  it  be  his 
business  to  tempt,  it  must  be  our  work  to  resist.  (Ibid.)  Temptation : — 1.  That 
ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  all  who  have  to  deal  with  souls,  need  temptation. 
How  pre-eminently  was  Jesus  an  experimental  minister  I  2.  That  when  temptation 
Cometh  of  fiod,  we  are  all  the  better  of  it.  8.  That  deliverance  from  temptation 
equally  with  the  temptation  itself,  to  be  a  blessing,  must  be  from  the  Lord.  It 
was  not  until  the  devil  had  ended  the  temptation,  all  the  temptation,  that  he 
departed.  But  when  he  had  ended  it,  he  did  depart.  Now,  mark  what  immediately 
followed,  viz.,  that  as  the  Lord  had  been  "  led  up  "  of  the  Spirit  "  to  be  tempted,'' 
so  He  was  ••  led  out "  from  the  temptation.  I  read  (Luke  iv.  14) :  "  And  Jesua 
returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee."  My  friends,  there  is  instruction 
for  us  here.  We  must  "  abide  "  under  our  trial  without  impatience,  without 
murmuring,  without  "  making  haste,"  if  we  would  be  "  led  out "  as  well  as  "  led  up."' 
(A,  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  How  slwuld  the  tempter  ever  have  thought  of  "  tempting  " 
tpith  any  hope  of  overcoming  the  Son  of  God  ? — I  may  reply — I.  The  devil  was — in  the 
Bible  sense— a  "  fool,"  I  use  the  word  "  fool " — a  Bible  word — in  its  deepest  and 
most  awful  meaning.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  is  not  suflBciently  kept  in  mind  that 
sin  had  and  has  the  same  binding,  stupefying  effects  on  Satan  that  we  see  it  have 
on  bad  men.  Let  a  man  persist  in  ungodliness,  and  see  how  bis  very  eyes  are  put 
out,  and  how  "  foolish  "  he  becomes.  I  should  grant  the  devil's  craft  and  clever- 
ness, but  not  his  common  sense,  much  less  wisdom ;  and  he  "  cannot  see  afar  off." 
There  was  pride  in  particular,  to  give  the  tempter  a  very  lofty  estimate  of  his  own 
capacity.  The  tempter  knew  the  effect  which  the  lofty  prize  of  sovereignty  for 
which  he  had  struck  had  upon  his  mind,  and  with  his  own  self-estimate  welded 
impenetrably  by  pride,  he  may  have  reasoned  from  himself  to  Christ  in  the 
prospect  of  that  immense  bribe  of  empire  with  which  he  was  to  "  tempt "  ;  while 
again,  in  retrospect,  there  was  the  great  and  very  mournful  fact,  that  not  one  "  in 
the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh"  assaulted  by  him,  had  stood  immaculate,  i.e.,  without 
yielding  less  or  more.  The  Incarnation,  by  the  very  broadness  of  Him  who  was 
"  to  be  tempted,"  presented  many  sides  upon  which  hope  of  partial  success  might 
hang.  II.  The  devil  had  grounds  to  expect  success,  and  motives  of  a  commanding 
kind.  I  find  in  that  curse  the  warrant,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  the  temptation  of 
the  Lord  Jesus.  The  promise  gave  power  to  the  serpent  to  bruise  the  heel  of  the 
woman's  seed.  (Ibid.)  The  devil  a  living  foe  : — Here  is  no  fate,  law,  machinery, 
impersonality  merely,  but  a  living  friend  and  a  living  foe  seeking  our  souls.  I 
apprehend  it  should  impart  a  more  intense  reality  to  our  lives  did  we  habitually 
grasp  this  verity  of  our  "  ever-living  advocate,"  and  ever-living  accuser — both,  not 
one  merely.  {Ibid.)  Temptation  sanctified : — 0  how  He  hath  sanctified  tempta- 
tions, and  made  them  wholesome,  which  before  were  rank  poison  1  (Bishop  Hacket.) 
An  example  : — Christ  was  tempted,  to  give  us  an  example  how  to  encounter  with  the 
roaring  lion,  and  to  win  the  mastery.  As  a  young  learner  will  observe  diligently 
every  ward  and  thrust  that  an  experienced  gladiator  makes,  so  the  Holy  Ghost 
hath  set  down  for  our  advertisement  every  passage,  how  Christ  did  turn  and  wind 
the  delusions  of  the  serpent.  (Ibid.)  Temptation  a  corrective: — As  a  little 
wedge  is  beaten  in  sometimes  to  drive  out  a  greater,  so  a  little  temptation  is  suffered 
to  creep  in  that  a  bigger  mischief  may  not  enter.  The  falling  into  some  sins  in  the 
best  of  God's  servants  is  an  anticipation  against  pride,  that  they  may  not  be  puffed 
np  with  their  own  righteousness.  Some  errors  and  offences  do  rub  salt  upon  a 
good  man's  integrity,  that  it  may  not  putrify  with  presumption.  (Ibid.)  Satan 
a,  reality : — As  if  the  sheep  should  think  wolves  werte  but  a  tale,  there  were  no  such 
creatures  that  sought  to  devour  them.     (Ibid.)        Christians  tempted: — If  Beel- 


CKAP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  S87 

lebub  was  busy  with  the  master,  what  will  he  be  with  the  servants  ?  (Ilnd.)  Fire 
in  ug : — To  us  the  devil  needs  bring  but  a  pair  of  bellows,  for  he  shall  find  fire 
within  us ;  but  to  Christ  he  was  fain  to  bring  fire  too.  (Bishop  Andrewes.) 
Christ's  antipathy  against  sin : — But  in  Christ  there  was  an  antipathy  against  sin, 
as  in  the  stomach  against  some  meats,  the  which  the  more  we  are  urged  to 
eat  of  them,  the  more  we  loathe  them ;  whereas  in  other  meats  that  we 
especially  love,  the  very  sight  of  them  is  persuasion  enough  to  eat  of  them. 
Christ's  heart  to  Satan's  temptations  was  as  a  stone  or  brass  wall  to  an 
arrow,  repulsing  them  back  presently.  Our  hearts  are  as  a  butt,  where 
they  may  easily  fasten  themselves.  Ours  is  a  barrel  of  gunpowder  to  the 
fire,  Christ's  as  water,  and  therefore  He  said,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  is  come, 
and  hath  nought  in  Me  "  (John  xiv.  30).  (D.  Dyke.)  Temptations  incessant : — The 
more  we  strive  and  beat  them  away,  the  more,  like  flies,  they  come  upon  us.  (Ibid.) 
And  in  those  days  He  did  eat  nothing. — Fasting : — 1.  Fasting  leads  to  uninterrupted 
communion  with  God.  I  believe  that  herein  lies  the  great  secret  of  the  often- 
recurring  retirement  of  our  Lord,  and  of  many  of  His  holiest  followers.  It  is  a 
good  thing  to  spend  a  whole  day  or  days  alone  with  God.  It  tests  a  man's 
spirituality.  2.  Fasting  breaks  in  upon  our  matter-of-course  reception  of  every-day 
"  mercies."  3.  Fasting  is  literally  necessary  to  not  a  few  of  God's  people.  But 
now  turning  from  fasting  in  itself  to  the  fasting  of  the  Lord,  I  ask  your  attention  to 
Bix  things  in  it.  1.  The  fasting  was  watched.  All  through  the  "  days  forty  and 
nights  forty  "  the  tempter's  eye  was  upon  Jesus.  2.  The  fasting  was  supernatural. 
This  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  recDrd.  3.  The  fasting  was  preparative.  You 
remember  that  the  Spirit  "led  up"  the  Lord  "  immediately  "  (Mark  i.  12).  The 
threefold  temptation  came  not  until  the  "forty  days"  were  ended.  Clearly  that 
He  might  be  prepared  for  what  awaited  Him.  4.  The  fasting  was  antitypical.  Tha 
most  cursory  reader  of  Scripture  must  be  struck  with  the  recurrence  of  certain 
numbers.  I  cannot  now  tarry  to  dwell  upon  this.  But  with  reference  to  "  forty,'* 
it  surely  is  noticeable  that  "  forty  "  days  was  the  Old  Testament  period  allotted  for 
repentance.  5.  The  fasting  was  for  our  learning.  6.  The  fasting  of  the  "  nights" 
suggests  imitation  in  measure.  It  is  noticeable  how  much  of  night,  even  midnight 
prayer  and  praise,  "  with  fasting,"  there  is  in  the  Psalms  and  by  Jesus.  Thua 
quaintly  and  racily  does  John  Downame  speak,  in  his  "Guide  to  Godliness,"  of  the 
benefit  of  devotion  at  bedtime :  "  Ovens  that  have  been  baked  in  over  night  are 
easily  heated  the  next  morning.  The  cask  that  was  well  seasoned  in  the  evening 
will  swell  the  next  day.  The  fire  that  was  well  raked  up  when  we  went  to  bed,  will 
be  the  sooner  kindled  when  we  rise.  Thus,  if  in  the  evening  we  spend  ourselves  in 
the  examination  of  our  hearts,  how  we  have  spent  the  time  past,  and  commit 
ourselves  unto  the  good  guidance  of  God  for  the  time  to  come,  we  shall  soon  find 
the  spiritual  warmth  thereof  making  us  able  and  active  for  all  good  duties  in  the 
morning  ;  and  by  adding  some  new  fuel  to  this  holy  fire,  we  shall  with  much  facility 
and  comfort  cause  it  to  burn  and  blaze  in  all  Christian  and  rehgious  duties." 
(A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  Satan  invades  holy  duties : — There  is  no  place  so  holy,  nor 
exercise  so  good,  as  can  repress  his  courage,  or  give  a  stay  to  the  boldness  of  his 
attempts,  as  we  see  (Mark  iv.  14).  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  Oil  taken  from  the 
lamp  : — Moreover,  take  away  oil  from  the  lamp,  and  the  flame  will  go  out  by  little 
and  Uttle;  and  surely  hunger  and  thirst,  and  afflicting  the  body,  joined  with  prayer 
and  repentance,  shall  obtain  this  mercy,  that  the  violence  of  voluptuousness  and 
luxury  shall  be  abated  in  our  sinful  flesh.  {Bishop  Racket.)  Distress  favourable 
to  temptation : — For  as  at  that  time  the  devil  came  upon  Christ  when  hunger 
pinched  Him,  so  where  we  are  in  any  distress  we  are  to  look  for  temptations. 
{Bishop  Andrewes.)  Fastings  : — Fastings  there  are  even  still  in  the  kingdom 
of  God  upon  earth ;  bodily  and  spiritual  fasts  of  all  kinds ;  painful  and  cheerful 
fasts.  Those  which  are  most  cheerful  are  kept  in  that  vernal  season  of  the  soul, 
when  in  the  genial  warmth  of  the  risen  Sun  of  Eighteousness,  it  first  begins  to 
bring  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance ;  for  it  now  feels  the  kindness  and  love  of 
God  our  Saviour,  which  hath  appeared  unto  all  men,  and  it  is  affianced  to  the 
heavenly  Bridegroom.  The  soul  now  no  longer  needs  self-denial  and  forbearance 
to  be  commanded  and  enjoined,  for  it  renounces  self  of  its  own  accord.  It  flies,  as 
by  a  new  instinct,  from  scenes  of  temptation  and  danger,  like  a  bird  from  the 
deadly  weapon  of  the  fowler.  How  can  the  once  lost  son,  now  happily  recovered, 
content  himself  any  longer  with  the  husks  !  for  he  has  tasted  the  fruit  of  the  vine 
that  flc urished  in  "the  pleasant  land,"  and  of  the  refreshments  of  its  milk  and 
honey.    How  can  the  renewed  man  still  take  delight  in  the  timbrel  and  the  dance, 


BS8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [«HA».  Tf, 

or  rejoice  at  the  sonnd  of  the  tabret  and  pipe,  after  he  has  once  learnt  to  raise  his 
holy  songs  of  joy  on  the  harp  of  David  1  In  opposition  to  the  vanities  and  follies 
of  this  world  he  sets  the  certainties  which  his  faith  now  beholds  in  the  opening 
glories  of  heaven  ;  and  with  the  couch  of  ease  and  luxury  he  contrasts  the  cross 
whereon  He  whom  his  soul  loveth  was  suspended,  bleeding  and  crowned  with 
thorns.  Away  then  at  once  with  every  wretched  and  shadowy  joy  and  every 
glittering  vanity ;  trouble  us  not,  vain  world,  with  these,  for  we  are  keeping  a  fast 
to  the  Lord.  How  often  do  we  hear  it  controverted  and  questioned  whether  one 
pleasure  or  another  be  compatible  with  real  piety  1  Only  let  men  become  really  in 
earnest  about  their  own  salvation,  and  they  will  cease  from  such  flimsy  casuistry ; 
and  will  perceive  at  once  what  agrees  or  disagrees  with  the  spirit  of  true  religion ; 
or  how  far  permission  and  ability  to  pursue  any  pleasure  may  belong  to  children  of 
God  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom.  Other  fastings  are  incident  to  a  state  of  grace, 
which  are  not  joyous,  but  grievous.  These  happen  when  the  soul  is  led  away,  not 
from  the  wild  luxuries  of  the  world  into  the  pastures  of  the  good  Shepherd,  but 
from  these  refreshing  and  invigorating  pastures  into  a  seeming  wilderness.  Oh  1  it 
is  a  bitter  change,  and  we  have  felt  it  the  more  from  having  enjoyed  such  unspeak- 
able happiness  while  leaning  on  Jesus'  bosom.  We  then  cry  out,  "Where  is  the 
blessedness  I  knew  ?  Where  are  now  those  lively  and  sweet  emotions,  those  con- 
genial delights  and  lively  enjoyments  which  we  realized  in  the  Lord's  nearness  to 
our  souls  ?  "  {F.  W.  KrumTimcher,  D.  D.)  Fasting  a  source  of  trial ; —Now  in  many 
ways  the  example  of  Christ  may  be  made  a  comfort  and  encouragement  to  as  at 
this  Lenten  season  of  the  year.  And,  first  of  all,  it  will  be  well  to  insist  on  the 
circumstance,  that  our  Lord  did  thus  retire  from  the  world,  as  confirming  to  us 
the  like  duty,  as  far  as  we  can  observe  it.  Next,  I  observe,  that  our  Saviour's  fast 
was  but  introductory  to  His  temptation.  He  went  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted 
of  the  devil,  but  before  He  was  tempted  He  fasted.  Nor,  as  is  worth  notice,  was 
this  a  mere  preparation  for  the  conflict,  but  it  was  the  cause  of  the  conflict  in  good 
measure.  Instead  of  its  simply  arming  Him  against  temptation,  it  is  plain,  that 
in  the  first  instance,  His  retirement  and  abstinence  exposed  Him  to  it.  Fasting 
was  the  primary  occasion  of  it.  "  When  He  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
He  was  afterwards  an  hungered  " ;  and  then  the  tempter  came,  bidding  Him  turn 
the  stones  into  bread.  Satan  made  use  of  His  fast  against  Himself.  And  this  is 
singularly  the  ease  with  Christians  now,  who  endeavour  to  imitate  Him ;  and  it  is 
well  they  should  know  it,  for  else  they  will  be  discouraged  when  they  practise 
abstinences.  It  is  commonly  said  that  fasting  is  intended  to  make  us  better 
Christians,  to  sober  us,  and  to  bring  as  more  entirely  at  Christ's  feet  in  faith 
and  humility.  This  is  true,  viewing  matters  on  the  whole.  On  the  whole, 
and  at  last,  this  effect  will  be  produced,  but  it  is  not  at  all  certain  that  it  will 
follow  at  once.  On  the  contrary,  such  mortifications  have  at  the  time  very 
various  effects  on  different  persons,  and  are  to  be  observed,  not  from  their 
visible  benefits,  but  from  faith  in  the  Word  of  Ood.  Some  men,  indeed,  are 
subdued  by  fasting,  and  brought  at  once  nearer  to  God ;  but  others  find  it,  however 
slight,  scarcely  more  than  an  occasion  of  temptation.  For  instance,  it  is  sometimes 
even  made  an  objection  to  fasting,  as  if  it  were  a  reason  for  not  practising  it,  that 
it  makes  a  man  irritable  and  ill-tempered.  I  confess  it  often  may  do  this.  Again, 
what  very  often  follows  from  it  is  a  feebleness  which  deprives  him  of  his  command 
over  his  bodily  acts,  feelings,  and  expressions.  Thus  it  makes  him  seem,  for 
instance,  to  be  out  of  temper  when  he  is  not ;  I  mean,  because  his  tongue,  his  lipi» 
nay  his  brain,  are  not  in  his  power.  He  does  not  use  the  words  he  wishes  to  ase* 
nor  the  accent  and  tone.  He  seems  sharp  when  he  is  not ;  and  the  consciousness 
of  this,  and  the  reaction  of  that  consciousness  upon  his  mind,  is  a  temptation,  and 
actually  makes  him  irritable,  particularly  if  people  misunderstand  him,  and  think 
him  what  he  is  not.  Again,  weakness  of  body  may  deprive  him  of  self-command 
in  other  ways  ;  perhaps  he  cannot  help  smiling  or  laughing  when  he  ought  to  b« 
serious,  which  is  evidently  a  most  distressing  and  humbling  trial ;  or  when  wrong 
thoughts  present  themselves  his  mind  cannot  throw  them  off  any  more  than  if  it 
were  some  dead  thing,  and  not  spirit ;  but  they  then  make  an  impression  on  him 
which  he  is  not  able  to  resist.  Or  again,  weakness  of  body  often  hinders  him  from 
fixing  his  mind  on  his  prayers  instead  of  making  him  pray  more  fervently ;  or 
again,  weakness  of  body  is  often  attended  with  langour  and  listlessness,  and 
strongly  tempts  a  man  to  sloth.  Yet  I  have  not  mentioned  the  most  distressing  of 
the  effects  which  may  follow  from  even  the  moderate  exercise  of  this  great  Ctiristian 
duty.    It  is  undeniably  a  means  of  temptation,  and  I  say  so,  lest  persons  should 


««AP.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  889 

be  surprised,  and  despond  when  they  find  it  so.  And  this  is  another  point  which 
calls  for  distinct  notice  in  the  history  of  our  Saviour's  fasting  and  temptation,  via., 
the  victory  which  attended  it.  He  had  three  temptations,  and  thrice  He  conquered — 
at  the  last  He  said,  "  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan  " ;  on  which  "  the  devil  leaveth 
Him."  This  conflict  and  victory  in  the  world  unseen  is  intimated  in  other  passages 
of  Scripture.  The  most  remarkable  of  these  is  what  our  Lord  says  with  reference 
to  the  demoniac  whom  His  apostles  could  not  cure  (Mark  ix.  29).  And  I  think  there 
is  enough  evidence,  even  in  what  may  be  known  afterwards  of  the  effects  of  such 
exercises  upon  persons  now  (not  to  have  recourse  to  history),  to  show  that  these 
exercises  are  God's  instruments  for  giving  the  Christian  a  high  and  royal  power 
above  and  over  his  fellows.  And  this  is  part  of  the  lesson  taught  us  by  the  long 
continuance  of  the  Lent  fast — that  we  are  not  to  gain  our  wishes  by  one  day  set 
»part  for  humiliation,  or  by  one  prayer,  however  fervent,  but  by  "  continuing 
.nstant  in  prayer."  This,  too,  is  signified  to  us  in  the  account  of  Jacob's  conflict. 
He,  like  our  Saviour,  was  occupied  in  it  through  the  night.  In  like  manner  Moses 
passed  one  of  his  forty  days'  fast  in  confession  and  intercession  for  the  people  who 
had  raised  the  golden  calf  (Deut.  ix.  25,  26).  An  angel  came  to  Daniel  upon  his 
fast;  so,  too,  in  our  Lord's  instance,  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  Him; 
and  so  we,  too,  may  well  believe,  and  take  comfort  in  the  thought,  that  even 
now,  angels  are  especially  sent  to  those  who  thus  seek  God.  {J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 
Fasting : — And,  first,  let  us  beware  of  the  opinion  of  merit  before  God  :  for  this 
conceit  makes  even  good  works  an  abomination  to  the  Lord.  There  is  no  place  for 
grace  to  enter  in,  where  merit  hath  possession.  Secondly,  we  are  to  take  heed  that 
our  fasting  be  without  superstition.  Thirdly,  that  it  be  not  without  prayer.  Fourthly, 
let  fasting  be  without  ostentation  before  men.  Our  Saviour  fasted  in  secret,  in  the 
wilderness.  Last  of  all,  let  it  always  be  seconded  with  amendment  of  life.  {Bislwp 
Cowper.)  Reasons  for  the  fast : — 1.  To  authorize  His  doctrine,  since  He  brought 
it  out  of  the  desert,  where  He  had  fasted  so  long  a  time  in  solitary  retiredness,  and 
not  out  of  the  schools  and  colleges,  and  that  the  rather  because  Moses  and  Elias, 
two  notable  restorers  of  religion  under  the  law,  had  done  the  like.  As  His  fasting 
coald  not  but  be  of  God,  so  neither  His  doctrine,  which  He  thus  fasting  received. 
2.  To  show  the  glory  of  His  Godhead  in  the  humiliation  of  His  manhood.  As  in 
most  of  His  humiliations,  some  sparkles  of  His  divinity  brake  forth  as  before  in  His 
birth  and  in  His  baptism.  3.  To  show  how  little  the  belly  should  be  regarded  of  us 
Christians  in  following  the  businesses  of  a  better  life.  (Ibid. )  Temptation  associated 
with  sinless  inferiority  : — When  the  devil  spies  us  weak,  in  want  and  necessity,  or 
in  any  other  way  disabled  to  resist  him,  that  is  a  fit  time  for  him  to  set  upon  us. 
As  the  enemies  wiU  make  battery  upon  the  walls  where  weakest,  and  every  one  goes 
over  the  hedge  where  lowest,  so  Satan,  where  and  when  he  finds  us  feeblest,  there 
and  then  will  he  be  deahng  with  us.  If  in  such  weakness  as  hunger,  how  much 
more  then  in  our  deadly  sicknesses,  and  in  the  very  pangs  of  death.  It  is  but  a 
coward's  trick,  but  the  devil  cares  not  for  his  honour,  so  he  may  hurt  us.  Again, 
if  natural  and  sinless  infirmities  yield  Satan  an  hint  for  temptation,  what  then  do 
the  unnatural  and  sinful  ?  If  natural  hunger  after  meat,  what  then  that  inordinate 
appetite,  and  itching  desire  after  gain,  glory,  and  preferment  ?  (D.  Dyke.) 
Temptations  adapted  to  temperament  and  condition : — The  devil  fits  and  shapes  his 
temptations  according  to  our  several  estates,  conditions,  and  dispositions.  As  here 
one  temptation  for  hunger  and  want.  If  Christ  had  been  in  fulness  and  abundance 
He  would  have  had  another.  He  hath  temptations  on  the  left  hand,  and  tempta- 
tions also  on  the  right.  When  in  want,  then  comes  the  temptation  to  distrust,  to 
use  shifts  and  unlawful  means.  If  in  discontent,  then  to  be  impatient ;  and  if  we 
be  of  great  spirit,  then  to  lay  hands  on  ourselves,  as  in  •' AchitopheL"  If  we  be 
rich,  and  in  great  and  high  places,  then  he  tempts  to  pride,  disdain,  and  oppression, 
epicurism,  and  voluptuousness  (Prov.  iii.  8,  9).  Thereafter  also  as  our  constitution 
of  body,  are  his  temptations.  The  sanguine  man  is  tempted  to  vain  lightness  and 
Bcurrihty;  the  choleric  to  wrath  and  fury  ;  the  melancholy  to  dead  and  unprofitable 
lumpishness,  to  strange  and  idle  conceits  ;  the  phlegmatic  to  sloth  and  drowsiness. 
Every  calling  also  hath  a  several  temptations.  As  the  judge  to  be  corrupted  with 
bribes,  the  preacher  either  with  man-pleasing  (Ezek.  xiii.),  or  to  self -pleasing,  as 
Angustine  complains  in  Psa.  li. ;  the  tra  iesman  with  deceit,  and  the  serving-man 
with  idleness  and  gaming.  Every  age  hath  its  temptations — youth  to  be  overcome 
with  the  love  of  pleasure,  and  old  age  with  coveteousness.  Tea,  every  gift  hath  its 
temptations,  as  the  gift  of  learning,  valour,  eloquence,  beauty — yea,  the  saving 
graces  of  Christianity  and  the  calUng  of  a  Christian.    He  will  not  tempt  a  Christian 


S90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ordinarily  to  the  grosser  and  more  odious  sins  of  the  world,  but  to  the  close  and 
more  secret — of  privy  pride,  hypocrisy,  coldness,  negligence,  and  security.  L, 
Look,  then,  to  what  temptation  thou  liest  most  open,  and  so  accordingly  arm  thy- 
self.  2.  Be  not  over-censorious  in  condemning  others  that  are  of  other  estate, 
calling,  age,  spirit,  constitution  of  body,  gifts,  than  ourselves,  for  we  know  not  their 
temptations.  And  specially  should  moderation  be  showed  to  those  of  high  place, 
because  their  temptafions  are  more  dangerous.  3.  Take  heed  of  that  deceitfulnesa 
of  heart,  whereby  we  promise  ourselves  great  matters  of  ourselves,  if  we  might  but 
change  our  estates  and  callings  to  our  minds.  Oh  how  liberal  would  the  poor  man 
be  if  he  were  rich,  how  upright  and  just  the  private  man,  if  he  were  a  magistrate  I 
But  they  consider  not  that  there  are  temptations  in  those  estates  and  callings,  and 
that  more  dangerous  than  in  their  own.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God. — The  devil's  preface : — Satan  knows  how  to 
write  prefaces  :  here  is  one.  He  began  the  whole  series  of  his  temptations  by  m 
doubt  cast  upon  our  Lord's  Sonship,  and  a  crafty  quotation  from  Scripture.  He 
caught  up  the  echo  of  the  Father's  word  at  our  Lord's  baptism,  and  began  tempting 
where  heavenly  witness  ended.  He  knew  how  to  discharge  a  double-shotted  temp- 
tation, and  at  once  to  suggest  doubt  and  rebellion —"  If "  ....  "command." 
I.  The  tempter  assails  with  an  "if."  1.  Not  with  point-blank  denial.  That 
would  be  too  startling.  Doubt  serves  the  Satanic  purpose  better  than  heresy.  2. 
He  grafts  his  "if  "  on  a  holy  thing.  He  makes  the  doubt  look  like  holy  anxiety 
concerning  Divine  Sonship.  3.  He  "  ifs  "  a  plain  Scripture.  "  Thou  art  My  Son  " 
(Psa.  ii.  7).  4.  He  "  ifs "  a  former  manifestation.  At  His  baptism  God  said, 
"  This  is  My  beloved  Son. "  Satan  contradicts  our  spiritual  experience.  5.  He 
♦•  ifs  "  a  whole  life.  From  the  first  Jesus  had  been  about  His  Father's  business  ; 
yet  after  thirty  years  His  Sonship  is  questioned.  6.  He  "  ifs"  inner  consciousness. 
Our  Lord  knew  that  He  was  the  Father's  Son ;  but  the  evil  one  is  daring.  7.  He 
"  ifs  "  a  perfect  character.  Well  may  he  question  as,  whose  faults  are  so  many. 
IL  Thk  tempteb  aims  the  "u'"  at  a  vital  pabt.  1.  At  our  sonship.  In  ou? 
Lord's  case  he  attacks  His  human  and  Divine  Sonship.  In  oar  case  he  would  make 
ns  doubt  our  regeneration.  2.  At  our  childlike  spirit.  He  tempts  as  to  cater  for 
ourselves.  3.  At  our  Father's  honour.  He  tempts  us  to  doubt  our  Father's  provi- 
dence, and  to  blame  Him  for  letting  as  hunger.  4.  At  oar  comfort  and  strength  as 
members  of  the  heavenly  family.  III.  The  tempteb  suppobts  that  "  if  "  with 
CIBCDM8TANCB8.  1.  You  are  alone.  Would  a  father  desert  his  child  ?  2.  Yoa  are 
in  a  desert.  Is  this  the  place  for  God's  Heir  ?  3.  You  are  with  the  wild  beasts. 
Wretched  company  for  a  Son  of  God  1  4.  You  are  an  hungered.  How  can  a  loving 
Father  let  His  perfect  Son  hunger?  Pat  all  these  together,  and  the  tempter's 
question  comes  home  with  awful  force  to  one  who  is  hungry  and  alone.  When  we 
Bee  others  thus  tried,  do  we  think  them  brethren  ?  Do  we  not  question  their  son- 
ship,  as  Job's  friends  questioned  him  t  What  wonder  if  we  question  ourselves  1 
IV.  When  ovebcome,  the  tempter's  "  e?  "  is  helpful.  1.  As  coming  from  Satan, 
it  is  a  certificate  of  our  true  descent.  (1)  He  only  questions  truth :  therefore  wa 
are  true  sons.  (2)  He  only  leads  sons  to  doubt  their  sonship :  therefore  we  are 
sons.  2.  As  overcome,  it  may  be  a  quietus  to  the  enemy  for  years.  It  takes  the 
sting  out  of  man's  questionings  and  suspicions ;  for  if  we  have  answered  the  devil 
himself  we  do  not  fear  men.  3.  As  past,  it  is  asually  the  prelude  to  angels  coming 
and  ministering  to  as.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon. )  The  force  of  an  "  if  " ; — What  force 
there  is  often  in  a  single  monosyllable  t  What  force,  for  instance,  in  the  mono* 
syllable  ••  if,"  with  which  this  artful  address  begins  I  It  was  employed  by  Satan, 
for  the  purpose  of  insinuating  into  the  Saviour's  mind  a  doubt  of  His  being  ia 
reality  the  special  object  of  His  Father's  care,  and  it  was  pronounced  by  him,  as  we 
may  well  suppose,  with  a  cunning  and  malignant  emphasis.  How  different  is  the 
ase  which  Jesus  makes  of  this  word  "  if  "  in  those  lessons  of  Divine  instruction  and 
heavenly  consolation,  which  He  so  frequently  delivered  to  His  disciples  when  He 
was  on  earth  I  He  always  employed  it  to  inspire  confidence ;  never  to  excite 
distrust.  Take  a  single  instance  of  this  :  "  If  God  so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field, 
which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the  oven,  shall  He  not  much  more 
clothe  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith  7  "  What  a  contrast  between  this  Divine  remon- 
strance and  the  malicious  insinuation  of  the  great  enemy  of  God  and  man  I  (Dean 
Bagot.)  Oh,  this  word  "  if  "  1  Oh,  that  I  could  tear  it  out  of  my  heart  I  O 
thou  poison  of  all  my  pleasures  I  Thou  cold  icy  hand,  that  touchest  me  so  often, 
and  fzeexest  me  with  the  touch  I    "  If  1    If  1 "    {Robert  Rohinaon.)        The  begim- 


CHA».  IT.]  8T.  LUKE,  t91 

m'ng  of  temptation  : — I.  The  first  step  towards  God  is  faith  in  Him  and  His  loTe. 
The  first  step  away  from  Him  is  doubt.  Therefore  the  devil  begins  all  temptation 
by  seeking  to  inspire  the  human  soul  with  doubt.  He  sought  to  make  Eve  doubt 
God's  loving  purpose  towards  her  by  his  "Yea,  hath  God  said?"  II.  1.  How  often 
are  we  tempted  to  doubt  God's  love  I  Especially  is  this  the  case  when  we  are  left 
for  a  time  without  any  sensible  tokens  of  His  presence.  2.  How  shall  we  meet  this 
temptation  7  By  reliance  on  the  Word  and  the  promise  of  God.  Is  there  not  in 
His  Word  food  for  the  hungry,  solace  for  the  lonely,  comfort  for  the  desponding  ? 
{Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  That  where  Satan  carries  on  a  main  design  and 
end  he  bestows  most  of  his  pains  and  skill  in  rendering  the  means  to  that  end  plausible 
and  taking  : — The  end  is  least  in  mention,  and  the  means  in  their  fit  contrivance 
takes  up  most  of  his  art  and  care.  The  reasons  whereof  are  these — (1)  The  end  ia 
apparently  bad,  so  that  it  would  be  a  contradiction  to  his  design  to  mention  it.  It 
is  the  snare  and  trap  itself,  which  his  wisdom  and  policy  directs  him  to  cover.  His 
ultimate  end  is  the  destruction  of  the  soul.  This  he  dare  not  openly  avouch  to  the 
vilest  of  men.  (2)  The  means  to  such  wicked  ends  have  not  only  an  innate  and 
natural  tendency  in  themselves,  which  are  apt  to  sway  and  bias  men  that  way,  but 
are  also  capable  of  artificial  improvement,  to  a  further  enticement  to  the  evils- 
secretly  intended ;  and  these  require  the  art  and  skill  for  the  exact  suiting  and 
fitting  of  them.  (3)  The  means  are  capable  of  a  varnish  and  paint.  He  can  make* 
a  shift  to  set  them  off  and  colour  them  over,  that  the  proper  drift  of  them  cannot 
easily  be  discovered ;  whereas  the  ends  to  which  these  lead  cannot  receive,  at  least 
BO  easily  with  some,  such  fair  shows.  It  is  far  easier  to  set  off  company-keeping, 
with  the  pleasurable  pretences  of  necessity  or  refreshing  divertisement,  than  to 
propound  direct  drunkenness,  the  thing  to  which  company-keeping  tends,  ander 
such  a  dress.  If  it  be  demanded.  How  and  by  what  arts  he  renders  the  means  so 
plausible  ?  I  shall  endeavour  a  satisfaction  to  that  query,  by  showing  the  way  that 
Satan  took  to  render  the  means  he  made  use  of  in  this  temptation  plausible  to 
Christ,  which  were  these :  (1)  He  represents  it  as  a  harmless  or  lawful  thing  in 
itself.  Who  can  say  it  had  been  sinful  for  the  Son  of  God  to  have  turned  stones 
into  bread,  more  than  to  turn  water  into  wine  ?  (2)  He  gives  the  motion  a  further 
pretext  of  advantage  or  goodness.  He  insinuated  that  it  might  be  a  useful  discovery 
of  His  Sonship,  and  a  profitable  supply  against  hunger.  (3)  He  seems  also  to  pu4 
a  necessity  upon  it,  that  other  ways  of  help  failing,  He  must  be  constrained  so  to  do, 
or  to  suffer  further  want.  (4)  He  forgets  not  to  tell  Him  that  to  do  this  was  but  suit- 
able  to  His  condition,  and  that  it  was  a  thing  well  becoming  the  Son  of  God  to  do  a 
miracle.  (5)  He  doth  urge  it  at  the  rate  of  a  duty,  and  that  being  in  hunger  and 
want,  it  would  be  a  sinful  neglect  not  to  do  what  He  could  and  might  for  His 
preservation.  (R.  Gilpin.)  First,  shipwreck  of  faith,  then  of  obedience  : — The 
devil  here  seeing  Him  in  great  want  and  hunger,  would  thereby  bring  in  doubt,  that 
He  was  not  the  Son  of  God,  which  is  not  a  good  argument.  For  whether  we  respeet 
the  natural  tokens  of  God's  favour,  we  see  they  happen  not  to  the  wisest  and  men 
of  best  and  greatest  knowledge,  as  appeareth  in  Eccles.  ix.  11,  or  the  supernatural 
favour  of  God.  We  shall  see  Abraham  forced  to  fly  his  country  into  Egypt  for 
famine  (Gen.  x.  J 2).  So  did  Isaac  (Gen.  xxvi.  1).  And  Jacob  likewise  was  in  th« 
same  distress  (Gen.  xliii.  1).  Notwithstanding  that  God  was  called  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  yet  were  they  all  three  like  to  be  hunger- starved.  Yea, 
not  only  so,  but  for  their  faith  many  were  burned  and  stoned,  of  whom  the  world 
was  not  worthy  (Heb.  xi.  37).  So  fared  it  with  the  apostles;  they  were  hungry, 
naked,  and  athirst  (1  Cor.  iv.  11).  (Bishop  Andrewet.)  Joy  and  comfort  ruin£d 
by  doubt : — Hope,  joy,  peace,  thankfulness,  repentance,  obedience,  prayer,  patience, 
worship — all  these  wiU  vanish  away  like  a  morning  mist  before  the  sun  if  the  devil 
ean  make  you  distrust  with  such  a  temptation  as  this,  "  If  thou,"  Ac.  {Bi$hop 
Hacket.)  Certitude  of  salvation  :—l.  That  the  Holy  Ghost  doth  beget  a  true  and 
•n  humble  assurance  in  many  of  the  faithful  touching  the  remission  of  their  sins 
in  this  life.  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  doth  beget  this  assurance  in  them,  by  causing 
them  to  examine  what  good  fruits  they  have  produced  already  from  a  lively  faith, 
and  do  resolve  t6  produce  thereafter.  3.  This  comfortable  assurance  is  not  the 
formal  act  of  justifying  faith,  but  an  effect  which  follows  it.  4.  This  assurance  is 
not  alike  in  all  that  are  regenerate,  nor  at  all  times  alike.  6.  No  mortified  humble 
Christian  must  despair,  or  afflict  his  heart,  because  scruples  arife  in  his  mind,  so 
that  he  cannot  attain  to  a  strong  confidence  or  assurance  in  Christ's  mercies.  He 
that  can  attain  but  to  a  conjectural  hope,  or  some  beginnings  of  gracious  comfort, 
shall  be  blessed  before  God,  who  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax.    (Ibid.)        AU 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Chriatiaru  have  not  the  tame  degree  of  assurance  : — Every  tree  doth  not  shoot  out 
its  root  so  far  as  another,  and  yet  may  be  firm  in  the  ground,  and  live  as  veil  as 
that  whose  root  is  largest.  So  every  faith  stretcheth  not  forth  the  arms  of  par- 
ticular assurance  to  embrace  Christ  alike,  and  yet  it  may  be  a  true  faith,  that  livei 
by  charity,  repentance,  and  good  works ;  some  faith  abounds  with  one  sort  of 
fruits,  some  with  another.  God  is  delighted  with  all  that  are  good,  and  He  will 
reward  them.  In  all  kind  of  Divine  conclusions  some  are  more  doubtful  spirited 
than  others.  {p>id.)  Faith  assaulted : — We  see  it  is  the  devil's  endeavour  to 
call  into  question  the  truth  of  God's  Word.  God  had  said,  "  Thou  art  My  Son," 
and  now  he  comes  with  his  '•  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  In  the  Word  of  God 
there  be  specially  three  things — 1.  Commandments.  2.  Threatenings.  3.  Promises. 
Secondly,  faith  is  the  very  life  of  our  lives,  and  the  strength  of  our  souls,  without 
which  we  are  but  very  drudges  and  drolls  in  this  life.  "  The  Holy  Ghost  fill  you 
with  all  joy  in  believing"  (Rom.  xv.  13).  "And  believing,  ye  rejoiced  with  joy 
glorious  and  unspeakable  "  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  Therefore  the  devil,  envying  our  comfort 
and  our  happiness,  would  rob  us  of  our  faith,  that  he  might  rob  as  of  our  joy. 
Thirdly,  faith  is  our  choicest  weapon,  even  our  shield  and  buckler  to  fight  against 
him,  *'  whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith  "  (1  Pet.  v.  9).  Therefore,  as  the  Philistines 
got  away  the  Israelites'  weapons,  so  doth  Satan,  in  getting  away  faith  from  us, 
disarm  us  and  make  us  naked.  "  For  this  is  our  victory  whereby  we  overcome,  even 
our  faith  "  (1  John  v.).  And  in  this  faith  apprehending  God's  strength  lies  our 
strength,  as  Samson's  in  his  locks ;  and,  therefore,  the  devil,  knowing  this, 
labours  to  do  to  us  which  Delilah  did  to  Samson,  even  to  cut  off  our  locks. 
(D.  Dyke.)  Affliction  no  argument  against  sonship : — If  any  man  should  be 
used  like  a  dog,  or  a  bear,  yet  as  long  as  he  sees  human  shape  and  discerns 
the  use  of  human  reason  in  himself,  he  would  still,  for  aU  this  usage,  think 
himself  to  be  a  man.  So  though  the  children  of  God  be  used  here  in  this  world 
as  if  they  were  wicked,  yet  as  long  as  they  feel  the  work  of  grace,  and  the  power 
of  God's  Spirit,  they  must  still  hold  themselves  to  be  God's  children.  (Ibid.) 
This  stone  toead. — The  plea  of  necessity  : — That  Satan  usually  endeavours  to  run 
his  temptations  upon  the  plea  of  necessity,  and  from  thence  to  infer  a  duty.  The 
reasons  of  this  policy  are  these :  1.  He  knows  that  necessity  hath  a  compulsive 
force,  even  to  things  of  otherwise  greatest  abhorrencies.  2.  Necessity  can  do  much 
to  the  darkening  of  the  understanding,  and  change  of  the  judgment,  by  the  strong 
influence  it  hath  upon  the  affections.  Men  are  apt  to  form  their  apprehensions 
according  to  the  dictates  of  necessity.  3.  Necessity  offers  an  excuse,  if  not  a  justi- 
fication, of  the  greatest  miscarriages.  4.  Necessity  is  a  universal  plea,  and  fitted 
to  the  conditions  of  all  men  in  all  callings,  and  under  all  extravagancies.  The 
tradesman,  in  his  unlawful  gains  or  overreachings,  pleads  a  necessity  for  it  from 
the  hardness  of  the  buyer  in  other  things.  We  may  observe  three  cheats  in  this 
plea  of  necessity.  1.  Sometimes  he  puts  men  upon  feigning  a  necessity  where 
there  is  none.  2.  Sometimes  he  puts  men  upon  a  necessity  of  their  own  sinful 
procurement.  3.  Sometimes  he  stretcheth  a  necessity  further  than  it  ought. 
This  must  warn  us  not  to  suffer  ourselves  to  be  imposed  upon  by  the  highest 
pretences  of  necessity.  {R.  Gilpin.)  To  open  this  a  little  further,  I  shall  add  the 
reasons  why  Satan  strikes  in  with  such  an  occasion  as  the  want  of  means  to  tempt 
to  distrust,  which  are  these : — 1.  Such  a  condition  doth  usually  transport  men 
beside  themselves.  2.  Sense  is  a  great  help  to  faith.  Faith,  then,  must  needs  bfl 
much  hazarded  when  sense  is  at  a  loss  or  contradicted,  as  usually  it  is  in  straits. 
That  faith  doth  receive  an  advantage  by  sense,  cannot  be  denied.  But  when  out. 
ward  usual  helps  fail  us,  our  sense,  being  not  able  to  see  afar  off,  is  wholly  puzzled 
and  overthrown.  The  very  disappearing  of  probabiUties  gives  so  great  a  shake  to 
our  faith  that  it  commonly  staggers  at  it.  It  is  no  wonder  to  see  that  faith,  which 
usually  called  sense  for  a  supporter,  to  fail  when  it  is  deprived  of  its  crutch.  8. 
Though  faith  can  act  above  sense,  and  is  employed  about  things  not  seen,  yet  every 
saint  at  all  times  doth  not  act  his  faith  so  high.  4.  When  sense  is  nonplussed, 
and  faith  fails,  the  soul  of  man  is  at  a  great  loss.  The  other  branch  of  the 
observation,  that  from  a  distrust  of  providence  he  endeavours  to  draw  them  to 
an  unwarrantable  attempt  for  their  relief,  is  as  clear  as  the  former.  That  from  a 
distrust  men  are  next  put  upon  unwarrantable  attempts,  is  clear  from  the  following 
reasons  :  1.  The  affrightment  which  is  bred  by  such  distrusts  of  providences  will 
not  suffer  men  to  be  idle.  Fear  is  active,  and  strongly  prompts  that  something  is 
to  be  done.  2.  Yet  such  is  the  confusion  of  men's  minds  in  such  a  case,  that 
though  many  things  are  propounded,  in  that  hurry  of  thoughts  they  are  deprived 


OHir.  xf.}  ST.  LUKE.  893 

usually  of  a  true  judgment  and  deliberation.  3.  The  despairing  grievance  of  spirit 
makes  them  take  that  which  comes  next  to  hand,  as  a  drowning  man  that  grasps  a 
twig  or  straw,  though  to  no  purpose.  4.  Being  once  turned  off  their  rock,  and  the 
true  stay  of  the  promise  of  God  for  help,  whatever  other  course  they  take  must 
needs  be  unwarrantable.  5.  Satan  is  so  officious  in  an  evil  thing,  that  seeing  any 
in  this  condition,  he  will  not  fail  to  proffer  his  help  ;  and  in  place  of  God's  provi- 
dence, to  set  some  unlawful  shift  before  them.  6.  And  so  much  the  rather  do  men 
close  in  with  such  overtures,  because  a  sudden  fit  of  passionate  fury  doth  drive 
them,  and  out  of  a  bitter  kind  of  despite  and  crossness — as  if  they  meditated  a 
revenge  against  God  for  their  disappointment — they  take  up  a  hasty  wilful  re&clve 
to  go  that  way  that  seems  most  agreeable  to  their  passion.  Application  :  Failures 
or  ordinary  means  should  not  fill  us  with  distrust,  neither  then  should  we  run  out 
of  God's  way  for  help.  He  that  would  practise  this  must  have  these  three  things 
which  are  comprehended  in  it.  1.  He  must  have  full  persuasions  of  the  power  and 
promise  of  God.  2.  He  that  would  thus  wait  upon  God  had  need  to  have  an  equal 
balance  of  spirit  in  reference  to  second  causes.  3.  There  is  no  waitiug  upon  God, 
and  keeping  His  way,  without  a  particular  trust  in  God.  But  let  the  strait  be  what 
it  will,  we  must  not  forsake  duty  ;  for  so  we  go  out  of  God's  way,  and  do  contradict 
that  trust  and  hope  which  we  are  to  keep  up  to  God-ward.  But  there  are  other 
cases  wherein  it  is  our  duty  to  fix  our  trust  upon  the  particular  mercy  or  help.  I 
shall  name  four ;  and  possibly  a  great  many  more  may  be  added.  As — 1.  When 
mercies  are  expressly  and  particularly  promised.  2.  When  God  leads  us  into  straits 
by  engaging  us  in  His  service.  3.  When  the  things  we  want  are  common  universal 
blessings,  and  such  as  we  cannot  subsist  without.  4.  When  God  is  eminently 
engaged  for  our  help,  and  His  honour  lies  at  stake  in  that  very  matter.  {Ibid.) 
Stones  turned  into  bread : — How  many  are  there  that  turn,  not  stones  into  bread, 
but  hes,  flatteries,  base  shifts,  into  silver  and  gold,  yea,  jewels  and  precious  stones? 
Others  turn  stones,  yea,  precious  stones,  and  their  whole  substance  into  bread,  into 
meats,  drinks,  and  apparel,  and  wastefuUy  lavish  God's  good  creatures  on  idle  backs 
and  bellies,  using  this  as  a  means  to  procure  something  their  affections  want.  (D. 
Dyke.)  How  many  sins  the  devil  couched  and  infolded  in  this  one : — It  teaches  us 
not  to  measure  actions  by  the  outward  appearance.  What  a  matter  is  it  to  eat 
bread  when  one  is  hungry  ?  but  we  see  what  a  matter  it  would  have  been  here  in 
Christ.  A  little  pin,  specially  being  poisoned,  may  prick  mortally,  as  well  as  a 
great  sword.  Adam's  eating  the  fruit  seems  a  small  matter  to  flesh  and  blood, 
which  wonders  that  so  small  a  pin  should  wound  all  mankind  to  the  death.  But 
Adam's  sin  was  not  simply  the  eating  of  the  apple,  but  the  eating  of  the  apple 
forbidden  by  God.  There  was  the  deadly  poison  of  that  Uttle  pin.  And  there  also 
the  devil  so  handled  the  matter,  that  all  the  commandments  were  broken  in  that 
one  action.  As  the  first  table  in  his  infidelity,  doubting  both  of  God's  truth  and 
goodness,  contempt  of,  and  rebellion  against  God,  preferring  of  Satan  before  God, 
and  in  the  profanation  of  that  fruit  he  ate,  which  was  a  sacrament.  And  for  the 
second  table,  he  broke  the  fifth  commandment,  in  his  unthankfulness  to  God  his 
Father,  that  gave  him  his  being,  and  had  bestowed  so  many  blessings  upon  him. 
The  sixth  in  the  murder  of  himself  and  all  his  posterity,  body  and  soul.  The 
seventh  in  his  intemperancy.  The  eighth  in  touching  another's  goods  against  the 
will  of  the  Lord.  The  ninth  in  receiving  the  devil's  false  witness  against  God. 
The  tenth  in  being  discontent  with  his  estate,  and  lusting  after  an  higher.  Take 
we  heed  now  of  the  deceit  of  sin.  It  shows  little  sometimes,  but  oh  the  bundle  of 
mischief  that  is  lapped  up  in  that  little  1  (Ibid.)  The  aim  of  Satanic  temptation 
not  always  apparent ; — Ijike  a  waterman,  he  looks  one  way  and  rows  another. 
The  special  thing  he  shot  at,  indeed,  was  to  make  Christ  call  in  question  the  truth 
of  that  oracle  that  sounded  at  Jordan,  to  think  through  unbelief  that  He  was  not  the 
Son  of  God.  But  yet  the  words  of  the  temptation  seem  to  import  that  he  sought 
only  the  working  of  the  miracle.  And  yet  the  devil  would  rather  a  great  deal  He 
would  never  work  the  mirafcle,  so  He  would  doubt  Himself  not  to  be  the  Son  of  God. 
For  this  would  have  been  the  greater  foil.  This  discloses  to  us  one  of  Satan's  mysteries. 
Sometimes  he  will  tempt  us  to  some  sin,  to  which  yet  he  cares  not  much  whether 
we  yield  or  no,  hoping  to  get  a  greater  conquest  of  us  by  not  yielding.  As  thus, 
when  by  not  yielding  we  grow  proud,  vain-glorious,  secure,  confident ;  wherein  the 
devil  seeems  to  deal  like  a  cunning  gamester,  that  hides  his  skill,  and  loses  two  or 
three  games  at  the  first,  that  he  may  win  so  much  the  more  afterwards.  (Ibid.) 
God  not  served  for  temporal  projit: — If  every  good  Christian  were  satisfied  at  all 
limeB  with  temporal  blessings,  we  should  appear  to  serve  God  for  our  own  pro  tit, 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [obaj.  it. 

that  we  might  lack  nothing  which  concerned  this  transitory  life.  (Bishop  Hacket.) 
The  eye  to  look  to  heaven: — God  doth  not  suppeditate  bread  always  to  him  that  ia 
ffis  Bon,  that  he  may  loathe  this  world,  and  look  for  a  recompense  for  all  this 
misery,  not  among  these  hard-hearted  generations  of  men,  but  among  the  habita- 
tions of  the  blessed.  (Ibid.)  Hereafter : — It  is  my  turn  to  want  for  awhile,  I 
shall  be  replenished  hereafter.  (Ibid.)  Better  than  bread: — Though  a  good  man 
labour  and  watch,  and  cannot  earn  the  bread  of  his  carefulness,  yet  he  shall  fill  hia 
bosom  with  better  fruits,  for  occasion  is  given  hereby  to  the  righteous  to  exercise 
these  three  spiritual  graces.  Prayer,  and  Patience,  and  Charity.  (Ibid.)  The 
deviVs  bread : — There  are  others  under  these,  indeed,  yet  of  a  most  vile  condition, 
(that  eat  their  bread  by  wrongful  dealing,  when  it  is  grounded  with  the  devil's  mill- 
'atones ;  and  according  to  Aristotle,  my  former  director,  these  may  be  ranged  into 
three  sorts  :  Such  as  maintain  themselves  with  no  calhng,  such  as  use  a  bad  calling, 
-and  such  as  cheat  in  a  good  calling.  We  must  eat  our  bread  by  prayer  to  God,  and 
good  employment  in  the  world,  that  is,  by  the  duty  of  invocation,  and  by  the  fruita 
of  our  vocation ;  therefore  he  that  fills  up  no  place  or  part  in  a  commonwealth  to 
earn  his  gains  must  needs  take  the  devil's  counsel  to  live  by  unjust  means,  com- 
mand that  these  stones  be  made  bread.  (Ibid.)  Bad  bread: — By  extortion  and 
usury  we  may  make  stones  into  bread,  that  is  the  devil's  alchemistry :  or  haply  we 
may  make  bread  of  nothing,  when  a  man  gets  a  thing  by  another's  oversight 
(Gen.  xliii.  12).  Or  else,  what  and  if  we  can  overreach  our  brother  in  subtilty,  and 
go  beyond  him  with  a  trick  of  wit  or  cunning  t  "  Let  no  man  defraud  or  oppress 
his  brother  in  any  matter :  for  the  Lord  is  avenged  of  all  such  "  (1  These,  iv.  6).  The 
one  is  called  "  the  bread  of  violence  and  oppression  "  (Prov.  iv.  17) ;  the  other,  "  the 
bread  of  deceit."  (Bishop  Andreioes.)  The  firit  temptation: — Though  in  form 
sensuous,  it  is  in  essence  moral  or  spiritual.  What  constituted  it  a  temptation — 
where  lay  its  evil  7  Christ  had  to  live  His  personal  life  (1)  within  the  limits 
necessary  to  man,  and  (2)  in  perfect  dependence  upon  God.  Had  He  transgressed 
either  of  these  conditions.  He  had  ceased  to  be  man's  ideal  Brother  or  God's  ideal 
Son.  His  supernatural  power  existed  not  for  Himself,  but  for  us.  The  ideal  Son 
could  not  act  as  if  He  had  no  Father.  He  conquered  by  faith,  and  His  first  victory 
was  like  His  last.  The  taunts  He  had  to  bear  on  the  cross — "  He  saved  others. 
Himself  He  cannot  save,"  &o. — were  but  a  repetition  of  the  earlier  temptations ; 
and  then,  as  now,  though  the  agony  was  deeper,  and  the  darkness  more  dense,  He 
triumphed  by  giving  Himself  into  the  hands  of  the  Father.  (A.  M.  Fairbaim^ 
D.D.)  The  first  assault: — I.  Thb  Satanic  suggestion.  To  have  complied  with 
it  would  have  been  a  violation  of  what,  on  reflection,  appeared  to  Jesus  to  be  the 
father's  will.  II.  The  beply  op  ocb  Lobd — "  It  is  written,  man  shall  not  live," 
&o.  This  reply — 1.  Disposes  most  effectually  of  all  the  arguments  which  are  com- 
monly urged  in  defence  of  modern  excesses.  2.  Points  to  man's  higher  nature  as 
his  distinguishing  possession.  3.  Teaches  that  man  is  not  dependent  on  bread  or 
material  sustenance  even  for  his  lower  life,  but  on  the  sustaining  Word  of  God. 
{W.  Landels,  D.D.)  Life  not  a  necessity  : — In  excuse  for  some  offence  against 
the  moral  law,  it  was  said  to  our  great  English  moralist  of  the  last  century :  "  ▲ 
man  must  live."  "  Sir,"  said  Dr.  Johnson,  '♦  I  do  not  see  the  necessity."  That  was 
the  Stoic  form  of  the  principle  enunciated  in  our  Lord's  reply,  but  our  Lord  invests 
it  with  an  infinitely  higher  character  by  expressing  it  in  the  gracious  tones  of  the 
gospel.  It  was  true  in  the  highest  sense  that  a  man  must  live ;  bat  his  life  does 
aiot  consist  in  the  mere  gratification  of  his  bodily  cravings,  or  even  the  natural 
desires  of  his  mind  and  heart,  or  even  in  his  life  here.  The  essential  life  of  his 
nature  consists  in  his  living  and  acting  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God.  (H, 
Wace,  D.D.)  Appositeness  of  the  temptation  : — The  temptation  was  shrewdly 
contrived  to  meet  the  peculiar  circumstances.  Bemember  that  the  desert  and  the 
Dead  Sea,  lying  in  the  basin  of  the  barren  hills,  were  a  figure  of  the  desolation 
brought  on  the  world  by  sin,  and  that  probably  our  Lord,  from  the  wilderness, 
looked  over  this  picture  of  death,  and  saw  in  it  a  figure  of  the  scene  of  His  moral 
operation.  Now  Satan  steals  up  to  Him,  holding  out  a  dead  stone,  and  asks  Him 
to  begin  His  work  by  transforming  that  stone.  As  He  is  about  to  make  the  desert 
;fruitful,  and  the  wilderness  blossom  as  a  rose,  and  the  Sea  of  Death  become  a  lake 
<if  living  water,  let  Him  begin  His  work  symbolically,  with  a  stone  of  this  district. 
'Wery  probably  the  temptation  was  not  to  turn  the  piece  of  black  stone  into  white 
wheaten  bread,  but  into  the  homely,  hard  rye,  black  bread,  which  nourishes,  bat  is 
sao  dainty.  On  the  way  to  Jericho,  and,  indeed,  all  around  the  Dead  Sea,  are  to  be 
ioond  in  chalk  beds,  masses  of  flint,  of  rounded  shape,  which  the  Arabs  suppose  to 


««AP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  895 

be  the  olives,  apples,  melons,  and  other  fruit  of  the  time  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
which,  at  the  overthrow  of  the  cities,  were  turned  into  stone.  Some  of  these  stones 
have  the  size  and  shape  of  loaves,  and  it  is  possible  that  Satan  took  one  of  these 
rounded  masses  of  flint,  and,  with  his  undercurrent  of  bitterness  and  scorn,  offered 
it  to  Christ,  supposing  Him  to  share  the  popular  superstition  about  them.  If  we 
may  expand  hia  words,  they  ran  thus  :  "  See  this  loaf-like  flint  stone  1  No  doubt 
it  was  once  bread  in  one  of  the  houses  of  Sodom,  but  God  overthrew  the  wicked 
city,  and  the  bread  was  turned  into  stone.  Now,  0  Son  of  God — that  is,  if  you  are 
the  Son  of  God — as  you  have  come  to  undo  the  work  of  destruction  wrought  by  sin, 
fmd  to  bring  life  into  a  world  subject  to  death,  show  your  power  on  this  stone,  and 
turn  it  back  into  the  loaf  of  bread  which  it  once  was."  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.) 
These  stones : — They  were,  perhaps,  those  siliceous  accretions,  sometimes  known 
nnder  the  name  of  lapidesjudaici,  which  assume  the  exact  shape  of  little  loaves  of 
bread,  and  which  were  represented  in  legend  as  the  petrified  fruits  of  the  cities  of 
the  plain.  The  pangs  of  hunger  work  all  the  more  powerfully  when  they  are  stimu- 
lated by  the  added  tortures  of  a  quick  imagination  ;  and  if  the  conjecture  be  correct, 
then  the  very  shape  and  aspect  and  traditional  origin  of  these  stones  would  give  to 
the  temptation  an  added  force.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Crystallizaticm: — The 
stones  called  '*  Elijah's  melons,"  on  Mount  Carmel,  and  "  the  Virgin  Mary's  peas," 
near  Bethlehem,  are  instances  of  crystallization  well  known  in  limestone  forma- 
tions. They  are  so  called  as  being  the  supposed  produce  of  these  two  plots  turned 
into  stone,  from  the  refusal  of  the  owners  to  sapply  the  wants  of  the  prophet  and 
the  saint.    {Dean  Stanley.) 

Yer.  4.  jlnd  Jesus  answered  him  asiytag,  It  Is  written,  that  man  shall  not  !!▼• 
hj  hread  alone,  but  by  every  word  of  God. — The  armoury  of  Scripture : — In  the 
plague  time  none  will  go  abroad  without  some  preservative.  None  will  go  forth 
into  the  fields,  but  take  at  least  a  staff  with  them  for  fear  of  the  worst.  Those  that 
travel  will  not  ride  without  their  swords ;  those  that  know  they  have  enemies  will 
never  go  forth  unweaponed ;  and  kings  always  have  their  guards.  Now  all  of  us 
having  Satan's  temptations,  and  our  enemies  ready  for  us  at  every  turn,  we  had 
need  daily  to  resort  to  the  armoury  of  the  Scriptures,  and  there  to  furnish  our- 
selves ;  for  when  this  word  shall  be  hid  in  our  hearts,  and  enter  into  our  souls, 
then  shall  we  prevail  both  against  the  violent  man  and  the  flattering  woman,  that 
is,  against  all  kind  of  temptations,  whether  on  the  right  or  on  the  left  hand.  "  I 
have  hid  Thy  word,"  saith  David  (Psa.  cxix.),  "  in  mine  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin." 
{D.  Dyke.)  All  meed  the  Scriptures  : — Cast  not  off  the  study  of  the  Scriptures 
only  to  the  ministers.  Though  the  law  be  not  thy  profession,  yet  thou  wilt  have 
BO  much  skill  in  it,  as  to  hold  thy  inheritance,  and  to  keep  thy  land  from  the 
eaviller.  So  here,  though  divinity  be  not  thy  profession,  yet  get  so  much  skill  as 
to  keep  thy  heavenly  inheritance  against  Satan's  cavils.  As  any  is  more  subject  to 
Satan's  temptations,  so  hath  he  greater  need  of  the  Scriptures.  {Ibid.)  The 
vyritten  word : — It  is  written  of  Augustine,  that  lying  sick  on  his  bed,  he  caused  the 
seven  penitential  Psalms  to  be  painted  on  the  wall  over  against  him,  in  great 
letters ;  that  if  after  he  should  become  speechless,  yet  he  might  point  to  every  verse 
when  the  devil  came  to  tempt  him,  and  so  confute  him.  •'  Blessed  is  he  that  hath 
his  quiver  full  of  such  arrows,  they  shall  not  be  ashamed."  Blessed  is  he  that  hath 
the  skill  to  choose  out  fit  arrows  for  the  purpose,  as  the  fathers  speak  out  of  Isa. 
xlix.  2.  Christ  saith  aflSrmatively  of  the  Scriptures,  that  "  in  them  is  eternal  life  " 
(John  V.  39).  Negatively,  that  the  cause  of  error  is  the  not  knowing  of  them  (Mark 
xii.  24).  David  saith  it  was  that  that  made  him  wiser  than  his  enemies,  than  his 
teachers,  and  than  the  ancients  (Psa.  cxix.  98,  99,  and  110).  So  the  error  of  the 
former  times  was  in  yielding  too  far  to  the  devil's  policy,  by  sealing  up  the  Scrip- 
tures, and  locking  the  storehouse  and  armoury  of  the  people.  The  like  policy  we 
read  of  (1  Sam.  xiii.  19) ;  when  the  Philistines  had  taken  away  all  smiths  and 
armour,  then  they  thought  they  were  safe.  So  in  the  time  of  darkness,  the  devil 
might  let  them  do  their  good  works,  and  what  they  list,  and  yet  have  them  still 
onder  his  lure,  that  he  might  offend  them  at  his  pleasure,  that  had  no  armour  to 
resist  him.  All  the  children  of  God  had  a  right  and  property  in  the  law  of  God,  as 
sppeareth  by  Christ's  words  (John  x.  34).  He  answered  them,  that  is,  the  common 
people,  "  Is  it  not  written  in  your  law  ?  "  As  though  He  should  say.  The  Scripture 
18  yours.  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  Safety  in  the  Scriptures : — We  are  penned  up 
into  the  Scriptures  as  into  our  sheepfolds,  while  we  contain  ourselves  within  them 
there  we  are  safe ;  the  wolf  may  howl,  but  he  cannot  bite  us.    There  we  are  in  the 


39«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch4p.  w. 

tower  of  David,  where  we  cannot  be  assaulted ;  bnt  as  David  acknowledgeth  :  "  It 
my  delight  had  not  been  in  Thy  law,  I  should  utterly  have  perished  in  my  trouble." 
{Bishop  Hacket.)  Grace  the  life  of  bread: — It  is  the  grace  of  God  which  gives 
meat  in  due  season  so  that  health  and  comfort  go  together  vrith  it.  And  heretofore 
I  have  used  this  similitude  to  give  it  light.  Sometimes  when  we  apply  physic  for 
any  disease,  we  are  bid  to  seethe  such  and  such  herbs  in  running  water,  and  then 
to  drink  the  water.  If  this  help  us,  we  all  know  it  was  not  the  water  which  did  the 
sick  man  good,  but  the  decoction  of  the  infusion.  So  it  is  not  bread  nor  drink, 
considered  barely  in  itself,  which  doth  nourish  the  body,  but  the  blessing  of  God 
infused  into  it.  Daniel,  and  the  three  children  of  the  captivity  that  were  with 
him,  prospered  better  with  pulse  and  water  than  any  of  the  Babylonians  with  the 
continual  portion  of  the  king's  meat.  (Ibid.)  God  better  than  bread  : — I  am 
sure  this  makes  it  evident  that  you  will  neither  trust  God  nor  nature  unless  all 
the  art  which  luxury  and  wantonness  can  excogitate  be  added  unto  it.  As  Elkanah 
said  to  Hannah  his  wife,  "  Am  not  I  better  to  thee  than  ten  sons  ?  "  So  let  it  run 
in  your  mind,  as  if  the  Lord  spake  it  to  you  in  your  ear,  ••  Am  not  I  better  unto 
thee  than  all  the  com  in  the  fields ;  than  all  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills ; 
than  all  the  cookery  in  the  world  that  can  be  sweet  upon  the  palate  ?  What  is 
bread?  What  is  a  plentiful  table  without  My  benediction  ?  "  (Ibid.)  Thebest  half  of 
man  lives  not  by  bread : — The  better  half  of  man,  which  is  the  soul  and  spirit,  hves 
not  by  material  bread,  but  by  the  Word  of  God.  {Ibid.)  Bread  and  life  : — 1. 
Our  acceptance  of  the  principle  re-asserted  by  Christ  that  "  Man  [the  man.  God- 
fearing, God-trusting]  liveth  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth 
out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  2.  Be  more  anxious  to  have  God's  blessing,  with  the 
lowliest  and  poorest  fare,  than  the  richest  without  it.  3.  With  reference  to  the 
temptation  to  "  turn  stones  into  bread,"  let  me  ask  if  none  of  you  have  been 
tempted  by  this  very  snare? — Beware  1  (Prov.  xx.  17).  4.  Is  there  not  a  great 
amount  of  this  "  living  by  bread  alone  "  ?  Are  not  provision  for  the  wants  of  the 
body,  and  gathering,  scraping  together  of  the  things  of  the  present  Hfe,  the  all  in 
all  with  many?  {A.  B.  Grosart,  LL.D.)  God  and  bread: — How  shall  we  live? 
Multitudes  of  people  are  asking  that  question  to-day  with  peculiar  earnestness.  The 
text  offers  an  answer.  It  strikes  out,  in  a  sentence,  a  theory  of  Uving.  The  two 
theories  of  living  are  here  squarely  confronted.  Satan,  as  the  prince  of  this  world, 
announces  his,  and  tries  to  win  Christ's  assent  to  it.  "  Man  lives  by  bread  and  by 
bread  alone."  Christ  replies,  "  Man  lives  not  by  bread,  but  by  God."  Man  lives 
by  God's  gifts  only,  as  God  is  behind  them  :  man's  real  support  is  not  in  the  gifts 
but  in  the  Giver.  I.  What  is  covered  by  this  wobd"  bread"?  It  covers  the 
whole  visible  economy  of  life.  For  what  are  the  mass  of  men  spending  their 
energies?  For  food  and  raiment  and  position — for  the  abundance  and  superfluity 
of  these  things.  Now  I  am  not  blind  to  men's  natural  and  pardonable  anxiety 
about  such  things.  Food  and  raiment  are  parts  of  God's  own  economy  of  life  in  this 
world;  and  Christ  Himself  saith,  "Your  Heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have 
need  of  all  these  things."  But  I  am  speaking  of  the  false  position  in  which  men 
put  these  things — of  their  tendency  to  separate  them  from  God,  and  to  seek  to  live 
by  them  alone.  The  gifts  are  to  be  sought  through  the  Giver.  Men  often  seek  food 
and  raiment  without  reference  to  God,  and  often  in  ways  forbidden  by  God  ;  where- 
as Christ  says,  "  Seek  God  first."    II.  If  our  Lord  had  yielded  to  the  temptation.  Ha 

WOULD  HAVE  COMMITTED  HlMSELF  TO  THE  BREAD-THEORY  AS  THE  LAW  OF  HiS  KING- 
DOM, NO  LESS  THAN  OF  His  OWN  LIFE.  He  would  have  said,  by  changing  the 
stones  into  bread,  "As  I  cannot  live  without  bread,  so  My  kingdom  cannot  thrive 
so  long  as  men's  worldly  needs  are  unsupplied.  My  administration  must  be  ft 
turning  of  stones  into  bread.  It  must  make  men  happy  by  at  once  miraculously 
removing  all  want  and  suffering  from  the  world,  and  inaugurating  an  era  of  worldly 
prosperity."  We  know  that  this  has  not  been  Christ's  policy.  Social  prosperity  ia 
based  on  righteousness.  Here,  then — III.  We  have  Christ's  theory  of  life, 
iNDiviDUAi  AND  SOCIAL.  Man  lives  by  God's  gifts,  but  not  by  the  gifts  only.  By 
bread,  but  not  by  bread  alone.  Bread  is  nothing  without  God.  Bread  points  away 
from  itself  to  God.  Bread  has  a  part  in  the  Divine  economy  of  society;  but 
it  oomes  in  with  the  Kingdom  of  God,  under  its  laws,  and  not  as  its  substi- 
tute. The  man  who  lives  by  bread  alone  has  nothing  when  bread  is  gone. 
The  practical  working  of  the  two  theories  is  written  down  in  lines  which 
he  who  runs  may  read.  What  is  my  theory  of  life  ?  Is  it  Christ,  or  Satan  ? 
Is  it  bread  alone,  or  bread  with  God?  (M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  2^ot  by 
bread  alone : — With  this  weapon,  taken  from  the  armoury  of  Deuteronomy,  Jesut 


fHA».  !▼.■»  ST.  LUKE.  897 

foilad  the  first  recorded  attack  of  His  implacable  enemy  and  ours.  It  is  not  the 
voice  of  the  Church  alone  that  may  be  heard  on  this  matter  to-day.      I.  Thh 

world's     GBBArEST     TEACHEK8     ARE     INVEIGHING     AGAINST     THE     SPIRIT     OP     THE   AGE, 

WHICH  WOULD  SACRIFICE  MIND  TO  THE  MoLocH  OP  LUXURY.  1.  "  Man  shall  not  Uve 
by  bread  alone,"  bnt  by  every  scientific  fact,  is  the  evansrel  of  Science.  2.  "  Man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,"  is  the  burden  of  Philosophy.  3.  "  Not  by  bread 
alone,"  chimes  in  the  voice  of  Art.  4.  "  Not  by  bread  alone,"  throbs  in  divinest 
music  from  the  poet's  lyre.  Bnt  all  these  voices  declare  only  half  the  truth — the 
negative  side  of  it.     II.  The  Christian  is  the  only  man  whose  angle  op  vision 

TAKES     IN     the    GREATEST    SWEEP     OP     THE     ILLIMITABLE    HORIZON   OP   TRUTH.        *'  Man 

shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,"  He  declares,  "  but  by  every  word  of  God."  What  is 
every  word  of  God  7  1.  Science  is  a  word  of  God.  2.  Philosophy,  in  so  far  as  she 
has  defined,  expressed,  and  enforced  truth,  has  spoken  for  God.  3.  Have  not  Art 
and  Culture  and  Poetry  voices  for  God  ?  or  are  they  merely  voices  of  man  7  We 
hold  that  they  are  truly  prophets  of  God.  So  far  we  have  the  sympathy  of  many 
minds  not  Christian.  Tbey  say,  ''Here  end  the  words  of  God."  We  say — 
4.  "  Here  begin  the  words  of  God."  Eevelation,  especially  the  revelation  of  the 
Incarnate  Word,  is  the  clearest  and  noblest  word  of  God,  because  it  is  addressed  to 
the  soul  of  man.  All  others  are  but  echoes  of  this  Incarnate  Word.  {W.  Skinmr.) 
The  true  support  of  human  life : — The  first  lesson  these  words  read  to  us  is  this. 
L  That  we  are  not  dependent  solely  on  materul  things  for  the  sustenancb 
AND  nourishment  OP  OUR  LIFE  II.  They  teach  us  to  refuse  to  hold  ob  sup- 
port OUR  life  in  ant  way  apart  from  God's  Word.  HI.  They  point  to  the 
truth  that  there  is  a  life  to  which  bread  does  not  minister.  {Studeiis.)  God'i 
word  the  bread  of  man's  life : — 1.  The  craving  for  Divine  truth  in  the  souls  of  men 
was  never  so  much  of  an  imperious  passion  as  it  is  at  the  present  day.  Men  have 
been  imposed  upon  by  fictions  long  enough.  If  they  are  to  have  true  hfe  they  must 
have  the  very  truth  and  substance  of  things  for  their  nourishment.  2.  Consider 
also  how  imperative  has  become  the  demand  for  beauty,  and  art,  and  poetry. 
There  may  be  goodness  in  the  world  that  is  never  touched  by  the  beauty  of  art, 
and  is  all  unconscious  of  the  inspiration  of  Divine  poetry ;  but  it  has  not  the 
abundant  life  which  Christ  came  to  bring.  3.  Another  of  those  cravings  in  which 
our  best  hfe  is  founded  is  in  the  personal  relations  which  are  so  necessary  to  us. 
In  fellowship  lies  a  great  part  of  the  strength  and  joy  of  life.  We  cannot  truly  live 
without  it.  4.  And  this  brings  us  to  consider  the  deepest  and  highest  personal  rela- 
tion, which  is  the  great  end  of  our  creation  and  redemption,  the  relation  which  we  have 
with  Christ  and  through  Him  with  the  Father.  This  relation  is  the  bread  of  life  to  as 
— the  vital  nourishment  and  enrichment  of  our  noblest  being.  (G.  Slwrt,  M.A.,  D.D.) 
The  mystery  of  life : — I,  Truths  involved  in  this  sating.  1.  Life  is  valuable  and 
ought  to  be  preserved.  Man  is  to  live  ;  nothing  can  be  compared  with  Ufe — wealth, 
honour,  reputation,  dignity,  position,  rank — what  is  all  that  compared  with  life  7 
Life  is  an  invaluable  boon  ;  it  is  the  day  of  grace,  the  day  of  opportunity,  the  day 
of  responsibility.  2.  Life  is  sustained  by  the  use  of  appointed  means.  We  are  not 
to  expect  life  to  be  sustained  by  miracle.  3.  Life  is  dependent  upon  the  great 
power  of  God.  He  is  the  great  Author  of  everything,  and  Arbiter  of  the  destinies 
of  all.  4.  God  has  a  variety  of  means  by  which  He  can  support  hfe.  When  He 
sees  fit,  He  can  and  does  support  life  by  miraculous  agency.  II.  Errors  corrected 
BT  this  sating.  1.  It  censures  the  loose  opinions  of  those  who  hope  to  live  upon 
pleasure.  Christ  says.  Men  are  to  live  upon  bread.  There  is  a  very  serious 
character  about  life.  To  expect  any  one  to  live  upon  pleasure  is  like  asking  a 
hungry  man  to  a  painted  banquet ;  there  is  the  form  of  food,  but  it  oannot  minister 
to  his  support.  2.  It  condemns  the  conduct  of  those  who  toil  only  for  bread. 
Another  world  has  claims,  as  well  as  this.  3.  It  corrects  the  doubts  and  unbehef 
of  many  concerning  Divine  Providence.  4.  It  suggests  the  means  of  life  for  the 
higher  nature  of  man.  {George  Smith.)  Christ's  miracles  reserved  for  others: — 
That  to  which  Satan  here  challenges  the  Lord  was  not  sinful  in  itself,  but  would 
have  been  sinful  for  Him.  To  have  complied,  would  have  been  a  defeat  of  Hia 
whole  mediatorial  work.  If  on  each  sharper  pressure  of  the  world's  suffering  and 
pain  upon  Himself,  He  had  fallen  back  on  the  power  which  as  Son  of  God  He 
possessed,  and  so  exempted  Himself  from  the  common  lot  of  humanity,  where  would 
have  been  the  fellow-man,  the  overcomer  of  the  world  by  ffis  human  faith,  and  not 
by  His  Divine  power  ?  The  whole  life  of  faith  would  have  disappeared.  At  Hia 
Ineamation  the  Lord  had  merged  His  lot  with  the  lot  of  tiie  race ;  the  temptation 
is,  that  He  should  separate  Himself  from  them  anew:  "  Son  of  God,  pat  forth  Thy 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [otap.  it, 

power."  When  in  some  besieged  and  famine-stricken  city,  when  in  hard  straitf 
during  the  march  through  some  waterless  desert,  a  captain  or  commander  refuse* 
special  exemptions  from  the  lot  of  his  suffering  fellow-soldiers,  when  a  Cato  pours 
upon  the  sands  the  single  draught  of  water  which  has  been  procured  in  the  African 
desert  and  brought  for  his  drinking,  such  a  one  in  his  lower  sphere  acts  out  what 
the  Lord  in  the  highest  sphere  of  all  was  acting  out  now.  He  who  made  the  water 
wine,  could  have  made  the  stones  bread  ;  but  to  that  He  was  solicited  by  the  need 
of  others,  to  this  only  by  His  own.  And  this  abstinence  of  self-help  was  the  law  of 
His  whole  life,  a  life  as  wonderful  in  the  miracles  which  it  left  undone  as  in  those 
which  it  wrought.  {Archbishop  Trench.)  Christ's  reply  assumes  our  immor- 
tality : — Suppose  bread  fails.  Suppose  the  body  literally  starves,  and  the  man  dies, 
as  we  say.  Is  Christ's  theory  disproved  ?  By  no  means.  Christ's  choice  led  Him 
to  the  cross,  and  many  a  follower  of  His  has  been  forced  to  choose  between  the 
bread-theory  and  death.  When  God  says  that  man  shall  live  by  His  Word,  He 
means  by  "  life,"  far  more  than  the  little  span  of  human  years,  with  their  eating, 
and  drinking,  and  pleasure,  and  gain-getting.  This  utterance  of  the  world's 
Redeemer  assumes  the  fact  of  immortality.  To  live  by  the  Word  of  God  is  to  share 
the  eternal  life  of  God.  The  bread-life  is  but  the  prelude  and  faint  type  of  this.  It 
gets  all  its  real  meaning  and  value  from  this.  Human  life  is  nothing  if  it  does  not 
foreshadow  the  larger  life  of  eternity :  and  when  the  lower  physical  life  fails  for 
lack  of  bread,  the  man  does  not  cease  to  live :  he  only  begins  to  live,  and  to  prove 
that  if  man  cannot  live  by  bread  alone,  he  can  live  by  God  alone.  {Marvin  R.  Vin- 
cent, D.D.)  The  rival  theories  of  life  tested: — The  practical  working  of  the  two 
theories  is  written  down  in  lines  which  he  that  runs  may  read.  Before  you  is  the 
picture  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows,  who  had  not  where  to  lay  His  head,  reviled  and 
spoken  against,  walking  by  His  hard  road  to  the  garden  and  to  the  cross,  and  yet 
deliberately  choosing  to  live  by  God  rather  than  by  bread ;  and  you  see  the  choice 
vindicated  by  the  peace  and  poise  of  that  life,  by  the  enthusiasm  of  its  faith,  by  its 
heavenly  joy  in  its  work,  by  its  evergrowing  power  over  the  life  of  the  world,  by  the 
adoration  and  love  and  praise  daily  wafted  towards  it  from  millions  of  souls  :  and 
all  this  while  the  worldly  dominion  He  refused  has  proved  a  vanished  shadow, 
while  the  old  empires  have  gone  down  in  ruin,  and  their  pleasures  have  turned  to 
a  corruption  which  is  an  offence  in  the  world's  nostrils.  The  old  city  which  rang 
with  the  cry  of  ''Bread  and  the  Circus  1 "  is  only  a  monument  now.  The  tourist 
wanders  over  the  Palatine,  and  peers  down  into  the  choked  vaults  of  the  Caasars* 
palaces ;  and  the  antiquarian  rummages  where  Nero's  fish-ponds  gleamed,  and 
climbs  along  the  broken  tiers  of  the  Coliseum,  from  which  the  culture  and  beauty 
and  fashion  of  Rome  looked  down  with  delight  upon  Christian  martyrs  in  the  fangs 
of  tigers.  As  you  look  on  this  picture,  surely  you  will  take  fresh  heart ;  surely  you 
will  win  a  new  faith  in  Christ's  theory  ;  surely  you  will  not  dare,  with  the  glory  of 
that  life  before  you,  to  take  the  baser  theory  of  the  prince  of  this  world,  to  choose 
the  hfe  which  is  by  bread  alone  1  {Ibid.)  Man  lives  by  the  Word  of  God : — The 
Word.  Now  what  is  a  word  ?  The  human  heart  is  peopled  with  thoughts  and 
feelings  hidden  away  in  its  secret  lanes  and  alleys,  and  what  is  a  word  bat  a  silver 
chariot  that  rolls  out  through  the  portals  of  the  lips  bearing  some  denizen  of  the 
palaces  and  hovels  that  fill  the  heart's  hidden  courts  ?  What  are  words  but  the 
commerce  of  mind  with  mind  T  Words  are  ships  that  go  to  and  fro  freighted  with 
thoughts,  feelings,  affections;  and  there  are  silver  words  hke  the  white-winged 
sloops  and  schooners,  graceful  words  like  the  beautiful  yachts,  iron  words  like  the 
steamships,  barbed  words  like  the  man-of-war  :  words  are  sometimes  sweet  as  tossed 
flowers,  sometimes  sharp  and  stinging  like  a  shot  arrow ;  words  are  the  commeice 
of  mind  with  mind,  and  yet  if  one  finite  mind  needs  a  hundred  and  fifteen  thousand 
words  to  express  its  thoughts,  how  many  words,  think  you,  could  alone  be  adequate 
to  express  the  infinite  mind  of  the  Infinite  God  ?  And  because  the  infinite  words 
are  so  many,  and  man  must  live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of 
God,  and  as  these  words  are  innumerable.  He  hath  found  out  a  way  of  summing 
them  all  up  in  one  word — the  Word  of  God.  It  is  by  this  Word  only  that  men  can 
live.  {F.  C.  Ewer,  D.D.)  The  Word  of  God  in  truth  and  duty  : — The  Word  of 
God  includes  two  notions,  one  of  revelation  and  one  of  commandment.  Whenever 
God  speaks  by  any  of  His  voices,  it  is  first  to  tell  us  some  truth  which  we  did  not 
know  before,  and  second  to  bid  as  do  something  which  we  have  not  been  doing. 
Every  Word  of  God  includes  these  two.  Truth  and  duty  are  always  wedded.  There 
is  no  truth  which  has  not  its  corresponding  duty.  And  there  is  no  duty  which  has 
not  its  corresponding  truth.     We  are  always  separating  them.    We  are  always 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  399 

trying  to  learn  truths,  as  i£  there  were  no  duties  belonging  to  them,  as  if  the  know- 
ing of  them  would  make  no  difference  in  the  way  we  lived.  That  is  the  reason 
why  our  hold  on  the  truths  we  learn  is  so  weak.  And  we  are  always  trying  to  do 
duties  as  if  there  were  no  truths  behind  them ;  as  if,  that  is,  they  were  mere 
arbitrary  things  which  rested  on  no  principles  and  had  no  intelligible  reasons. 
That  is  the  reason  why  we  do  our  duties  so  superficially  and  unreliably.  When 
every  truth  is  rounded  into  its  duty,  and  every  duty  is  deepened  into  its  truth,  then 
we  shall  have  a  clearness  and  consistency  and  permanence  of  moral  life  which  we 
hardly  dream  of  now.  (Ibid.)  The  higher  life  in  man : — The  temptation  of  Jesus 
was  not  a  splendid  solitary  victory  of  divinity  over  human  conditions.  It  was  the 
assertion  of  the  possible  victory  that  waits  for  every  man  who,  like  Christ,  has  in 
him  the  power  of  divinity.  Jesus  found  in  His  human  consciousness  the  original 
purpose  of  human  life.  He  brought  it  out  clearly.  He  said,  It  is  not  the  Divine 
prerogative  alone.  Here  it  is  in  man — the  power  to  live,  not  for  comfort,  but  for 
truth  and  duty.  Here  it  is  in  this  humanity  of  Mine,  along  with  all  else  that  ia 
truly  human,  all  My  tastes  and  propensities,  all  My  aches  and  pains.  Here  it  is 
in  Me,  and,  lol  other  men  have  found  it  in  themselves,  "  It  is  written,"  &c.  And 
men,  all  the  more  clearly  since  Jesus  showed  it  there,  are  always  finding  in  their 
own  consciousness  and  in  the  prolonged  consciousness  of  their  race  which  we  call 
experience  or  history,  this  same  higher  capacity  or  higher  necessity  of  man.  They 
find  it  in  their  own  consciousness.  What  do  we  make  of  every  strong  young  man's 
discontent  with  the  actual  conditions  of  things  before  he  settles  down  into  the 
limited  contentment,  the  sense  that  things  are  about  as  good  as  they  are  likely  to 
be,  which  makes  up  the  dull  remainder  of  his  life  ?  Question  yourself,  and  see  how 
there  is  something  in  you  which  rebels  when  the  lower  expediency  of  any  action  ia 
set  before  you  as  its  suflfiinent  justification,  how  something  rises  up  in  you  and  tella 
you  that  there  is  a  higher  expediency,  and  makes  you  want  to  sweep  away  the 
worldly  maxims  which  you  cannot  confute,  but  which  you  know  are  false.  Some- 
times there  comes  in  all  of  us  a  strong,  deep  craving  to  give  up  this  endless,  com- 
plicated search  after  what  it  is  safe  or  proper  or  fashionable  to  believe,  and  just  to 
seek  what  is  true  ;  and  to  get  rid  of  these  thousand  artificial  standards  of  what  a 
man  is  expected  to  do,  and,  come  of  it  what  will,  simply  do  what  is  right :  and  when 
we  are  simply  asking,  "  What  is  right  ?  "  the  answer  always  comes.  (Ibid.)  The 
deeper  power  in  man: — There  always  is  this  deeper  power  in  man,  and  men  are 
always  finding  it  there.  I  think  we  are  amazed  not  at  the  rarity,  but  rather  at  the 
abundance,  of  the  power  of  martyrdom.  When  a  great  cause  breaks  out  in  war, 
and  needs  its  champions,  how  wonderful  it  is  to  us,  with  our  low  notions  of 
humanity,  to  see  the  land  \vith  its  furrows  full  of  the  deserted  ploughs  from  which 
the  men  have  run  to  go  and  die  for  principle,  and  save  their  country.  How  wonder- 
folly  frequent  are  the  stories  that  we  hear  of  men  giving  their  lives  to  do  their  duty. 
The  exception  is  where  the  engineer  of  the  railroad  train  which  is  rushing  into 
certain  ruin  deserts  his  post ;  not  where  he  stands  still  and  calm,  and  is  found 
with  the  iron  clenched  in  his  dead  hand.  No  doubt,  if  he  had  time  to  think  of  it 
at  all,  he  would  be  surprised  at  himself  in  the  terrible  instant  when  his  quick 
resolve  was  made.  He  reaches  down  through  the  ordinary  standards  of  his  life, 
and  takes  up  the  deepest  one  of  all,  and  says,  "  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone, 
but  by  every  word  of  (rod ;  and  the  Word  of  God  which  is  my  duty  now  says,  'Stand 
and  die ' ;  and  so  I  cannot  live  except  by  dying."  And  in  spite  of  all  the  men  who 
are  sacrificing  their  convictions  to  their  interests,  there  are  thousands  of  men  who 
might  be  at  the  head  of  things,  and  rich  and  famous,  if  they  would  only  give  up 
what  they  think  is  true  for  bread.  Oh,  it  is  very  common !  Men  find  in  their  own 
nature  necessities  which  they  must  submit  to,  and  they  do  submit  to  them.  We 
can  hear  in  their  submission,  though  it  makes  them  very  poor,  something  if  that 
same  trumpet-like  triumph  and  exaltation  which  I  think  we  always  feel  in  those 
words  from  the  lips  of  the  sick  and  hungry  Jesus,  "  Not  by  bread  alone,  but  hy  the 
Word  of  God."  (Ibid.)  Rectitude  is  better  than  profit: — When  Mr.  Bussell 
Lowell  was  called  as  a  witness  before  the  Senate  Committee  to  give  evidf>nce  on 
International  Copyright,  he  lifted  up  the  whole  discussion  from  the  level  of  interests 
and  expediences  into  the  clear  air  of  duties  and  moralities.  He  said,  "  I  myself 
take  the  moral  view  of  the  question.  I  believe  this  is  a  mere  question  of  moi-ality 
and  justice.  One  could  live  a  great  deal  cheaper,  undoubtedly,  if  he  could  supply 
himself  from  other  people,  without  either  labour  or  cost.  But  at  the  same  time- 
well,  it  was  not  called  honest  when  I  was  young,  and  that  is  all  I  can  say.  I  can- 
not help  thinking  that  a  book  which  was,  I  believe,  more  read  when  I  was  young 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tt, 

than  it  is  now,  is  quite  right  when  it  says,  •  Eighteousness  exalteth  a  nation.*  I 
believe  this  is  a  question  of  righteousness.  If  I  were  asked  what  book  is  better 
than  a  cheap  book,  I  should  answer  that  there  is  one  book,  and  that  one  is  a  book 
honestly  come  by,"  Remembering  what  is  written  : — It  is  related  of  the  late  Lord 
Ampthill,  British  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  Berlin,  that  during  his  mission  in 
Rome  he  possessed  a  huge  boa  constrictor  and  interested  himself  in  watching  its 
habits.  One  day  the  monster  escaped  from  the  box  where  he  supposed  it  was 
asleep,  quietly  wound  itself  around  his  body,  and  began  gradually  to  tighten  its 
folds.  His  position  became  extremely  perilous;  but  the  consummate  coolness 
and  self-possession  which  had  enabled  him  to  win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph 
befriended  him  in  this  dangerous  emergency.  He  remembered  there  was  a  bone 
in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which,  if  he  could  find  and  break  he  would  save 
himself.  He  was  aware  that  either  he  or  the  snake  must  perish.  Not  a  moment 
must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He  deliberately  seized  the  head  of  the  serpent,  thrust 
his  hand  down  its  throat,  and  smashed  the  vital  bone.  The  coils  were  relaxed, 
the  victim  fell  at  his  feet,  and  he  was  free  I  In  all  wickedness  there  is  weakness, 
and  it  is  a  grand  thing  to  discern  the  vulnerable  spot  and  to  be  ready  with  the 
exact  truth,  fact,  promise,  which  deals  death  to  the  foe.  This  insight  and 
power  are  given  to  all  who  prayerfully  study  God's  Word.  (Christian  Journal.) 
Man  liveth  not  by  bread  alone  : — I.  Adam's  brief  life  not  bt  bread  alone  in 
Eden.  1.  The  angels  living  by  the  Word  of  God  alone  without  bread.  "He 
maketh  His  angels  spirits ;  and  the  highest  of  their  heavenly  host,  those  amongst 
them  that  "  excel  in  strength  "  live  only  by  "  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  His  Word." 
The  prince  o£  this  world  in  his  first  estate  lived  by  the  Word  of  God,  but  he  kept 
not  that  Word,  for  "  His  Word  is  truth,"  and  he  "  abode  not  in  the  truth,"  but 
became  "  a  liar  and  the  father  of  it."  2.  The  ox  living  by  bread  alone  without  the 
Word  of  God.  To  the  ox  his  Creator  gave  "  every  green  herb  for  meat,"  but  with- 
out imparting  the  knowledge  of  his  Maker,  or  capacity  for  acquiriug  it.  The  beast 
of  the  field  was  formed  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  sustained  by  His  power ;  but  with 
no  command  either  what  to  eat  or  from  what  to  abstain,  with  no  consciousness  of 
good  or  evil,  of  obedience  or  transgression,  and  with  no  conception  of  the  great 
Being  to  whom  He  owed  his  life.  He  ate  the  grass  without  sin  and  without  holiness, 
and  lived  by  grass  alone  without  the  Word  of  God.  As  he  was  formed,  so  he  liveth 
on  from  generation  to  generation  to  the  world's  end,  "  asking  no  questions."  3. 
Adam  living  by  bread  with  the  Word  of  God.  "  In  the  image  of  God  made  He  man," 
and  He  made  him  for  communion  with  Himself.  He  did  not  evolve  him  from  any 
beast  of  the  field  after  its  likeness,  but  fashioned  him  in  His  own  Ukeness,  "  a  Uttle 
lower  than  the  angels,"  leaving  the  ox  utterly  and  for  ever  incapable  of  entering 
into  the  heart  or  mind  of  man  ;  but  creating  man  capable  at  once  of  entering  into 
His  own  thoughts,  and  of  loving  and  being  consciously  loved  by  the  invisible  God. 
From  the  day  of  man's  creation  he  lived  by  bread,  but  not  for  one  hour  by  bread 
alone  without  the  Word  of  God.  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  he  might  freely  eat ; 
but  the  liberty  was  by  the  Divine  Word  in  express  permission,  and  in  so  eating  man 
lived.  II.  Israel's  chequered  life  not  bt  bread  alone  in  the  wilderness. 
1.  Israel  redeemed  from  Egypt  and  day  by  day  fed  by  the  hand  of  God.  One  chief 
end  of  the  forty  years'  travelling  through  the  wilderness  was  to  train  Israel  to  know 
that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by  the  Word  of  God ;  showing  us  both 
how  high  a  place  this  lesson  takes  in  the  Divine  teaching,  and  how  slow  men  are 
to  learn  it.  2.  Bansomed  men  learning  to  live  not  by  bread  alone.  When  the 
three  thousand  converts  at  Pentecost  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for 
the  remission  of  sins,  "  they  did  eat  their  meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of 
heart,  praising  God."  It  was  repentance  unto  life  and  deliverance  from  condem- 
nation that  had  been  granted  them  from  heaven ;  and  they  had  no  care  "  what  they 
should  eat  or  wherewithal  they  should  be  clothed."  But  for  the  first  time  in  their 
lives  they  had  learned  that  man  does  not  live  by  bread  only,  but  by  every  word  of 
God ;  the  eating  of  their  daily  food  became  part  of  their  higher  and  everlasting  life  ; 
and  receiving  it  from  the  hand  of  a  reconciled  Father,  they  lived  not  by  bread 
alone,  but  by  bread  with  the  Word  of  God  that  sanctified  it  to  them.  III.  Thb 
Son  of  Man's  whole  life  on  earth  never  by  bread  alone.  {Tlie  Expositor.) 
Ood  in  means  : — The  very  heathen  apprehended  this  point  very  well ;  they  made 
their  goddess  Providence  to  be  the  midwife  of  nature,  showing  that  nature  could  do 
nothing  without  the  power  of  God's  providence.  Aiid  hence,  though  the  wiser  of 
them  acknowledge  but  one  God,  yet  to  every  several  creature  gave  they  the  name 
tf  Gbd,  aa  of  Ceres  to  the  com,  of  Baoohus  to  the  wine,  of  Neptune  to  the  watora^ 


.nrj  ST.  LUKE,  401 

to  show  that  the  power  of  God  was  in  these  creatnres,  and  that  it  was  not  so  much 
they,  l^nt  God  in  them,  and  with  them  that  wrought.  What  a  shame  then  for 
Christians  to  repose  and  secure  ourselves  in  these  outward  means?  Oh,  when  on« 
hath  gotten  a  great  living,  and  great  friends,  we  say,  Oh,  he  is  made  for  ever.  God 
that  can  break  the  staff  of  bread,  can  break  the  staff  of  friends,  riches,  favour,  and 
all  such  means  as  we  trust  to.  As  He  did  the  staff  of  physic  to  Asa  (2  Chron.  xv.) 
As  He  restrained  the  fire  (Dan.  iii.)  from  hurting  and  from  burning,  so  can  He  also 
from  helping  and  from  warming.  If  we  want  means,  then  let  ns  not  only  seek  to 
them,  but  to  God.  And  if  we  have  them,  though  in  never  such  strength  and 
abundance,  yet  let  ns  as  earnestly  crave  God's  blessing  and  help,  as  we  would  do  in 
our  greatest  want.  For  what  have  we  when  we  have  the  means  ?  Have  we  God 
locked  up  in  the  means?  No,  we  have  but  dead  things,  nnabla  to  help  without 
God.  Therefore  in  the  fourth  petition,  Christ  teacheth  the  greatest  princes  that 
Bwim  in  wealth,  to  pray  for  their  daily  bread,  as  the  poorest  beggar.  2.  This 
teaches  as  never  to  use  meats,  drinks,  marriage,  physio,  recreation,  apparel,  habi- 
tation, or  any  other  of  God's  creatures  without  prayer.  This  sanctiiies  them  all 
(1  Tim.  iv.  4),  nor  yet  otherwise  to  go  about  any  business.  (D.  Dyke.)  Living 
by  the  Word: — In  this  case  the  temptation  seems  to  refer  to  natural  hunger,  but 
the  answer  of  our  Lord  goes  deeper,  even  to  the  life  itself.    I.  The  wobds  or  UT 

TEXT,  TAKEN  IN  THEIB  LOWEST  SENSE,  IN  WHICH  SaTAN  PROBABLY  UNDERSTOOD  THEM,  ARE 

8IMPLT  TBUB.  Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone ;  he  needs  raiment,  shelter,  and  a 
thousand  other  things,  not  included  in  bread  alone.  Man  creates  nothing.  From 
the  grain  that  springs  up  after  his  planting  and  furnishes  "bread  to  the  eater  and 
seed  to  the  sower  "  to  the  lightnings  of  heaven  that  flash  along  the  lines  of  His  pro- 
viding, carrying  His  messages  over  continents  and  under  oceans  to  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth — all,  all  is  of  God,  the  result  of  His  inward  thought  and  His 
spoken  Word,  and  we  are  living  now,  as  never  before,  in  all  the  history  of  our  race, 
not  by  bread  alone  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God. 
But  man  is  an  intellectual  being  and — II.  His  intellectual  lite  requibes  more  than 
BREAD,  Nothing  satisfies  human  intelligence  but  the  Word,  "  every  word  that  pro- 
ceedeth out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  The  human  mind  is  so  constituted  as  to 
recognize  every  expressed  idea  of  the  Divine  mind.  Take  English  literature,  for 
instance,  and  what  is  there  in  it  that  deserves  to  live  and  that  wUl  live,  that  does 
not  in  some  degree  express  the  Divine  thought.  Take  the  bad  books  that  are 
printed — literary  garbage,  rightly  excluded  from  the  mails,  and  hauled  oat  and 
dumped  with  other  garbage  on  waste  places.  How  it  shuns  the  hght !  Literature 
can  only  live,  and  bless  mankind,  that  has  in  it  the  Word  of  God.  Mark  the 
history  of  our  own  English  literature.  It  had  its  rise  in  the  fourteenth  century  in 
the  translation  and  publishing  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  John  Wickliffe.  It 
gathered  new  life  in  the  times  of  the  English  Eeformation  when  the  same  Word 
was  freely  given  to  the  people,  and  reached  its  zenith,  intellectually  considered,  in 
the  reign  of  King  James  at  the  hands  of  Shakespeare  and  Lord  Bacon.  Literature 
lost  none  of  its  strength,  but  became  purer  in  the  days  of  Milton  and  more  religious 
during  the  revival  period  under  Whitfield  and  the  Wesleys.  Take  out  of  our  literatara 
all  that  is  inspired  by  the  Bible  and  all  that  expresses  the  Divine  Word  in  creation, 
and  little  would  remain  worth  saving.  Yes,  man  lives  by  ideas.  God's  ideas 
inscribed,  it  may  be,  on  the  unhewn  tables  of  stone  that  build  up  the  foundations 
of  the  earth,  or  they  may  wave  in  beauty  on  the  green  banners  that  adorn  its  sur- 
face, or  shine  with  resplendent  glory  in  the  heavens  above  us,  wherever  they  exist 
they  are  Gods  ideas.  The  scientist  in  his  deepest  researches  only  discovers  them. 
He  is  engaged  in  translating  an  ancient  manuscript,  and  if  he  dares  to  say  there  is 
no  God  he  is  trying  to  translate  a  book  that  has  no  author.  But  the  meaning  of 
Christ's  answer  to  the  tempter  is  deeper  and  broader  than  this.  Man  never  truly 
lives  until  the  conditions  of  his  moral  nature  are  met  and  satisfied.  This  is  a  fact 
too  often  overlooked  by  the  epicurean  and  the  scientist,  and  it  will  remain  a  fact 
even  after  these  worthies  have  exhausted  all  their  resources  in  trying  to  prove  that 
man  is  nothing  more  than  an  intellectual  brute.  III.  Man's  moral  lite  bequibes 
uoBB  THAN  BREAD  AND  IDEAS.  Man  is  as  truly  moral  as  he  is  intellectual  and 
physical.  His  moral  nature  can  no  more  be  fed  on  bread  than  his  physical  powers 
can  be  sustained  by  pure  thought.  If  in  the  Divine  word  provision  has  been  made 
for  the  body  and  the  mind  it  would  be  a  strange  and  inexplicable  oversight  if  no 
word  has  been  spoken  of  sufficient  vitality  to  meet  the  wants  of  man's  moral 
natnre.  And  tlus  oversight,  if  it  exists,  is  all  the  more  grievous  from  the 
fact  that  man's  happiness  in  this  life  depends  absolutely  upon  his  moral  oonditioa. 

26 


40a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«HA».  m 

{H.  C.  Ctuhing.)  Extraordinary  mearu  : — God  is  not  tied  to  the  second  ordinaij- 
canses,  but  He  can  do  that  without  them  which  He  can  do  with  them.  This  will  appeaz 
in  these  particulars :  1.  God  sometimes  works  without  the  means  at  all,  as  in  the 
first  creation  of  the  chaos,  and  in  Christ's  healing  of  many  diseases.  2.  God  some> 
times  works  by  ordinary,  but  those  weak  and  insufficient,  means  in  the  order  of 
nature.  As  when  the  bunch  of  figs  healed  Hezekiah's  sore  (2  Kings  xx.) ;  as  when 
Jacob's  rods  laid  before  the  sheep  of  one  colour,  and  made  them  conceive,  and 
bring  forth  parti-coloured  ones  (Gen.  xxx.) ;  when  the  wind  brought  the  Israelites 
quails  in  such  abundance  (Exod.  xvi.) ;  when  Gideon's  three  hundred  soldiers  got 
the  victory  (Judg.  vii.) ;  and  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  alone  chased  away 
and  slew  so  many  of  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6).  3.  God  otherwhiles  works 
altogether  by  unusual  and  unwonted  means :  such  as  was  manna  in  the  desert.  4. 
God  sometimes  works  not  only  by  means  diverse  from,  but  quite  contrary  unto,  the 
ordinary.  As  the  blind  man's  eyes  are  restored  with  clay  and  spittle  (John  ix.) ; 
and  Jonah  is  saved  by  being  in  the  whale's  belly.  (D.  Dyke.)  Unlawful  meant 
not  needed .'—iie  needs  not  His  own  lawful,  much  less  thy  unlawful,  means. 
Unlawful  it  was  under  the  law  to  couple  an  ox  and  an  ass  together,  how  much  more 
to  couple  God's  holy  and  just  providence,  and  thine  unholy  and  onrighteooa 
means?    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  5,  8.  And  the  devil,  taMng  Him  np  Into  an  hlgli  mountain,  showed  waX» 
TTini  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  in  a  moment  of  time. — Satan  a  close  solicitor : — 
1.  The  importunity  of  Satan  :  he  is  upon  our  Saviour  again :  "  Again  the  devil  taketh 
Him  up."  2.  The  variety  of  his  shifts :  from  the  pinacle  of  the  Temple  "  he  taketh 
Him  up  to  an  exceeding  high  mountain."  3.  Note  by  what  gate  or  passage  he  would 
enter  his  temptation  :  by  the  eye ;  he  shows  a  goodly  object  unto  Him.  4.  The  dignity 
of  the  object :  he  shows  Him  kingdoms.  5.  For  the  amplitude  and  generality  :  ••All 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world."  6.  In  their  most  amiable  and  desirable  shape  he  showed 
them  in  their  glory.  7.  Satan  showed  himself  to  be  an  arch  juggler,  or  prestidigitator, 
as  artists  call  it,  for  St.  Luke  adds,  that  he  showed  aU  this  "  in  a  moment  of  time." 
A  close  solicitor,  and  a  diligence  worthy  to  be  commended,  if  it  had  been  in  a  good 
cause  ;  but  they  that  are  in  a  wrong  way  are  most  zealous  in  their  course,  and 
negotiate  for  hell  more  urgently  than  we  do  for  heaven.  (Bishop  Hacket.)  Temp- 
tation recurrent : — But  that  tyranny  is  uncessant,  the  hatred  of  the  devil  hath  no 
stint ;  expect  it,  be  ready  for  it,  and  let  it  not  sting  your  conscience  with  horror  if 
you  find  somewhat  within  you  always  warring  against  the  Spirit ;  temptations  are 
not  like  some  diseases,  which  are  not  incident  to  a  man  above  once  in  his  life, 
escape  once  and  secure  for  ever,  but  hke  hereditary  infirmities  which  are  ever 
recurring  to  torment  the  flesh.  A  quotidian  is  more  like  to  be  cured,  if  it  be  well 
looked  to,  than  an  ague  whose  paroxysms  keep  longer  distance.  (Ibid.)  Prin- 
ciple not  place  the  safeguard : — But  it  is  not  the  shifting  to  this  place  or  that  place 
that  breeds  contrary  affections  in  a  good  man.  Where  there  is  an  inward  principle 
of  goodness,  firm  and  sure  under  every  cope  of  heaven  the  mind  is  unalterable. 
(Ibid.)  Renewed  temptation : — His  mouth  was  stopped,  and  he  was  set  nonplus 
in  the  former  temptation,  yet  how  soon  doth  he  begin  to  open  his  mouth 
again  ?  He  was  repulsed,  yet  he  comes  to  fight  again.  He  hath  many  strings 
to  his  bow,  and  many  arrows  in  his  quiver.  When  one  way  takes  not  he  tries 
forth  with  another ;  yea,  he  will  make  proof  of  all  ere  he  leaves.  (Ibid.)  The  eye 
the  portal  to  the  heart : — There  is  nothing  so  soon  enticed  and  led  away  as  the  eye ; 
it  is  the  broker  between  the  heart  and  all  wicked  lusts  that  be  in  the  world.  And 
therefore  it  was  great  folly  in  Hezekiah  to  show  his  robes  and  treasure  (Isa.  xxxix. 
2),  as  he  was  told  by  the  prophet ;  it  stirred  up  such  coals  of  desire  in  them  that 
saw  them,  as  could  not  be  quenched  till  they  had  fetched  away  all  that  he  had, 
and  all  that  his  ancestors  had  laid  up,  even  till  that  day.  It  is  the  wisdom  that  is 
used  nowadays,  when  men  would  have  one  thing  for  another,  to  show  the  thing 
they  would  so  exchange  ;  as  the  buyer  showeth  his  money,  and  the  seller  his  wares 
in  the  best  manner  that  he  can,  each  to  entice  the  other  (by  the  eye)  to  the  desire 
of  the  heart.  (Bishop  Andrewes.)  Fancy  enticed: — His  power  and  work  upon 
the  fancies  of  men  is  none  of  the  least  of  his  ways  whereby  he  advanceth  the 
pleasures  of  sin.  That  he  hath  such  a  power,  hath  been  discoursed  before,  and 
that  a  fancy  raised  to  a  great  expectation  makes  things  appear  otherwise  than  what 
they  are,  is  evident  from  common  experience.  The  value  of  most  things  depends 
rather  upon  fancy  than  the  internal  worth  of  them,  and  men  are  more  engaged  to 
a  pursuit  of  thiugs  by  the  estimation  which  fancy  hath  begat  in  their  minds,  than 


CBAV.  IT,  ST.  LUKE.  40t 

by  certain  principles  of  knowledge.  Children  by  fancy  have  a  value  of  their  toys, 
and  are  so  powerfully  swayed  by  it,  that  things  of  far  greater  price  cannot  stay 
their  designs,  nor  divert  their  course.  Satan  knows  that  the  best  of  men  are  some- 
times childish,  apt  to  be  led  about  by  their  conceits,  and  apt  in  their  conceits  to 
apprehend  things  far  otherwise  than  what  they  are  in  truth.  {R.  Gilpin.)  The 
after-claps  of  $in : — We,  knowing  this  craft,  must  labour  in  these  temptations  to 
see  that  which  the  devil  hides,  and  to  apprehend  the  fearful  after-claps.  Let  us 
labour  to  see  Jael's  nail  as  well  as  her  milk ;  Delilah's  scissors  as  well  as  her 
bosom ;  the  snake's  poison  as  well  as  her  embrace ;  and  the  bee's  sting  as  well  as 
her  honey.  (D.  Dyke.)  True  sight  after  sin: — The  devil  blinds  ns  so  that  we 
see  not  till  afterward,  as  Gen.  iii.,  "Then  were  their  eyes  opened."  (Ibid.) 
Distance  lends  enchantment  to  the  view  : — Put  a  bit  of  broken  glass,  or  a  shred  of 
worthless  mica,  in  a  ploughed  field,  and  let  the  sun  shine  upon  it,  and  it  sparkles 
as  vividly  as  that  gem  which  "  spills  its  drop  of  light  "  on  the  finger  of  beauty. 
"  Afar  off,"  it  is  a  glory  :  near,  just  a  bit  of  broken  glass,  or  shred  of  mica.  My 
dear  friends,  beware  of  the  "  glory,"  the  "  splendour  "  that  seems  to  show  verv 
substantially  at  a  distance,  but  which  needs  only  to  be  approached  to  prove  unreal. 
I  remember  very  well  how,  up  in  the  Italian  and  Styrian  Alps,  many  an  apparent 
sky-kissing  range  of  yet  mightier  Alps  seemed  to  tower,  white  and  lustrous,  over 
what  we  had  deemed  the  loftiest  peaks.  They  were  but  vanishing  clouds,  climbing 
higher  than  the  peaks,  but  with  no  base — showing  fair,  glitteringly,  astonishingly, 
unutterably  beautiful,  but  carrying  within  them  the  rain  that  drenches,  and  the 
lightning  that  smites  and  the  blast  that  loosens  the  roaring  avalanche.  "  Take 
heed  "  to  this  artifice  of  the  world's  "  show  "  at  a  distance  and  from  the  mountain. 
top.  There  is  delusion  and  peril  in  the  "  splendour."  (A.  B.  Grosart.)  And  the 
devil  taketh  Him  up  into  an  high  mountain  : — Here  the  temptation  seems  eminently 
gross.  Yet  devil-worship  can  assume  many  forms,  and  some  of  these  may  be  most 
refined.  Worship  is  homage,  and  homage  to  a  person,  real  or  supposed,  repre- 
sentative of  certain  principles,  modes  of  action,  and  aims.  What  it  here  means 
seems  evident  enough.  Jesus  is  recognized  as  seeking  a  kingdom,  as  intending, 
indeed,  to  found  one.  His  aims  are  confessed  to  be  more  than  Jewish,  not  national, 
but  universal ;  not  an  extension  of  Israel,  but  a  comprehension  of  the  world.  It  is 
known  that  His  purpose  is  to  be  the  Messiah,  not  of  the  Jews,  but  of  man.  The 
only  question  is  as  to  the  nature  of  His  kinghood  and  kingdom.  The  kingdom  here 
offered  is  one  not  of  the  Spirit,  but  "  of  the  world."  And  "  world  "  here  means  not 
what  it  may  be  to  the  good,  but  what  it  is  to  the  bad.  It  and  its  kingdoms  may 
be  won  at  once,  and  will  be,  if  Jesus  worships  the  devil,  i.e.,  makes  evil  His  good, 
uses  unholy  means  to  accomplish  His  ends.  It  is  as  if  the  tempter  had  said, 
"  Survey  the  world,  and  mark  what  succeeds.  Away  there  in  Italy  lives  and  rules 
the  emperor  of  the  world,  a  selfish,  sensual  man,  whose  right  is  might.  Over  there 
in  Caesarea  sits  his  red-handed,  yet  vacillating,  procurator.  In  your  own  Galilee  a 
treacherous  and  lustful  Herod  reigns,  its  deputy  lord.  Up  in  Jerusalem  are  priests 
and  scribes,  great  in  things  external,  the  fierce  fanatics  of  formalism.  Everywhere 
anboly  men  rule,  unholy  means  prevail.  Worldliness  holds  the  world  in  fee.  By 
it  alone  can  you  conquer.  Use  the  means  and  the  men  of  Caesar,  and  your  success 
will  be  swift  and  sure.  Worship  me,  and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  thine." 
The  temptation  was  subtly  adapted  to  the  mood  and  the  moment,  and  was  as  evil 
as  subtle.  Bad  means  make  bad  ends.  Good  ends  do  not  justify  evil  means  ;  evil 
means  deprave  good  ends.  So  a  Messianic  kingdom,  instituted  and  established  by 
worldliness,  had  been  a  worldly  kingdom,  no  better  than  the  coarse  and  sensuous 
empire  of  Eome.  And  Jesus,  while  He  felt  the  force,  saw  the  evil  of  the  tempta- 
tion, and  vanquished  it  by  the  truth  on  which  His  own  spiritual  and  eternal  city 
was  to  be  founded,  "Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,"  &c.  (A.  M.  Fair' 
bairn,  D.D.)  The  force  of  this  temptation : — Could  it  be  other  than  a  temptation 
to  think  that  He  might,  if  He  would,  lay  a  righteous  grasp  upon  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment, leap  into  the  chariot  of  power,  and  ride  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer  ? 
Glad  visions  arose  before  Him  of  the  prisoner  breaking  jubilant  from  the  cell  of 
injustice  ;  of  the  widow  lifting  up  the  bowed  head  before  the  devouring  Pharisee  ; 
of  weeping  children  bursting  into  shouts  at  the  sound  of  the  wheels  of  the  chariot 
before  which  oppression  and  wrong  shrunk  and  withered,  behind  which  sprung  the 
fir-tree  instead  of  the  thorn,  and  the  myrtle  instead  of  the  briar.  Could  He  not 
mould  the  people  at  His  will  ?  Could  He  not,  transfigured  in  snowy  garments,  call 
aload  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  "  Behold  your  King  "  ?  And  the  fierce  warriors 
of  His  nation  would  start  at  the  sound ;  the  ploughshare  would  be  beaten  into  the 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  w. 

sword,  and  the  pruning-hook  into  the  epear.  Ah,  but  when  were  His  garments 
white  as  snow  ?  Not  when  He  looked  to  such  a  conquest ;  but  when,  on  a  moment 
like  this.  He  ••  spake  of  the  decease  which  He  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem." 
But  how  would  He,  thus  conquering,  be  a  servant  of  Satan  T  I  will  not  inquire 
whether  such  an  enterprise  could  be  accomplished  without  the  worship  of  Satan. 
But  I  will  ask  whether  to  know  better  and  do  not  so  well,  is  not  a  serving  of  Satan? 
whether  to  lead  men  on  in  the  name  of  God  as  towards  the  best,  when  the  end  is 
not  the  best,  is  not  a  serving  of  Satan?  whether  to  flatter  their  pride  by  making 
them  conquerors  of  the  eoemies  of  their  nation  instead  of  their  own  evils,  is  not  a 
serving  of  Satan?  Nothing  but  the  obedience  of  the  Son,  the  obedience  unto  death, 
the  absolute  doing  of  the  will  of  God  because  it  was  the  truth,  could  redeem  the 
prisoner,  the  widow,  the  orphan.  But  it  would  redeem  them  by  redeeming  the 
conquest- ridden  conqueror  too,  the  strife-giving  jailor,  the  unjust  judge,  the  devour- 
ing Pharisee.  He  would  not  pluck  the  spreading  branches  of  the  tree  ;  He  would 
lay  the  axe  to  its  root.  It  would  take  time ;  but  the  tree  would  be  dead  at  last — 
dead,  and  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  It  would  take  time ;  but  His  Father  had  time 
enough  and  to  spare.  It  would  take  courage  and  strength  and  self-denial  and 
endurance ;  but  His  Father  could  give  Him  all.  The  will  of  God  should  be  done. 
Man  should  be  free — not  merely  man  as  he  thinks  of  himself,  but  man  as  God 
thinks  of  him.  He  shall  grow  into  the  likeness  of  the  Divine  thought,  free  not  in 
his  own  fancy,  but  in  absolute  Divine  fact  of  being,  as  in  God's  idea.  The  great  and 
beautiful  and  perfect  vrill  of  God  must  be  done.  (George  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  This 
was  a  temptation  which  every  worker  for  God,  weary  with  the  slow  progress  of  good- 
ness, must  often  feel,  and  to  which  even  good  and  earnest  men  have  sometimes 
given  way — to  begin  at  the  outside  instead  of  within,  to  get  first  a  great  shell  of 
external  conformity  to  religion,  and  afterwards  fill  it  with  the  reality.  It  was  the 
temptation  to  which  Mahomet  yielded  when  he  used  the  sword  to  subdue  those 
whom  he  was  afterwards  to  make  religious,  and  to  which  the  Jesuits  yielded  when 
they  baptized  the  heathen  first,  and  evangelized  them  afterwards.  {J.  Stalker,  M.A.) 
This  was  of  all  the  temptations  the  most  awful  and  searching.  It  was  the  only  one 
of  the  three  in  which  Satan  suggests  no  doubt  of  the  Divine  Sonship  and  Divine 
glory  of  Christ.  Could  a  Divine  Son  rightly  refuse  the  honour  and  glory  of  a  son  ? 
Could  it  be  anythinj;  but  a  sin  to  turn  His  back  on  the  only  way  that  seemed  to 
lead  straight  up  to  His  throne?  Was  not  this  a  "tempting"  of  God?  How 
solemn  and  heart-searching  are  the  lessons  it  may  teach  all  those  who  profess  to 
be  servants  of  God  among  men ;  lessons  which,  perhaps,  were  never  more  needed 
than  in  the  present  day.  1.  The  conversion  to  Christ  of  the  unconverted,  and  the 
evatigelization  of  the  masses,  absorb  the  energies  and  the  efforts  of  the  Church. 
But  the  intensity  of  this  passion  for  saving  men  may  itself  become  a  peril  to  the 
Church.  In  its  zeal  to  save  souls  it  may  become  indifferent  to  the  means  by  which 
they  are  saved.  2.  To  resort  to  worldly  and  carnal  metl'ods  for  the  extension  of 
Christ's  kingdom  ;  to  lose  faith  in  the  power  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  do  its  own 
work,  and  to  win  its  own  way  in  the  world  is  treason  to  Christ  and  to  God  ;  it  is 
the  worship  of  the  devil.      (G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  What  would  the  result  have 

been  if  Chritt  had  yielded .« — There  can  be  little  doubt  that  in  one  sense  Satan 
would  have  fulfilled  his  promise.  No  cross  would  have  stood  at  the  end  of  Christ's 
earthly  life.  There  would  have  been  louder  Hosanuas  than  Jerusalem  ever 
offered  Him  as  its  King ;  there  would  have  been  vaster  throngs  of  people  proclaim- 
ing Him  their  Messiah  and  Lord  ;  a  more  splendid  homage  from  the  rich  and  great, 
from  rulers  and  Pharisees,  would  have  been  laid  at  His  feet ;  in  a  word,  Christ 
would  have  received  the  crown  of  worldly  dominion  and  glory.  But  at  what  a 
cost  I  Tlie  great  burden  of  human  guilt  would  have  been  left  still  resting  on  the 
world  ;  the  heart  of  man  would  have  been  still  weary  and  heavy-laden ;  the  hope 
of  immortal  life  would  have  been  left  a  yearning  and  a  longing,  unsatisfied  and 
unfulfilled ;  and  the  kingdom  of  God  among  men  would  have  been  unfounded  and 
unknown.  Christ  would  have  lost  the  kingdom  by  appearing  to  gain  it.  The 
promise  of  the  devil,  like  all  his  promises,  would  have  turned  out  a  black  and 
terrible  lie.  He  would  have  given  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  and  the  glory  cf 
them  to  our  Lord,  but  only  after  Christ  had  given  Himself  to  the  deviL  Satan 
would  have  lost  nothing  of  his  kingdom,  for  he  would  have  been  king  of  the  world's 
King.  Appearing  to  resign  his  sovereignty  for  a  moment  he  would  have  secured  it 
for  ever.  (Ibid.)  The  temptation  on  the  mountain : — 1.  The  vision  was  a  splendid 
one,  well  fitted  to  appeal  even  to  a  mind  that  was  actuated  by  no  vulgar  ambition. 
8.  The  desire  for  power  here  appealed  to  ia  one  of  which  the  noblest  natures 


«HAy.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  405 

•re  susceptible.  3.  It  was  not  a  wrong  thing,  nor  at  variance  with  His  mission, 
that  Christ  should  contemplate  the  prospect  of  becoming  universal  King.  4.  Tha 
prospect  held  out  to  Him  was  well-fitted  to  stir  the  loftiest  and  holiest  ambition. 
6.  It  may  well,  then,  foster  our  reverence  for  His  character,  while  it  teaches  ua 
lessons  of  the  greatest  practical  importance,  that  although  His  universal  dominion 
would  lead  to  such  blessed  results,  He  would  not  procure  or  hasten  it  by  entering 
into  compromise  with,  or  doing  the  slightest  homage  to,  wrong.  6.  Paying  homage 
to  evil  with  a  view  to  the  easier  and  speedier  accomplishment  of  good  is  a  sin  to 
which  the  Church  has  always  been  powerfully  tempted.  7.  Christ's  kingdom  ia 
not  of  this  world.  It  is  neither  formed  on  worldly  principles  nor  furthered  by 
worldly  measures,  {W.  Landels,  D.D.)  An  high  mountain  : — The  "  high  moun- 
tain "  is  most  probably  Abarim,  with  its  three  peaks  of  Pisgah,  Peor,  and  Nebo, 
From  the  western  point,  Peor,  Balaam  overlooked  the  tents  of  Israel  and  blessed 
them,  when  brought  there  by  Balak  to  curse  the  people.  From  the  northernmost 
peak,  Nebo,  above  Baal  Maon,  a  complete  panorama  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  obtained. 
Thence  it  was  that  the  Lord  God  showed  Moses  "  all  the  land  of  Gilead  unto  Dan, 
and  all  Naphtali,  and  the  land  of  Ephraim,  and  all  the  land  of  Judah  .  .  .  nnto 
Zion  "  (Deut.  ixxiv.  1-4).  Now  Satan  takes  Christ  to  the  point  where  Moses  stood 
to  view  the  Promised  Land  which  he  was  not  to  enter.  And  here  again  we  notice 
a  covert  sneer.  "  O  Thou  Prophet  of  the  Most  High,  like  unto  Moses,  who  comest 
to  lead  the  people  of  God  out  of  bondage  into  liberty,  to  restore  again  the  kingdom 
to  Israel  1  Thou  wilt,  may  be,  do  what  Thou  undertakest.  But  what  will  be  the 
result  to  Thyself  f  Wilt  Thou  profit  in  any  way  by  it  ?  God  gave  to  Moses  a 
hard  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  and  instead  of  rewarding  him  with  rest  at  the 
end,  let  him  see  the  Promised  Land  from  afar,  even  from  this  spot,  and  let  him  die 
without  allowing  him  to  set  foot  on  it.  That  is  how  God  deals  with  His  prophets,  and 
that  is  how  He  will  deal  with  Thee !  "  And  as  he  spake  may  be  the  eye  of  the  Son 
of  Man  rested  on  far-off  Calvary,  which  is  visible  from  this  spot.  Then  Satan  went 
on  with  the  contrast:  "But  I — I  reward  my  servants  at  once.  Come,  bend  the 
knee  to  me,  and  I  will  give  Thee  glory,  and  power,  and  dominion  in  the  present." 
And  there  rose  a  mirage  of  the  desert,  and  in  that  mirage  was  a  vision  of  palacea 
and  palm  trees,  and  glittering  sheets  of  water,  on  which  gay  barges  sailed, 
apparently  very  real,  but  it  was  only  a  phantom  scene  painted  in  the  unwholesome 
vapours  that  rose  from  the  Dead  Sea,  and  from  the^hot  bituminous  desert  sands  and 
rocks.  A  phantom  splendour  over  desolation  and  death.  That  was  what  Satan 
offered.  And  observe  likewise  the  difference  between  his  offers  and  those  of  God, 
offers  which  he  makes  quite  unabashed,  and  emphasizes.  God  gives  present  pain 
and  future  glory ;  Satan  gives  present  satisfaction  and  future  wretchedness.  Only 
note  how  he  pitches  on  one  half  of  each  offer,  and  contrasts  only  the  present,  say- 
ing nothing  of  the  future.  God  gives  present  sadness,  Satan  present  satisfaction ; 
and  he  utters  not  a  word  about  the  future.  The  vision  was  but  for  a  moment. 
Satan  "  showed  unto  Him,  in  a  moment  of  time,  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  " ; 
the  desert  mirage  does  not  last  long,  but  while  it  lasts  it  is  thoroughly  deceptive. 
So  it  is  with  the  gifts  of  Satan ;  they  are  but  for  a  moment,  and  then  they  vanish 
away,  and  leave  dust,  and  ashes,  and  barrenness,  and  death  behind.  (5.  Baring- 
Oould,  M.A.)  Satan's  short  cut: — The  devil  fits  his  temptation  nicely  to  his 
purpose.  Christ  ia  about  to  begin  His  mission,  and  to  found  His  kingdom,  which 
is  to  be  nniversal,  to  extend  throughout  the  world.  Satan  shows  Him  how  to  maka 
the  kingdoms  of  earth  His  own  instantaneously,  by  doing  homage  to  himself.  No 
need  then  for  Calvary,  no  laborious  preachings,  no  persecutions,  no  martyrdoma, 
no  sowing  in  tears,  no  casting  of  the  bread  on  the  waters  and  patient  expectance  of 
the  result  after  many  days.  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  will  become  the  kingdoms 
of  Christ  at  once,  if  He  will  conform  to  the  world,  and  acknowledge  the  Evil  One  as 
supreme — if  He  will  allow  the  presence  of  evil,  legislate  for  it,  accept  it,  and  not 
fight  against  it.  But  this  offer  of  Satan  is  an  usurpation  of  power — of  God's 
power.  No  compromise  with  evil.  "  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan."  (Ibid.) 
Satan^s  methods : — An  illustration  of  Satan's  method  of  beguiling  to  destroy,  was 
one  day  witnessed  by  the  writer  when  rambling  near  Scawfell.  His  guide  said  ha 
thought  he  could  find  a  trout,  and  stooping  down  over  the  grassy  bank  of  a  small 
mountain-stream,  remained  for  a  few  minutes  perfectly  quiet,  excepting  a  slight 
motion  of  the  arm.  Presently  he  brought  up  a  large  fish.  He  knew  where  it  was 
likely  to  be ;  he  gently  touched  its  back,  drew  his  hand  lightly  backwards  and  for< 
wards,  soothed  and  charmed  his  victim,  then  grasped  and  captured  it.  So  "  tht 
devil's  poliqy  is  to  tickle  his  viotims  to  death,  and  damn  ihem  with  delightk" 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  w, 

{Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Elation  no  temptation  to  Christ : — The  tempter  had  tried 
the  Son  of  Man  through  the  power  of  depression ;  he  now  tries  Him  by  the  power  ol 
exaltation.  He  had  sought  to  vanquish  Him  by  the  scourge  of  poverty ;  he  now 
seeks  to  overcome  Him  by  the  vision  of  plenty.  He  had  brought  Him  down  into  th»^ 
valley,  and  had  tempted  Him  by  the  dangers  of  humiliation  ;  he  now  carries  Him 
up  to  the  mountain  and  tempts  Him  by  the  dangers  of  elevation.  Why  was  tha 
Son  of  Man  superior  to  all  circumstances  T  Only  because  He  was  superior  to  all 
sin.  The  sinless  heart  will  be  free  from  temptation  everywhere.  It  will  neither 
be  reduced  by  the  exigencies  of  the  valley  of  humiliation,  nor  by  the  allurements 
of  the  mountain  of  elevation ;  it  will  not  turn  the  stones  into  bread  to  avoid  the- 
famine ;  it  will  not  bow  the  knee  to  Baal  to  purchase  a  crown.  {G.  Mathe$onr 
M.A.,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  All  this  power  will  I  give  Thee. — The  devil's  bounty  : — His  bounty  is- 

treacherous.  (D.  Dyke.)  Bounty  attractive  : — Bounty  in  a  master  is  a  great 
attraction  to  his  service.  (Ibid.)  Satan's  promises : — 1.  That  the  very  desiret 
of  abundance  and  greatness  are  in  themselves  unlawful,  though  we  desire  them 
not  upon  such  conditions  as  here  the  devil  offers  them.  We  are  commanded 
(1  Tim.  vi.  8)  to  be  content  with  mere  necessaries,  for  food  and  raiment.  2.  Thai 
the  devil  in  these  promises  deceives  us,  and  that  three  ways.  (1)  Sometimes  not 
giving  all  the  things  promised,  but  the  contrary.  Adam  was  promised  to  be  like 
God  Himself,  but  how  well  he  obtained  it,  witness  God's  bitter  scoff,  "  Behold,  man 
is  become  as  one  of  Us  "  (Gen.  iii.).  (2)  The  devil  deceives  us  in  his  promises,  in 
getting  far  better  things  of  us,  than  we  have  of  him.  For  in  these  contracts  with 
the  devil  we  make  Esau's  pennyworth,  sell  heaven  for  a  mess  of  pottage  ;  Glaucus' 
exchange,  gold  for  copper.  We  are  as  foolish  as  children  that  lose  their  parents, 
and  their  own  liberty,  and  suffer  themselves  to  be  stolen  away  for  an  apple.  Yea,, 
as  the  bird  that  accepts  of  the  fowler's  meat,  but  buys  it  full  dearly  with  her  own  life.. 
8.  That  all  these  things  he  promises  are  vain  and  insufficient  to  give  true  content.. 
For  (1)  they  are  inferior  unto  us  as  men,  much  more  as  Christians.  A  thing^ 
worse  than  thyself  cannot  make  thee  better.  Gold  and  silver  are  inferior  to  thee. 
(2)  They  are  fickle  and  fugitive,  therefore  well  shown  here  in  a  moment,  because, 
they  glide  away,  as  the  running  water,  and  in  representation,  because  they  have  no 
substance,  but  are  mere  shadows  and  vanishing  shows.  4.  Meditate  of  the  excellent 
reward  of  the  life  to  come.  {Ibid.)  Toleration  not  donation: — Now  the  devil 
turns  toleration  into  donation,  connivance  and  permission  into  approbation,  and 
that  which  is  done  at  some  times  and  in  some  places  he  makes  constant  and 
general.  This  is  the  trick  of  devilish  liars  thus  to  piece  oat  things  by  addition^ 
A  little  truth  shall  be  enough  to  face  out  and  colour  over  many  lies,  {Ibid.) 
Mortifying  the  carnal  desires : — This  being  so  dangerous  and  prevailing  a  tempta- 
tion that  hath  wounded  so  many,  it  must  teach  us  to  strengthen  ourselves  against 
it.  Which  that  we  may  do,  two  main  remedies  must  be  used.  The  first  is  the 
mortification  of  our  fleshly  members,  the  eye  and  the  ear  of  old  Adam.  If  a  man 
should  come  to  a  dead  man,  and  promise  him  never  so  many  kingdoms,  and  show 
him  never  so  much  honour  and  glory,  he  is  nothing  moved.  Now  mortification 
makes  us  dead  men  to  the  world,  as  blind  men  to  this  goodly  sight  of  the  Word, 
and  as  deaf  adders  to  the  charms  of  this  charmer.  {Ibid.)  Giving  ;  Divine  and 
Satanic  : — But,  on  the  other  hand,  what  a  difference  between  all  other  "  I  will 
gives  "  and  the  "  I  will  give  "  of  Jesus  I  After  the  ringing  of  changes  by  good 
Eichard  Gierke  on  the  tempter's  *'  I  will  give,"  let  the  sweet  bell-sounds  of  the 
Lord's  promise-words  rise  and  swell  through  your  memories — •'  Come  unto  Me, 
all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy-laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest "  (Matt.  xi.  28) ; 
"  Ask  whatsoever  thou  wilt,  and  I  will  give  it  "  (Mark  vi.  22) ;  "  I  will  give  you  the 
sure  mercies  of  David  "  (Acts  xiii.  34) ;  " I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life " ;  "I  will 
give  him  the  morning-star" ;  '*  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain 
of  the  water  of  life  freely"  (Kev.  ii.  10,  28;  xxi.  6).  Thus  is  it  also  in  the  Old 
Testament,  in  historic  book  and  prophecy  and  Psalm.  {A.  B.  Grosart.)  Satan 
offering  stolen  goods  : — And  before  whom  could  he  have  told  this  tale,  to  be  taken 
in  a  lie  so  soon,  as  by  driving  this  bargain  with  Christ  T  As  if  a  thief  shoold  steal 
plate,  and  offer  to  sell  it  to  the  owner ;  or  a  plagiary,  filtch  a  great  deal  out  of  a 
book,  and  rehearse  it  for  his  own  before  the  author.  So  the  tempter  had  robbed 
Christ  of  that  honour  and  majesty  which  was  moat  properly  His  own  (I  mean  he 
robbed  Him  of  it  by  the  blasphemy  and  falsehood  of  his  tongne),  and  tmo  brings 
il  to  Christ  to  barter  it  away  for  other  merchandise.    {Bishop  Haeket.)        Satan's 


«MV.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  407 

attempted  bribery  of  Christ: — There  was,  let  as  remember,  nothing  ooarse  or  eommoa 
in  the  snggestion  whioh  Satan  here  brought  before  the  mind  of  Christ.  He  appealed 
to  an  attribute  of  man  which,  though  often  misdirected  and  abused,  was  originally 
a  heaven- born  instinct,  designed  to  lift  him  above  all  other  earthly  creatures,  vis., 
ambition  and  a  desire  for  power.  There  is  by  nature  something  kingly  in  each 
human  soul.  Man  was  made  for  ruling.  God  set  him  at  the  first  to  be  a  lord  la 
Eden.  And,  knowing  that  Christ  had  come  to  establish  here  upon  earth  that 
kingdom  which  the  throne  of  David  but  faintly  symbolized,  the  tempter  spread 
before  His  soul  a  vision  of  universal  dominion,  offered  Him  the  sceptre  of  world* 
wide  sovereignty,  with  all  the  glory  belonging  thereto,  adding  this  promise,  "  Every* 
thing  shall  be  yours,  without  the  Gross,  without  the  cost  of  pain,  or  toil,  or  sacrifice, 
if  you  will  only  make  the  very  slight  and  harmless,  because  secret,  acknowledg- 
ment of  indebtedness  to  me.  All  these  things  will  I  give  Thee,  if  Thou  wilt  bend 
in  reverence  to  receive  them  at  my  hands."  Was  that  vision  a  mere  dream  ?  Was 
the  offer  all  a  he  ?  If  so,  where  was  the  temptation  ?  There  must  have  been  at 
least  some  truth  in  it.  Think  of  the  political  condition  of  the  world  at  that  time. 
There  were  many  kingdoms,  but  over  them  all  spread  the  one  consolidating  and 
ruling  power  of  Bome.  Her  law  reached  everywhere.  Her  empire  stretched  from 
the  Atlantic  to  the  Euphrates,  a  distance  of  more  than  three  thousand  miles,  and 
from  the  Danube  on  the  north,  and  the  friths  of  Scotland,  to  the  cataracts  of  the 
Nile  and  the  African  desert.  All  the  tribes  and  nations  inhabiting  this  immense 
territory  had  surrendered  their  independence  and  were  fused  into  one  political 
system.  Moreover,  that  empire  was  tottering  towards  its  fall.  It  was  ready  to 
accept  even  then  a  new  Leader,  even  as  only  a  little  while  later  on  it  did  in  its 
helplessness  accept  the  new  faith.  Can  we  who  know  how  men  have  risen  from 
the  lowest  to  the  highest  worldly  positions,  doubt  the  possibility  of  Christ's  reaching, 
without  supernatural  help,  the  place  which  Julius  Ceesar  gained?  Suppose  by 
skilful  management,  and  by  a  little  concession  here  and  a  little  there.  He  had 
united  the  three  rival  factions  of  Judaea,  the  Pharisees,  the  Sadducees,  and  the 
Herodians,  takiug  for  a  basis  this  last,  which  was  a  political  party  favouring  the 
dominion  of  Bome.  That  first  step  might  have  led  on  gradually  to  the  grand 
result  which  the  tempter  showed  Him.  All  this  any  shrewd  and  far-discerning 
man  could  have  thought  of  as  possible.  On  the  other  side,  and  as  the  only  alter- 
native, Christ  saw  a  lonely  path,  leading  through  Gethsemane  and  its  terrible 
agony,  and  rising,  step  after  step,  up  to  Calvary  and  its  awful  Cross.  He  knows 
beforehand  His  rejection  and  betrayal,  the  scourging,  the  mocking,  and  the  borrowed 
sepulchre.  Even  now,  amid  the  solitude  of  the  wilderness  and  its  solemn  stillness. 
He  hears  that  bitter,  maddened  cry,  "  Away  with  Him  1  Crucify  Him  1  We  will 
have  a  Caesar  for  our  king,  and  no  one  else."  That  is.  He  knows  that  if  He  now 
accepts  the  tempter's  offer,  instead  of  being  afterwards  rejected  by  "  His  own  ** 
nation,  He  will  become  their  acknowledged  king.  And  beyond  those  three  years  of 
ministry  and  of  conflict  which  He  Himself  must  endure.  He  sees  at  least  nineteen 
centuries  during  which  His  Church  must  fill  up  that  which  remains  behind  of  His 
appointed  sufferings,  praying  meanwhile  for  the  coming  of  His  kingdom.  "  Save 
Thyself,"  the  tempter  said,  "  and  spare  Thy  followers.  Take  the  Crown  without  the 
Cross."  It  was  a  proffered  bribe.  The  question  was  whether  Christ  should 
sacrifice  principle,  or  whether  He  should  sacrifice  Himself ;  whether  He  should 
reach  that  end  for  which  He  had  come  into  the  world  by  God's  appointed  way,  or 
by  one  easier ;  in  short,  whether  He  should  make  duty  or  policy  the  law  of  His  life. 
You  know  the  decision  and  the  answer.  Nevertheless,  let  me  read  it  in  your  ears, 
for  the  voice  of  this  very  temptation  comes  often  to  us  all,  and  therefore  the  Voice 
of  the  Victor  is  never  without  its  lessons.  {E.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Unprincipled 
success  is  failure : — What  looks  outwardly  hke  the  highest  worldly  snocess,  may, 
nevertheless,  be  the  worst  kind  of  failure,  because  it  has  been  purchased  at  th» 
price  of  honesty  and  principle.  It  is  not  so  very  difficult  to  gain  riches  and  social 
position,  to  secure  control  over  this  or  that  kingdom  of  earth,  provided  a  man  will 
bend  all  his  energies  towards  that  particular  end,  and  at  the  same  time  crush 
down  every  conscientious  scruple  that  rises  to  protest  in  God's  name  against  the 
anrighteousness  of  the  methods  he  is  using.  Christ  would  not  march  to  His  king-  ' 
dom  except  by  a  king's  highway,  and  along  an  unswerving  path  of  loyal  integrity. 
In  the  worship  and  also  in  the  service  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  both  by  making  Him. 
supreme,  and  then,  instead  of  folding  our  hands,  using  every  power  we  have  in  th«p 
Work  to  which  He  calls  us,  we  too  can  resist  the  power  of  him  who  comes  whispering 
with  honeyed,  sympathetic  voice,  "  Poor,  weary,  unsuccessful  one,  let  me  show 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohav.  rr, 

yon  an  easier  way."    {Ibid.)        The  temptation  to  doubt  God's  present  government 
of  the  world : — While  we  maintain  most  firmly  the  simple  and  literal  truth  of  tha 
facts  of  the  temptation  as  recorded  by  the   evangelist,  utterly  renouncing  the 
scepticism  that  would  resolve  them  into  oriental  imagery ;  yet  we  see  in  them  some- 
thing far  beyond  the  mere  facts,  the  absolute  truth  of  which  we  nevertheless  main- 
tain.   They  are  symbols  full  of  meaning,  symbols  of  what  was  going  on  all  through 
the  human  life  of  the  Kedeemer,  and  of  the  struggle  which  all  must  maintain  whc 
would  follow  in  His  steps.    The  very  order  in  which  they  are  related  is  expressive. 
Beginning,  as  they  did,  with  a  suggestion  that  He  should  abuse  the  high  powers 
with  which  He  was  endued,  by  providing  through  them  for  the  gratification  of 
appetite  now  sharpened  by  long  fasting— passing  on,  when  He  had  triumphed 
easily  over  this  coarser  temptation,  to  the  more  ensnaring  and  alluring  bait  of 
promised  success  through  a  compromise  with  evil ;  and  when  this  also  had  been 
thrust  aside,  seeking  to  lift  up  into  presumption  that  most  holy  soul — what  is  this 
but  the  history  of  man's  temptation,  first  amidst  the  passions  of  youth,  then  in  the 
scheming  worldliness  of  middle  life,  and  last  of  all,ia  the  self-confident  elation  wliich 
has  caused  the  fall  of  many  who  had  hitherto  run  well  ?     1.  Many  have  believed, 
from  his  audacious  taunt  and  the  silence  with  which  Christ  dismissed  it,  that  Satan 
has,  to  a  great  degree,  the  power  to  which  he  here  lays  claim  ;  they  secretly  admit, 
in  their  suspicions  at  least,  that  he  does  bestow  the  good  things  of  this  life ;  that 
ii)  this  sense,  rather  than  as  being  the  tyrant  over  the  faction  of  earthly  and  wicked 
hearts,  he  is  "  the  prince  of  this  world."     (1)  Mischievous  effects  of  this  doctrine. 
Allow  for  a  moment  that  the  world  is  in  any  sense  under  the  dominion  of  Satan, 
that  it  has  been  committed  to  him,  and  the  whole  scheme  of  God's  government 
becomes  entangled  in  hopeless  contradiction.     Such  a  thought,  admitted  even  in 
its  lowest  degree,  must  take  from  the  heart  its  power  of  striving  against  sin,  and  of 
labouring  to  relieve  the  misery  around  it.     Nothing  can  keep  this  in  vigorous 
action  but  the  undoubting  confidence  that  we  are  at  every  turn  really  in  the  hand 
of  a  good  and  holy  and  Almighty  Governor,  and  that  He  is  now  ruling  all  things, 
and  disposing  all  things  according  to  His  own  counsel ;  an?;els  and  men  and  every 
created  being  but  carrying  out  His  will ;  the  holy  and  the  just  doing  it  from  love  ; 
the  unholy  and  rebellious  bowed  by  its  irresistible  compulsion.    Without  the  living 
energy  to  which  this  thought  gives  birth,  who  could  strive  alone  against  the  multi- 
tude of  evil  doers ;  and  what  would  there  be  to  redress  all  the  apparent  contradic- 
tions of  the  mighty  entanglement  of  this  world?    We  must  be  entirely  certain,  in 
the  depth  of  our  hearts,  that  in  all  the  maze  (as  it  would  seem)  around  us,  there 
is  to  be  traced  a  wise  and  a  mighty  plan,  working  out  its  harmonious  accomplish- 
ment, that  the  kingdom  of  the  "  Stone  cut  out  without  hands  "  is  even  now  set 
up ;  that  this  world  is  not  renounced  by  God ;  that  in  the  Church  of  the  redeemed, 
each  one  of  us  may  work  with  and  for  God,  just  as  surely  as  the  angels  of  heaven. 
For  then,  and  never  before,  shall  we  see  in  every  duty  an  opportunity  of  service  ; 
in  every  sorrow  a  messenger  of  love,  and  in   every  threatened  peril  the  fiery 
Bquadrona  of  the  heavenly  host  shielding  the  true  servants  of  the  Highest.     (2) 
The  nature  of  the  fraud  here  used  by  Sitan.     We  do  not  deny  that  sin  is  often  so 
far  successful  as  to  gain  for  a  time,  for  the  sinner,  certain  specific  objects  that  he 
has  desired,  or  that  the  righteous  are  often  kept  bare  of  those  outward  good  things 
which  the  wicked  possess  ;  but  we  affirm  that  this  is  not  (as  Satan  would  have  ua 
believe)  because  any  power  is  committed  to  the  evil  one,  or  that  he  is  allowed 
to  suspend,  even  for  a  moment,  God's  righteous  government,  and  so  to  reward  his 
own  foUowera ;  but  that  these  objects  of  men's  desire  are  given  and  withheld  by 
God  Himself,  as  a  moral  governor,  uj^on  a  strictly  moral  rule,  and  in  exact  accord- 
ance  therewith ;  that  they  are  given  to  the  wicked  in  anger,  and  withheld  from  the 
righteous  in  love;  that  they  are  given  by  Him,  who  has  appointed  certain  results 
to  follow  from  certain  causes  ;  who  permits,  therefore,  the  activity  and  the  earnest- 
ness and  the  labour  of  the  evil  to  work  out  for  them  those  results  which  activity 
and  earnestness  and  labour  will,  through  His  appointment,  in  general  attain:  but 
that  even  in  giving  these  He  marks  the  gift  with  His  anger.    For  even  when  the 
particular  object  is  attained,  its  possession  does  not  bring  with  it  that  which  the 
evil  man  had  promised  to  himself,  and  which  made  it  desirable  in  his  eyes.    Ha 
gets  it ;  and  it  is  barren  and  joyless.    And  herein  is  the  juggling  of  the  great 
deceiver.    He  promised  the  gift  as  bis  reward,  and  he  promised  with  it  the  enjoy- 
ment of  it ;  but  as,  even  when  the  end  is  gained,  it  is  not  of  his  giving,  so  neither 
can  he  give  with  it  the  enjoyment  of  it.     God  bestows  the  objects  desired,  but  puts 
in  a  sting  with  the  gift,  and  so  the  followers  of  the  evil  one  are  cheated.    2.  Coa- 


CBAV.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  409 

oinding  applications  of  this  trnth.  (1)  Warning.  Which  of  ua  i8  not  oftentimes 
tempted  to  believe  this  lie  of  Satan  ?  Who  is  not  tempted,  by  doing  evil,  or  by 
enduring  evil,  or  by  winking  at  evil  (all  different  forma  of  worshipping  the  evil 
one)  to  seek  for  some  advantage  which  will  (as  it  seems)  be  held  back  from  him  if 
he  walk  straight  on  along  the  narrow  path  which  leads  unto  life  ?  Who  has  not 
had  a  place  to  gain  in  the  life-race,  steps  to  make  good  in  the  world-struggle,  a 
family  to  push,  a  fortune  to  better,  a  powerful  friend  to  gain  or  to  keep,  some  weak 
point  to  cover  by  a  falsehood,  or  some  simulated  virtue  to  make  shine  in  the  eyes 
of  others  7  And  who  has  not  known,  if  he  searched  his  heart  at  such  a  time,  the 
flattering  voice  of  expediency,  and  the  grating  harshness  of  truth  ?  I  ask  you,  in 
the  sight  of  God,  how  have  you  acted  at  such  times  ?  How  are  you  acting  now 
when  they  arise  ?  Take  up  this  thought  in  its  simplicity,  without  doing  away  by 
artifice  its  strength,  and  then  try  your  lives  by  it ;  try  by  it  your  daily  conduct, 
whether  in  the  shop,  family,  counting-house,  senate,  or  wherever  your  lot  may  be 
cast.  God's  rule  follows  you  into  every  act  of  every  day;  His  sentence  of  anger 
or  of  approval  is  ever  pronounced,  ever  executed.  No  one  sin  can  prosper  in  God's 
world.  That  which  flatters  the  most  is  commonly  in  the  end  the  keenest  torturer 
of  him  who  yields  to  it.  (2)  Encouragement.  Christian  man  1  this  God  is  your 
God  for  ever  and  ever ;  He  shall  be  your  guide  even  unto  death.  He  is  your  Father, 
if  you  be  a  true  and  earnest  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Here  is  comfort 
for  you  in  every  trial ;  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  sorrow,  here  is  joy.  You  must 
be  truly  happy,  for  God  is  with  you  ;  you  must  be  truly  rich,  for  you  possess  all 
things  in  Him.  This  thought  reverses  in  an  instant  every  earthly  calculation. 
{Bishop  S.  Wilherforce.)  The  deviVs  bargain : — As  it  was  proposed  to  Christ  at 
the  opening  of  His  ministry,  so  mostly  is  it  offered  to  men's  acceptance  in  the 
oi>ening  of  their  youth.  Practically  it  was  the  same  bargain  that  was  ma^le  with 
our  first  parents  in  the  garden.  I.  A  tempting  bakgain.  II.  A  deceitful,  bargain. 
1.  In  the  quantity.  2.  In  the  quality  of  the  article  purchased.  III.  A  deab 
BABGAiN.  Consider — 1.  The  sin  of  it.  2.  The  humiliation  of  it.  (T.  Wkitelaw,  M.A.) 
Satan^s  offer : — Are  men  and  women  ever  tempted  in  this  way,  and  in  our  day?  I 
think  so.  1.  There  is  the  danger  generally  of  pursuing  legitimate  ends  by  unlawful 
and  unrighteous  means.  2.  The  temptation  to  pious  frauds,  the  suppression,  mis- 
representation, or  obscuring  of  the  truth  in  the  supposed  interests  of  religion.  3. 
With  regard  to  our  own  personal  salvation,  the  idea  that  there  is  some  royal  road 
into  the  glories  and  blessedness  of  the  eternal  kingdom.  {Gordon  Calthrop,  M.A.) 
Two  mountain  scenes : — The  offer  was  empire,  and  the  price  was  worship.  Jesus 
Christ  said  "  No,"  and  came  down  from  the  mountain  as  poor  as  He  was  when  He 
was  taken  up.  So  much,  you  say,  for  throwing  away  the  great  opportunities  of 
life.  But  read  again  Matt,  xxviii.  16-18,  "  The  disciples  went  away  into  Galilee 
into  a  mountain  where  Jesus  had  appointed  them.  .  .  .  And  Jesus  came  and  spake 
onto  them  saying.  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  Put  these 
two  mountain  scenes  together.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  plausible  lie: — "For  that 
is  delivered  unto  me."  One  of  the  additions  made  by  Luke  to  our  knowledge  of 
the  temptations  is  the  monstrous  assumption  of  power  and  royalty  on  the  part  of 
the  tempter.  There  is  something  fearful  in  the  language  which  he  uses — God  had 
never  given  over  the  power  to  Satan.  "  Thine  "  we  truly  confess  in  our  prayer  to 
our  Father  in  heaven,  "  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory."  It  was  s 
lie,  such  as  might  have  been  expected  to  proceed  from  the  ••  father  of  lies."  Yet 
there  was  sufficient  appearance  of  truth  to  make  the  lie  plausible.  Anybody  looking 
upon  the  world  would  say,  especially  at  the  time  of  the  Temptation,  that  the  power 
and  glory  were  acknowledged  by  general  consent  to  belong  to  the  prince  of  evil. 
Thank  God  that  it  is  not  so,  and  thank  God  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  prove  how  false  Satan's  words  were,  and  to  claim  the  power  and  the  glory  wholly 
for  God  His  Father.  [Bishop  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  bait  of  worldly  prosperity : — 
A  literary  angler  in  the  lochs  of  Scotland  was  wont  to  catch  trout  in  a  singularly 
suggestive  fashion.  The  bait  consisted  of  a  pellet  made  of  chloroform  paste.  No 
sooner  had  a  trout  taken  one  of  these  pellets  into  his  mouth,  than  it  fell  into  a 
Bweet  sleep.  All  efforts  at  escape  were  prevented ;  it  could  instantly  be  drawn  to 
tbs  shore.  Prosperity  acts  similarly  upon  many.  They  are  lulled  to  spiritual 
Elnmber,  and  easily  become  Satan's  prey.  If  that  is  a  man's  peril,  what  worse  can 
happen  to  him  than  so-called  success  ?  (G.  T.  Coster.)  Satanic  fascinations  : — 
Not  unlike  this  is  the  experience  sometimes  of  many  Christian  brethren.  Those 
who  are  of  a  fervid  temperament  and  lively  imagination,  can  tell  of  similar  fasci- 
oations.     The  Cidversary  is  the   readier  to  nractise  them  upon  persons  of  tint 


3410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  it, 

description,  because  their  natural  love  of  excitement  and  the  vividness  of  theif 
;;ensations  seem  to  promise  him  a  surer  triumph  ;  indeed,  he  is  often  far  too  sue* 
cessful  in  bearing  their  spirits  up  to  his  enchanting  heights.  For  this  purpose  h« 
eommonly  employs  some  outward  means.  These  he  will  gather,  for  instance,  from 
the  fine  arts,  as  they  are  everywhere  abused  to  worldliness  and  the  pleasures  of  sin. 
Thus  at  one  time  it  is  a  beautiful  picture,  at  another  the  witcheries  of  poetry,  at 
another,  the  sweetness  of  melody,  or  the  sublimity  of  musical  composition,  whereby 
he  dissolves  their  spiritual  firmness.  Sometimes,  if  only  some  sweet  mazy  melody 
softly  undulating  from  a  distance,  be  listened  to,  as  one  sits  musing  in  the  solitary 
chamber,  his  sorcery  may  prove  successful.  {Dr.  Krummacher.)  The  world 
postetsed  by  Satan : — Who  can  number  the  hundreds  of  millions  whose  souls  he 
secures  in  his  manifold  chains,  in  the  bands  of  sin  and  ignorance,  in  countless 
spiritual  prisons  and  cells,  under  Mohammedan  imposture,  or  in  pagan  idolatry ;  in 
the  strong  delusions  of  the  Talmud,  or  under  the  dogmas  of  the  seven  hills ;  in 
heaven-defying  rationalism,  pantheism,  or  atheism.  Surely,  without  any  arrogant 
claim,  Satan  might  say,  "  All  this  is  mine  I  "  For  the  little  which  is  not  his,  the 
"  lodge  in  the  garden  of  cucumbers,"  the  ••  worm  Jacob,"  the  despised  handful  of 
Israel,  is,  as  compared  to  the  giant  domains  of  this  prince  of  fallen  angels,  but  as  a 
drop  to  the  ocean.  What  is  there  in  the  whole  world  that  the  devil  has  not  usurped 
ior  the  extension  and  establishment  of  his  kingdom,  and  made  subservient,  especially 
in  the  present  age,  to  his  infernal  plans  ?  Are  not  most  of  our  pulpits  and  pro- 
fessional chairs  still  his  ?  May  not  the  same  be  said  of  the  greater  part  of  our 
public  journals  and  newspapers?  Are  not  our  assemblies,  associations,  and  clubs 
chiefly  devoted  to  his  service  ?  And  which  of  the  sciences  or  of  the  fine  arts  is 
exempt  from  perversion  to  his  interests  ?  Almost  everything  in  the  world  has  he 
contrived  to  draw  by  Uttle  and  little  into  subservience  to  his  cause.  Who  deals  out 
poetry  in  that  deluge  of  romance  and  comedy  which  inundates  the  world  with 
millions  of  infidel  falsehoods  and  unholy  ideas  ?  Who  is  the  invisible  manager  and 
conductor  of  those  sensual  operas,  elysian  concerts,  and  other  entertainments, 
whereby  music,  that  gift  bestowed  to  praise  withal  the  perfections  of  Jehovah, 
stands  prominent  as  the  destroyer  of  souls,  because  it  is  now  made  to  breathe  subtle 
poison  into  human  hearts  ?  Who  is  it  that  has  stationed  his  camp  behind  the 
ramparts  of  modern  philosophy,  and  aims  from  thence  to  inflict  the  most  wicked 
and  deadly  blows  on  the  gospel  of  peace  ?  Who  is  it  that  has  schemed 
and  palmed  upon  Christendom  that  fashionable  modern  religion  sweetened  with 
effeminate  ta-'te,  and  spiced  with  lax  and  godless  morality,  which  lulls  people  into 
a  deep  spiritual  slumber,  from  which  but  too  late  the  thunder  of  judgment  will 
awaken  them  ?  From  whom  does  all  this  originally  proceed  but  from  the  father  of 
lies,  the  old  serpent,  the  dragon  of  the  bottomless  pit?  Nor  let  us  be  surprised 
that  he  even  speaks  of  "giving  "  what  is  certainly  within  the  compass  of  his  power. 
{Ibid.)  Theji'sh  and  Spirit  in  conflict : — "  God  made  all  things,"  saith  Lactantius, 
"'to  set  two  armies  in  array  " — the  flesh  and  the  Spirit;  sense  and  reason  ;  man 
whom  He  made  after  His  own  image,  and  the  prince  of  this  world.  And  therefore 
He  hath  mixed,  as  it  were,  an  appearance  of  good  with  that  which  is  evil,  various 
and  delectable  pleasantness  in  the  things  of  this  world,  that  by  those  fair  allure- 
ments in  show  there  may  be  a  possibility  of  inducement  into  that  evil  which  is 
not  seen  :  and  He  hath  blended  an  apparency  of  evil  with  that  which  is  good,  that, 
by  those  sorrows  and  labours  which  are  distasteful  to  the  eye,  there  may  be  a 
possibility  in  us  of  refusing  that  good  which  is  covered  with  such  horror.  But  the 
present  pleasure  He  checketh  with  fear  of  punishment,  and  the  present  horror  and 
sharpness  He  sweetens  with  hope  of  reward  ;  that  we  may  see  more  with  our  mind 
than  with  our  eye ;  that  when  our  sense  would  join  with  evil  because  of  its  colour, 
our  reason  may  fly  from  it  because  of  its  smart ;  and  when  the  flesh  declines  good- 
ness because  it  is  irksome,  the  spirit  may  embrace  it  because  it  hath  the  promise  of 
a  reward ;  that  when  the  devil  speaketh  fair,  we  may  shut  our  ears,  because  we 
tnow  his  words  are  as  swords ;  and  when  God  nails  us  to  the  cross,  we  may  bless 
His  name,  because  He  means  to  crown  us.  (A.  Farindon,D.D.)  Gifts  Satanical: — 
There  are  gifts  Satanical  as  well  as  gifts  Divine ;  and  the  world  has  always 
abounded  with  persons  who  have  owed  their  enjoyments,  treasures,  honours,  titles, 
and  rank,  to  Satanical  ministration  or  superintendence.  For  our  great  adversary 
has  always  his  pay  and  his  prize-money  in  readiness  for  any  who  will  follow  his 
banner,  and  he  has  various  methods  of  handsomely  remunerating  their  zeal  in  his 
service.  {Dr.  Krummacher.)  To  be  right  is  to  be  rich: — How,  then,  as  to  tho 
truth  of  the  doctrine  that  to  be  right  is  to  be  rich  7    To  test  that  doctrine  7>»a 


OTA».  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  411 

mast  get  into  the  very  heart  of  the  sufferer  himself.  He  will  show  yon  the  com. 
pensations  of  a  righteous  life ;  he  will  tell  you  how  Bweet  is  the  bread  eaten  in 
secret,  how  holy  and  aU-comforting  is  the  approval  of  a  good  conscience,  and  how 
infinite  is  the  independence  of  the  soul  whose  trust  is  in  God.     In  such  a  case  the 

Eoverty  is  wholly  on  the  outside ;  the  soul  is  clothed  in  more  than  purple  and  fint 
nen,  and  is  rich  with  more  than  gold.  Outside,  things  are  rough  enough  un- 
doubtedly ;  the  storm  does  not  spare  the  roof,  nor  do  the  rags  keep  away  the  biting 
wind,  yet  somehow  the  man  who  is  right  has  a  quiet  and  thorough  mastery  over 
the  circumstances  which  fret  and  vex  the  mere  surface  of  his  life.  The  king  is 
within.  The  fountain  of  his  joy  is  not  dependent  on  the  clouds,  but  on  "the  river 
of  God,  which  is  full  of  water."  "  The  ungodly  are  not  so,  but  are  like  the  chaff 
which  the  wind  driveth  away."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Satan's  bid  for  the  soul  .-—A 
story  is  told  of  Rowland  Hill,  the  eccentric  preacher.  Lady  Ann  Erskine  was  passing 
by  in  her  carriage,  and  she  asked  her  coachman  who  that  was  that  was  drawing 
such  a  large  assembly.  He  replied  that  it  was  Rowland  Hill.  "  I  have  heard  a 
good  deal  about  him,"  she  said  ;  "  drive  up  near  the  crowd."  Mr.  Hill  soon  saw 
her,  and  saw  that  she  belonged  to  the  aristocracy.  He  all  at  once  stopped  in  the 
midst  of  his  discourse  and  said,  "  My  friends,  I  have  something  for  sale."  This 
Jistonished  his  hearers.  '•  Yes,  I  have  something  for  sale ;  it  is  the  soul  of  Lady 
Ann  Erskine.  Is  there  any  one  here  that  will  bid  for  her  soul  ?  Ah,  do  I  hear  a 
bid?  Who  bids?  Satan  bids.  Satan,  what  will  you  give  for  her  soul?  'I  will 
^ve  riches,  honour,  and  pleasure.'  But  stop.  Do  I  hear  another  bid ?  Yes,  Jesus 
Christ  bids.  Jesus,  what  will  you  give  for  her  soul?  •  I  will  give  eternal  life.' 
Lady  Ann  Erskine,  you  have  heard  the  two  bids— which  will  you  take  ?  "  And 
Lady  Ann  fell  down  on  her  knees,  and  cried  out,  "  I  will  have  Jesus."  The  devil 
lies  when  he  promises,  but  Christ  always  keeps  His  word.  Sold  to  the  d.evil  :— 
Laura  Phillips,  "  a  pretty  and  well-educated  young  woman,"  committed  suicide  in 
Omaha  the  other  day.  She  took  blood  from  her  own  veins,  and  wrote  with  it  the 
following  note,  which  was  found  on  her  pillow  :  "  I,  Laura  Phillips,  hereby  sell  my 
soul  to  the  devil,  in  consideration  for  which  he  agrees  to  give  me  wealth,  beauty, 
•nd  the  power  to  overcome  all  jmy  enemies."  She  left  a  comfortable  home  in  Iowa 
three  years  ago,  and  went  step  by  step  into  the  slough  of  degradation.  (Newspaper.) 
The  soul  sometimes  sold  for  the  smallest  things  : — It  does  not  require  a  devil  to  ternpt 
you.  The  smallest  thing  can  tempt.  As  poor  John  Bunyan  said  once,  something 
kept  tempting  him  to  sell  Christ.  If  he  stooped  to  pick  up  a  pin  the  voice  said, 
"  Sell  Him  for  that  I  sell  Him  for  thatl  "  And  men  sell  their  honour  for  things  as 
cheap.  A  pin  will  do  it ;  a  sweet  smile  ;  a  fair  face ;  the  ruby  wine  ;  the  love  of 
money.  Ah,  for  what  has  not  a  man  sold  his  soul  1  (George  Dawson.)  Satan  a 
tyrant  though  he  may  seem  a  parasite : — When  we  are  once  sure,  Satan  is  a  tyrant ; 
till  then,  he  is  a  parasite.  There  can  be  no  safety  if  we  do  not  view  as  well  the 
back  as  the  face  of  temptation.  (A.  B.  Grosart.)  Wrong  moral  conditions  cannot 
ie  prodiictive  of  happiness: — Look  at  the  price  required  for  the  supremacy  offered 
to  Christ — "  If  Thou  wilt  faU  down  and  worship  me  "  1  But  consider  what  it  is 
to  worship  at  the  wrong  altar  I  It  is  to  debase  the  affections,  to  bring  the  best 
energies  of  the  soul  under  malign  influence,  and  to  forfeit  the  power  to  enjoy  the 
▼ery  things  which  it  is  supposed  to  purchase.  Worship  expresses,  though  it  may 
be  feebly,  the  worshipper's  supreme  ideal  of  life ;  if,  therefore,  it  be  offered  to  an 
evil  spirit,  the  whole  substance  and  course  of  life  will  be  deeply  affected  by  the 
«rror.  What  if  the  very  act  of  false  worship  disqualify  the  soul  for  relishing  any 
supposed  or  undoubted  joy  ?  Offer  a  man  long  draughts  of  the  choicest  wines  il 
be  will  first  drench  his  mouth  with  a  strong  solution  of  alum,  and  what  are  the 
choicest  wines  to  him  then  ?  They  cannot  penetrate  to  the  palate,  they  are  abso- 
lutely without  taste,  and  they  mock  the  appetite  they  were  meant  to  gratify.  So, 
if  a  man  put  his  moral  nature  under  false  conditions,  and  create  anarchy  between 
himself  and  the  principle  of  eternal  righteousness,  no  matter  what  fortune  or 
honour  may  accrue  to  him,  his  power  of  serene  enjoyment  is  gone,  and  he  becomes 
burdened  and  plagued  by  his  very  successes.  This  will  be  the  first  point  insisted 
upon  by  the  moralist ;  in  the  plainest  words  he  will  say,  "  The  promise  is  very  great, 
but  it  is  a  lie  to  begin  with,  and  the  man  who  sells  his  soul  to  get  it  will  soon  find 
that  he  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  dupe  of  the  devil."    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yet.  8.  Oet  thee  behind  Ue,  Satan ;  for  It  is  written,  Then  shalt  worship  tb* 
iMri.  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt  thon  serve. — The  necessity  of  a  quick  and  speedy 
njcotion  of  a  sinful  motion  is,  then,  beyond  dispute,  and  there  needs  no  more  to  be 


413  THE  BIBIICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».   ». 

said  for  the  explanation  of  this  direction,  but  an  account  of  what  is  implied  in  a 
speedy  denial.  It  contains  these  fonr  things  : — 1.  That  it  must  issue  from  a  fixed 
determination  against  sin.  2.  This  positive  denial  must  be  also  wisely  jealous  oi 
Satan,  in  motions  that  are  unlikely,  or  that  may  seem  light,  little,  and  not  directly 
intended.  3.  The  refusal  must  be  so  quick,  that  it  may  be  ready  to  take  the  temp- 
tation by  the  throat.  4.  When  this  is  done,  we  mast  endeavour  to  maintain  and 
stick  to  our  first  disallowance.  (E.  Gilpin.)  Service  joined  to  worship  : — Dr. 
Thomas  Taylor  similarly,  but  in  his  own  original  way,  observes : — "  God  must  not 
only  be  worshipped,  but  also  served.  The  distinction  is  easily  observed.  For  a 
man  may  in  heart  and  gesture  honour  another  to  wbom  he  owes  but  little  service. 
And  this  word  in  the  Hebrew  is  taken  from  servants,  who,  besides  inward  reverence 
and  outward  worship,  owe  to  their  masters  their  strength,  labour,  and  service,  yea, 
frank  and  cheerful  obedience.  And  suppose  any  man  have  a  servant  who  will  be 
very  complimental,  and  give  his  master  cap  and  knee  and  very  good  words,  yet  when 
his  master  commands  him  anything,  he  will  not  do  it — here  is  honour,  but  no 
service ;  and  denying  service,  he  plainly  shows  that  his  honour  is  but  dissembled 
and  hypocritical.  So  as  this  service  to  God,  as  to  earthly  masters,  stands — (1)  In 
*  fear'  and  reverent  inward  affection ;  (2)  In  dutiful  and  ready  obedience  in  all  holy 
and  civil  [moral]  actions.  For — 1.  These  two,  God  in  the  Scriptures  hath  every- 
where joined  together ;  and  therefore  no  man  may  separate  them.  *  Oh  that  there 
were  in  them  such  an  heart  to  "  fear "  Me,  and  to  keep  My  commandments  1 ' 
(Deut.  v.  29).  •  Now,  therefore,  fear  the  Lord  and  serve  Him  in  uprightness,  else 
choose  you :  for  I  and  my  house  will  serve  the  Lord '  (Josh.  xxiv.  14,  15).  *  Let  tiB 
hear  the  end  of  all,  Fear  God  and  keep  His  commandments  *  (Eccles.  xii.  13),  which 
is  all  one  with  '  fear  God  and  serve  Him.'  2.  This  service  is  a  fruit  of  fear,  and  a 
true  testimony  of  it,  for  fear  of  God  is  expressed  in  service ;  and  if  a  man  would 
make  true  trial  of  his  fear  he  may  do  it  by  his  service."  {A.  B.  Grosart.)  TemptO' 
turn  firmly  rejected: — The  nature  of  temptations,  as  dangerous  or  infectious,  doth 
sufficiently  enforce  a  necessity  of  their  speedy  removal.  Things  of  danger  require 
a  sudden  stop.  If  poison  be  taken  into  the  body,  we  speedily  labour  to  cast  it  up, 
or  to  overcome  it  by  antidotes.  We  labour  to  stay  the  spreading  of  a  gangrene 
presently.  Who  thinks  it  fit  to  delay  when  fire  hath  taken  hold  upon  a  house  ? 
The  very  opportunity  of  help  is  in  the  speediness  of  the  endeavour.  It  is  too  late 
to  bring  water  when  the  house  is  consumed,  too  late  to  apply  a  remedy  when  the 
disease  hath  conquered.  They  that  consider  what  a  temptation  is  will  see  no  reason 
to  move  slowly  in  opposing.  {R.  Gilpin. )  The  devil  quotes  Deuteronomy : — The 
Law  (we  know)  is  a  great  cooler  to  presumption.  {Bishop  Andrewes.)  True  woT' 
ship:  The  essentials  of  true  worship:— I.  Thk  object:  The  Lord  God.  II.  Thb 
OHASiCTEBiSTics  I  1.  Meditation ;  2.  Realization ;  3.  Personal  communion.  (A.  F, 
Barfield. )  The  service  of  God  : — L  He  has  the  right  to  claim  oub  bebviob.  Hii 
right  is  threefold.  He  is— 1.  Our  Creator.  2.  Our  Preserver.  3.  Our  Redeemer. 
II.  His  claim  upon  us  is  for  oub  undivided  and  whole-hearted  sertice.  "  Him 
only."  You  cannot  serve  Him  and  anything  else  that  is  contrary  to  Him.  Our 
"  reasonable  service  "  is  the  presentation  of  ourselves.  III.  His  service  confbb» 
the  highest  honour  upon  those  who  undertake  it.  To  serve  self  and  sin  is  to 
sink  always  deeper  into  the  depths  of  degradation.  To  serve  God  is  to  be  exalted 
to  the  position  of  fellow-labourer  with  Him  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes. 
IV.  His  service  is  the  only  service  which  is  freedom.  "  I  will  walk  at  liberty, 
for  I  seek  Thy  precepts."  V.  The  service  which  He  has  a  bight  to  demand  Hh 
TET  CONDESCENDS  TO  ENTREAT.  He  sceks  foT  HO  compulsory  obedience.  The  only 
service  acceptable  in  His  sight  is  that  which  springs  from  love.  "  My  son,  give  Me 
thy  heart."  {J.  R.  Bailey.)  Satan  cannot  stand  a  text: — "  What's  wrang  wi'  ye 
noo  ?  I  thocbt  ye  were  a'  richt,"  said  a  ragged  boy,  himself  rejoicing  in  the  Saviour, 
to  another,  who  a  few  nights  before  professed  to  be  able  to  trust  Jesus,  but  who  had 
again  begun  to  doubt.  "  What's  vn-ang  wi'  ye  noo  ?  "  "  Man,  I'm  no  richt  yet," 
rephed  the  other, "  for  Satan's  aye  tempting  me."  "  And  what  dae  ye  then  ?  "  asked 
his  friend.  "  I  try,"  said  he,  "to  sing  a  h^mn."  "  And  does  that  no  send  him 
away?  "  "  No  ;  I  am  as  bad  as  ever."  "  Weel,"  said  the  other,  "when  he  tempts 
ye  again,  try  him  wi'  a  text ;  he  canna  staun  then."  Vnjlinehing  fidelity  to  God  :— 
Be  not  in  baste  to  be  rich  or  to  be  famous  or  to  be  admired.  "  Make  haste  slowly,** 
says  the  proverb,  and  it  means  just  this — Make  haste  in  God's  way ;  take  everything 
you  can  get  from  God,  take  nothing  from  the  devil.  Most  powerfully  was  this  illus- 
trated in  the  life  of  the  noble  Havelock.  For  many  years  in  the  army  he  straggled 
against  the  arbitrary  character  of  official  patronage,  and  the  odious  abuses  of  Um 


CBAP.  if.J  ST.  LUKE,  413 

purchase  system ;  and  he,  who  in  the  end  was  the  redeemer  of  the  Indian  Empire, 
was  for  a  dreary  while  only  a  lieutenant.  Yet  how  did  he  bear  himself  under  it  7 
As  a  Christian  soldier,  after  the  pattern  of  the  Lord  here,  he  placed  the  worship  of 
the  Lord  first,  and  that  he  would  not  renounce  for  anything  that  man  could  name. 
Hear  his  words,  and  they  are  worthy  of  being  written  in  letters  of  gold ;  yea,  the 
spirit  which  utters  them  manifests  a  nobler  courage  than  that  which  won  so  many 
fights  and  rescued  the  forlorn  garrison  at  Lucknow.  Here  they  are  :  "  Let  me  ask 
you,  my  good  friend,  what  you  mean  by  prejudices  against  me.   Tell  me  plainly.    I 

am  not  aware  of  any.    Old and  others  used  to  tell  me  that  it  was  believed  at 

the  Horse  Guards  and  in  other  quarters  that  I  professed  to  fear  God,  as  well  as  to 
honour  the  Queen,  and  that  Lord  Hill  and  others  had  made  up  their  minds  that  a 
man  could  not  be  at  once  a  saint  and  a  soldier.  Now,  I  dare  say  any  such  authorities 
must  be  right,  notwithstanding  the  example  of  Colonel  Gardiner,  Cromwell,  and 
Gustavus  Adolphus.  But,  if  so,  all  I  can  say  is,  that  their  bit  of  red  ribbon  was  very 
ill  bestowed  upon  me ;  for  I  humbly  trust  that  in  that  great  matter  I  should  not 
change  my  opinions  and  practice,  though  it  rained  garters  and  coronets  as  the 
reward  of  apostasy."  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Motto  for  the  tempted  . — There  is 
in  the  south  of  France,  on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  a  huge  tower,  form- 
ing part  of  the  fortifications  by  which  St.  Louis  secured  his  embarkation  for  his 
troops  for  the  last  crusade.  It  is  called  the  Tower  of  Constance,  and  iu  it  were  im- 
prisoned during  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  Protestant  women  who  would  not  renounce 
their  faith  at  the  request  of  the  great  king.  In  this  lonely  tower  there  is  a  gloomy 
chamber  in  which  these  women  passed  their  lives,  and  there  carved  with  some  rude 
instrument  on  the  pavement  of  the  prison  this  one  word,  "  Eesist."  It  is  ascribed 
to  Marie  Duran,  who,  for  being  sister  to  a  French  pastor,  was  there  confined  for 
more  than  forty  years.  She  found  her  great  resource,  her  great  consolation,  in 
carving  out  this  word  for  any  one  who  should  hereafter  come  to  read  it  there.  {Dean 
Statdey.) 

Vers.  9, 13.  And  he  brougbt  Him  to  Jerusalem,  and  set  Him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the 
Temple,  and  said  unto  Him,  If  Thou  be  tlie  Son  of  God,  cast  Tbyself  down  from 
hence. — It  is  Satan's  policy  in  tempting  to  run  from  one  extreme  to  another: — 
Seasons  of  this  policy  are — 1.  The  avoiding  of  one  extreme  gives  the  soul  such  a 
swing,  if  care  be  not  used  to  prevent  it,  that  they  are  cast  more  than  half  way  upon 
the  other.  2.  While  men  avoid  one  extreme  by  running  into  another,  they  carry 
with  them  such  strong  impressions  of  the  evil  they  would  avoid,  and  such  fierce 
prejudices,  that  it  is  not  an  ordinary  conviction  will  bring  tbem  right,  but  they  are 
apt  to  be  confident  of  the  goodness  of  the  way  they  take,  and  so  are  the  more  bold 
and  fixed  in  their  miscarriage.  That  as  distrust  on  the  one  hand,  so  presumption 
on  the  other,  is  one  of  his  grand  designs.  Show  what  presumption  is.  It  is  in 
the  general  a  confidence  without  a  ground.  1.  It  is  made  up  of  audacity — which 
is  a  bold  and  daring  undertaking  of  a  thing — and  security.  2.  The  ground  of  it  is 
an  error  of  judgment.  A  blind  or  a  misled  judgment  doth  always  nourish  it.  3. 
In  its  way  of  working  it  is  directly  opposite  to  distrust,  and  is  a  kind  of  excessive 
though  irregular  hope.  1.  Then  it  is  presumption,  when  from  external  or  subordi- 
nate means  men  expect  that  for  which  they  were  never  designed  nor  appointed  of 
God.  2.  When  men  do  expect  those  fruits  and  effects  from  anything  unto  which 
it  is  appointed,  in  neglect  or  opposition  to  the  supreme  cause,  without  whose  con- 
current influence  they  cannot  reach  their  proper  ends — that  is,  our  hopes  are  wholly 
centred  upon  means,  when  in  the  meantime  our  eye  is  not  upon  God.  3.  It  is  a 
presumption  to  expect  things  above  the  reach  of  our  present  state  and  condition, 
4.  When  men  expect  things  contrary  to  the  rules  that  God  hath  set  for  His  dispen- 
sations of  mercy,  they  boldly  presume  upon  His  will.  5.  It  is  also  a  presumption 
to  expect  any  mercy,  though  common  and  usual,  without  the  ordinary  means  by 
which  God  in  providence  hath  settled  the  usual  dispensations  of  such  favours. 
6,  When  ordinary  or  extraordinary  mercies  are  expected  for  an  unlawful  end. 
Having  thus  proved  that  presumption  is  one  of  the  great  things  he  aims  at,  I  shall 
next  discover  the  reasons  of  his  earnestness  and  industry  in  his  design,  which  arc 
these — 1.  It  is  a  sin  very  natural,  in  which  he  hath  the  advantage  of  oxa  own 
readiness  and  inclination.  2.  As  it  is  easy  for  Satan's  attempt,  so  it  is  remote  from 
conviction,  and  not  rooted  out  without  great  difficulty.  3.  The  greatness  of  the 
sin  when  it  is  committed,  is  another  reason  of  his  diligence  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  4. 
The  dangerous  issues  and  consequences  of  this  way  of  sinning,  do  not  a  little 
animate  Satan  to  tempt  to  it.    It  was  no  small  piece  of  Satan's  craft  to  take  this 


4U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohi».  it. 

sdTsntage,  Trhile  the  impression  of  trust  in  the  want  of  oatward  means  was  warm 
upon  the  heart  of  Christ.  He  hoped  thereby  the  more  easily  to  draw  Him  to  an 
excess.  For  he  knows  that  a  zealous  earnestness  to  avoid  a  sin,  and  to  keep  to  a 
duty,  doth  often  too  much  incline  us  to  an  extreme,  and  he  well  hoped  that  when 
Christ  had  declared  Himself  so  positively  to  depend  upon  God,  he  might  have 
prevailed  to  have  stretched  that  dependence  beyond  its  due  bounds,  taking  the  oppor- 
tunity of  His  sway  that  way,  which,  as  a  ship  before  wind  and  tide,  might  soon  be  over- 
driven. (R.  Gilpin.)  Satan  watches  the  wind  : — They  admire  how  it  comes  to 
pass  that  their  temptations  should  so  suddenly  alter,  that  when  Satan  seems  to  be 
so  intent  upon  one  design,  he  should  so  quickly'change,  and  urge  them  presently  to 
B  different  or  contrary  thing  ;  but  they  may  know  that  the  devil  watcheth  the  wind, 
and  spreads  his  sail  according  to  the  advantage  which  ariseth  from  our  answer  or 
repulse.  So  that  if  we  would  but  plough  with  our  own  heifer,  and  observe  our 
frame  of  spirit,  we  should  easily  find  out  this  riddle.  For  as  it  is  in  disputings  and 
arguings  of  men,  replies  beget  new  matter  for  answer,  and  so  do  they  multiply  one 
another ;  thus  are  temptations  altered  and  multiplied,  and  out  of  the  ashes  of  one 
assault  repelled,  another  doth  quickly  spring  up.  (Ibid.)  The  influence  of  place 
in  temptation: — As  long  as  Noah  was  in  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  he  had 
in  him  no  presumptuous  thought ;  but  sitting  under  the  vine  in  his  vineyard,  he 
was  overcome  therewith.  And  just  Lot  (2  Pet.  ii.  8)  in  Sodom,  had  no  fit  time  or 
place  to  be  presumptuous  ;  but  when  he  dwelt  in  the  mountain  in  security,  then  he 
committed  incest  with  his  daughters,  being  made  drunk  by  them.  David,  so  long 
as  he  was  persecuted  by  Saul,  tossed  up  and  down  from  post  to  pillar,  had  no 
leisure  to  be  presumptuous ;  but  in  the  top  of  his  turret,  when  he  was  at  rest  in 
his  palace.  (Bishop  Andrewes.)  The  same  d^vil : — But  though  it  be  not  the  same 
temptation,  yet  it  is  the  same  devil  in  both  places.  (Ibid.)  Pride  seeks  the 
pinnacle : — All  other  sins  keep  out  of  the  way,  as  well  as  they  can,  but  pride  is  not 
ashamed  to  be  manifested,  nay,  it  loves  to  have  witnesses  of  its  folly  and  insolency. 
(Bishop  Hackct.)  Satan  loves  open  sins: — This  is  that  itch  which  Satan  hath 
rubbed  upon  self-admiring  pride,  sometime  to  be  gazed  upon  at  one  place,  some- 
time at  another,  by  the  court,  by  the  theatre,  by  the  congregation  assembled  to  praise 
God,  by  the  whole  city,  if  it  be  possible,  as  it  was  purposed  in  this  temptation.  But 
the  more  publication  pride  makes  of  itself,  the  more  scandal  is  given,  the  more 
scandal  the  more  guiltiness,  and  the  more  guiltiness  the  greater  condemnation. 
Satan  loves  these  open,  these  flaming  sins,  that  weak  ones  may  run  to  them  like 
moths  to  the  light  of  a  candle,  and  be  touched  and  scorched  with  coming  near 
them.  (Ibid.)  The  holy  Temple  defiled : — And  above  all  places  on  earth  if  he 
make  us  his  instruments  to  defile  the  holy  Temple,  God's  glory  is  put  to  the 
greatest  scandal  and  reproach.  And  this  is  brought  to  pass  so  many  ways,  that  it 
is  plain  to  see  there  hath  been  a  most  witty  complotter  in  the  treachery.  1. 
When  any  prelate  is  so  puffed  up  that  he  thinks  himself  too  great  to  be  a  door- 
keeper in  Gods  house,  but  will  be  higher  than  all  the  Church,  and  set  on  the  top 
of  the  pinnacle,  who,  sitting  in  the  Temple  of  God,  exalts  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God.  2.  The  temple  is  defiled  by  setting  up  idols  in  the  courts  of  our 
heavenly  King,  even  in  the  midst  of  thee,  0  thou  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  3.  By 
offering  up  unclean  sacrifice,  either  false  doctrine,  or  impious  prayers,  or  super- 
stitious worship,  or  corrupted  sacraments.  4.  When  men  set  their  foot  within  the 
sacred  tabernacle  with  carnal  thoughts,  with  worldly  imaginations,  with  no  zeal  or 
attention.  5.  To  bring  any  profane  work,  any  secular  business  within  those  walla 
which  are  consecrated  to  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (Ibid.)  Satan  not  discouraged 
by  failure : — The  manner  is,  after  one  hath  taken  a  foil,  his  courage  will  fail.  The 
angel  would  have  been  gone,  when  he  saw  he  could  not  prevail  over  Jacob 
^Gen.  xxxii.  26).  But  it  is  not  so  here  with  the  devil.  For  when  he  saw  that  hia 
first  temptation  would  not  prevail  he  trieth  another.  (Bithop  Andrewes.)  A 
new  assault  made  out  of  vanquished  temptation  : — He  is  not  only  content  to  take  a 
foil,  but  even  out  of  the  same  thing  wherewith  he  was  foiled  maketh  he  matter  of 
a  new  temptation,  a  new  ball  of  fire.  Out  of  Christ's  conquest,  he  makes  a  new 
assault ;  that  is,  since  he  will  needs  trust,  he  will  set  him  on  trusting ;  he  shall 
trust  as  much  as  he  will.  As  the  former  tempted  him  to  diffidence,  so  this  shall 
tempt  him  to  precedence.  (Ibid.)  1.  It  is  a  favourite  snare  of  the  tempter  to 
"  take  "  men,  ay.  Christian  men,  to  "  pinnacles."  2.  It  is  to  "  tempt "  God,  to  do 
anything  wrong  on  the  plea  of  imagined  or  intended  good  to  others.  3.  Too  many 
make  the  same  mis-use  of  the  Bible  that  the  devil  did.  4.  The  believer  mast 
appropriate  to  himself  the  Bible  promises  and  commandments.    5.  Obedience  must 


emu.  xf.]  8T,  LUKE.  ilS 

be  kept  abidingly  in  mind.  6.  We  moat  never  sunder  means  from  ends.  7.  Let 
the  tempted  reaUie  the  great  protecting  hands.  (A,  B.  Grosart.)  A  pinnacle  of  the 
Temple : — The  "pinnacle  "  is  properly  the  wing  of  the  temple-buildings,  not  of  the 
main  building  itself.  The  pinnacle  has  been  supposed  to  be  the  pediment  of  the 
three-storied  royal  hall,  which  Herod  had  erected  at  the  southern  corner  of  the 
temple  area,  and  which  reached  to  the  mouth  of  the  Tyropoeon,  and  stood  high 
above  the  ravine  of  Gedron,  where  it  turns  into  the  Valley  of  Hinnom.  Josephus 
thoB  describes  it.  "  It  was  an  astonishing  work  of  art,  the  like  of  which  was 
nowhere  else  to  be  seen,  for  the  valley  was  so  deep,  that  when  any  one  standing  on 
the  top  looked  down  into  it,  he  lost  his  head.  Above  this,  Herod  erected  a  portico  of 
lour  storeys  of  pillars,  of  such  extraordinary  height,  that  when  any  one  ascended  to 
the  parapet,  so  as  to  look  down  from  the  roof  on  the  entire  depth  of  building  and 
natural  precipice,  he  stood  a  chance  of  becoming  giddy  before  his  eyes  reached  the 
hottom  of  the  abyss."  The  parapet  here,  no  doubt,  formed  a  low  pediment,  such 
as  is  common  to  the  gables  of  Grecian  temples.  On  the  top  of  this  pediment  stood 
Jesus,  with  Satan  by  Him.  A  great  commotion,  and,  indeed,  a  riot  was  caused  in 
Jerusalem,  by  the  erection  of  a  golden  Boman  eagle,  on  the  Temple  gate,  as 
crowning  the  pediment,  by  Herod  the  Great,  about  4  b.c.  The  eagle  was  torn  down 
and  broken  in  pieces  by  the  rioters.  It  was  a  symbol  both  of  Eoman  power  and  of 
Jupiter,  the  king  of  the  gods.  Now — perhaps  in  covert  reference  to  this  incident — 
Satan  plants  the  Lord  on  the  apex  of  the  pediment  of  Herod's  great  four-storied 
hall,  or,  possibly  on  the  entrance  gate,  on  the  very  pedestal  from  which  the  golden 
eagle  had  been  thrown  down.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  The  devil  where  least 
expected: — During  the  past  week  I  had  a  nosegay  of  flowers  brought  me.  I 
handled  them,  and  they  passed  through  the  hands  of  my  household.  They  had 
been  in  the  house  four-and-twenty  hours,  when,  going  into  the  room  where  they 
were,  I  observed  a  serpent  issuing  from  among  the  flowers.  When  I  approached  it 
darted  about  the  room,  shooting  out  its  poisoned  fangs.  I  thought,  "  How  like  the 
'  old  serpent  the  devil,'  coming  to  us  hidden  in  those  beautiful  flowers,  where  we 
least  expected  to  find  anything  so  dangerous  I  "  (J.  Stuchbery.)  Christ  on  the 
pinnacle  : — Looking  down  from  that  dizzy  height.  He  could  see  the  marble  pave- 
ment and  the  people  walking  upon  it.  "  Cast  Thyself  down  from  hence."  He 
could  have  done  it.  Sustained  by  angel  hands,  kept  secnre  by  His  own  inherent 
power,  He  could  have  descended  without  harm  into  the  midst  of  the  people.  No 
doubt  it  would  have  brought  Him  great  applause  from  the  idle  and  wonder- 
mongering  crowd,  but  whose  tears  would  it  have  wiped  away,  whose  aching  heart 
would  it  have  comforted,  whose  sickness  would  it  have  healed  ?  Never,  never, 
would  the  Lord  of  love  put  forth  His  power  for  such  a  useless,  fruitless,  purpose  as 
that ;  and  He  kept  his  Divine  resources  in  all  their  virgin  freshness  and  fulness. 
He  kept  them  untouched  till  presently  the  lepers  crossed  His  path  and  He  could 
cleanse  them,  till  presently  the  dying  were  within  His  reach  and  He  could  lift  them 
into  life  again,  till  the  broken-hearted  were  by  His  side,  and  He  could  dry  up  the 
fountain  of  their  woe  and  make  their  broken  hearts  to  be  whole  again.  (C  Vince.) 
Satan  busy  during  spiritual  exercises : — To  the  "  holy  city,"  to  the  holiest  place  in 
the  holy  city,  the  Temple,  is  the  Lord  Jesus  "  taken  "  by  the  tempter,  and  there 
afresh  tempted.  Whither  then  will  not  the  tempter  enter  ?  What  "  light-flaming 
battlement  "  will  be  not  over-leap  ?  My  dear  friends,  we  must  be  "  vigilant " 
everywhere  ;  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places :  in  the  house  of  God ;  at  the  family 
altar ;  within  our  closets  ;  beside  our  opened  Bible.  I  would  even  say  that  most  of 
all  must  we  "  watch  unto  prayer  "  in  these  holy  scenes  and  seasons.  For  it  is  with 
the  "  roaring  lion,"  who  ever  "  goes  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  as  with 
the  beasts  of  prey  in  the  forest.  I  remember  once,  when  camped  on  the  shores  of 
one  of  the  great  lakes  of  America,  that  in  the  stillness  of  the  pine-forest,  within 
whose  shadows  our  camp-fire  was  lit,  it  was  a  sight  to  see  the  wild  beasts  stealthily 
stealing  to  their  watering-places.  It  so  chanced  that  in  the  tangled  jungle  opposite 
us,  there  was  one  of  their  lurking-places ;  and  as  the  moonlight  streamed  its  wan 
radiance  over  it,  I  could  see  the  fierce  creatures  couched  behind  a  shattered  pine. 
Why  there  ?  Because  from  beneath  its  roots,  gushing  from  out  the  ferns,  was  a 
spring  of  water.  Thither  the  "  flocks  and  herds,"  came,  and  just  as  they  lapped 
their  refreshing  draught,  out  sprang  at  a  bound  the  wehr-wolf  or  other  terrible 
oeatt.  It  is  precisely  so  with  us.  While  the  beUever  is  quenching  his  soul's 
longings  and  thirstings  at  the  well  of  salvation,  the  adversary  crouches  to  make  his 
fatal  spring.  Alas,  alas  1  that  so  many  "of  the  fluck"  are  borne  way.  [A.  B. 
^otart,  DM.)       I.  The  tempter  comes  a  second  time  with  an  "  if."    Doubt  is  toe 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [aur.  n, 

potent  a  thing  to  be  lightly  or  readily  abandoned.  2.  The  tempter  goes  from 
extreme  to  extreme.  This  seems  to  be  a  favonrite  device  of  the  evil  one.  3.  Th« 
tempter  is  very  successful  in  tempting  professing  Christians  with  his  "If  [= since] 
son  thou  be  of  God,  cast  Thyself  beneath."  Everyday  observation  will  satisfy  that 
there  are  two  classes  who  fall  before  this  snare.  There  is  first  of  all  the  man  who 
has  newly  proved  the  power  of  the  "gift"  of  "faith"  to  produce  absolute  trust. 
Strong  in  that  trust,  there  is  the  danger  of  thinking  of  and  relying  more  upon  the  gift 
than  the  Giver;  and  of  acting  upon  the  grace  in  possession  as  semi-independent, 
instead  of  looking  to  Him  who  holds  all  grace  in  His  own  hands.  Presumption 
inevitably  comes  out  of  that ;  self-confidence,  rashness,  "  high  thoughts,"  and  all 
nnder  the  guise  of  an  unquestioning  faith.  My  dear  friends,  search  and  see  if  yoa 
are  not  hable  to  presume  upon  your  Christian  character,  and  to  run  risks  such  u 
you  should  else  shrink  from.  4.  The  tempter  seeks  first  to  lead  into  sin,  and  then 
to  justify  the  sin  by  Scripture.  5.  The  tempter  can  only  persuade,  never  oompeL 
"  Satan  can  tempt  and  persuade  us,  but  he  cannot  force  us  to  sin,  or  he  can- 
not cast  thee  down  unless  thou  *  cast  thyself  down.' "  {Ibid.)  What  toot  the 
evil  in  this  suggested  act  t — It  was  twofold,  evil  alike  on  the  Godward  and  on  the 
manward  side.  1.  In  the  first  aspect  it  meant  that  God  should  be  forced  to  do  for 
Him  what  He  had  before  refused  to  do  for  Himself — make  Him  an  object  ot 
supernatural  care,  exempted  from  obedience  to  natural  law,  a  child  of  miracle, 
exceptional  in  His  very  physical  relations  to  God  and  Nature.  2.  In  the  second 
aspect  it  meant  that  He  was  to  be  a  Son  of  wonder,  clothed  with  marvels,  living  a 
life  that  struck  the  senses  and  dazzled  the  fancies  of  the  poor  vulgar  crowd.  In 
the  one  case  it  had  been  fatal  to  Himself,  in  the  other,  to  His  mission.  Special 
as  were  His  relations  to  God,  He  did  not  presume  on  these,  but,  with  Divine  seU- 
command,  lived,  though  the  supernatural  Son,  like  the  natural  child  of  th« 
Eternal  Father.  His  human  life  was  as  real  as  it  was  ideal.  The  Divine  did  not 
supersede  the  human,  nor  seek  to  transcend  its  limits,  physical  and  spiritual.  And 
His  fidelity  to  our  nature  has  been  its  pre-eminent  blessing.  No  man  who  knows 
the  spirit  of  Christ  will  presume  either  on  the  providence  or  the  mercy  of  God, 
because  certain  that  there  remains,  even  in  their  highest  achievements,  the  dutiful 
servants  of  Divine  wisdom  and  righteousness.  He  who  came  to  show  us  the  Father, 
showed  Him  not  as  a  visible  guardian,  not  as  an  arbitrary,  mechanical  providence, 
but  as  an  invisible  presence  about  our  spirits,  about  our  wajs,  source  of  our  holiest 
thoughts,  our  tenderest  feelings,  our  wisest  actions.  The  Only-begotten  lived  as  one 
of  many  brethren,  though  as  the  only  one  conscious  of  His  Sonship.  And,  perhaps, 
His  self-sacrifice  reached  here  its  sublimest  point.  He  would  not,  and  He  did  not, 
tempt  the  Lord  His  God,  but  lived  His  beautiful  and  perfect  life  within  the  terms 
of  the  human,  yet  penetrated  and  possessed  by  the  Divine.  {A.  M.  Fairbaim,D.D,) 
The  temptation  to  pres^imption : — "If  God  is  to  be  so  trusted,  try  Him.  Show 
thyself  His  darling.  Here  is  the  word  itself  for  it.  Take  Him  at  His  word." 
Again,  with  a  written  word,  the  Lord  meets  him.  And  He  does  not  quote  Scripture 
for  logical  purposes — to  confute  Satan  intellectually,  but  as  given  even  Satan  the 
reason  of  His  conduct.  If  the  Father  told  Him  to  cast  Himself  down,  that 
moment  the  pinnacle  pointed  naked  to  the  sky.  If  the  devil  threw  Him  down,  let 
God  send  His  angels ;  or,  if  better,  allow  Him  to  be  dashed  in  pieces  in  the  valley 
below.  But  never  will  He  forestall  the  Divine  will.  The  Father  shall  order  what 
comes  next.  The  Son  will  obey.  In  the  path  of  His  work  He  will  turn  aside  for 
no  stone.  There  let  the  angels  bear  Him  in  their  hands  if  need  be.  But  He  will 
not  choose  the  path  because  there  is  a  stone  in  it.  He  will  not  choose  at  all.  He 
will  go  where  the  Spirit  leads  him.  (George  Macdonald,  LL.D.)  The  temptation  oj 
display  : — I.  The  attack.  1.  It  was  a  temptation  to  presumption.  2.  The  object 
of  this  presumption  was  display,  3.  The  temptation  was  presented  with  an  excuse 
in  Scripture.  II.  The  bepulse.  1.  Our  Lord  again  quotes  Scripture,  partly  (a) 
for  the  same  reason  as  formerly,  for  that  which  is  good  when  rightly  handled  must 
not  be  abandoned  because  evil  persons  abuse  it ;  and  partly  {b)  because  Scripture  is 
best  interpreted  and  balanced  by  Scripture.  2.  The  words  quoted  by  our  Lord  show 
that  He  regarded  the  act  of  presumption  suggested  by  Satan  as  an  insult  to  God. 
{W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Illustrations: — Walker  was  treated  less  respectfully. 
William  thought  him  a  busybody,  who  had  been  properly  punished  for  running  into 
danger  without  any  call  of  duty,  and  expressed  that  feeling,  with  characteristic  blunt* 
ness  on  the  field  of  battle.  "  Sir,"  said  an  attendant,  "the  Bishop  of  Derry  has  been 
killed  by  a  shot  at  the  ford."  "  What  took  him  there?  "  growled  the  king.  {MacaulayU 
History  of  Englmnd.)  Wellington,  of  an  officer  killed:  "Whatbasiuesshadhelarkuii 


«HA».  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  417 

there?  Shall  not  mention  him  in  my  despatch."  Trusting  and  tempting  providence:-— 
You  may  rely  upon  God  for  protection,  solace,  help,  but  not  if  you  are  foolhardy. 
No  miracle  will  do  for  you  what  you  can  do  for  yourself.  Jesus  might  have  come  down 
by  the  staircase ;  there  was  no  need  to  get  down  the  other  way — tempt  providence, 
and  providence  will  fail  you  to  a  certainty.      If  you  are  idle  and  feckless,   no 
philosopher's  stone  will  turn  your  dross  iuto  gold.    If  you  have  weak  lungs  and 
expose  yourself  recklessly  to  chill,   God's  icy  wind   will   slay   you   in   spite   of 
your  prayers.     If  you  neglect  the  laws  of  health  and  live  fast,  you  will  soon  sink 
from  the  heaven  of  health  into  the  hell  of  disease.    If,  from  the  pinnacle  of  desire, 
you  leap  into  the  pit  of  lust,  you  shall  die  mangled.     If,  from  the  pinnacle  of 
greed,  yon  plunge  into  the  gulf  of  peculation,  you  fall  crushed.    The  moral  order  of 
the  universe  will  not  be  suspended  for  you — "  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy 
God."     (H.  R.   Haweis,  M.A.)        Pinnacle  of  the  Temple : — Some  places  are  as 
dangerous  for  our  souls  as  the  pinnacle  of  the  Temple  was  for  the  body.    (D.  Dyke.) 
Cast  Thyself  down  from  hence. — Humility  employed  in  the  service  of  pride  : — That 
He  might  fall  down  bodily,  and  be  proud  spiritually,  and  so  he  thrust  together  a 
frivolous  presumption,  and  a  dangerous  descension.    How  much  is  humility  abused 
when  pride  will  wear  the  colours  of  that  great  virtue  to  deceive  the  world.     There 
was  gross  ambition  in  Absalom's  stooping  to  steal  the  hearts  of  the  people.    As  a  kite 
will  sweep  the  earth  with  his  wings,  that  he  may  truss  the  prey  in  his  talons,  and 
fly  aloft  to  devour  it,  so  all  the  crouches  and  submissions  which  an  ambitious  man 
makes  are  to  get  somewhat  what  he  seeks  for,  and  to  clamber  to  promotion.     This 
is  obserred,  because  Satan  impels  Christ  to  cast  Himself  down,  not  for  true  humility's 
sake,  but  upon  vainglory  to  hutter  in  the  air,  that  all  Jerusalem  might  take  notice 
how  precious  He  was  to  the  care  and  custody  of  all  the  angels.     {Bishop  Hacket.) 
Election  no  reason  for  presumption  : — I  see  now  who  is  the  author  of  that  fallacy 
which,  I  fear,  hath  cost  many  a  soul  the  loss  of  eternal  life,  that  such  as  assure 
themselves  they  are  elect  ones,  they  are  the  sons  of  God,  may  make  bold  with  their 
Father's  mercy,  may  rely  upon  it,  and  now  and  then  transgress  His  commandmenta 
for  their  pleasure,  or  profit,  or  some  other  fleshly  consideration ;  there  is  no  con- 
demnation to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus;  God  sees  no  sin  in  the  righteous — 
though  they  fall,  they  shall  rise  again  ;  and  many  more  such  deluding  axioms  as  they 
apply  them,  which  I  beseech  you  return  back  again  to  hell  with  him  that  invented 
them.     {Ibid.)         Trusting  too  much  : — As,  seeing  the  water  of  distrust  will  not 
extinguish  His  faith,  but  that  He  would  trust  in  God,  he  endeavoureth  now  by 
Scriptures  (that  magnify  the  providence  of  God,  and  the  confidence  we  are  to  put 
in  Him)  to  set  Him  as  far  gone  in  the  other  extreme,  by  presuming  or  trusting  too 
much,  that  so  the  fire,  which  before  he  would  have  quenched,  may  now  so  flame 
out  as  not  to  keep  itself  within  the  chimney,  but  to  set  the  whole  house  on  fire. 
{Bishop  Andreices.)       Vice  coloured  with  virtue : — The  devil  sees  that  against  God's 
children  oftentimes  he  can  have  no  other  advantage,  than  that  which  they  had 
against  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.)  in  the  law  of  his  God,  in  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit,  and 
therefore  he  dyes  his  bad  clothes  in  good  colours,  and  paints  the  foul  faces  of  sin 
with  the  colours  of  graces  and  virtues  to  deceive  us  ;  as  here  he  presents  presump- 
tion to  Christ  under  the  colour  and  in  the  habit  of  faith ;  and  so  now  covetousness, 
of  frugahty  and  good  husbandry ;  drunkenness  and  carousing  of  healths,  of  good 
fellowship;  sottish  sloth,  of  quietness  (Eccles.  iv.3),  unlawful  sports  both  in  regard 
of  the  nature  of  the  games,  as  dice.     What  need  have  we  not  to  be  carried  away 
with  everything  that  hath  a  show  of  goodness,  or  of  indifferency,  but  to  bring 
these  painted  strumpets  of  the  devil  to  the  light,  yea,  and  to  the  heat  of  the  Word 
of  God,  and  then  their  painting  shall  melt  away,  and  we  shall  see  their  beauty  came 
only  out  of  the  devil's  box?     {D.  Dyke.)         For  It  la  written,  He  shall  give  Hla 
angels  charge  over  thee. — Satan  quoting  the  Psalms  : — A  man  would  have  thought 
Satan  would  have  skipped  the  Book  of  the  Psalms  though  he  had  searched  over  all 
the  Scripture  beside.    It  is  the  volume  of  joy,  of  consolation,  of  alacrity,  the  very 
Bongs  of  angels.    «'  Is  any  man  merry,  let  him  sing  psalms,"  says  St.  James.    Is 
there  any  use  of  that  sweet  harmony  for  him  that  lives  in  perpetual  torment? 
{Bishop  Hacket.)        Scripture  not  defiled  by  Satanic  uses : — I  wiU  not  put  myself  to 
the  task  to  go  any  further  in  this  reckoning ;  for  all  schisms  and  heresies,  and 
almost  all  sins,  will  shroud  under  the  patronage  of  the  Word  of  God.     Yet  such  is 
the  pureness  of  that  fountain,  that  it  is  not  puddled,  though  dirty  swine  do  wallow 
in  it ;  nay,  though  the  devil  himself  run  headlong  into  it,  as  he  did  into  the  sea. 
Here  he  tumbles  about  in  this  psalm  to  cast  dirt  upon  it,  yet  the  psalm  is  no  whit 
1m8  sacred  and  venerable  than  it  was  before.    {Ibid.)       Misuse  qf  Scrij^ture  «• 

^2 


41S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLV8TRAT0R.  [obav.  m 

argument  against  iti  use  : — It  is  no  disgrace  nor  disparagement  to  the  Scrip. 
tures  to  proceed  from  Satan,  nor  any  occasion  to  make  us  leave  oar  hold;  for 
Christ  answereth  again,  and  striketh  with  the  same  weapon  wherewith  He  was 
stricken,  showing  us  that  it  is  lawful  to  use  a  text  well,  against  them  that  do  abuse 
a  text ;  and  if  Christ's  example  be  our  precedent,  then  we  may  allege  Scripture 
against  depraved  Scripture.  For  the  bee  may  gather  honey  on  the  same  stalk  that 
the  spider  doth  poison.  And  though  a  swashbuckler  kill  a  man  with  his  weapon, 
yet  a  soldier  may  lawfully  knit  a  sword  to  his  side ;  and  though  there  be  many 
piracies  committed  on  the  sea,  yet  may  the  merchants  traflSc;  or  though  some 
surfeit  by  gluttony,  yet  may  others  use  their  temperate  diet.  And  if  the  devil 
change  himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  shall  therefore  the  angels  lose  their  light  ? 
Misquoted  Scripture: — "In  the  ways"  all  is  safe.  Out  of  the  ways  all  is 
perilous.  Satanic  use  of  Scripture  : — I  shall  show  to  what  base  designs  he 

makes  it  subserve.  1.  He  useth  this  artifice  to  beget  and  propagate  erroneous 
doctrines.  Hence  no  opinion  is  so  vile,  but  pretends  to  Scripture  as  its  patron. 
2.  He  makes  abused  Scripture  to  encourage  sinful  actions.  3.  By  this  imita- 
tion of  the  commands  and  promises  of  God,  he  doth  strangely  engage  such  as 
he  can  thus  delude  unto  desperate  undertakings.  4.  He  sometimes  procures  ground' 
less  peace  and  assurance  in  the  hearts  of  careless  ones  by  Scripture  misapplied. 
Lastly :  This  way  of  Satan's  setting  home  scriptures  proves  sadly  effectual  to  beget 
or  heighten  the  inward  distresses  and  fears  of  the  children  of  God.  It  is  a  wonder 
to  hear  some  dispute  against  themselves,  so  nimble  they  be  to  object  a  scripture 
against  their  peace,  above  their  reading  or  ability,  that  you  would  easily  conclude 
there  is  one  at  hand  that  prompts  them,  and  suggests  these  things  to  their  own  pre- 
judice. And  sometime  a  scripture  will  be  set  so  cross  or  edgeway  to  their  good  and 
comfort,  that  many  pleadings,  much  time,  prayers,  and  discourses  cannot  remove 
it.  I  have  known  some  that  have  seriously  professed  scriptures  have  been  thrown 
into  their  hearts  like  arrows,  and  have  with  such  violence  £xed  a  false  apprehen- 
sion upon  their  minds,  as  that  God  had  cut  them  off,  that  they  were  reprobate, 
damned,  <fco.,  that  they  have  borne  the  tedious,  restless  affrightments  of  it  for  many 
days,  and  yet  the  thing  itself,  as  well  as  the  issue  of  it,  doth  declare  that  this  was 
not  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  is  a  spirit  of  truth,  and  cannot  suggest  a 
falsehood,  but  of  Satan,  who  hath  been  a  liar  from  the  beginning.  {R.  Gilpin.) 
Scripture  falsely  cited: — Another  point  of  Satan's  unfaithful  dealing  with  Scripture 
is  his  false  citation  of  it.  It  is  nothing  with  him  to  alter,  change,  or  leave  out  such 
a  part  as  may  make  against  him.  If  he  urge  promises  upon  men,  in  order  to  their 
security  and  negligence,  he  conceals  the  condition  of  them,  and  banisheth  the 
threatening  far  from  their  minds,  representing  the  mercy  of  God  in  a  false  glass,  as 
if  He  had  promised  to  save  and  bring  to  heaven  every  man  upon  the  common  and 
easy  terms  of  being  called  a  Christian.  If  it  be  his  purpose  to  disquiet  the  hearts 
of  God's  children,  to  promote  their  fears,  or  to  lead  them  to  despair,  then  he  seta 
home  the  commands  and  threatenings,  but  hides  the  promises  that  might  reheve 
them,  and,  which  is  remarkable,  he  hath  so  puzzled  some  by  setting  on  their  hearts 
a  piece  of  Scripture,  that  when  the  next  words,  or  next  verse,  might  have  eased  them 
of  their  fears,  and  answered  the  sad  objections  which  they  raised  against  themselves 
from  thence,  as  if  their  eyes  had  been  holden,  or  as  if  a  mist  had  been  cast  over 
them,  they  have  not  for  a  long  time  been  able  to  consider  the  relief  which  they 
might  have  had.  This  hiding  of  Scripture  from  their  eyes,  setting  aside  what  God 
may  do  for  the  just  chastisement  of  His  children's  folly,  is  effected  by  the  strong 
impression  which  Satan  sets  upon  their  hearts,  and  by  holding  their  minds  down  to 
a  fixed  meditation  of  the  dreadful  inferences  which  he  presents  to  them  from  thence, 
not  suffering  them  to  divert  their  thoughts  by  his  incessant  clamours  against  them. 
(Ibid.)  The  Word  of  God: — Now,  brethren,  I  would  have  you  remember  two 
things  throughout,  in  our  Lord's  use  of  Scripture,  in  this  sore  contest.  First :  As 
towards  Himself  and  His  own  human,  and  therefore,  it  might  be  supposed,  infirm 
heart.  It  is,  you  see,  the  sole  argument  which  He  uses,  the  sole  guide  which  He 
takes,  the  sole  source  of  strength  on  which  He  throws  Himself.  You  see  nothing 
added  to  it,  no  consideration  from  any  other  quarter,  of  reason,  or  convenience,  or 
nltimate  gain ;  no  calculations  of  any  kind  called  in  to  give  it  fresh  power,  or  an 
influence  not  properly  its  own.  It  is  thrust  boldly,  nakedly,  solitarily  forward,  by 
its  own  strength  alone  sustained.  Secondly :  It  is  clearly  implied  that  the  powerful 
spirit  who  was  tempting  Him  was  quite  as  well  aware  as  He  Himself  that  God's 
word  was  immutable  and  unconquerable;  and  that  it  contained  within  itself  all 
that  faith  needed  to  resist  his  utmost  assaults.    He  knew  full  well  that  all  "piritual 


OAF   IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  419 

strength  and  comfort  was  contained  in  it ;  nay,  a  clothing  of  the  sonl  that  rested  oa 
it  with  the  very  power  of  Him  who  spake  it  in  His  truth  and  holiness,  and  victory 
to  tread  all  sin  and  temptation  under  foot.  With  all  his  subtlety,  therefore,  and 
devices  of  a  bad  wisdom,  he  has  nothing  to  reply  to  the  bold  and  straightforward 
declaration  of  God's  will.  He  is  struck  dumb.  It  seems,  after  this,  useless  before 
Christians,  to  give  any  reasons  why  it  should  be  so,  seeing  that  we  have  such  a 
witness  to  it;  but  one  or  two  immediately  occur  to  every  thougtitful  person,  which 
I  will  just  suggest.  1.  Almighty  God  is  the  very  truth  itself,  and  it  is  no  more 
possible  for  Him  to  utter  what  is  false  than  for  the  glorious  and  blessed  sun  to 
shoot  forth  darkness  instead  of  light.  2.  He  is  all-powerful,  as  well  as  all  true,  and 
therefore,  if  He  be  bent  upon  executing  His  will,  whatever  it  be,  it  is  impossible  to 
resist  it.  3.  He  is  all  good,  and  gracious,  and  loving,  aud  hath  poured  the  riches 
of  His  mercy  into  the  book  which  He  has  given  unto  us ;  and  so  far  from  dreading 
these  perfections  of  His  nature,  which  make  all  that  He  has  said  unchangeable,  and 
grieving  that  it  cannot  bb  blotted  out — herein  is  our  joy,  as  sons  of  God  by  adop- 
tion and  grace,  that  "  it  is  written  "  that  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not 
one  tittle  of  that  blessed  writing  1  And  now,  only  turn  for  a  moment  to  what  it  is 
in  this  temptation  of  Satan  of  which  our  Lord  affirmed  that  it  was  the  Word  of  God, 
Bnd  found  strength  whereby,  in  the  hour  of  His  great  need,  to  vanquish  the  tempter, 
and  bring  down  angels  out  of  heaven  to  minister  to  Him  I  For  you  may  be  sure, 
that  the  sinless  Lamb  of  God,  who  took  our  nature  upon  Him,  that  we  might  be 
raised  to  the  purity  of  His,  seeing  that  He  was  flesh  and  blood  in  all  things,  sin 
only  excepted,  hath  recorded  His  own  temptations,  because  He  knew  full  well,  by 
the  wisdom  that  was  in  Him,  that  the  very  same  would  assault  us  1  Look  well,  dear 
brethren,  to  this  1  1.  Though  it  be  true,  that  we  must  all  labour  in  the  station  to 
which  God  has  called  us,  and  by  the  sweat  of  our  brow  must  eat  bread,  yet  that  is 
not  the  first  thing ;  that  is  not  the  great,  the  one  thing  needful.  "  The  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  meat,  or  drink,  but  righteousness,  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost."  "My  meat,"  saith  our  Lord,  and  therefore  ours,  "  is  to  do  the  will  of  My 
Father  which  is  in  heaven  I  "  "  Thou  shalt  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  "  Look  at  the  lilies  of  the  field, 
how  they  grow  I  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin  1  and  yet  your  heavenly  Father 
clotheth  them  I  Shall  He  not  much  more  clothe  you,  0  ye  of  little  faith  ?  "  In  one 
word,  "  It  is  written,"  and  it  cannot  be  changed.  Again — look  at  this :  Do  you 
never  tempt  the  Lord  your  God  ?  that  is,  presume  upon  His  aiding  and  protecting 
you,  where  He  has  not  promised  to  do  so,  but  the  contrary,  and  so  bring  a  curse 
upon  the  soul,  and  not  a  blessing  1  But,  you  may  say,  can  we  trust  God  too  much  ? 
or  throw  our  whole  souls  with  too  unreserved  a  love  and  confidence  upon  His 
fatherly  care?  But  to  presume  on  His  love  when  our  heart  is  elsewhere,  and  when 
we  refuse  to  obey  His  evideut  commandments,  is  death  to  us !  Again,  it  is  written, 
"  Thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God."  Thirdly :  Do  we  fall  down  and  worship 
Satan  ?  '•  It  is  written,  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  Him  only  shalt 
thou  serve  1 "  Finally  :  Before  we  part,  let  me  once  more  impress  upon  you,  that 
all  this,  and  much  more  of  the  like  import,  is  written,  and  that  to  teU  you  so  is  the 
same  thing  as  to  tell  you  that  it  will  all  come  to  pass,  as  sure  as  man  is  sinful  and 
ignorant,  and  God  wise,  holy,  and  true.  And  in  more  than  one  sense  it  is  thus 
written :  for  first  of  all — you  find  it  in  the  holy  book  1  There  it  is,  and  fire  cannot 
burn  it  out,  nor  water  wash  it  out,  nor  all  the  wishes  and  struggles  of  ungodly  men 
make  it  less,  even  by  a  single  letter.  It  is  written,  therefore,  not  only  in  a  book, 
but  in  the  eternal  counsels  of  God,  out  of  the  depths  of  which,  in  the  fulness  of 
time,  it  hath  all  issued  forth  to  us.  It  has  been  written  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting, that  thus  it  shall  be.  But  there  is  one  more  book,  dear  brethren,  in  which 
this  blessed,  and  eternal,  and  unchangeable  word  must  be  written,  if  we  would  be 
the  better  or  the  more  blessed  for  it.  In  our  own  hearts — in  our  souls,  in  the  fleshly 
tablets  within  us,  and  not  on  stone  tables,  or  paper  books,  must  the  Word  of  God 
be  engraven  by  the  Spirit.  So  long  as  it  remains  an  outward  thing,  merely  spoken 
or  merely  written,  it  is  only  condemnation ;  it  hath  a  sword  in'its  hand,  and  killeth. 
{J.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  devil  quoting  Scripture  : — The  failure  of  the  tempter  has 
not  deterred  mankind  from  venturing  on  the  same  appeal,  with  no  very  unhke 
design.  Among  the  crowd  of  pilgrims  who  throng  the  pages  of  bis  allegory,  Bunyan 
depicts  one  Mr.  Self  will,  who  holds  that  a  man  may  follow  the  vices  as  well  as  the 
virtues  of  pilgrims.  "  But  what  ground  has  he  for  so  saying  ?  "  is  Mr.  Greatheart'a 
query.  And  old  Mr.  Honesty  replies :  "  Why,  be  said  he  had  Soriptare  for  hii 
wamnt." 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  rr. 

••  The  devil  can  qnote  Scripture  for  his  porposat 
An  evil  soul  producing  holy  witness 
Ib  like  a  villain  with  a  smiling  cheek, 
A  goodly  apple  rotten  at  the  core." 

Baefa  Is  Antonio'i  stricture  on  Shylook'a  appeal  to  Jacob's  practice ;  and  Umm  Ii  • 
parallel  passage  to  it  in  the  next  act,  where  Bassanio  is  the  speaker  :— 

•*  In  religion, 
What  damned  error,  but  some  sober  brow 
Will  bless  it  and  approve  it,  with  a  text 
Eiding  the  grossness  with  fair  ornament." 

Shakespeare  embodies  in  Bichard  of  Gloucester  a  type  of  the  political  intrfgner ;  as 
where  the  usurper  thus  answers  the  gulled  associates  who  urge  him  to  be  aveitged 
on  the  opposite  faction : — 

**But  then  I  sigh,  and  with  a  piece  of  Scripture 
Tell  them  that  God  bids  us  do  good  for  eviL 
And  thus  I  clothe  my  naked  villainy 
With  old  odd  ends,  stolen  forth  of  holy  writ ; 
And  seem  a  saint  when  most  I  play  the  devil. ** 

An  anmitigated  scoundrel  in  one  of  Mr.  Dickens's  books  is  represented  as  openly 
grudging  his  old  father  the  scant  remnant  of  his  days  (on  the  ground  that  "  Three- 
score and  ten's  the  Bible-mark  ") ;  whereupon  the  author  interposes  this  parenthe- 
tical comment :  *'  Is  any  one  surprised  at  Mr.  Jonas  making  such  a  reference  to 
such  a  book  for  such  a  purpose  ?  Does  any  one  doubt  the  old  saw  that  the  devil 
quotes  Scripture  for  his  own  ends  ?  If  he  will  take  the  trouble  to  look  about  him, 
he  may  find  a  greater  number  of  confirmations  of  the  fact  in  the  occurrences  of  a 
single  day  than  the  steam-gun  can  discharge  balls  in  a  minute."  (F.  Jacox.) 
The  religious  devil: — "  But  what  is  this  I  see  ?  Satan  himself  with  a  Bible  under 
his  arm,  with  a  text  in  his  mouth  ?  No  devil  is  so  dangerous  as  the  religious  devil." 
So  writes  Bishop  Hall,  speaking  of  the  temptation  of  Christ.  There  are  two  classes 
of  devils,  the  religious  and  the  irreligious — both  in  reality  irreligious — and  the 
former  more  so  than  the  latter ;  but  these  make  no  show  or  pretence  of  religion, 
whereas  those  do.  St.  Paul  had  to  contend  with  them.  Speaking  of  false  apostles, 
he  wrote :  "  And  no  marvel ;  for  Satan  himself  is  transformed  into  an  angel  of 
light,"  &o.  The  religious  devil  has  often  been  enthroned  as  the  head  of  the  Church 
on  earth  ;  he  has  at  one  time  or  another  enjoyed  the  emoluments  of  every  bishopric 
in  Europe ;  there  is  scarcely  a  monastery  of  which  he  has  not  been  abbot;  there  are 
not  many  pulpits  from  which  he  has  not  preached,  for  he  is  to  be  found  in  every 
denomination.  A  religious  devil  has  been  known  to  join  a  Church,  and  go  from 
one  Church  to  another,  from  one  denomination  to  another,  in  order  to  secure 
customers  in  the  congregation.     {U.  S.  Brown.)  Satan's  many  disguise*  : — 

No  player  hath  so  many  several  dresses  to  come  in  upon  the  stage  as  the 
devil  hath  forms  of  temptation;  but  he  is  most  dangerous  when  he  appears 
in  Samuel's  mantle,  and  silvers  his  foul  tongue  with  fair  language.  {Gumall.) 
The  Word  of  God  the  end  of  controversy  : — To  dispatch  this  out  of  hand,  the  mis- 
construing the  Word  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  all  strife ;  the  true  allegation  of  it 
is  the  end  of  a  controversy.  (Bislwp  Racket.)  Satan  God's  ape : — That  the 
Scripture  is  alleged  in  a  perverse  apish  imitation,  because  Christ  had  alleged 
Scripture  before.  Thus  hath  the  devil  always  been  God's  ape,  as  in  sacrifices, 
washings,  tithes,  priests,  altars,  oracles  of  the  heathen,  all  which  he  did  apishly  imitate, 
and  counterfeit  the  like  to  those  in  the  Church  of  God,  thinking  by  this  means  to 
disgrace  the  ordinances  of  God.  (D.  Dyke.)  The  ahxise  of  Scripture: — That  the 
abuse  of  the  Scriptures  must  not  take  away  the  use  of  it.  Christ  doth  not  give 
over  alleging  Scripture  because  the  devil  abused  it.  The  honest  traveller  doth  so 
much  the  more  wear  his  weapon  and  his  sword  because  the  thief  useth  the  same 
weapon.  (Ibid.)  And  Jesus  answering  said  unto  him.  It  Is  said.  Thou  shalt 
not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. — Faith  distinguished  from  presumption : — Thou  shalt 
not  tempt,  &c.  Is  there  any  law  which  can  be  laid  down  which  will  serve  in  all 
eases  to  distinguish  faith  from  presumption,  which  will  warn  us  when  we  are  no 
longer  honouring  God  by  our  trust,  bat  dishonouring  Him  bjr  our  unbelief  t 


OUP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  421 

There  is,  and  it  is  as  follows : — The  moment  trust  in  God  presumes  to  break  any 
one,  even  the  least,  of  the  laws  of  God,  and  then  expects  God  to  save  it  from  the 
consequences  of  its  disobedience,  it  is  not  trust,  but  unbelief  ;  it  is  not  faith,  but 
presumption;  it  is  not  honouring,  it  is  tempting,  God.  {G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.) 
Our  Lord'$  quotatioTU  from  the  Scriptures  : — The  words  of  all  the  three  answers  to 
the  tempter  come  from  two  chapters  of  Deuteronomy,  one  of  which  (chapter  vi.) 
flupplied  one  of  the  passages  for  the  phylacteries  or  frontlets  worn  by  devout  Jews« 
The  fact  is  in  every  way  suggestive.  A  prominence  was  thus  given  to  that  portion 
of  the  book  which  made  it  an  essential  part  of  the  education  of  every  Israelite. 
The  words  which  our  Lord  now  uses  had,  we  must  believe,  been  familiar  to  Him 
from  His  childhood,  and  He  had  read  their  meaning  rightly.  With  them  He  may 
have  sustained  the  faith  of  others  in  the  struggles  of  the  Nazareth  home  with 
poverty  and  want.  And  now  He  hnds  in  them  a  truth  which  belongs  to  His  high 
calling  as  well  as  to  His  life  of  lowliness.  {Dean  Plumptre.)  The  inductive 
Mtudy  of  the  Scriptures : — What  the  Saviour  did  here  was  to  fill  out  and  complete 
the  interpretation  of  the  passage  which  Satan  had  repeated,  and  He  did  that  by 
showing  from  various  passages  the  conditions  within  which  alone  the  former  could 
be  rationally  and  intelligently  accepted.  Now  the  procedure  of  the  Lord  in  this 
instance  plainly  implies  that  one  portion  or  saying  of  Scripture  is  to  be  read  in 
connection  with  all  other  portions  of  it,  and  is  to  be  understood  and  interpreted 
only  in  that  sense  which  is  in  harmony  with  every  other  utterance  of  the  sacred 
oracles.  What  Nature  is  to  the  physical  philosopher.  Scripture  is  to  the 
theologian.  Li  prosecuting  a  systematic  examination  of  the  Scriptures  there  are 
three  things  in  reference  to  which  we  must  be  always  on  our  guard.  1.  We  must 
see  to  it  that  all  the  passages  brought  together  have  a  real  bearing  on  the  subject 
in  hand.  2.  We  must  see  to  it  that  we  give  to  each  passage  its  own  legitimate 
weight — no  more,  no  less.  3.  We  must  see  to  it  that  our  induction  of  passages  is 
complete.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Spiritual  acuteness: — There  is  a  story  of  a 
limner,  that  to  show  his  art,  drew  a  white  line  so  small  that  it  could  hardly  be 
discerned ;  another,  to  show  that  he  could  excel  him,  drew  a  black  line  through 
the  middle  of  it.  It  required  an  acute  sight  to  detect  either.  But  our  Saviour  at 
first  view  immediately  discerned  the  black  line  of  temptation  to  run  through  the 
plausible  advice  that  Satan  gave  Him.  (White.)  Tempting  Qod: — And  surely 
one  principal  and  notorious  offence  is  committed  when  a  man  exposeth  his  life  to 
unnecessary  dangers,  upon  an  iU-grounded  confidence  that  God  wUl  bring  him  off 
with  safety.  2.  The  Lord  is  tempted  when  we  will  not  believe  Him,  unless  we  see 
signs  and  wonders,  and  provoke  Him  to  let  us  see  some  print  of  His  omnipotence, 
or  we  will  fall  out,  and  trust  Him  no  more.  3.  There  is  another  crooked  branch, 
much  like  unto  the  former,  growing  out  of  the  same  root ;  not  simply  by  declining 
natural  means,  but  by  declining  all  means ;  having  no  calUng,  using  no  labour, 
cashiering  all  providence,  and  yet  expecting  to  live  and  thrive  as  well  as  they  that 
eat  the  bread  of  carefulness  by  the  sweat  of  their  brows.  4.  Then  they  shall  stand 
lor  the  fourth,  that  make  holy  vows,  and  bind  themselves  in  a  perpetual  obliga- 
tion, where  God  hath  given  no  promise  of  assistance,  that  they  shall  be  able  to 
perform  them.  6.  Fifthly,  to  use  such  things  again,  which  either  always  or  for 
the  most  part  have  been  unto  as  an  occasion  of  sinning,  is  to  tempt  the  Lord, 
whether  He  will  let  those  things  prevail  against  our  souls  which  so  often  have 
proved  unto  us  an  occasion  of  falling.  6.  And  sixthly,  this  smells  of  a  most 
andaciona  spirit,  provoking  wrath,  and  urging  the  patient  God  to  indignation, 
when  you  make  shght  of  all  the  terrors  and  minaciea  in  the  law,  as  if  they  were 
high  words ;  but  do  what  you  will  they  shall  never  fall  upon  you.  This  was  the 
first  imposture  that  Satan  put  upon  our  first  parents.  {Bishop  Hacket.)  Tempt- 
ing  Providence: — To  go  into  any  peril,  however  great,  at  the  call  of  duty 
trusting  that  God  will  protect,  is  faith.  To  go  into  any  perU,  when  there  is 
no  call  of  doty,  trusting  that  God  will  protect,  is  presumption.  Every  one 
can  see  that,  aa  a  general  principle,  presumption  is  not  faith.  Both  ere  trust 
in  God ;  bot  faith  is  reasonable  trust,  presumption  is  unreasonable  trust.  Faith  ia 
trusting  God,  where  He  has  told  us  and  because  He  has  told  as  to  trust  Him. 
Presamption  is  trusting  that  God  will  do  what  would  suit  us,  though  He  has  never 
said  He  would.  I  know  that  the  two  trusts  shade  off  into  each  other ;  and  it  is 
difficult,  in  some  cases,  to  say  whether  to  trust  that  God  will  provide,  will  order» 
will  protect,  is  faith  or  presumption.  Many  virtues  have  a  black  shadow  that 
keeps  near  them,  a  correspondiiig  vice  into  which  they  melt  by  imperceptibla 
gradations.    Who  will  eaj  exactly  where  courage  ends  and  foolhudiness  begins  i 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  it. 

\?here  tact  ends  and  trickery  begins  ?  But  then  it  is  just  here  that  each  man'r 
own  conscience  and  common  sense  must  guide  him.  We  read  in  the  history  oi 
that  same  great  king  who  has  already  been  named  of  a  case  in  which  the  tempting 
of  God's  providence  brought  instant  and  awful  consequence.  Daring  a  battle  in 
Planders,  Bang  William  was  giving  his  orders  under  a  shower  of  bullets,  when  ha 
■aw  with  surprise  and  anger  among  the  officers  of  his  staff,  one  Michael  Godfrey, 
a  mercantile  man,  the  Deputy-Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England.  A  foolhardy 
curiosity  to  see  real  war  had  brought  him  there.  The  king  said,  sharply,  "  Sir, 
you  ought  not  to  run  these  hazards  ;  you  are  not  a  soldier  ;  you  can  be  of  no  OM 
to  us  here."  "  Sir,"  answered  Godfrey,  "  I  run  no  more  hazard  than  your 
Majesty."     "  Not  so,"  said  William  ;  "  I  am  where  it  is  my  duty  to  be ;  and  I  may 

without  presumption  commit   my   life  to   God's  keeping ;    but  you "     The 

sentence  was  never  finished ;  at  that  moment  a  cannon-ball  laid  Godfrey  dead  at 
the  king's  feet.  I  do  not  venture  to  talk  of  judgments.  But  here  the  man's  death 
was  beyond  all  question  the  consequence  of  his  temerity.  Now  that  we  have 
thought  of  the  general  truth  set  forth  in  the  text,  I  wish  to  show  you  its  applica- 
tion to  certain  particular  cases,  with  which  we  are  all  quite  famihar.  I.  The  text 
tells  UB,  if  it  tells  us  anything,  that  wk  ought  not,  nkkdlbsslt,  to  oo  iw  ihb  watt  o» 
INFECTIOUS  DISEASE.  Well,  there  are  some  people  who,  if  they  would  not  fail  of  their 
duty,  must  just  trust  in  God's  providence,  and  run  that  risk.  This  is  part  of  their 
vocation ;  to  this  they  are  called  of  God.  To  them  the  promise  is,  that  His  angels 
will  keep  them ;  for  here  is  their  way,  the  way  God  has  set  them ;  and  in  that 
way  God  has  said  He  will  protect  His  people,  heartily  doing  their  appointed  work. 
The  doctor,  fulfilling  his  noble  calling ;  the  nurse ;  the  minister.  It  is  no  tempt- 
ing of  Providence  if  such  as  have  been  named  be  near  the  sick,  even  where  sickness 
is  most  malignant.  But  there  it  ends.  To  go,  when  you  are  not  needed ;  whear 
you  can  do  no  good  ;  when  you  may  carry  away  fatal  infection  to  others :  that  is 
doing  what  Christ  in  my  text  forbids.  II.  There  is  another  familiar  instance  in 
which  my  text  is  disregarded,  which  one  constantly  hears  named  as  a  singular 
folly  and  eccentricity,  but  which,  in  the  light  of  the  word  of  our  Master,  looks 
something  more  serious  than  folly.  There  are  many  men,  as  we  all  know,  whose 
business,  and  daily  work,  lies  upon  the  sea,  fishermen  and  sailors ;  and  there  are 
others  also  who  are  many  times  called  to  be  upon  the  sea.  Now,  God  has  mad* 
us  so,  and  made  the  waters  so,  that  if  we  fall  into  deep  water  and  sink  beneath 
its  surface,  we  must  soon  die ;  two  minutes,  and,  as  a  rule,  Ufe  is  gone.  But  God 
has  made  us  so,  and  made  the  waters  so,  that  in  two  or  three  weeks  we  may  each 
acquire  a  simple  art,  that  needs  no  machinery,  no  tools,  nothing  but  the  limbs 
God  gave  us,  and  skill  to  use  them,  and  courage  got  in  their  use ;  and  then,  this 
simple  art  acquired,  we  may  fall  into  deep  water,  and  be  just  as  safe  and  as  much 
at  our  ease  as  on  dry  land.  Now,  strange  to  say,  a  great  many  of  those  men  whose 
work  is  on  the  waters  will  not  take  the  trouble  of  learning  this  simple  art,  the 
knowledge  of  which,  the  exercise  of  which  for  five  or  six  minutes,  may  some  day 
just  decide  the  question.  Whether  or  not  their  poor  children  shall  or  shall  not  be 
left  fatherless  httle  paupers.  HI.  And  now  let  us  think  of  a  third  case  in  which 
the  warning  in  my  text  should  be  laid  to  heart  by  all  of  ua.     This  is  as  conckbni 

TBOCOHT  A«D  FOEESIGHT  IN  THE  MATTEE  OF  OUB  WOBIiDLT  MEANS  ;   the   laying  by  III 

prosperous  times  against  the  rainy  day  which  may  come ;  the  provision  to  be 
diligently  made  by  the  head  of  every  family,  while  health  and  strength  last,  for  the 
support  of  wife  and  children  after  he  is  taken  away.  The  Savings  Bank  and  the 
Life  Insurance  Company  are  sacred  institutions  as  much  as  any  institutions  can 
be.  It  is  tempting  Providence  when  a  working-man,  earning  large  wages,  doea 
not  try  to  lay  by  something  which  may  be  a  stay  should  sickness  come,  or  work 
fail.  He  ought  to  go  to  the  Savings  Bank  as  regularly  as  he  goes  to  the  church. 
Then  it  is  tempting  Providence,  in  another  walk  of  life,  when  a  professional  man, 
earning  a  considerable  income,  spends  it  all,  though  knowing  it  must  cease  with 
his  life,  never  caring  what  is  to  become  of  his  wife  and  children  ii  he  dies.  lY. 
Surely  it  is  a  tempting  of  God's  providence  if  wx  oo  not  take  bvxbt  kkaxb  to 

PREVENT  the  CHOLEBA  FBOM  COUmO,  AND  TO  PBEPABE  FOB  IT  SHOULD  IT  COIOC.      He  lUUI 

put  within  our  reach  means  that  conduce  to  the  health  of  the  community.  Wt 
know  that  impure  air,  and  impure  water,  and  filthy  dwellings,  and  drunkennese, 
ere  direct  invitations  to  the  cholera ;  and  though  no  authority,  however  stringent 
end  searching,  can  compel  individuals  to  be  clean  and  sober,  yet  an  enlightened, 
effloient  magistracy  has  great  power.  We  know  that  it  is  tempting  Providenoe  to 
praj  without  working,  and  yet  that  all  oar  work  will  go  for  nothing  without  Ood'r 


«AP.  rr.l  ST.  LUKS.  42» 

blessing  sought  by  prayer.  All  through  my  discourse  I  have  been  pointing  out  to 
you  what  you  are  bound,  as  reasonable  creatures,  to  do  for  yourselves.  Do  it ; 
but  after  all  is  done  you  must  still  pray  for  God's  blessing  on  it ;  you  must  still 
trust  in  His  providence.  True  faith  in  Him  will  do  its  own  best  as  though  it 
could  do  all ;  and  then  remember  that  without  3i8  blessing  it  can  do  nothing. 
That  is  our  way,  and  by  God's  grace  we  shall  go  on  in  it.  By  God's  grace.  {A .  H.  K. 
Boyd,  D.D. )  Presumption : — 1.  In  a  way  of  distrust.  (1)  Some  will  not  believe  the 
gospel  except  they  see  a  miracle  or  hear  an  oracle.  Christ  representeth  their 
thoughts  (Luke  xvi.  30).  (2)  Some  will  not  believe  God's  providence,  but  make 
question  of  His  power  and  goodness,  and  care  over  us  and  our  welfare,  when  He 
hath  given  us  sufficient  proof  thereof.  (3)  Some  will  not  be  satisfied  as  to  their 
spiritual  estate  without  some  sensible  proof  or  such  kind  of  assurance  as  God 
usually  vouohsafeth  not  to  His  people.  2.  In  a  way  of  presumption ;  so  we  tempt 
God  when,  without  any  warrant,  we  presume  of  God's  power  and  providence.  (1) 
When  without  call  we  rush  into  any  danger,  o  throw  ourselves  into  it,  with  an 
expectation  God  will  fetch  us  off  again.  (2)  When  we  undertake  things  for  which 
we  are  not  fitted  and  prepared,  either  habitually  or  actually,  as  to  speak  largely 
without  meditation.  The  heinousness  of  the  sin.  1.  _  Because  it  is  a  great 
arrogancy  when  we  seek  thus  to  subject  the  Lor  to  our  direction,  will,  and  carnal 
affections.  2.  It  is  great  unbelief,  or  a  calling  into  question  God's  power,  mercy, 
and  goodness  to  us.  3.  It  looseneth  the  bonds  of  all  obedience,  because  we  set 
up  new  laws  of  commerce  between  God  and  us ;  for  when  we  suspect  God's  fidelity 
to  as,  unless  He  do  such  things  as  we  fancy,  we  suspect  our  fidelity  to  Him.  4. 
It  is  wantonness,  rather  than  want,  pata  as  upon  tempting  of  God.  6.  It  argues 
impatiency — "  They  soon  forgat  His  works ;  they  waited  not  for  Hia  counsel,  but 
lasted  exceedingly  in  the  wilderness,  and  tempted  God  in  the  desert "  (Psa.  ovi.  18, 
14).  6.  The  greatness  of  the  sin  is  seen  by  the  punishments  of  it.  One  is 
mentioned — "Neither  let  as  tempt  Christ,  as  some  of  them  also  tempted, 
and  were  destroyed  of  serpents"  (1  Cor.  x.  9).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  H& 
departed  from  Him  for  a  season. — The  devil  leaveth  Him : — He  had  run  out  hia 
line,  and  tried  all  his  strength,  our  Saviour  stood  it  out  till  His  enemy  tilted  the 
very  dregs  of  his  gall,  and  drew  them  out.  He  that  undertakes  an  ill  cause  can- 
not except,  but  the  hearing  of  it  was  very  fair,  if  he  may  plead  out  his  matter  till 
he  can  say  no  more ;  so  the  tempter  cannot  say  he  was  cut  off  before  he  came  to  a 
period,  he  was  provided  of  better  arguments,  but  he  was  stopped  from  proceeding,  he 
could  not  make  these  cavils  for  shame,  for  his  departure  was  not  commanded  until 
he  ended  all  his  temptation.  (Bishop  Hacket.)  Satan  ashamed : — Another  reason 
why  he  fled  from  the  presence  of  Christ  is,  he  was  so  beaten  out  of  all  falsehoods 
and  inventions  by  the  evidence  of  truth,  that  he  was  ashamed  to  appear  any  longer 
before  the  face  of  the  Conqueror.  {Ibid.)  Breathing  time : — The  use  of  it 
shall  come  home  to  ourselves  thus  :  The  Lord  sometimes  takes  ofF  our  foe  from  as, 
and  gives  us  breathing  time  after  temptations,  it  is  but  for  a  season,  not  to  flatter 
ourselves  with  quietness  and  security,  but  to  repair  our  ruins  to  keep  out  the  bat- 
teries that  will  ensue.  It  is  but  a  refreshing  after  the  fit  of  an  ague,  the  sick  day 
is  coming  again.  Like  a  calm  upon  the  sea,  while  a  sweet  gale  blows  what  sensible 
man  will  not  have  all  things  ready  for  a  tempest.  Bemember  the  parable,  Lake 
xi  And  what  the  unclean  spirit  said,  "  I  will  return  into  my  house  from  whence 
I  came."  {Ibid.)  A  feigned  departure : — A  fox  will  stretch  himself  for  dead  that 
poultry  may  come  into  his  reach  and  never  fear  him ;  yet  if  they  do  stalk  towards 
him,  they  shall  find  to  their  cost  he  is  not  past  doing  mischief.  So  the  tempter 
will  give  back,  as  if  he  were  fled  for  ever,  but  he  departs  only  for  a  more  seasonable 
opportunity,  and  will  return  again  with  seven  spirits  worse  than  himself,  when  you 
are  worse  prepared.  (Ibid.)  The  life  of  temptation : — The  circle  of  attack  had 
been  exhausted.  All  possible  temptation  had  been  summed  up,  and  had  failed. 
Creation,  providence,  redemption,  had  each  furnished  the  ground  of  attack.  Body, 
soul,  and  spirit  had  each  been  assailed.  But  in  vain.  The  triumphant  Lord  had 
been  "  tempted  in  all  points,  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  Bat  the  words 
which  immediately  follow  are  of  dark  and  ominous  significance :  "  He  departed 
from  Him  for  a  season."  What  do  these  words  mean?  To  what  farther  and 
future  conflicts  do  they  point?  Can  we  discover  in  the  after  narrative  of  the 
Oospels  any  light  on  these  mysterious  words  ?  Yes,  fear  or  five  times  at  least  in 
oar  Lord's  after-life  did  specific  temptation  occur.  1.  The  first  of  these  renewed 
assaults  occurs  in  John  vi.  15.  The  miracle  of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand 
2iad  just  taken  place  and  had  made  a  profound  impression  on  the  multituds.  Tbij 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

resolved  at  once  to  proclaim  Jesus  as  their  Messianic  King.  Once  more  the  formet 
temptation  was  repeated.  How  did  Christ  meet  it  ?  Withdrew  into  a  mountain 
to  pray.  2.  A  little  later  on  a  still  more  remarkable  repetition  of  the  same  temp- 
tation in  which  the  tempter  was  none  other  than  one  of  Christ's  own  disciples,  ia 
recorded  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew.  Christ  had  been  unfolding  to  His  disciples, 
how  that  He  must  go  unto  Jerusalem,  and  suffer  many  things,  Ac.  (Matt.  xvi.  21, 
<&c.).  Simon  Peter  took  Him,  and  began  to  rebuke  Him,  saying,  Be  it  far  from 
Thee,  Lord.  In  these  words  another  than  Peter  had  spoken  to  Christ.  Satan  had 
come  again.  The  Lord  turned  and  said  unto  Peter,  almost  repeating  the  very 
words  He  had  spoken  to  Satan,  "  Get  thee  behind  Me,  Satan,"  &o.  And  then 
follow  the  words,  so  solemn  and  piercing,  which  told  the  disciples  that  the  only  way 
to  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth  is  the  way  of  the  cross :  "  Whosoever  would  save 
his  life,"  &Q.  3.  The  third  recurrence  of  this  temptation  took  place  nearly  at  the 
close  of  Chris's  earthly  life,  and  just  before  the  anguish  of  Gethsemane.  Multi- 
tude  crying  Hosauna  (Mark  xi.  9, 10).  Once  more  the  earthly  crown  seemed  within 
our  Lord's  grasp.  The  conflict,  however,  did  not  fully  begin  until  the  day  but  one 
after  this  triumphal  entry.  Certain  Greeks  had  desired  to  see  Jesus.  In  them 
Christ  sees  the  first  fruits  of  His  redeeming  work  among  the  Gentiles.  "  The  hoar 
is  come,"  He  says, ' '  that  the  Son  of  Man  should  be  glorified. "  Bat  the  mention 
of  His  own  glorification  at  once  suggests  the  dark  aud  sorrowful  way  through 
which  alone  it  could  be  reached.  For  one  moment  there  was  a  human  shrinking 
from  the  cup.  "  Father,"  He  cried,  *'  save  Me  from  this  hoar."  The  next  words 
check  the  natural  shrinking — "  But  for  this  cause  came  I  anto  this  hoar."  And 
the  answer  quickly  came.  Voice  from  heaven  spake  of  which  we  only  read  at  the 
great  crises  of  His  life.  The  victory  was  once  more  won,  and  with  new  and  trium- 
phant  joy  Jesus  cries,  "Now  is  the  judgment  of  this  world ;  now  shall  the  prince 
of  this  world  be  cast  out,"  «fec.  4.  One  final  crisis  in  the  life  of  Jesus  is  recorded  in 
the  Gospels.  Hitherto  each  successive  assault  had  been  beaten  back,  and  now  the 
time  of  conflict  was  drawing  to  a  close.  Gethsemane  still  intervened  between  the 
struggle  in  the  upper  room  and  the  crucifixion,  and  it  is  in  Gethsemane  that  the 
last  conflict  takes  place.  The  last  damning  act  of  ingratitude  is  consummated  in 
the  traitor's  kiss,  but  as  Jesus  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  men,  the  last  words  He 
utters  in  the  garden  disclose  the  presence  of  a  vaster  hostility  than  even  the  hatred 
of  the  son  of  perdition :  "  This  is  your  hour,  and  the  power  of  darkness,"  &c. 
(Luke  xxii,  53).  5.  Possibly  during  the  crucifixion  there  was  a  recurrence  of  another 
of  these  three  wilderness  temptations.  The  very  words  that  Satan  used  challenging 
Christ  to  prove  His  Divine  Sonship  by  a  miracle,  are  again  heard  in  the  scornful 
mockery  of  the  crowd  beneath  the  cross,  "  If  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  come  down 
from  the  cross "  (Matt,  xxvii.  42).  But  Christ's  triumph  in  the  wilderness  over 
Satan  was  only  augmented  in  the  voluntary  obedience  of  the  eternal  Son  to  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  He  had  come  to  save  others,  and  Himself  He  would 
not  save.  6.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  the  instances  of  temptations  which  we 
have  been  considering  were  all  the  temptations  which  Christ  endured  subsequently 
to  His  temptation  in  the  wilderness.  His  life,  from  first  to  last,  was  a  tempted 
life.  Was  there  no  temptation  to  our  Lord  (1)  in  the  poverty  of  His  earthly  life  ? 
(2)  in  the  hopeless  indifference  and  deadness  of  the  people  ?  (3)  in  the  activities  of 
His  public  life — activities  so  incessant  that  we  read  that  there  was  not,  at  one  time, 
"  leisure  so  much  as  to  eat "  ?  7.  The  life  of  temptation  was  also  a  life  of  uninter- 
rupted  victory.  It  is  in  this  light  that  the  sinlessness  of  Jesus  becomes  amazing. 
It  is  idle  to  imagine  that  it  is  possible  to  get  rid  of  the  supernatural  in  the  Gospels 
oy  blotting  out  the  miracles  wrought  by  Jesus.  The  miracle  of  Jesus  remains — 
the  miracle  of  a  will  ceaselessly  assaulted,  but  as  ceaselessly  victorious;  the 
miracle  of  a  goodness  touching,  like  the  sunlight,  the  darkest  and  most  festering 
pollutions  of  this  world  aud  remaining  as  untainted  as  the  sunlight  by  contact 
with  impurity.  (G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A.)  How  to  vanquish  temptation: — In  his 
charge  to  the  newly-ordained  ministers  Dr.  Pope,  when  ex-President,  referred  to  • 
certain  teacher  of  the  Church  who,  on  one  occasion,  asked  his  pupils  by  what 
means  they  sought  to  vanquish  the  temptation  to  worldly  lasts.  One  answered 
"By  prayer  I"  Another,  "By  endeavouring  to  realize  what  the  punishment  o£ 
transgression  will  be  1 "  The  third,  however,  replied,  "  When  the  tempter  comes  I 
simply  say,  The  place  isoecnpiedl  pass  on  1 "  "  The  best  way  to  keep  tares  out  of 
a  bushel,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  is  to  fill  it  with  wheat."  Christ  the  deviVt 
master: — Timms  had  a  very  wicked  master,  whose  ridicule  of  all  religion  was  sad 
to  hear.    Coming  op  to  his  old  servant  one  day,  he  said,  "  Timms,  I  hear  yoa'rft 


OHAF.  w.]  ST.  LUKE,  425 

converted."  "  Yes,  master,  praise  the  Lord  I  "  "  Can  you  tell  me  who's  the  devil's 
lather  ?  "  said  the  master.  *'  I  dinno  as  I  can,  but  I  can  tell  'e  who's  'is  master, 
and  that's  the  Lord  JesuB  Christ ;  He  clean  licked  him  when  He  had  the  fight  with 
him ;  and,  master,  I  can  tell  'e  who's  the  devil's  servant.  You  be,  master,  and 
accordin'  to  my  knowledge  of  him  you  be  servin'  a  bad  master."  {Sword  and 
Trowel.)  Angelic  ministry  after  temptation: — That  God  maketh  use  of  the 
ministry  of  angels  in  supporting  and  comforting  His  afflicted  servants.  Why  doth 
God  make  use  of  the  ministry  of  angels  ?  and  how  far  ?  1.  To  manifest  unto  them 
the  greatness  and  glory  of  His  work  in  the  recovering  mankind,  that  their  delight 
in  the  love  and  wisdom  of  God  may  be  increased.  2.  To  maintain  a  society  and 
communion  between  all  the  parts  of  the  family  of  God.  8.  To  preserve  His  people 
from  many  dangers  and  casualties,  which  fall  not  within  the  foresight  of  man,  God 
employeth  "the  watchers,"  as  they  are  called  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,  chap.  iv.  13, 
17,  for  He  is  tender  of  His  people,  and  doth  all  things  by  proper  means.  Now  the 
angels  having  a  larger  foresight  than  we,  they  are  appointed  to  be  guardians.  4. 
Because  they  are  witnesses  of  the  obedience  and  fidelity  of  Christ's  disciples,  and, 
«o  far  as  God  permitteth,  they  cannot  but  assist  them  in  their  conflicts.  Thui 
Paul;  "We  are  made  a  spectacle  unto  the  world,  and  to  angels  and  to  men"  (1  Cor. 
iv.  9).  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Besisting  Satan : — I.  Thb  kind  or  besibtanob.  1. 
It  must  not  be  faint  and  cold.  Some  kind  of  resistance  may  be  made  by  general 
and  coiomon  graces ;  the  light  of  nature  will  rise  up  in  defiance  of  many  sins, 
especially  at  first,  before  men  have  sinned  away  natural  light ;  or  else  the  resist- 
ance at  least  is  in  some  cold  way.  But  it  must  be  earnest  and  vehement,  as 
against  the  enemy  of  God  and  our  souls.  2.  It  must  be  a  thorough  resistance  of 
aU  Bin,  "  take  the  little  foxes,"  dash  "  Babylon's  brats  against  the  stones."  Lesser 
sticks  set  the  great  ones  on  fire.  The  devil  cannot  hope  to  prevail  for  great  things 
presently.  3.  It  must  not  be  for  a  while,  but  continued ;  not  only  to  stand  out 
against  the  first  assault,  but  a  long  siege.  II.  Aboumbnts  to  persuade  xt.  1. 
Because  he  cannot  overcome  you  without  your  own  consent.  2.  The  sweetness  of 
victory  will  recompense  the  trouble  of  resistance.  It  is  much  more  pleasing  to 
deny  a  temptation  than  to  yield  to  it ;  the  pleasure  of  sin  is  short-lived,  but  the 
pleasure  of  self-denial  is  eternal.  3.  Grace,  the  more  it  is  tried  and  exercised,  the 
more  it  is  evidenced  to  be  right  and  sincere  (Rom.  v.  3-5).  4.  Grace  is  atrength- 
ened  when  it  hath  stood  out  against  a  trial ;  as  a  tree  shaken  with  fierce  winds  ii 
more  fruitful,  its  roots  being  loosened.  Satan  is  a  loser  and  you  a  gainer  by 
temptations  wherein  you  have  approved  your  fideUty  to  God ;  as  a  man  holdeth  a 
stick  the  faster  when  another  seeketh  to  wrest  it  out  of  his  hands.  6.  The  more 
we  resist  Satan,  the  greater  will  our  reward  be  (2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8).  The  danger  of 
the  battle  will  increase  the  joy  of  the  victory,  as  the  dangers  of  the  way  make  home 
the  sweeter.  7.  The  Lord's  grace  is  promised  to  him  that  resisteth.  God  keepeth 
us  from  the  evil  one,  but  it  is  by  our  watchfulness  and  resistance ;  His  power 
maketh  it  efiectual.  III.  What  abe  the  obacss  that  enable  us  in  this  besistance? 
I  answer,  the  three  fundamental  graces,  faith,  hope,  and  love.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  And  Jesus  returned  In  the  power  of  the  Spirit  Into  Galilee.— -TA« 

higherspiritual  life : — Jesus  returns  to  GaUlee  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  This  is 
full  of  interest  in  every  way.  1.  As  bringing  up  the  question  of  Christ's  Divinity. 
Can  One  who  is  Divine  receive  augmented  powers  J  Especially  can  He  from  another 
co-equal  Spirit  ?  To  this  inquiry  it  may  be  replied  that  Christ's  life  on  earth  was  the 
Divine  circumscribed.  The  power  of  the  Spirit  that  rested  upon  Christ  brought 
forth  no  new  elements,  but  it  brought  out  the  Divine  element  previously  existing. 
2.  Interesting  as  a  study  of  the  life  of  Christ,  it  becomes  even  more  so  in  its  con- 
nection with  ourselves — with  the  whole  sphere  and  operation  and  possibilitiea  of 
the  human  mind.  A  like  experience  will  be  traced  in  the  apostles'  lives.  At  the 
time  of  His  death  they  were  very  little  advanced,  except  in  personal  affection  for 
Him,  beyond  Nicodemus,  or  other  devout  and  spiritually-minded  Jews.  He  had 
told  them  to  stay  in  Jerusalem  until  some  great  change  should  come  upon  them. 
And  He  declared  wbat  that  change  should  be  —power  from  on  high ;  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  then  came  the  Pentecostal  experience.  3.  We  find  traces 
in  the  early  Church  to  show  that  there  were  those  who  received  this  special  power 
over  and  above  mere  ordinary  endowments.  4.  In  every  age  there  have  been  those 
to  whom  these  disclosures  have  been  made,  pre-eminently  the  case  with  John 
Wesley,  who  laboured  years,  as  he  regarded  it,  in  bondage,  and  at  last  came  out  in 
tli«  power  of  the  Spirit.     6.  Lastly,  many  now  living  are  distinctly  oonsoioas  that 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  it. 

this  same  impulse,  this  same  clothing  of  extraordinary  power  remains  on  earth. 
Men's  faculties  are  telescopic.  Used  in  their  lower  state  they  are,  as  it  were,  un- 
drawn out.  They  are  capable  of  being  brought  to  a  condition  in  which  they  will  be 
a  hundred  times  more  than  in  their  ordinary  condition.  The  consciousness  of  this 
transcends  all  other  evidences  of  the  Divine  life.  Application  :  Many  of  you  are 
longing  for  the  renewal  of  life.  Here  is  the  instrument  of  your  power.  This  is 
what  you  need ;  this  is  what  we  all  need — that  higher  life  which  comes  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost : — There  was  no 
great  natural  capacity  in  Harlan  Page  ;  and  yet  he  was  an  apostle ;  and  his  life  has 
quickened  the  lives  of  tens  of  thousands  since  he  has  been  gone.  Being  dead,  ha 
jet  speaks.  But  he  had  the  Holy  Ghost  rising  upon  him.  There  are  men  who  say 
^ut  little ;  and  yet  they  give  you  anew  ideal.  They  shine  as  stars  in  the  heavens. 
And  there  can  be  no  accounting  for  it,  except  on  the  ground  of  the  dynamie  influ- 
ence of  spiritual  Ufe  and  spiritual  power  in  this  world.  There  are  men  who  stand 
in  the  centre  of  circles,  and  all  rise  up  and  call  them  blessed ;  and  nobody  can  tell 
why,  except  that  they  bring  heaven  near,  and  bring  invisible  things  near,  and  gain 
faith,  and  strengthen  their  moral  tendencies,  and  see  God,  and  have  the  power  to 
reflect  what  thay  see  upon  other  persons.  It  is  these  men  who  have  the  bighet 
region  of  their  soul  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  do  the  most  for  other 
men  ;  that  set  aside  scepticism,  that  convince  the  unconvinced,  that  penetrate  the 
unconverted  through  with  a  new  and  eternal  sense,  both  of  their  lacks  and  of  their 
possibilities  and  hopes.  It  is  these  men  who  are  joined  together,  and  who  receive 
their  power  of  life  and  of  working  from  God,  that,  after  all,  are  the  lights  of  the 
world.  (Ibid.)  Effects  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit: — Dr.  Daniel  Steele  saySf 
"  Soon  after  Dr.  Finney's  conversion  he  received  a  wonderful  baptism  of  the  Spirit 
which  was  followed  by  marvellous  effects.  His  words  uttered  in  private  conversa- 
tion, and  forgotten  by  himself,  fell  like  live  coals  on  the  hearts  of  men,  and 
awakened  a  sense  of  guilt  which  would  not  let  them  rest  till  the  blood  of  sprinkling 
was  applied.  At  his  presence,  before  he  opened  his  lips,  the  operatives  in  a  miU 
began  to  fall  on  their  knees  and  cry  for  mercy,  smitten  by  the  invisible  currents  of 
Divine  power  which  went  forth  from  him.  When,  like  a  flame  of  flre,  he  was  tra> 
versing  western  and  central  New  York,  he  came  to  the  village  of  Borne  in  a  time  of 
spiritual  slumber.  He  had  not  been  in  the  house  of  the  pastor  an  hoar  before  he 
had  conversed  with  all  the  family,  the  pastor,  children,  boarders,  and  servants,  and 
brought  them  all  to  their  knees  seeking  pardon,  or  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  In  a 
few  days  almost  every  man  and  woman  in  the  village  and  vicinity  was  converted, 
and  the  work  ceased  from  lack  of  material  to  transform,  and  the  evangelist  passed 
on  to  other  fields,  to  behold  new  triumphs  of  the  gospel  through  his  instrumen- 
tality." (Lightning  Flasket.)  Spiritual  power : — Dr.  Steele  mentions  another 
n&se,  not,  however,  so  well  known  in  this  country  as  that  of  Professor  Finney.  He 
fiays, "  Another  rare  instance  of  extraordinary  spiritual  power  is  that  of  Father 
Carpenter,  of  New  Jersey,  a  Presbyterian  layman  of  a  past  generation.  A  cipher  in 
the  Church,  till  anointed  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  immediately  became  a  man  of  won- 
derful spiritual  power,  though  of  ordinary  intellect,  and  very  limited  education.  In 
personal  effort,  hardened  sinners  melted  under  his  appeals  and  yielded  to  Christ. 
Once  in  a  stage-coach  going  from  Newark  to  New  York,  he  found  six  unconverted 
men  and  one  believer  his  fellow-passengers.  He  began  to  present  the  claims  of 
Jesus,  and  so  powerfully  did  the  Spirit  attend  the  truth,  that  four  were  converted 
in  the  coach,  and  the  other  two  after  reaching  New  York.  At  his  death  it  was 
■stated  that  by  a  very  careful  inquiry  it  had  been  ascertained  that  more  than  ten 
thousand  souls  had  been  converted  through  his  direct  instrumentality.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  16.  And  He  came  to  Nazareth,  where  He  had  been  brought  np :  and,  as 
Hl8  custom  was,  He  went  Into  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath  day. — The  tides  of 
the  Spirit: — The  moment  was  overcharged  with  a  certain  sad  intensity.  Since 
last  He  stood  upon  that  spot,  a  change  had  passed  upon  Him ;  a  light,  long 
struggling  with  the  clouds,  and  often  drowned  in  a  golden  haze  of  mystery,  had 
cleared  itself  within  Him ;  He  was  no  longer  at  His  own  disposal,  nor  free  to  rest 
upon  the  trodden  paths ;  but  the  sacred  dove  was  ever  on  the  wing  before  Him : 
and  now  alighted  on  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth,  and  there,  where  He  naturally 
fell  into  the  attitude  of  docility,  left  Him  to  speak  the  word  of  supernatural  power. 
Kever  is  it  so  hard  to  follow  and  trust  a  higher  inspiration,  as  amid  the  erowd  oi 
customary  things.  If  ever  Jesus  could  yield  to  misgivings  of  what  was  committed 
4o  Him  it  would  be  in  that  place.    There,  in  the  presence  of  those  at  whoee  feet 


CHAP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  427 

He  used  to  sit — there,  where  He  first  heard  and  pondered  Israel's  hope,  and 
watched  a  holy  light  on  other  faces,  not  knowing  that  it  was  reflected  from  His  own 
— how  could  He  stand  up  and  draw  the  great  words  of  Isaiah  upon  Himself,  and 
•ay  aloud,  "  This  is  the  hour.  Lo  I  it  is  I."  But  He  had  emerged  from  the  desert 
that  lay  between  the  old  life  and  the  new.  The  very  Spirit  of  God  had  driven  Him 
ihither  to  hear  what  could  be  said  against  itself.  And  now,  He  was  no  longer  His 
own.  No  flitting  ol  the  Spirit,  off  and  on.  It  rested  with  Him  now.  And  so  He 
eoald  bear  those  native  scenes  again,  for  they  lay  in  another  light ;  the  hills  of 
Nazareth  were  transfigured  before  Him ;  from  all  things  round  the  chiU  and  weary 
aspect  had  fled,  that  makes  them  press  with  the  weight  of  usage ;  and  He  stood 
amid  the  well-known  groups,  as  some  immortal  friend  might  return  and  look  in 
among  us  here,  with  unabated  love,  but  with  saintly  insight  into  meanings  hid 
from  US.  Lifted  then  into  the  full  power  of  the  Spirit,  whither,  as  least  congenial, 
does  He  take  His  heavenly  point  of  view  ?  To  the  village  synagogue,  on  the  stated 
day  of  rest ;  nothing  newer,  nothing  higher ;  but  just  the  place  and  time  which 
had  been  sacred  to  the  fathers.  The  first  thing  which  He  did,  under  freshest 
inspiration,  was  to  resume  the  dear  old  ways,  to  fall  in  with  the  well-known  season, 
to  unroll  the  same  venerable  page  ;  only  to  find  a  new  meaning  in  words  that  had 
long  carried  their  rhythm  to  His  heart.  We  are  sustained  then  by  the  sympathy  of 
the  highest  inspiration,  when  we  make  it  our  "  custom,"  too,  to  illuminate  in  our 
calendar  some  holy  day,  and  to  raise  near  every  cluster  of  our  dwellings  a  house 
where  "  prayer  is  wont  to  be  made."  Against  ihe  Christian  habit  of  seasonal  and 
local  worship  the  truth  is  often  urged  that  God  is  a  Spirit,  eternal  and  omniscient, 
abiding  neither  in  "  this  mountain  "  nor  in  that  "  Jerusalem,"  and  bearing  equal 
relation  into  every  mind  and  moment.  In  the  oeeasionalism  of  piety  I  see,  how- 
ever, not  its  shame  but  its  distinctive  glory.  For  of  all  God's  agencies  and  mani- 
festations, it  is  the  lowest  that  are  least  mutable,  and  most  remain  the  same  from 
first  to  last ;  whilst  the  highest  have  ever  a  tidal  ebb  and  flow — moving  in  waves  of 
time,  and  surprising  hidden  inlets  of  space  with  their  flood.  Be  assured  then  that 
in  your  ancient  usages  of  seasonal  and  local  worship,  in  seeking  here  to  meet  at 
intervals  the  high  tides  of  God's  Spirit,  yon  are  in  harmony  with  His  sublimest 
providence — wiSi  a  law  of  variation  transcending  any  physical  uniformity  over 
which  it  sweeps.  Reverence  the  holy  custom,  shelter  from  heedless  shght  the 
living  impulse  that  week  by  week  calls  you  hither  to  remember,  to  aspire,  to  pray. 
Bring  only  the  pure,  lowly,  childlike  hearts,  tender  to  everything  except  the  sins  you 
mast  confess — ^fuU  of  hope  for  the  world  and  trust  in  God ;  spread  out  an  eager  and 
a  gentle  spirit  for  the  dropping  of  fruitful  seeds  from  Holy  Writ  and  saintly  hymn ; 
freshen  the  fading  vow  of  self-sacrificing  love ;  and  your  worship  here  will  not  only 
resemble  His  who,  in  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  '•  went  as  His  custom  was,"  &c.,  hot 
prepare  for  a  higher  communion  where  "  your  life  is  hid  with  Him  in  God."  {J. 
Martineau,  LL.D.)  Syriagogue  tBor$hip : — The  Jewish  synagogues  were  open 
•very  day  for  three  services,  but  as  those  of  the  afternoon  and  evening  were 
always  joined,  there  were,  in  reality,  only  two.  It  was  the  duty  of  every  godly 
Jew  to  go  to  each  service,  for  so  sacred  was  daily  attendance  ^at  the  Babbis 
taaght  that  "he  who  practised  it  saved  Israel  from  the  heathen."  The  two 
market  days,  Monday  and  Thursday,  when  the  country  people  came  into  town,  and 
when  the  courts  were  held,  and  the  Sabbaths,  were  the  special  times  of  public 
worship.  Feast  days  and  fasts  were  also  marked  by  similar  sacredness.  (Dr. 
Oeikie.)  A  good  example  in  attending  public  worship: — Of  good  Archbishop 
Leighton  it  is  said,  that  the  Sabbath  was  his  delight,  and  no  slight  hindrance 
could  detain  him  from  the  house  of  prayer.  Upon  one  occasion,  when  he  was 
indisposed,  the  day  being  stormy,  his  friends  urged  him,  on  account  of  his  health, 
not  to  venture  to  church.  ♦'  Were  the  weather  fair,"  was  the  reply,  "  I  would  stay 
at  home,  but  since  it  is  otherwise,  I  must  go,  lest  I  be  thought  to  countenance  by 
my  example,  the  irreligious  practice  of  allowing  trivial  hindrances  to  keep  me  back 
from  public  worship."  {Life  of  Leighton.)  Evil  of  neglecting  public  worship : — 
Of  the  late  venerable  Dr.  Waugh,  his  biographer  records  that,  in  his  ministerial 
visitations,  his  nationality  was  often  strongly  displayed,  and  this  with  most  bene- 
ficial effect,  both  in  sentiment  and  language.  When,  without  any  adequate  cause, 
any  of  his  hearers  had  failed  to  attend  public  ordinances  so  regularly  as  he  could 
have  wished,  and  would  plead  their  distance  from  the  chapel  as  an  excuse,  he 
would  exclaim  in  the  emphatic  northern  dialect,  which  he  used  on  familiar 
occasions  to  employ,  '  *  What,  you  from  Scotland  1  from  Melrose  I  from  Gala 
Water  1  from  Selkirk  I  and  it's  a  hard  matter  to  walk  a  mile  or  two  to  serre  your 


ii9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rr. 

Maker  one  day  in  the  week  1  How  many  miles  did  you  walk  at  Selkirk  f  '* 
"  Five."  "  Five  I  "  "  And  can  ye  no  walk  twa  here  ?  Man  I  your  father  walked  ten 
or  twal  (twelve)  out,  and  as  many  hame,  every  Sunday  i'  the  year ;  and  your  mither 
too,  af ten.  I've  seen  a  hunder  folk  and  mair,  that  aye  walked  six  or  seven — men, 
women,  and  bairns  too:  and  at  the  sacraments  folk  walked  fifteen,  and  some 
twenty  miles.  How  far  will  you  walk  the  morn  to  mak'  half-a-crown  t  Fie  1  fie  I 
But  ye'U  be  out  wi'  a'  your  household  next  Sabbath,  I  ken.  O  my  man,  mind  the 
bairns  1  If  you  love  their  souls,  dinna  let  them  get  into  the  habit  of  biding  awa' 
fra  the  kirk.  All  the  evils  among  young  folk  in  London  arise  from  their  not 
attending  God's  house."  Such  remonstrances,  it  may  easily  be  imagined,  were  not 
often  uiged  in  vain.  {Baxendale's  Anecdotes.)  The  synagogue  service : — The  order 
of  service  was  certainly  fixed  and  invariable  in  the  time  of  Christ.  The  supreme 
moment  of  the  service  was  that  of  the  reading  of  the  law,  for  the  great  end  of 
meeting  was  to  hear  and  study  the  law.  Prayer  preceded  this  exercise,  and  the 
reading  of  a  passage  chosen  from  the  prophets,  followed  by  the  benediction,  closed 
the  service.  In  the  opening  prayer  there  were  several  distinct  portions.  It  began 
with  the  recitation  of  the  Shema  (three  passages  of  the  law,  viz.,  Deut.  vi.  4-9 ; 
xi.  13-21 ;  Numb.  xv.  37-41).  Then  came  the  eighteen  blessings.  During  thi» 
solemn  recitation,  the  people  remained  standing  with  their  faces  turned  towards 
Jerusalem  and  the  Holy  Place.  The  reciter  stood  before  the  chest  containing  the 
manuscripts.  Any  member  of  the  assembly  could  be  called  on  by  the  president  to 
perform  this  important  duty.  Minors  alone  were  excepted,  and  Christ  may  have 
very  likely  taken  His  turn  in  these  introductory  prayers,  both  at  Nazareth  and  at 
Capernaum.  The  people  responded  with  a  loud  Amen  at  the  close  of  each  prayer. 
The  reading  of  the  law  followed.  The  Chazzan  took  the  sacred  scroll  out  of  the 
chest,  removed  its  case,  and  placed  it  before  the  first  reader.  The  seven  members 
who  had  been  chosen,  rose,  and  read  in  turn  at  least  three  verses  each.  The  first 
reader  before  beginning  used  a  short  formula  of  benediction,  which  he  repeated 
also  at  the  end.  The  Torah  was  divided  into  one  hundred  and  fifty-three  sections. 
In  three  years  the  whole  was  read  through.  Subsequently  these  sections  were 
made  three  times  as  long,  and  the  whole  law  was  read  through  in  one  year.  The 
Chazzan  remained  all  the  time  close  to  the  reader,  and  watched  that  he  made  no 
mistake,  and  read  nothing  unsuitable  for  a  general  audience.  To  the  reading  and 
its  translation  was  always  added  a  commentary,  a  sort  of  homily,  to  which  great 
importance  came  to  be  attached  in  the  Christian  Churches,  and  which  subsequently 
developed  into  the  sermon.  The  reading  of  the  law  being  over,  the  one  who  had 
recited  the  opening  prayer  read  a  portion  from  one  of  the  prophets.  This  was 
called  the  closing  lesson,  because  it  completed  the  service.  The  reader  was  chosen 
by  the  head  of  the  synagogue.  He  read  three  verses  in  succession,  and  then  trans- 
lated them  (into  Aramaic).  Christ  one  day  read  one  of  these  closing  lessons  in  the 
synagogue  at  Nazareth.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  He  may  have  chosen  the 
passage  Himself.  We  notice  that  it  consists  of  only  two  verses.  This  was  allow- 
able, because  He  proposed  to  make  some  comment  on  it.  The  final  benediction 
was  then  pronounced,  and  the  assembly  broke  up.  {E.  Stopfer,  D.D.)  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  admired  but  rejected  ;— If  we  were  to  single  out  one  place  as  illustrating 
more  perhaps  than  any  other  place  St.  John's  remark,  "  He  came  to  His  own  and 
His  own  received  Him  not,"  that  place  would  surely  be  Nazareth.    I.  Observe  thk 

VALUE  WHICH   THE   LoBD   PUTS   UPON   THE   PUBLIC   MEANS   OF   GRACE — "  As  His  CUStom 

was."  Although  there  was  very  little  life  or  spirituality  in  the  synagogue  services, 
yet  Jesus  was  a  habitual  worshipper  there.  What  a  lesson  for  those  who  excuse 
themselves  on  such  grounds  as  that— 1.  They  can  pray  as  well  at  home.  Do 
they  ?  2.  The  service  is  not  quite  to  their  mind  (Heb.  x.  25).  II.  The  account 
WHICH  Christ  gave  at  Nazareth  of  His  own  office  and  ionistry.  III.  The 
effect  produced  by  our  Lord's  discourse  at  Nazareth,  1.  Admiration  and 
astonishment.  2.  But,  mingled  with  this,  contempt.  8.  And  so  Christ  and  His 
salvation  are  rejected.  (O.  T.  Harding,  M.A.)  An  inaugural  discourse  : — The 
first  sermon  of  Jesus  at  Nazareth,  a  standard  for  the  minister  of  the  gospel  at  the 
beginning  of  His  work.  The  narrative  imparts  to  the  minister  of  the  gospel  preg- 
nant suggestions.  I.  In  reference  to  the  point  of  view  from  which  he  is  to 
consider  his  work.  1.  Origin.  2.  Matter.  3.  Object  of  preaching.  ^  II.  In  rela- 
tion to  the  MANNER  in  which  he  must  perform  his  work.  His  preaching  must  be, 
as  here — 1.  Orounded  on  Scripture.  2.  Accommodated  to  the  necessity  of  the 
hearers.  8.  Presented  in  an  attractive  manner.  III.  In  relation  to  the  fruit  upon 
wMoh  he  can  reckon  in  this  labour.    Naiareth  shows  as — 1.  That  blossoms  are  M 


IRAV.  IT.]  ST.  LVKB.  429 

yet  no  certain  signs  of  fruit.  2.  That  this  fruit  may  be  blasted  by  the  most 
unhappy  causes.  3.  That  the  harvest  may  turn  out  yet  better  than  at  the  beginning 
it  appears  (there  in  the  synagogue  were  Mary,  and  also  the  "  Lord's  brethren,"  who 
afterwards  believed;  and  if  the  Saviour  did  not  work  many  miracles  at  Nazareth, 
He  yet  wrought  some)  (Matt.  xiii.  58).  IV.  In  relation  to  the  tempeb  in  which  he 
is  to  begin  a  new  work.  1.  With  thankful  recollections  of  the  past.  2.  With 
holy  spiritual  might  for  the  present.  3.  With  joyful  hope  for  the  future.  Happy 
the  teacher  who  is  permitted  to  begin  his  preaching  under  more  favourable 
presages  than  Jesus  began  His  in  the  city  where  He  was  brought  up.  (J.  J.  Van 
Oosterzee,  D.D.)  View  of  Nazareth: — Sheets  of  smooth  rock;  fields  of  huge 
boulders,  between  which,  at  times,  there  was  scarcely  room  to  pass ;  acres  of 
loose  stones  of  all  sizes,  no  path  or  track  visible — parts  so  steep  that  to  hold  on  to 
the  horse's  mane  was  a  help — everything  unspeakably  rough  and  difficult — such  was 
the  way  up  the  face  of  the  rocks  to  get  to  the  table-land  on  which  Nazareth 
Utands.  After  a  time  spots  of  green  appeared  on  the  wide,  unearthly  desolation, 
and  some  lean  cattle  were  to  be  seen  picking  up  poor  mouthfuls  among  the  stones. 
Further  on  was  a  larger,  but  still  very  small,  spot  of  green.  Goats  and  sheep  alone 
could  find  sustenance  in  such  a  weird  place.  After  an  hour's  ride,  during  which  we 
passed  both  camels  and  donkeys  toiling  up  the  face  of  the  hill  with  heavy  loads,  we 
came  to  a  spring  at  the  wayside,  now  running,  but  dry  in  summer.  At  last,  all  at 
once,  a  small  valley  opened  below,  set  round  with  hills,  and  a  pleasant  Uttle  town 
appeared  to  the  west.  Its  straggling  houses,  of  white,  soft  limestone,  and  mostly 
new,  rose  row  over  row  up  the  steep  slope.  A  fine  large  building,  with  slender 
cypresses  growing  around  it,  stood  nearest  to  us ;  a  minaret  looked  down  a  little  to 
the  rear.  Fig-trees,  single  and  in  clumps,  were  growing  here  and  there  in  the 
valley,  which  was  covered  with  crops  of  grain,  lentils,  and  beans.  Above  the  town 
the  hills  were  steep  and  high,  with  thin  pasture,  sheets  of  rock,  fig-trees,  and  now 
and  then  an  enclosed  spot.  The  small  domed  tomb-shrine  of  a  Mahommedan 
eaint  crowned  the  upper  end  of  the  western  slope.  Such  was  Nazareth,  the  home 
of  our  Lord.  .  .  .  Numerous  hills,  not  grassy  like  those  of  England,  but  bare, 
white,  and  rocky,  though  here  and  there  faintly  green,  shut  in  Nazareth  from  the 
outer  world;  the  last  heights  of  Galilee,  as  they  melt  away  into  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon.  Their  long,  rounded  tops  have  no  wild  beauty,  and  there  are  no 
ravines  or  shady  woods  to  make  them  romantic  or  picturesque ;  indeed,  so  far  aa 
the  eye  reaches,  they  are  treeless,  or  very  nearly  so.  .  .  .  The  water  of  Nazareth 
is  mainly  derived  from  rain-cisterns,  for  there  is  only  one  spring,  and  in  autumn  its 
supply  is  precarious.  A  momentous  interest,  however,  gathers  around  this  single 
fountain,  for  it  has  been  in  use  for  immemorial  ages,  and,  no  doubt,  often  saw  the 
Virgin  and  her  Divine  Child  among  those  who  frequented  it  morning  and  evening, 
as  the  mothers  of  the  town,  many  with  children  at  their  side,  do  now.  The  water 
comes  through  spouts  in  a  stone  wall,  under  an  arched  recess  built  for  shelter,  and 
falls  into  a  trough  at  which  a  dozen  persons  can  stand  side  by  side.  Thence  it  runs 
into  a  square  stone  tank  at  the  side,  against  which  gossips  at  all  hours  delight  to 
lean.  The  water  that  flows  over  the  top  of  the  trough  below  the  spouts  makes  a 
small  pool  immediately  beneath  them,  and  there  women  wash  their  linen,  and 
even  their  children ;  standing  in  the  water,  ankle-deep,  their  baggy  trousers — 
striped  pink  or  green — tucked  between  their  knees,  while  those  coming  for  water 
are  continually  passing  and  repassing  with  their  jars,  empty  or  full,  on  their  heads. 
The  spring  lies  under  the  town,  and  as  the  Nazareth  of  ancient  times,  as  shown  by 
old  cisterns  and  tombs,  was  rather  higher  up  the  hill  than  at  present,  the  fountain 
must  in  those  days  have  been  still  farther  away  from  the  houses.  (C.  Geikie, 
D.D.)  ^  The  synagogue :— A  synagogue  generally  stood  on  the  highest  piece  of 
ground  in  a  city,  or  near  it ;  it  was  oblong,  and  the  end  opposite  to  the  entrance 
pointed  towards  Jerusalem.  There  were  the  seats  of  the  eiders,  and  in  the  midst, 
at  this  end,  was  the  ark  with  a  lamp  always  burning  before  it,  in  which  was  pre- 
served the  roll  of  the  Law.  Before  it  also  was  an  eight- branched  candlestick, 
lighted  on  the  highest  festivals.  A  little  way  down  was  a  raised  platform,  on 
which  several  persons  could  stand  at  once,  and  in  the  middle  rose  a  pulpit,  in  which 
the  reader  stood  to  read  those  lessons  which  were  not  from  the  books  of  Moses. 
The  roll  of  the  Law  was  taken  with  great  solemnity  out  of  the  ark,  and  unrolled 
by  the  Babbi,  so  that  the  congregation  might  not  look  on  the  writing.  The 
lessons  from  Moses  were  so  arranged  that  the  books  of  the  Law  were  read  through 
•nee  in  three  years.  Much  less  ceremony  was  shown  about  the  second  lesson, 
which  was  taken  from  the  prophets  and  historical  booka.    On  week-daya,  not  leai 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

than  twenty-one  verses  were  read  ;  on  the  Sabbath,  not  more  than  three,  five,  or 
seven.  After  this  lesson  followed  the  exposition,  or  interpretation.  The  Scriptures 
were  read  in  Hebrew,  but  the  Hebrew  was  unintelligible  to  the  Jews  after  their 
return  from  the  Babylonish  captivity,  consequently  the  interpreter  translated  or 
expounded  what  he  had  read  in  the  Aramaic  or  Syro-Chaldee  tongue.  The  reader 
stood  when  reading  the  prophets,  but  was  allowed  to  sit  or  stand  for  the  historical 
books.  Originally  the  prophets  and  historical  books  had  not  been  read  in  the 
synagogue  service,  but  when  Antiochus  Epiphanes  forbade  the  reading  of  the  Law, 
in  the  services  of  the  Sabbath,  the  propheis  and  other  books  had  been  substituted 
for  those  of  Moses,  and  when  this  restriction  was  withdrawn  the  Jews  continued 
reading  the  prophets,  but  read  the  Law  as  well,  as  of  old,  in  the  place  of  honour. 
{S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  Christ's  mission : — I.  The  gkeat  distinction  ih 
WHICH  OUR  Lord  exulted — "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me."  As  this  waa 
what  distinguished  the  Lord,  bo  it  ought  to  distinguish  His  Church.  II.  Thk 
GREAT  MESSAGE  OUR  LoRD  HAD  TO  DELIVER — "  To  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor," 
&c.  III.  The  GREAT  WORK  OCR  LoRD  HAD  TO  ACCOMPLISH — "  To  heal  the  broken- 
hearted," &c.  {J.  P.  Ghown.)  The  Christ  at  a  preacher  .-—Christ  read  the 
appointed  lesson  for  the  day  (which  happened  to  be  the  day  of  Atonement),  bat 
not  the  whole  of  it.  He  had  not  come  to  proclaim  the  day  of  the  vengeance  of 
our  God.  The  gospel  is  primarily  a  deliverance  shadowed  by  the  year  of  Jubilee ; 
it  embraces  the  physical  and  social  ills  of  men,  and  their  spiritual  ills.  The  inex- 
tricableness  with  which  they  are  united  in  the  words  of  Christ  suggests  the  pro- 
found mystery  of  body  and  spirit,  mind  and  matter,  environment  and  spiritual 
history.  In  these  words  we  find  a  theology  and  a  life,  a  doctrine  and  a  practice, 
and  that  the  two  are  inseparable.  Pass  now  to  this  preaching  of  Christ.  I.  Its 
SUBSTANCE.  Without  doubt  we  have  here  the  key-note  to  His  entire  teaching.  It 
is  the  peculiarity  of  Christ's  preaching  that  He  pierces  at  once  to  the  centre  of  His 
great  delivering  system,  and  plants  His  ministry  upon  it.  The  peculiar  feature  of 
this  quotation  from  Isaiah,  which  Christ  makes  His  own,  is  its  doubleness:  poor, 
captives,  blind,  bruised  physically  and  morally,  but  chiefly  morally.  Let  no  man 
think  that  there  is  any  gospel  of  deliverance  or  helpfulness  for  him,  except  as  it  is 
grounded  in  a  cure  of  whatever  evil  there  may  be  in  him — evil  habits,  or  selfish 
aims,  or  a  worldly  spirit.  II.  Its  philosophy.  Suppose  some  questioner  had 
arisen  in  that  synagogue  of  Nazareth  and  asked  Jesus,  not  as  to  the  substance  of 
His  preaching,  for  that  was  plain  enough,  but  what  was  the  ground  of  it,  on 
what  ultimate  fact  or  reason  it  rested.  I  think  the  answer  would  have  been  of 
this  sort :  "  I  am  making  in  this  gospel  a  revelation  of  God,  showing  you  His  very 
heart.  This  is  what  God  feels  for  you  ;  this  is  how  He  loves  and  pities  you  ;  this 
is  what  God  proposes  to  do  for  you,  to  cheer  you  with  good  news,  and  open  your 
blind  eyes,  and  free  yonr  bruised  souls  and  bodies  from  the  captivity  of  evil."  III. 
Its  power.  In  one  sense  its  power  lay  in  its  substance ;  in  another,  in  the 
philosophy  or  ground  of  it ;  but  there  was  more  than  come  from  these  ;  there  was 
the  power  that  resided  in  Him  who  spoke  these  truths.  In  what  lay  the  com- 
manding power  which  made  them  wonder  at  His  words  ?  Not  in  any  impressive- 
ness  of  manner,  or  felicity  of  presentation.  These  are  elements  of  power,  but 
they  do  not  constitute  power.  The  main  element  of  power  in  one  who  speaks  is, 
an  tntire,  or  the  largest  possible  comprehension  of  the  subject.  Here  we  have  the 
key  to  the  power  with  which  Christ  preached.  He  saw  the  meaning  of  the  Jewish 
system.  He  knew  what  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  meant.  He  pierced  the 
whole  symbolism  to  its  centre,  and  drew  out  its  significance.  He  saw  that  God 
was  a  deliverer  from  first  to  last,  and  measured  the  significance  of  the  fact.  The 
whole  heart  and  mind  of  God  were  open  to  Him.  This  was  the  power  of  Christ's 
preaching  ;  He  saw  God ;  He  understood  God ;  He  knew  what  God  had  done,  and 
would  do ;  the  whole  purpose  and  plan  of  deliverance  and  redemption  lay  before 
Him  as  an  open  page.  We  cannot  measure  this  knowledge  of  the  Christ,  we  can 
but  faintly  conceive  it.  But  the  measure  of  our  conception  of  it  is  the  measure  of 
our  spiritual  power  over  others.  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  Jesus  at  Nazareth : — Observe — 
I.  The  place  specified  in  the  text.  1.  The  obscurity  of  Christ's  private  life.  2.  We 
see  in  it  God's  estimation  of  the  world's  pomp  and  glory.  3.  We  see  honest  industry 
honoured  by  the  Saviour.  II.  What  Jesus  did  on  His  visit  to  Nazareth.  1.  The 
place  to  which  He  resorted.  "  The  synagogue."  2.  This  place  was  identified  with 
former  associations.  "  As  His  custom  was."  3.  The  time  when  Christ  went  into  the 
synagogue  was  the  Sabbath.  4.  What  Jesus  did  in  the  synagogue.  5.  The  portion 
of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  which  He  read.    Application :  1.  Give  especial  heed,  d^ 


tHAV.  IT.]  BT.  LUKE,  4tt 

to  the  Holy  SoriptareB.  2.  Let  Scripture  be  the  test  of  all  yoar  views  and 
doctrines,  &a.  3.  The  rule  of  your  life,  &c.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christ's  first 
termon : — I.  Thb  account  which  Jesus  gate  of  His  mission.  1.  He  refers  to 
His  Divine  qualification.  (1)  The  Spirit  was  upon  Him  in  unbroken  plenitude. 
^2)  He  had  the  Spirit  always  with  Him.  2.  He  refers  to  the  fulfilment  of  a 
striking  prophecy.  Every  word  of  God  is  pure,  true,  unalterable.  3.  He  declares 
the  character  of  His  work.  (1)  To  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor.  (2)  To  heal  the 
broken-hearted.  (3)  Deliverance  to  the  captives.  (4)  Recovering  of  sight  to  the 
blind.  (5)  He  sets  at  Uberty  those  that  are  bruised.  (6)  He  proclaimed  the  year 
of  jubilee  to  the  people.  The  very  reverse  of  their  former  state,  made  known  the 
joyful  sound  of  peace  and  plenty,  of  rest  and  festivity.  The  gospel  era  is 
emphatically  "the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  U.  The  effect  it  produced 
UPON  His  auditobt.  1.  They  listened  with  marked  attention.  This  was  proper, 
necessary,  pleasing.  Some  have  their  eyes  closed  in  sleep,  some  gaze  about, 
some  look  into  their  Bibles  and  hymn  books;  but  they  fixed  their  eyes  upon 
the  speaker.  2.  They  were  filled  with  astonishment  and  wonder.  No  doubt  at 
His  wisdom,  but  equally  so  at  the  tenderness,  condescension,  and  love  with  which 
He  spake.  3.  They  were  spell-bound,  however,  by  prejudice.  4.  They  attempted 
to  murder  the  Son  of  God.  Truth  flashed  upon  their  minds,  but  they  hated  it ;  it 
exasperated  them,  and  they  tried  to  cast  the  messenger  of  mercy  headlong  down 
the  hill,  &o.  Application :  1.  To  you  Jesus  has  come  with  the  message  of  life.  2. 
YoQ  stand  in  need  of  the  blessings  He  bestows.  3.  Do  not  allow  prejudice  to  make 
Christ  a  stone  of  stumbling  and  rock  of  offence.  4.  Embrace  the  message,  and 
live.  6.  Put  on  Christ,  and  profess  Him  to  the  world.  (Ibid.)  Jems  at 
Nazareth  : — Let  us  notice  the  chief  points  of  interest  connected  with  Christ's  first 
appearance  as  the  Messiah,  proclaiming  the  gospel  in  the  home  of  His  childhood. 
I,  Thb  place.  He  was  ready  to  preach  where  He  had  been  known  all  His  life. 
Many  resolve  to  become  disciples  of  Christ  as  soon  as  they  get  away  among 
strangers.  They  say  they  have  not  courage  to  follow  Him  amongst  their  own 
friends.  Every  one  knows  their  past  sins.  Their  friends  would  laugh  at  them. 
Their  changed  lives  would  attract  general  attention.  Bat,  the  greater  the  change, 
the  more  reason  for  showing  it  at  home.  Jesus  had  no  past  sins  laid  to  His  charge 
when  He  went  back  to  His  own  home  to  preach  glad  tidings.  If  your  past 
character  has  been  upright,  the  remembrance  of  it  will  give  weight  to  your 
testimony  as  a  disciple  of  Christ.  If  your  past  life  has  been  evil,  no  one  will  be 
so  moved  by  the  genuineness  of  the  change  in  you  as  those  who  knew  you  before 
your  conversion.  H.  Thb  absocutions.  He  preached  in  the  synagogue.  It  was 
His  custom  to  attend  there.  He  always  worked  through  the  regularly  organized 
ohannels  for  religious  labour,  and  among  those  who  professed  to  be  religious. 
There  are  those  who  profess  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  who  stand  apart  from  the 
Churches  because  of  the  imperfections  of  Christians.  They  cannot  work  with  or 
enter  into  fellowship  with  Christians.  But  they  find  no  warrant  for  this  in  the 
example  of  Jesus.  The  Jewish  Church  was  corrupt ;  yet  He  worked  in  and  with 
and  through  it,  till  they  cast  Him  out.  III.  The  time.  He  preached  on  the 
Sabbath.  He  used  holy  time  for  holy  work.  His  work  was  always  holy,  always 
appropriate  to  time  and  place.  But  He  honoured  the  Sabbath  in  its  true  meaning 
as  the  day  of  worship.  IV.  The  subject.  It  was  a  text  from  the  Bible.  No  one 
ever  expounded  the  Scriptures  as  He  did.  He  was  Himself  the  Word.  God  had 
spoken  through  the  prophets.  His  Word  of  old  had  been  the  revelation  of  Him- 
self. Now  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.  The  living  speech  and 
living  speaker  revealed  the  mind  of  God.  His  words  were  spirit  and  life.  But 
they  never  thrust  into  the  background  what  had  been  already  spoken.  Those  who 
would  follow  Christ  will  love  the  Bible,  and  will  grow  holy  by  receiving  and 
obeying  it,  and  will  persuade  others  through  it  to  believe  on  Jesus  Christ. 
Without  it  we  are  defenceless  against  the  attacks  of  the  adversary.  V.  Thb 
BouBCB  or  the  pebacheb's  foweb.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  upon  Him.  It 
empowered  Him  to  make  known  the  gracious  message  of  salvation,  and  Himself  the 
Saviour.  Before  leaving  the  world  He  bestowed  this  Divine  gift  on  His  disciples, 
and  it  is  promised  to  every  one  who  believes  on  Christ  and  seeks  it.  He  is  ready  to 
anoint  every  believer  for  service.  Whoever  empties  himself  of  pride,  self-seeking, 
all  sin,  and  asks  for  that  gift  simply  that  he  may  glorify  God,  will  receive  it.  VL 
The  sermon.  He  was  Himself  the  explanation  of  His  text.  His  presence  spoke 
and  made  His  words  luminous.  VII.  Thb  bbception  of  the  sermon.  His 
heareri  lacked  the  sense  of  the  Divine  preseuM.    They  were  filled  with  worldlineM 


433  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oBir.  nw 

and  pride,  and  oonld  not  appreciate  the  heavenlj  gifts  which  Christ  broaght. 
With  no  consciousness  of  inner  want,  they  soaght  only  outward  things.  They 
judged  Him  first  by  His  personal  appearance  and  manner,  and  the  graoiousnesa 
of  His  words  ;  they  were  pleased.  Then  they  remembered  His  humble  position  in 
society,  and  their  impression  began  to  change.  Then  they  recalled  the  fame  of  Hi< 
miracles,  and  they  began  to  desire  to  be  entertained  by  wonders.  Then  they  saw 
that  He  was  exposing  their  prevailing  sins,  and  they  were  enraged.  But  the  truth 
which  He  presented  they  could  not  discern,  and  they  saw  the  frame  not  the  picture ; 
the  vessel,  not  the  contents.  They  sought  entertainment,  flattery,  agreement  with 
themselves,  not  truth.  They  thrust  for  ever  salvation  and  their  Saviour,  with 
murder  in  their  hearts.  VIII.  The  escape.  The  only  wonder  which  they  would 
be  likely  to  remember  was  that  by  which  He  separated  Himself  from  them  for 
ever.  A  mob  is  always  unreasoning.  Some  sudden  feeling  or  event  may  change 
its  purpose  as  quickly  as  it  was  started.  Many  times  the  courage  and  firmness  of  a 
single  man  has  dispersed  enraged  multitudes.  When  Marius,  once  the  honoured 
consul  of  Rome,  was  being  dragged  to  execution  by  a  yelling,  cursing  crowd,  he  fixed 
his  eye  on  the  man  who  came  forward  to  kill  him,  with  the  words,  "  Slave  I  dostthoa 
dare  to  kill  Marius  ?  "  The  soldier  dropped  his  sword  and  fled,  and  with  him  the 
panic-stricken  mob.  When  Napoleon  came  back  to  France  from  exile,  and  met 
the  troops  sent  to  oppose  him,  they,  at  the  sight  of  him,  changed  their  purpose, 
and  welcomed  him  as  their  commander.  Jesus,  with  the  majesty  of  grace  and 
truth,  so  awed  His  enemies,  that  their  rage  was  restrained,  and  He  passed  through 
them  unharmed.  But  oh  I  had  they  welcomed  the  Prince  of  Peace,  even  at  that 
last  moment,  how  different  their  destiny  would  have  been.  {A.  E.  Dunning.) 
The  new  teacher : — Jesus  emerged  from  the  desert  to  enter  on  His  great  career. 
The  season  was  the  spring.  And  within  as  without  all  was  spring-time.  Ha 
"  returned  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  into  Galilee,"  and  Galilee  felt  and  owned  the 
Spirit  and  the  power.  In  the  homes  of  its  peasantry  and  the  hamlets  of  its 
fishermen,  on  the  shores  of  its  beautiful  sea,  in  the  towns  and  villages  that  stood  on 
its  banks,  and  were  mirrored  in  its  waves.  He  preached  His  gospel.  Only  His  own 
Nazareth  refused  to  hear  Him.  Thither,  indeed,  He  had  gone,  had  entered  the 
synagogue  on  the  Sabbath,  as  His  custom  was,  and  had  stood  up  to  read.  To  Him 
the  place  was  full  of  sacred  associations.  He  had  there,  as  boy  and  youth  and 
man,  listened  for  hours  and  days  to  the  voice  of  God.  But  others  had  their 
associations  as  well  as  He,  and  theirs  were  not  always  as  sacred  as  His.  The 
synagogue  was  often  the  scene  of  strife.  The  conflict  of  opinion  was  not  unknown 
there.  The  men  of  Nazareth  had  their  personal  rivalries  and  spites,  and  when 
One  whom  they  knew,  so  far  as  the  senses  can  know,  rose  and  read,  and  applied 
to  Himself  the  prophetic  words,  they  received  His  gracious  speech  with  incredulous 
wonder.  But  when  He  proceeded  to  speak  with  authority,  to  rebuke  their  unbeHef, 
to  quote  against  them  their  own  proverbs,  then  they  "  were  filled  with  wrath,"  &o. 
And  He  went  His  way,  and  found  elsewhere  men  who  heard  gladly  His  words  of 
power.  The  strange  thing  about  the  new  Teacher  was  not  His  having  been 
untaught  and  a  carpenter.  The  great  creative  spirits  of  Israel  had  never  been  the 
sons  of  a  school.  The  Babbi  was  qualified  rather  than  disqualified  for  his  office  by 
a  handicraft.  But  the  strange  thing  was  the  the  new  Teacher  Himself.  He  stood 
distinguished  from  all  the  Eabbis  who  had  been,  or  then  were,  in  Israel.  Of  the 
points  that  made  Him  pre-eminent  and  unique,  three  may  be  here  specified.  1.  The 
relation  between  His  person  and  His  word.  The  Teacher  made  the  truth  He 
taught.  His  teaching  was  His  articulated  person,  His  person  His  incorporated 
teaching.  2.  The  consciousness  He  had  of  Himself  and  His  truth ;  its  authority  and 
creative  energy.  3.  His  knowledge  of  His  truth  and  mission,  throughout  perfect 
and  self -consistent.  His  first  word  revealed  His  purpose,  expressed  His  aim.  "  Had 
Christ  at  first  a  plan  ?  "  is  a  question  often  discussed.  "  Plan "  is  a  word  too 
mechanical  and  pragmatic.  Christ  had  at  the  beginning  the  idea  He  meant  to 
realize.  The  evidence  lives  in  the  phrase  most  frequent  on  His  lips,  "  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  (A.  M.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)  The  gospel  for  the  Gentiles: — If  I  read  this 
narrative  for  the  first  time  I  should  pause  at  the  words,  "  glorified  of  aU,"  knowing 
that  there  would  be  a  thunderstorm  before  long.  Here  is  Christ,  with  more  wisdom 
in  Him  than  all  the  world  besides ;  and  yet,  "  as  His  custom  was.  He  went  into  the 
synagogue,"  &c.  What  did  He  go  there  for  ?  They  could  teach  Him  nothing.  Men 
and  women  now,  on  the  plea  that  they  learn  nothing,  that  there  is  nothing  fresh  to 
hear  or  know  or  learn  at  church,  very  seldom  come.  And  many  of  yon  who  ooma 
to  hear  me,  come  not  tp  wordiip  God.     So  I  turn  and  read  this  history  of  how 


€BAP.  IT.]  8T.  LUKE.  433 

Christ,  who  was  the  foxintain  of  life,  the  wisest  of  the  wise,  went,  "  as  nis  custom 
was,"  &o.  "  He  stood  up  for  to  read."  Here  stands  a  teacher  from  whose  teaching 
men  shall  date  for  all  time,  and  He  is  about  to  choose  a  text.  What  it  was  you  know. 
Who  could  wonder  that  the  eyes  of  all  were  fastened  upon  Him.  They  had  never 
heard  the  words  read  as  He  read  them.  "  They  wondered  at  the  gracious  words," 
Ao.  They  found  them  gracious,  and  they  said,  some  of  them  honestly,  some  of  them 
meanly,  "Is  not  this  Joseph's  son?  "  Now  watch  for  the  storm.  He  tells  them  a 
terrible  truth  which  they  don't  like.  As  long  as  they  thought  He  was  going  to  preach 
all  these  things  to  the  Jewish  nation  it  was  all  right,  but  the  moment  they  hear 
that  these  things  are  to  be  done  to  the  Gentiles,  oh  1  then  the  storm  comes.  You 
know  what  they  had  heard — that  God's  love  was  big  enough  to  reach  Sarepta.  These 
people  had  sound  right  views.  Think  of  that  I  And  what  did  Christ  do  to  anger 
them  7  He  told  them  that  God's  love  reached  even  to  Sidon ;  that  His  heart  was 
deep  enough  to  take  in  the  leprous  Naaman.  What  shocking  things  to  tell  the  people, 
weren't  they?  And  what  effect  did  they  have?  They  were  proud  of  Him  ten 
minutes  ago ;  but  now  they  are  going  to  throw  Him  headlong  over  the  brow  of  the 
hill.  Has  there  ever  been  any  picture  like  that  ? — the  sunny  morning  ;  the  welcome 
Christ ;  the  teacher  kissed ;  the  teacher  thrown  down  the  precipice.  And  what 
brought  it  about  ?  He  discussed  of  the  largeness  of  God's  love.  I  often  see  these 
things.  It  does  not  belong  to  this  history  only.  {George  Dawson,  M.A.)  Habit 
and  holiness : — Here,  in  our  text,  is  one  case  of  Jesus  conforming  to  a  good  common 
custom — perhaps  not  only  following  the  custom,  but  getting  help  from  it  to  promote 
His  own  spiritual  life.  From  this  one  well- authenticated  custom  of  Jesus  in  regard 
to  Sabbath  observance,  I  purpose,  in  connection  with  the  text,  to  set  before  you  the 
value  and  use  of  habit,  as  an  aid  to  holy  life  and  character,  placed  by  God's  provi- 
dence within  our  reach,  and  which  we  are  bound,  as  wise  men,  to  tura  to  account. 
The  capacity  of  forming  habits  is  a  very  valuable  part  of  human  nature,  as  originally 
framed  by  God.  By  doing  a  thing  often,  we  come  to  do  it  easily,  and  even  to  con- 
tract a  liking  and  craving  to  do  it.  Sometimes  this  facility  and  inclination  grow  up 
before  we  are  aware  of  it,  in  matters  where  we  did  not  intend  it.  Moreover,  it  is  a 
power  as  ready  for  bad  uses  as  for  good,  so  that  it  requires  observation  and  guidance. 
It  is  by  habit  and  use  that  workmen  in  the  various  arts  and  trades  learn  to  manipu- 
late skilfully  the  various  tools  and  materials  which  they  employ.  Similarly,  by 
gradual  training,  both  animal  and  vegetable  natures  may  be  wonderfully  modified— 
by  more  or  less  light,  water,  warmth,  food,  or  motion.  It  is  the  alteration  of  these 
conditions  that  determines  life  and  death,  beauty  and  deformity,  success  and  failure. 
Many  of  the  evils  that  give  us  the  greatest  annojance  in  society  are  largely  the  result 
of  neglected  or  misdirected  habits  or  customs.  It  is  no  new  thing  to  employ  the 
force  of  habit  in  connection  with  piety ;  it  has  already  been  done  very  systematically 
in  past  ages.  In  fact,  it  is  only  in  comparatively  recent  times,  and  in  connection 
with  Protestant  Churches  especially,  that  the  power  of  habit  has  been  neglected. 
Under  the  Romish  system  there  was  both  great  use  and  abuse  of  habit  and  custom. 
At  present  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  reaction  and  protest  against  former  abuses.  AH 
the  details  of  rule  and  discipline,  as  laid  down  for  monks  and  nuns,  had  for  their 
aim  the  utilizing  of  habit  on  the  side  of  virtue  and  hohness.  But,  in  many  cases, 
this  was  carried  to  excess,  and  rules  became  ridiculous  when  emphasized  as  important 
in  themselves,  whereas  they  were  only  means  to  an  end.  Such  rules  applied  to 
dress,  to  hours  of  devotion,  to  repeating  certain  formulae,  to  the  period  of  sleep,  to 
regulation  of  diet.  Wnen  this  was  pushed  beyond  reasonable  bounds,  the  system 
was  open  to  ridicule,  as  an  attempt  to  make  virtue  by  machinery.  But  these  ancient 
extravagances  of  certain  branches  of  the  Christian  Church  are  no  reason  why  habit 
should  not  be  studied  and  utihzed  for  the  same  purposes  within  proper  limits. 
Habit,  in  excess,  is  formahsm  or  routine,  and  is  near  of  kin  to  hypocrisy.  This  was 
the  besetting  sin  of  the  old  Pharisees.  In  the  same  way,  habit  or  custom,  in  excess, 
becomes  a  system  of  ceremony,  or  rituaUsm,  which  is  just  old  Pharisaism  renewing 
its  youth,  but  in  adaptation  to  the  Christian  System.  Warned  by  these  errors — but 
mindful  that  there  is  also  in  habit  a  mighty  power  for  good — let  us  consider  a  few 
of  those  matters  in  which  habit  is  desirable.  1.  The  instance  in  the  text  applicable 
to  Jesus — the  custom  of  being  present  at  public  worship  every  Sabbath.  How  great 
an  aid  is  this  to  everything  that  is  good  1  It  puts  us  in  the  way  of  the  chief  means 
of  grace  ;  it  puts  us  in  the  way  of  the  best  human  companionship.  2.  A  habit  of 
prayer.  The  prayer  to  which  I  refer  specially  at  present  is  family  and  personal 
prayer.  Public  or  common  prayer  is  implied  in  Sunday  observance  and  church- 
going.    If  there  is  no  habit  of  family  prayer,  the  prayer  is  not  likely  to  be  made  at 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctur,  m 

all.  All  the  details  of  family  worship  imply  arrangement — a  certain  honr — a  fixed 
place — books  at  hand — a  person  responsible  for  conducting  the  service.  Family 
worship  thus  becomes  one  of  the  most  beautiful  features  of  domestic  order  in  every 
house  where  it  is  duly  attended  to.  Its  omission  becomes  at  once  a  mark  and  cause 
of  disorder.  Personal  prayer  no  less  depends  on  habit  and  custom  for  its  mainten- 
ance. 3.  Labour  may  be  the  subject  of  another  of  those  good  habits,  in  a  religioiu 
point  of  view.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  as  if  a  habit  of  labour,  while  good  and 
useful  in  itself,  had  little  to  do  with  religion.  These  idle,  aimless  existences  are  the 
most  unhappy  condition  possible  for  reasonable  beiuRS.  Far  better  is  it  for  a  man 
to  hold  on  steadily  in  his  work  to  the  end,  and  nobly  wear  out,  than  rust  wearily 
and  unprofitably.  It  is  a  calamity  when  a  man  cannot  work  by  reason  of  old  age 
or  sickness.  The  man  who  has  acquired  the  habit  of  labour  has  got  possession  of 
that  honest  power  which  will  advance  him  alike  in  a  worldly  and  moral  point  of 
view,  and  which  will  keep  him  out  of  many  temptations.  4.  A  habit  of  learning 
may  well  form  the  sequel  to  a  habit  of  labour.  It  is  in  always  aiming  to  learn  some- 
thing new  that  we  secure  for  ourselves  real  improvement  and  progress,  carrying  the 
purposes  of  youth  and  early  manhood  into  advanced  years.  There  are  various  ways 
in  which  this  habit  of  learning  may  develop  itself.  The  simplest,  perhaps,  is  obser* 
vation  for  one's  self ;  and  the  next  in  simplicity,  conversation  with  one's  neighbours, 
so  as  to  add  their  observation  or  information  to  one's  own.  But  far  more  valuable  are 
books  and  professed  teachers,  who  have  made  a  specialty  of  some  subject.  A  habit  of 
spending  leisure  time  in  careJEul,  dehnite  reading  on  matters  useful  in  ordinary  life, 
is  one  of  the  most  noble  exercises  in  which  a  man  can  train  himself.  6.  The  last 
matter  that  I  shall  at  present  name  as  a  fit  subject  for  a  good  habit  is  charity.  A 
custom  of  this  noble  sort  could  not  be  formed  or  maintained  save  by  very  deUberate 
effort  and  self-sacrifice.  Thus  have  we  considered  the  place  and  utility  of  habit  from 
a  Christian  point  of  view.  (J.  Rankin,  D.D.)  Our  Lord's  visit  to  Nazareth : — I.  Elis 
ABRrvAL  AT  Nazareth.  "Hb  Came  to  Nazareth,  where  He  had  been  brought  up."  A 
man  of  reflection  and  feeling  piety  will  always  be  affected  when  he  comes  to  the  place 
where  he  was  brought  up.  1.  What  was  Nazareth?  It  was  a  small  town  of  the  Zebu- 
lonites,  in  Galilee,  seventy-two  miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  and  west  of  Mount  Tamar. 
"Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  ?  "  2.  How  came  He  to  be  brought  up 
here  ?  3.  How  was  He  brought  up  there  ?  4.  How  came  He  to  Nazareth,  since  He  was 
there  brought  up?  Because  He  had  been  absent  from  the  place  :  He  had  been  to 
the  baptism  of  John.  For  a  considerable  time  He  visited  other  places,  where  He 
performed  His  first  miracles  ;  and  having  thus  gained  a  well-deserved  renown,  this 
would  serve  to  favour  His  introduction  to  His  townsmen  and  His  relations :  and 
thus  He  came  to  Nazareth  where  He  had  been   brought  up.      II.  His  peivatb 

ENGAGEMENTS   THERE    BEEOKE    He    PREACHED "  And,    aS   His    CUStom    WaS,  He   WCUt 

into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath  day,  and  stood  up  for  to  read."  1.  The  time  was 
the  Sabbath.  2.  The  place  was  the  synagogue.  Syuagogues  were  scattered  all 
over  Judea,  and  were  in  every  country  where  the  Jews  lived.  They  were  places 
sacred  to  devotion  and  instruction.  They  were  not  expressly  of  Divine  appointment, 
like  the  Temple,  but  they  arose  from  the  moral  exigeucies  of  the  people  ;  and  were 
peculiarly  serviceable  in  maintaining  and  perpetuating  the  knowledge  of  Moses  and 
the  prophets.    They  are  supposed  to  have  originated  in  the  days  of  Ezra.     3.  The 

action "  He  stood  up  for  to  read."     Bless  God  that  you  have  the  Scriptures  in 

your  own  hand,  and  in  your  own  language;  and  that  you  are  allowed  to  read  them, 
and  that  you  are  commanded  to  read  them.  III.  This  brings  us  to  His  preaohino. 
*•  And  there  was  delivered  unto  Him  tbe  book  of  the  prophet  Esaias ;  and  when  He 
had  opened  the  book.  He  found  the  place  where  it  was  written.  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  Me,  because  He  hath  anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor.  He 
hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and 
recovering  of  sight  to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  to  preach 
the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord."  1.  This  was  the  text.  2.  But  observe  the 
attention  of  the  audience — "  And  He  closed  the  book,  and  gave  it  again  to  the 
minister,  and  sat  down  :  and  the  eyes  of  all  them  that  were  in  the  synagogue  were 
fastened  on  Him."  It  is  very  desirable  to  see  an  audience  attentive,  as  the  mind 
follows  the  eye,  and.  the  eye  affecteth  the  heart.  3.  Then  observe  the  sermon 
itself—"  And  He  began  to  say.  This  day  is  this  Scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears." 
(1)  First,  He  asserts  His  qualification  for  His  mission—"  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  God  is  upon  Me."  (2)  Then  He  asserts  the  design  of  His  office—"  He  hath 
anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor."  IV.  What  waf  thk  kitect  of  thb 
BBBiioM?    They  were  struck  with  admiration ;  bat  admiration  seemi  to  have  been  all 


.  XT.]  8T.  LUKE,  488 

that  they  felt — "  And  they  wondered  at  the  gracious  words  that  prcceetled  out  oi 
His  mouth ;  and  they  said,  Is  not  this  Joseph's  sou  ?  "  What  reception  does 
Jesas  Christ  meet  wiUi  from  as  ?    {W.  Jay.) 

Vers.  18-22.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Is  upon  Me,  because  He  hath  anointed 
file  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor. — The  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord : — Every 
Christian  would  wish  to  know  what  were  the  first  words  spoken  by  Jesus  as  a 
preacher  of  good  tidings.  Two  of  the  evangelists  seem  to  gratify  this  natural 
curiosity.  According  to  Matthew  the  Beatitudes  were  the  inaugural  utterances  of 
the  Galilean  gospel ;  according  to  the  third  evangelist,  not  the  sermon  on  the  mount, 
but  the  sermon  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
neither  of  the  sermons  occupied  the  place  of  an  inaugural  discourse.  Luke  himself 
knowsof  things  previously  done,  and  we  may  assume  said  also,  in  Capernaum  (ver.  23). 
Why  then  does  he  introduce  this  scene  at  so  early  a  place  in  the  narrative  f  He  has 
selected  it  to  be  the  frontispiece  of  his  Gospel,  showing  by  sample  the  salient  features 
of  its  contents.  Probable  that  for  St.  Luke's  own  mind  the  emblematic  significance 
of  the  scene  lay  chiefly  in  these  two  features :  the  gracious  character  of  Christ's  dis- 
course, and  the  indication  in  the  close  of  the  universal  destination  of  the  gospel. 
These  were  things  sure  to  interest  the  Pauline  evangelist.  It  is  a  worthy  frontispiece, 
in  respect  both  of  the  grace  and  of  the  universality  of  the  gospeL     1.  In  the  first 

Elace  the  text  of  Christ's  discourse  was  a  most  gracious  one ;  none  more  so  could 
ave  been  found  within  the  range  of  Old  Testament  prophecy.  Made  more  gracious 
than  in  the  original  by  the  omission  of  the  reference  to  the  day  of  vengeance,  and 
by  the  addition  of  a  clause  to  make  the  Messiah's  blessed  work  as  many-sided  ancl 
complete  as  possible.  2.  If  Christ's  text  was  full  of  grace.  His  sermon  appears  to 
have  been  not  less  so.  That  this  was  so  the  evangelist  indicates  when  he  makes 
use  of  the  phrase  "  words  of  grace  "  to  denote  its  general  character.  That  phrase, 
indeed,  he  reckoned  the  fittest  to  characterize  Christ's  whole  teaching  as  recorded 
in  his  Gospel,  and  on  that  very  account  it  is  that  he  introduces  it  here.  3.  In  res- 
pect of  the  universal  destination  of  the  gospel,  the  scene  is  also  sufficiently  signifi. 
cant.  The  attempt  on  the  life  of  Jesus  foreshadows  the  tragic  event  through  which 
the  Prophet  of  Nazareth  hoped  to  draw  to  Himself  the  expectant  eyes  of  all  men. 
The  departure  of  Jesus  from  His  own  town  is  a  portent  of  Christianity  leaving  the 
sacred  soil  of  Judea,  and  setting  forth  into  the  wide  world  in  quest  of  a  new  home. 
4.  The  two  features  most  prominent  in  this  frontispiece  are  just  the  salient  charac- 
teristics of  the  Christian  era.  It  is  the  era  of  grace,  and  of  grace  free  to  all  mankind. 
And  on  these  accounts  it  is  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.  It  is  acceptable  to  God. 
It  should  be  acceptable  to  ns.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  The  interrupted  sermon : — In 
the  course  of  His  first  preaching  tour  Jesus  came  to  Nazareth.  It  was  the  Sabbath. 
He  entered  the  synagogue  '*  according  to  His  custom."  Observe — for  the  greatest 
revolutionist  the  world  had  ever  seen  the  current  forms  and  church  services  of  the 
dftT  sufficed.  He  was  even  willing  to  poor  the  new  wine  into  the  old  bottles  till  the 
ola  bottles  burst.  He  enters  the  village  synagogue — His  parish  church.  He  offers 
to  read  the  lesson ;  He  ascends  the  pulpit ;  the  clerk  hands  up  a  roll  of  the  prophet 
Isaiah ;  before  Him  are  a  curious  medley  of  faces — the  eastern  women  veiled  behind 
lattice-work  on  one  side,  the  men  of  the  village  with  a  sprinkling  of  the  tradesfolk  and 
gentry  on  the  other.  He  unrolls  the  scroll  and  finds  the  place,  Isaiah  Ixi.  1. 1  wish  our 
elergy  would  always  take  care  to  find  theright  place — the  suitable  text — the  passage  in 
season.  In  this  case  it  was  actually  the  lesson  for  the  day.  So  out  of  routine  the  Lord 
brings  life.  He  reads,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me. "  Ah,  without  that  spiritual 
concentration  in  the  pulpit  as  well  as  in  the  pew,  priest  may  preach  and  people  may 
hear  in  vain :  *'  He  has  anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor.*'  Yes,  yoa 
neglected,  suffering  people,  the  Saviour  of  the  world  places  you  on  a  level  with  the 
lavoured  of  the  earth.  The  permanent  and  the  spiritual  belongs  to  yoa  as  mochas 
to  them ;  the  same  Father ;  the  same  love  revealed ;  the  same  heaven  beyond — are 
for  you.  "  To  heal  the  broken-hearted."  What  a  lift  there  is  for  the  sorrowful  in 
the  sympathy  of  God,  that  steals  like  summer  light  into  the  darkened  room ;  no 
despair  can  ever  quite  keep  it  out.  "  Recovery  of  sight  to  the  blind."  The  mists 
of  passion,  the  clouds  of  prejudice,  the  veil  of  selfishness,  the  pall  of  spiritaal  ignor- 
ance, lo,  at  a  touch  the  scales  fall  off,  you  see  yourselves  as  others  see  yoa,  yon 
know  as  yoa  are  known,  your  heart  grows  pure,  yon  see  God.  "  To  preach  tb« 
Moeptable  year  of  the  Lord."  There  He  stopped.  The  next  words  of  Isaiah  ara, 
**  The  day  of  Tengeanoa  of  our  God."  He  would  not  break  into  that  new  train  of 
tbonght  which  might  clash  with  the  spirit  of  His  sermon.    The  Ust  words  of  th# 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ota».  m 

text  should  be  words  of  peace,  though  the  end  was  to  be  tamult.  "  He  elosed  tha 
book,  and  sat  down  "  to  deliver  His  sermon.  We  shall  never  know  what  the  eermon 
was.  It  began  with  a  searching  application ;  no  beating  about  the  bush.  "  This 
day  is  this  scripture  fulfilled  in  your  ears."  It  ended  with  that  fierce  storm  of 
invective  which  was  the  Lord's  dauntless  reply  to  the  rage  of  an  envenomed  minority. 
He  has  fascinated  the  majority.  They  '•  wondered  at  the  gracious  words,"  &o. ;  but 
the  conceited  gentry  could  not  bear  to  be  lectured  by  "  a  Carpenter,"  and  they  soon 
let  Him  know  it.  "  Enough  of  that,"  they  cried.  •♦  A  sign  1  a  sign  I  you  can  do 
wonders  at  Capernaum ;  give  us  a  taste  of  your  quality  here.  A  miracle  is  worth 
all  this  talk — unwholesome,  democratic  talk  about  the  poor,  and  a  message  for  all 
men,  and  pray  what  is  to  become  of  us  if  we  are  to  be  mixed  up  with  the  rabble  ?  " 
It  was  aU  over  with  the  sermon.  The  knot  of  malcontents  expressed  their  dissent 
loudly,  and  were  resolved  to  break  up  the  meeting.  So  Christ  cast  His  bread  upon 
the  waters.  The  last  words  maddened  His  adversaries,  but  they  struck  the  second 
key-note  of  His  ministry.  The  first  was  "  peace  on  earth ;  goodwill  towards  men." 
A  gospel  of  healing,  liberty,  illumination,  and  comfort  for  all,  beginning  with  the 
lowest  of  the  people.  The  second  key-note  was  an  implacable  opposition  to  bigotry, 
heartlessness,  and  formalism.  "  You  want  a  sign  1  You  shall  have  one.  My  signs 
are  the  seals  of  my  teaching.  Those  who  accept  my  teaching  get  my  signs.  Yon 
will  have  none  of  my  message,  you  shall  have  none  of  my  miracles.  You  are  no 
better  than  your  fathers,  who  persecuted  the  prophets.  Were  they  not  outcasts  and 
rejected  wanderers  ?  There  were  many  widows  in  Israel,  but  Elias  only  healed  the 
Gentile's  son  at  Sarepta.  There  were  many  lepers  in  those  days,  but  Eliseus  only 
healed  Naaman  the  Syrian.  Syrian  lepers  and  Gentiles  go  into  the  kingdom  before 
you."  They  would  hear  no  more ;  they  rose  in  their  fury,  hustled  Him  out  of  the 
building,  hurried  Him  up  the  steep,  rocky  path  to  the  summit  of  the  hill,  and  would 
have  cast  ELim  down,  but  His  friends,  doubtless  some  of  those  sturdy  Galilean 
fishermen,  rallied  around  Him  and  got  Him  clear  of  the  village.  In  one  way  or 
another  He  passed  through  the  crowd,  on  His  way  back  to  Capernaum  and  the 
Galilean  shore.  He  left  Naaareth,  never  apparently  to  return.  The  secluded  moan- 
tain  village  had  indeed  oast  Him  out— the  world  received  Him.  (H.  R.  HaveiB^ 
M.A.)  The  matter  of  Christ's  preaching: — I.  I  preach  that  the  great  atonement 
for  sin  has  been  offered.  II.  I  preach  that  the  guilty  may  be  forgiven.  III.  I  preach 
that  the  slave  may  be  emancipated.  lY.  I  preach  that  the  lost  inheritance  may  be 
regained.  (O.  Brooks.)  The  Gospel  and  the  poor: — That  our  Lord's  ministry 
was  eminently  a  ministry  for  the  poor  is  a  commonplace  which  need  not 
be  insisted  on.  His  relations  were  poor  people,  with  the  associations,  the  habits, 
the  feelings  of  the  poor.  He  passed  among  men  as  the  carpenter's  Son.  He  spoke, 
it  would  appear,  in  a  provincial  north-country  dialect,  at  least  commonly.  His 
language.  His  illustrations.  His  entire  method  of  approaching  the  anderstandings 
and  hearts  of  men,  were  suited  to  the  apprehension  of  the  uneducated.  When  He 
spoke  the  common  people  heard  Him  gladly.  When  He  was  asked  by  what  signs 
He  could  prove  His  claims.  He  replied,  among  other  things,  "  The  poor  have  the 
gospel  preached  to  them."  His  first  disciples  were  poor  men.  As  they  looked  back 
upon  it,  the  grace  of  His  example  was  felt  by  His  disciples  and  servants  to  consist 
pre-eminently  in  this : — "  That,  though  He  was  rich,"  &o.  1.  Notice  the  marked 
connection,  in  this  and  other  passages,  between  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  the 
poor,  and  tiie  gift  of  the  Eternal  Spirit.  2.  The  work  of  preaching  the  gospel  to  the 
poor  is  far  from  being  either  commonplace  or  easy.  Notice  two  mistakes  which 
have  been  made  in  undertaking  it.  (1)  It  has  failed  sometimes  from  a  lack  of  sympathy 
with  the  mental  condition  and  habits  of  the  poor.  (2)  The  other  mistake  has  been  in  an 
opposite  direction.  Men  who  have  sympathized  warmly  with  the  mental  difficulties 
of  the  poor  have  endeavoured  to  recommend  the  Christian  faith  sometimes  by 
making  unwarranted  or  semi-legendary  additions  to  it,  and  sometimes  by  virtually 
mutilating  it.  3.  These  considerations,  then,  may  lead  us  to  reflect  that  the  connec- 
tion implied  in  the  text  between  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  and  the  task  of  evangelizing 
the  poor,  is  not,  after  all,  so  surprising.  To  be  sympathetic,  yet  sincere ;  true  to 
the  message  which  has  come  from  heaven,  yet  aUve  to  the  difficulties  of  conveying 
it  to  untutored  minds  and  hearts ;  sensible  of  the  facilities  which  a  few  unauthorized 
additions  or  mutilations  would  lend  to  the  work  in  hand,  yet  resolved  to  decline 
them — this  is  not  easy.  For  such  a  work  something  higher  is  needed  than  natural 
quickness  of  wit  or  strength  of  will,  even  His  aid  who  taught  the  peasants  of  Galilee 
in  the  upper  chamber  to  speak  as  with  tongues  of  fire,  and  in  languages  which  men 
of  many  nations  could  understand.  And  the  elf ort  for  which  He  thus  equipped  them 


OBAV.  IT.]  8T.  LUKE.  43» 

eontinnes  still ;  and  EQs  aid,  adapted  to  new  circumstances,  is  present  with  us  as  it 
was  with  them.  {Canon Lid do7i.)  Ministry  for  thepoor  : — To  awaken  a  spiritual 
interest  in  the  poor  is  my  object.  1.  The  outward  condition  of  the  poor  is  a  hard 
one,  and  deserving  of  our  sympathy — though  not  necessarily  wretched.  Give  them 
the  Christian  spirit,  and  they  would  find  in  their  lot  the  chief  elements  of  good.  2. 
The  condition  of  the  poor  is  unfriendly  to  the  action  and  unfolding  of  the  intellect 
— a  sore  calamity  to  a  rational  being.  3.  I  proceed  to  another  evil  of  poverty — its 
disastrc^'as  influence  on  the  domestic  affections.  4.  Another  unhappy  influence 
exarted  by  poverty  is  that  it  tends  to  breed  discontent,  envy,  and  hatred — hence 
crime.  5.  I  pass  on  to  another  sore  trial  of  the  poor — tne  temptation  to  make  up 
for  their  anxieties  and  privations  by  resorting  to  debasing  gratifications — drink, 
«fec.  Yet — 6.  The  highest  culture  is  in  reach  of  the  poor,  and  is  sometimes  attained 
by  them.  The  great  idea  on  which  human  cultivation  especially  depends  is  that  of 
God.  7.  We  are  solemnly  bound,  therefore,  to  cherish  and  manifest  a  strong  moral 
and  religious  interest  in  the  poor.  Every  man  whom  God  has  prospered  is  bound 
to  contribute  to  this  work.  The  Christian  ministry  is  a  blessing  to  all,  but  above 
all  to  the  poor.  If  there  be  an  office  worthy  of  angels,  it  is  that  of  teaching  Christian 
truth.  The  Son  of  God  hallowed  it  by  sustaining  it  in  His  own  person.  (W.  E, 
Channing,  D.D.)  Christ  the  great  Harmonizer : — The  gospel  is  the  great  harmo- 
nizer  of  all  the  conflicting  interests  of  human  society.  It  alone  can  elevate 
the  "  masses " ;  it  alone  can  reclaim  the  fallen.  Dr.  Alexander  M'Leod,  in 
his  "  Christus  Consolator,"  says  that  "  when  Orsted  first  exhibited  to  Frederika 
Bremer  the  beautiful  and  now  familiar  experiment  of  sand-grains  upon  a  glass  plate 
arranging  themselves,  under  the  influence  of  a  musical  note,  in  symmetrical  and 
harmonious  figures,  this  reflection  passed  through  the  mind  of  the  lady  :  '  A  human 
hand  made  the  stroke  that  produced  the  note.  But  when  the  stroke  is  made  by  the 
hand  of  the  Almighty,  will  not  the  note  then  produced  bring  into  exquisitely  harmo- 
nious form  those  sand-grains  which  are  human  beings,  communities,  nations?  It 
will  arrange  the  world  in  beauty,  and  there  shall  be  no  discord,  and  no  lamentation 
anymore.'"  This  is  right.  That  divinely  musical  note  is  the  preaching  of  the 
glorious  gospel  of  Christ.  I'he  power  of  Christ's  sympathy  : — Some  time  ago,  a 
Christian  young  lady  was  visiting  a  lunatic  asylum,  and  her  soul  was  filled  with 
sadness  and  pity  with  the  sights  she  saw.  By  and  by  she  was  led  into  a  room 
where  there  was  but  one  patient,  a  young  girl  of  the  same  age  as  herself.  She  was 
standing  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  her  face  almost  touching  the  wall.  In  stony 
hopelessness  she  stood,  immobile  and  rigid  as  a  statue.  She  neither  looked  nor 
spoke.  She  might  have  been  as  dead  as  the  statue  she  represented  but  that  she  still 
stood  on.  It  was  a  heart-breaking  spectacle.  "  Will  you  speak  to  her?  "  asked  the 
doctor,  "  we  can  do  nothing  with  her.  She  has  been  thus  for  days ;  but  one  like 
yourself  might  move  her."  The  young  lady,  trembling  with  emotion,  with  one  up- 
ward cry  to  heaven  for  help,  stepped  forward,  gently  laid  her  hand  on  the  listless 
form  and,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  spoke  one  sentence  of  yearning  sympathy  and 
compassion.  The  poor  patient  turned,  gazed  for  one  moment,  her  form  quivered, 
and  she  burst  into  tears  1  The  doctor  exclaimed,  "  Thank  God,  she  may  be  saved  I  " 
The  visitor  could  never  recall  the  words  she  had  used ;  but  they  had  done  their 
work.  This  poor,  wrecked  girl,  who  thought  that  nobody  knew  or  cared  for  her, 
had  felt  the  heart  that  pitied  her,  the  hand  stretched  out  to  help  her.  0,  the  power 
of  tears  I  the  magic  of  sympathy  1  It  is  the  sympathy  of  Christ  that  calls  a  mad, 
despairing  world  to  itself — to  its  better  self.  (Christian  Journal.)  The  cold  com- 
fort  of  worldly  philosophy  : — Some  years  ago  (says  Dr.  M'Cosh)  I  had  a  call  at  my 
bouse  in  Ireland  by  a  young  nobleman  with  whom  I  was  at  that  time  intimate,  and 
who  has  since  risen  to  eminence  as  a  statesman  (I  mean  Earl  Dufferin),  who  intro- 
duced to  me  his  friend  Lord  Ashburton.  The  nobleman  introduced  took  me  aside 
and  said,  ♦♦  You  know  that  I  have  lately  lost  my  dear  wife,  who  was  a  great  friend  of 
Mr.  Carlyle's  ;  and  I  have  applied  to  Mr.  Carlyle  to  tell  me  what  I  should  do  to  have 
peace,  and  make  me  what  I  should  be.  On  my  making  this  request  he  simply  bade 
me  read  Goethe's  '  Wilhelm  Meister.'  I  did  so,  and  did  not  find  anything  there 
fitted  to  improve  me.  I  went  back  to  Mr.  Carlyle,  asking  him  what  precise  lesson 
be  meant  me  to  gather  from  the  book;  and  he  said,  'Bead  "  Wilhelm  Meister  "  a 
Becond  time.'  I  have  done  so  carefully,  but  I  confess  I  am  unable  to  find  any- 
thing there  to  met  my  anxiety  ;  and  I  wish  you  to  explain,  if  you  can,  what  Mr. 
Carlyle  could  mean."  I  told  him  that  I  was  not  the  man  to  explain  Carlyle's 
meaning — if,  indeed,  he  bad  any  definite  meaning.  I  told  him  plainly  that  neither 
Goethe  nor  Carlyle,  tboagh  men  of  eminently  literary  genius,  could  supply  the  bftlm 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [01U».  w. 

which  his  wounded  spirit  needed ;  and  I  remarked  that  Goethe's  work  oontainei 
not  a  little  that  was  sensual.  I  did  my  best  to  point  to  a  better  way,  and  to  the  deli- 
verance promised  and  secured  in  the  gospel.  I  do  not  know  the  issue,  but  I  got 
an  eager  listener.  Carlyle  wished  to  persuade  his  mother,  a  woman  of  simple  but 
devoted  piety,  that  his  advanced  faith  was  the  same  as  that  which  she  held  firmly,  and 
80  much  to  her  comfort,  only  in  a  somewhat  different  form.  But,  in  fact,  the  mother's 
faith  was  crushed  in  the  form  in  which  the  son  put  it,  when  it  became  a  skeleton, 
as  different  from  the  life  which  sustained  her  as  the  bones  in  our  museums  are  from 
the  living  animal.  {Dr.  M'Cosh's  "  Certitude,  Providence,  and  Prayer.")  Prayer 
lielps  emancipation: — This  instructive  anecdote  relating  to  President  Finney  is 
characteristic.  A  brother  who  had  fallen  into  darkness  and  discouragement  was 
staying  at  the  same  house  with  Dr.  Finney  over  night.  He  was  lamenting  his  con- 
dition,  and  Dr.  F.,  after  listening  to  his  narrative,  turned  to  him  with  his  peculiar 
earnest  look,  and  with  a  voice  that  sent  a  thrill  through  his  soul,  said,  "You 
don't  pray  :  that  is  what's  the  matter  with  you.  Pray — pray  four  times  as  much 
as  ever  you  did  in  your  life,  and  you  will  come  out."  He  immediately  went 
down  to  the  parlour,  and  taking  the  Bible,  he  made  a  serious  business  of  it, 
stirring  up  his  soul  to  seek  God  as  did  Daniel,  and  thus  he  spent  the  night.  It 
was  not  in  vain.  As  the  morning  dawned  he  felt  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Eight- 
eousness  shine  upon  his  soul.  His  captivity  was  broken;  and  ever  since  he  has 
felt  that  the  greatest  difficulty  in  the  way  of  men  being  emancipated  from  their 
bondage,  is  that  they  "don't  pray."  The  bonds  cannot  be  broken  by  finite  strength. 
We  must  take  our  case  to  Him  who  is  mighty  to  save.  Our  eyes  are  blinded  to 
Christ  the  Deliverer.  He  came  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captive,  to  break  the 
power  of  habit;  and  herein  is  the  rising  of   a  great  hope  for  us.  Christ  the 

Emancipator : — A  doctrine  with  which  the  hearts  of  men  are  universally  in 
sympathy.  Men  want  the  restrictions  and  limitations  around  them  to  be  de- 
stroyed. It  is  not  merely  the  few  who  are  actually  in  dungeons  that  want  it. 
Thousands  are  in  dungeons,  around  whom  no  stone  wall  is  reared.  Men  in  general 
have  a  consciousness  of  being  prisoners,  without  actually  being  under  military  rule 
and  ward.  Men  are  bearing  bonds,  and  are  bruised,  who  are  not  in  the  actual 
relation  of  service ;  the  consciousness  of  circumscription,  of  limitation,  and  of  suffer- 
ing under  various  forms  of  bondage,  is  universal.  1.  The  first  blow  which  Christ 
strikes  for  tVie  enlargement  of  men's  liberty  wears  the  appearance  of  the  opposite; 
it  is  at  the  tyranny  of  sense  and  sensuousness  in  the  individual.  Man  cannot  run 
away  from  himself.  Christ  emancipates  him  from  this  bondage  by  introducing  him 
into  the  higher  course  of  nature ;  into  that  sphere  in  which,  in  his  relations  to  God, 
he  is  acted  upon  precisely  as  in  a  family  children  are  acted  upon  by  the  living  pre- 
sence and  power  of  a  good  father  and  mother.  Then  the  Divine  influence  becomes 
more  active  in  him  than  the  flesh,  and  he  achieves  a  victory  over  himself — the 
nobler  nature  having  gained  ascendancy  over  the  lower.  2.  Christ  delivers  us  from 
our  bondage  to  secular  conditions.  The  light  and  life  that  we  receive  by  faith  make 
ns  superior  to  our  circumstances,  so  that  we  can  maintain  our  manhood,  not  only 
in  spite  of  adverse  surroundings,  but  even  by  reason  of  them  ;  working  out  through 
adversity  and  trouble  what  men  in  prosperity  and  joy  fail  to  find,  3.  Christ  in  an 
Emancipator  in  another  way  also.  There  is  a  power  given  to  men  through  faith 
in  Him,  to  set  themselves  free  from  the  great  source  of  those  cares,  infirmities,  and. 
annoyances  which  chiefly  afflict  life.  If  pride  be  essential  to  a  noble  character — 
and  it  is  ;  if  the  love  of  praise  be  one  of  the  civilizing  elements — and  it  is ;  if  both 
of  these  influences  conjoined  under  right  directions  and  inspirations  tend  to  en- 
noble, to  soften,  to  sweeten,  and  to  beautify  human  nature — and  they  do :  on  the 
other  hand,  pride  and  vanity  in  their  corrupt  forms  tend  to  bring  upon  men  in  the 
most  acute  ways  many  sufferings  which  afflict  them — for  our  troubles  are  mainly  of 
our  own  making.  He  who  is  nervously  sensitive  to  praise  is  in  great  distress  when 
he  fears  the  withdrawal  of  praise  or  popularity.  He  who  has  an  intense  conscious- 
ness of  his  own  excellence  and  desert  is  continually  harried  and  annoyed  and  irri- 
tated by  a  lack  of  that  respect  and  appreciation  of  which  he  has  himself  so  supreme 
a  sense.  All  the  world  are  over-proud,  or  over-vain,  or  both  ;  but  he  who  has  sub- 
dned  his  pride,  and,  by  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  his  heart,  has  turned  it  to 
higher  and  nobler  uses ;  he  who,  lacking  nothing  of  sensibility  to  praise,  yet  beUevea 
in  the  presence  of  God,  wants  praise  only  for  supernal  things,  and  disdains  ths 
offering  of  praise  for  things  meagre  and  mean  and  low  and  vile ;  because  he  sets  hi* 
standard,  not  according  to  the  current  ideas  of  human  society,  and  not  according  to 
the  ways  of  men  who  are  onillimiined,  but  according  to  that  higher  and  mcbler  man- 


CHAP.  rv.J  ST.  LUKE.  48* 

hood  which  was  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ — he  is  emancipated  from  this  universal 
bondage.  4.  Christ  emancipates  from  the  bondage  which  comes  through  ignorance 
and  superstition.  It  is  for  men  to  choose  whether  they  will  govern  themselvea  or 
be  governed.  It  must  be  one  or  the  other.  (H.  IV.  Beecher.)  Christ's  meihod  of 
emanri potion : — How  strangely  Christ  comported  Himself  !  The  Jewish  people  were 
at  that  time  living  under  one  of  the  worst  forms  of  Koman  despotism,  and  ther© 
was  a  universal  desire  all  over  Palestine  that  the  land  should  be  emancipated ;  yet 
He  never  said  one  word  to  that  effect,  or  performed  one  act  towards  that  purpose. 
The  prisons  of  Ju'lea  were  crowded,  to  be  emptied  by  the  executioner,  and  hundreds 
of  thousands  were  lying  in  hopeless  darkness  ;  yet  we  do  not  hear  of  Him  taking 
up  a  single  case.  There  was  slavery,  with  all  its  cursed  attendant  influeuces,  spread 
through  the  civilized  world ;  yet  in  all  our  Lord's  discourses  we  do  not  find  a  single 
word  of  reference  to  this  condition  of  aiJairs.  When  He  died  there  was  not  one 
prison  less  in  the  laud,  nor  one  prisoner ;  there  had  been  no  casting  away  of  chains 
or  manacles,  and  the  black  darkness  of  the  people  had  not  been  lightened.  Nor  did 
His  apostles,  when  they  took  up  His  work  after  Him,  disturb  the  order  of  society, 
or  revolutionize  government  by  the  sword.  On  the  contrary,  they  enjoin  most  ex- 
plicitly, "  Obey  the  magistrates;  obey  the  powers  that  be  ;  obey  the  laws  that  are 
meant  for  good,  however  badly  they  may  be  administered."  And  so  men  sometimes 
Bay  that  Christ  did  nothing  at  all,  that  He  came  on  a  fool's  errand.  But,  remember^ 
there  are  different  ways  of  doing  the  same  thing.  Christ  came  to  raise  the  human 
race,  to  develop  it  one  step  higher,  to  construct  kingdoms,  establish  arts,  rear  manu- 
factories, elevate  knowledge— to  make  men  happier,  truer,  more  perfect  everywhere. 
He  came  to  do  this,  not  by  working  outwardly,  but  by  working  inwardly.  He  did 
not  come  to  found  new  institutions,  or  to  overturn  old  institutions.  He  came  to 
produce  such  a  state  of  heart  in  man  throughout  the  whole  race,  that  the  unavoid- 
able outworkings  of  this  new  power  would  be  ultimately  to  change  all  institutions 
and  redeem  the  world  from  animalism,  crime,  and  oppression.  Look  at  this  in- 
ternal working  of  Christ.  He  deals  with  men,  not  in  the  mass,  but  one  by  one ; 
and  He  deals  with  the  moral  sentiments,  subjecting  all  the  others  to  them.  The 
whole  order  inside  a  man  is  changed  by  the  influence  of  Christianity  from  lower  to 
higher,  from  flesh-man  to  spirit-man.  The  sovereign  and  central  force  employed 
in  this  transformation  is  love.  Christ  undertakes  to  reconstruct  tbe  dispositions  of 
men  by  bringing  into  supreme  agency  this  transcendent  love.  1.  Christ's  gospel 
was  a  more  perfect  disclosure  of  the  great  natural  law  as  applied  to  men  than  had 
ever  been  understood,  or  is  understood  to-day.  There  is  an  unused  principle  in  the 
human  soul  which,  brought  out  by  the  stimulus  of  the  Divine  afHatus,  can  cleanse 
the  whole  lower  nature  of  man  and  deaden  the  passions,  not  by  direct  attack,  but 
by  giving  principle  and  authority  to  their  opposites,  and  shape  to  the  inspiration — 
the  central  principle — love.  It  was  there  before  Christ  came,  only  men  did  not 
know  it ;  and  so,  until  brought  out  by  Christ,  it  was  a  dead  thing.  He  has  put  life 
into  it,  and  through  it  into  men.  2.  Christianity  never  has  been,  and  never  can 
be,  contained  wholly  in  the  New  Testament.  The  gospel  is  only  a  hint  and  a  guide 
to  a  higher  nature,  which  needs  to  be  developed.  If  I  take  a  handful  of  wheat  frona 
my  granary,  there  is  a  promse  of  a  hundred  bushels  in  it — only  a  promiae,  how- 
ever.  It  must  be  sown  before  the  promise  can  be  realized.  So  with  the  gospeL 
Everything  of  knowledge  that  tends  to  the  elevation  of  the  human  family  id  an  un- 
folding of  Christianity.  If  there  is  anything  good  for  man,  capable  of  reconstruct- 
ing his  nature,  it  is  part  and  parcel  of  that  human  nature  which  is  broader  than 
the  earth  and  deeper  than  eternity  ;  it  is  part  of  that  Divine  nature  by  which  a  man 
is  raised  up  to  the  glorious  florescence  of  manhood  and  carried  up  to  the  angels  y 
and  I  hold  and  rejoice  in  everything  that  develops  man,  and  assists  in  the  building 
of  the  new  world.  3.  The  progress  of  this  new  kingdom  has  been  very  much  hin- 
dered by  the  materializing  influences  of  man.  (1)  The  incarnation  of  spiritual 
forces  in  outward  institutions.  Men  are  always  apt  to  pay  more  attention  to  the 
form  than  to  the  spiritual  reality  it  embodies.  (2)  The  substitution  of  ideas  for 
forces.  What  is  being  a  Christian  but  to  be  the  embodiment  of  tender-hearted- 
ness, generosity,  self-denial,  self-sacrifice — a  desire  for  the  welfare  of  others,  even 
though  at  the  expense  of  your  own  ?  What  is  Christianity,  if  not  this  ?  Names 
are  nothing ;  being  is  everything.  The  power  of  the  gospel  is  the  promulgation  <A 
dispositions.  It  is  the  heart-life.  The  heart  wears  the  crown,  and  the  intellect  is 
its  servant,  walking  behind  it,  asking  what  it  shall  and  shall  not  do.  (3)  The  sub- 
stitution of  worship  for  morality.  How  can  a  man  who  is  living  in  sin  love  God  T 
How  can  a  man  be  a  partaker  of  the  love  of  peace  and  joy  if  he  has  not  the  spirit 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  foHAP.  !▼. 

of  long-snffering,  gentleness,  forgiveness,  within  him  ?  Morality  is  God's  method 
when  developed  to  the  uttermost.  Men  will  not  be  accepted  for  being  so  obsequioua 
to  God,  while  they  remain  indifferent  to  their  fellows.  (4)  The  substitution  of 
justice  for  Divine  love.  When  we  can  open  spring  flowers  by  spring  frosts,  when 
we  can  ripen  summer  fruits  by  summer  thunder-storms,  and  bring  tranquillity  by 
tempests,  then  you  may  by  rigour  and  threat  have  God's  work  in  the  soul — God's 
humility,  love,  patience,  self-sacrifice,  forbearance,  temperance.  We  hardly  know 
our  God  under  such  doctrine.  Oh,  Sun  of  Righteousness  !  Thou  art  not  known  by 
the  tempest,  nor  by  the  earthquake,  but  by  the  still,  small  voice — love  ;  and  religious 
truth  will  never  be  thoroughly  understood  until  men  are  transformed  into  love, 
with  that  system  which  enthrones  God  as  the  universal  cause,  who  knows  how  to 
Buffer  most  because  He  loves.  4,  The  road  to  hberty  is  a  very  simple  one.  One* 
change  the  unit  and  you  change  the  sum  ;  begin  with  changing  individuals,  and  you 
transform  local  public  sentiment.  Laws,  customs,  and  institutions  must  take  on  the 
same  form.  No  royal  road  to  liberty,  largeness,  and  freedom,  except  that  which 
comes  from  the  perfection  and  exaltation  of  human  nature  ;  no  true  nobility  until 
mankind  touch  mankind,  neighbourhood  neighbourhood,  nation  nation.  We  are 
scattered  here  and  there.  When  are  we  to  collect  in  communities  like  bands  of 
Christian  graces  all  attuned  to  each  other,  working  out  a  visible  result  ?  When  that 
time  oomes  men  wiU  say,  "  Human  nature  never  was  so  beautiful  before  as  it  is 
here."  That  is  gospel.  It  appeals  to,  and  changes,  the  heart.  (Ibid.)  The 
ilavery  of  unrest : — We  do  not  require  to  be  delivered  from  Egyptian  bondage,  or 
Grecian  cruelty,  or  the  Roman  yoke  ;  but  we  have  lust,  and  we  have  passion,  and 
we  have  the  restlessness  of  care,  and  we  have  the  fears  of  anxiety,  and  we  have 
vanity  and  ambition,  and  a  thousand  other  incendiaries  and  tyrants  which  abuse 
our  bosom  while  yet  under  the  bondage  of  sinful  nature,  and  which  still  abuse  the 
peace  and  welfare  of  all  who  have  not  been  emancipated  by  the  Cross  of  Christ. 
The  captivity  of  sin  seems  no  captivity  tc  many.  There  are  sleeping  draughts  of 
pleasure  with  which  the  devil  serves  his  servants.  There  are  vain  shows  of  pride, 
and  castle-buildings  of  ambition,  and  dreams  of  wealth,  by  which  the  spirits  of 
people  are  charmed  away  from  the  thought  of  their  condition.  But  it  is  a  miserable 
trick  played  off  on  the  immortal  soul,  and  at  every  instant  it  is  liable  to  a  fearful 
exposure.  It  is  a  fabric  of  grandeur  built  over  a  horrid  sepulchre,  on  which  it 
totters  and  shakes,  and  at  length  falls  on  the  ambitious  wight  who  trusted  thereto. 
It  is  a  wretched  bondage  to  be  captive  to  sin,  though  yda  were  at  large  without  any 
on  the  earth  to  make  yon  afraid.  It  is  not  the  narrowness  of  the  dungeon,  or  of 
his  knowledge,  wealth,  or  power,  that  makes  a  man  a  slavd ;  it  is  the  disrepose,  the 
unrest  of  the  mind,  the  coveting  the  things  we  cannot  have,  the  fearing  of  things  we 
cannot  avoid,  the  meeting  of  things  we  cannot  brook,  the  hoping  for  things  we  can- 
uot  have,  the  enjoying  of  things  we  cannot  keep.  Thus  to  be,  is  to  be  in  slavery  ; 
and  not  to  be  thus,  is  to  be  free.  .  .  .  What  unchristian  man  is  there  who  is  not 
thus  ?  There  is  a  discord  between  our  spiritual  man  and  this  our  earthly  habita- 
tion, which  nothing  but  the  religion  of  Jesus  can  appease.  (E.  Irving,  M.A.)  The 
accfptabU  year  of  the  Lord:  Jubilee  year: — If  you  turn  to  Leviticus  xxv.  you 
will  see  what  the  arrangements  of  the  Jewish  jubilee  were.  It  was  intended  to  cure 
four  great  political  evils  which  oppressed  that  nation,  and  which  have  oppressed 
many  nations  since — ^viz.,  slavery,  debt,  chronic  pauperism,  and  alienation  of  the 
land  from  the  people.  The  Jewish  jubilee  was  a  system  intended  to  abolish  by  an- 
ticipation all  these  four  great  evils.  Every  fiftieth  year  every  man  who  had  been  a 
slave  was  set  free ;  he  could  not  be  kept  in  slavery  after  that  year  of  jubilee.  Every 
one  was  then  restored  to  freedom ;  the  nation  took  a  fresh  start  of  freedom.  Men 
became  slaves  for  various  reasons ;  they  might  have  been  captured  in  war,  they 
might  have  sold  themselves  into  slavery  in  the  payment  of  debts,  or  in  several  other 
ways — but  in  the  year  of  jubilee  all  were  set  free.  There  might  have  been  an  accu- 
mulation of  debts  which  they  were  unable  to  pay  off  altogether,  but  at  this  jubilee 
debts  were  all  cancelled.  Chronic  pauperism  was  to  be  cured  by  making  certain 
provisions  every  seventh  year  and  fiftieth  year,  by  which  those  who  had  sank  through 
incapacity,  or  illness,  or  intemperance,  or  from  whatever  oaase  it  might  be — at  this 
time  they  had  an  opportunity  of  starting  again.  It  was  not  possible  for  any  family 
to  part  with  its  hereditary  property  irrecoverably :  at  the  year  of  jubilee  all  went 
back  to  its  original  owners.  Such  was  the  system ;  bat  there  is  no  proof  tbat  it  was 
ever  carried  oat.  Neither  the  Old  Testament  nor  any  other  history  affords  the 
slightest  evidence  that  these  laws  were  ever  observed  as  a  whole.  When  they  ar« 
tiamined,  one  can  see  such  diffioolties  Uiat  it  woold  require  strong  evidence  to  eon 


CHA».  IT]  ST.  LUKE.  441 

vince  ae  that  snch  laws  had  worked  at  all.  Still  they  remained  on  the  statute-book, 
and  theiefore  formed  the  ideal  and  the  hope  of  the  people ;  but  the  ideal  never 
came.  Why  did  it  not  come?  Because  these  laws  presupposed  a  condition  of 
morality,  of  brotherliness,  of  good  feeling  among  the  people,  which  never  existed. 
When  laws  are  pitched  in  too  high  a  key  they  become  as  it  were  dead  laws.  The 
laws  do  not  precede  morality ;  they  follow  it,  they  perpetuate,  they  register  it.  A 
nation  has  to  raise  its  standard  of  morality ;  then  the  laws  can  be  made  which  will 
perpetuate  that  morality  ;  but  you  cannot  make  the  laws  first.  It  would  be  of  no 
use  for  any  Government  now  to  make  some  law  far  above  the  standard  of  existing 
morality,  because  the  law  could  not  be  worked.  That  was  the  case  in  Judah.  It 
would  presuppose  a  willingness  to  part  with  their  property,  a  wiUingness  to  give  up 
their  slavery ;  it  would  presuppose  willing  industry  again  on  the  part  of  the  people, 
and  a  greater  level  of  mental  and  moral  equality  among  them  than  ever  existed  | 
and  80  the  law  remained  simply  a  dead  letter.     {J.  M.  Wilson,  M.A.)       The  jubilee 

Sirit  in  Christianity  : — The  Jewish  jubilee  was  a  legislation  which  never  worked. 
)t  ns  see  what  Christianity  has  done  instead  in  the  way  of  social  reform.  1.  Chris- 
tianity has  abolished  slavery.  Not  by  preaching  direct  political  action,  but  by 
preaching  the  equality  of  all  men  as  children  of  God.  It  has  given  men  a  new 
interest  in  one  another,  and  a  new  relationship  to  one  another,  secretly  transform- 
ing human  character,  so  that  slavery  became  impossible  and  melted  away  as  ice — 
wUch  will  not  melt  under  blows — melts  before  the  sun.  2,  If,  again,  you  consider 
how  cruelly  debtors  were  oppressed,  you  will  see  how  wonderfully  that  has  been 
changed  by  the  influence  of  Christ.  Some  of  the  best  Komans  that  ever  lived  com- 
placently consigned  their  debtors  to  slavery;  and  in  other  countries  debtors  were 
imprisoned  and  their  lives  rendered  hopelessly  miserable;  but  Christianity  has 
greatly  altered  such  things,  and  has  compelled  mankind  to  treat  debtors  with 
humanity.  3.  The  evil  of  chronic  pauperism  still  faces  us,  and  we  can  see  no  con- 
ceivable method  of  getting  rid  of  it,  except  by  a  wider  spread  of  true  Christian  feel- 
ing among  the  whole  population.  What  else  can  we  look  to  ?  Legislation  ?  How 
can  legislation  do  it  ?  Legislation  will  not  make  people  industrious,  and  skilful, 
and  self-restraining.  Nothing  else  but  Christian  principles  of  love  and  virtue  will 
do  that.  4.  Alienation  of  land.  Legislation  could  not  completely  get  rid  of  this 
evil,  for  the  simple  reason  that  the  nation  is  not  yet  good  enough.  If  to-day  there 
were  three  acres  and  a  cow  given  to  every  man  in  England,  before  ten  years,  or  evea 
one  year,  had  elapsed  there  would  be  some  with  thirty  acres  and  ten  cows,  and  the 
rest  with  none.  The  nation  has  not  sufficiently  advanced  in  morality,  industry,  and 
self-control  for  such  an  equality  to  exist,  and  the  attempt  to  force  it  would  only  pro- 
dace  idleness.  But  reform  will  come  in  the  way  Christ  indicated :  it  will  come  from 
the  inner  spirit.  When  men  become  better,  then  happiness  and  prosperity  will 
zxatnrally  follow.  There  is  no  cure  for  the  evils  of  this  world — its  competition,  and 
crushing,  and  failure — except  this  inner  reform  of  the  spirit,  the  faith  in  Christ,  and 
the  love  of  God  and  of  man.  Like  all  God's  laws,  it  works  slowly ;  bat  it  is  sure, 
and  in  the  end  it  will  bring  about  that  for  which  it  was  framed.  (Ibid.) 
The  joy  of  acquiring  liberty : — In  the  dark  days  of  American  slavery,  a  very  fine 
Mulatto  woman  and  her  nearly  white  boy  were  raffled  for.  Two  kind  men  paid  a 
share  each  for  the  woman  and  her  boy,  so  that  they  might  have  two  chances  for 
their  freedom.  After  aU  the  others  who  had  a  share  in  that  lottery  had  thrown  the 
dice,  the  poor  woman  was  so  overpowered  by  hopes,  fears,  and  solicitude,  that  she 
could  not  throw  for  herself.  Her  boy,  therefore,  threw  for  her,  and  was  unsucoess- 
fal.  Then  the  boy  had  to  throw  for  himself,  and  there  many  hopes  and  prayers  that 
he  might  win.  And  he  did,  and  the  joy  of  the  mother  and  son,  on  acquiring  their 
liberty,  was  indescribable.  So  Jewish  parents  and  their  children  rejoiced  in  the 
year  of  jubilee  as  they  went  forth  from  bondage  to  liberty,  and  from  poverty  to 
posseses  the  inheritance  of  their  fathers.  But,  when  "  Christ  makes  us  free,"  by  "  the 
truth,"  from  spiritual  ignorance,  sin,  Satan,  and  evils,  into  "  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God,"  with  its  precious  and  eternal  heritage  of  blessings,  ve  then 
ied— 

"  A  day,  an  hoar  of  virtuous  liberty, 
Is  worth  a  whole  eternity  of  bondage."  (Henry  S,  Burbm,) 

KoMoreth  amd  iu  good  news : — The  Lord  here,  quoting  Isaiah,  states  His  mission  to 
be  the  preaching  of  the  acceptable  year  of  Jehovah.  Let  us  inquire  what  the  accept* 
able  year  of  the  Lord  is,  and  how  He  preached  it.  I.  The  acceptabia  tkib  or  ths 
IjOBd.   This  expression  corresponds  to  that  of  Paul,  "  the  accepted  time,"  "  the  day 


U2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

of  salvation  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  2) ;  and  means  that  there  is  a  time  when  God  accepts  oz 
shows  favour  to  the  sinner.  It  is  what  Ezeliiel  calls  "the  time  of  love  ";  what 
our  Lord  calls  "  the  time  of  visitation  "  (Luke  xix.  44) ;  and  what  we  usually  call 
"  the  day  of  grace."  Every  era  has  its  character,  and  the  character  of  this  is 
"grace."  In  it  the  long-suffering  of  God  gets  full  vent  to  itself,  and  His  almighty 
love  is  pouring  itself  down  upon  an  unworthy  world.  II.  How  Chkist  pkeached 
THIS  ACCEPTABLE  YEAR.  Thls  preaching  of  the  acceptable  year  was  to  run  through 
His  whole  life  and  ministry.  1.  In  His  person  He  preached  it ;  for  His  mere  pre- 
sence upon  earth  among  sinful  men  was  an  announcement  of  it.  Grace  and  truth 
came  by  Jesus  Christ.  2.  He  preached  it  by  what  He  did.  He  went  about  healing 
all  manner  of  sicknesses,  and  all  manner  of  diseases.  3.  He  preached  it  by  what  He 
did  not  do.  He  did  no  deeds  of  terror,  and  wrought  no  miracles  of  wrath  or  woe. 
4.  He  preached  it  by  what  He  said.  His  words  were  all  of  grace ;  and  even  the 
sharp  rebukes  against  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  the  warnings  of  grace,  not  of 
wrath.     {H.  Bonar,  D.D. )        The  work  of  Christ : — I.  Our  first  inqdirt  shall  bb 

RESPECTING  THE  CHARACTER  OR  CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  THE  PERSONS  DESCRIBED  IN  MT  TEXT. 

It  seems  clear  that  this  whole  passage  is  metaphorical  I  for,  allowing  that  a  literal 
sense  may  be  applied  to  parts  of  it  with  propriety,  yet  there  are  other  parts  which 
will  not  bear  that  sense.  These  images  serve  only  to  present,  under  different 
aspects,  the  sad  state  of  those  whom  Christ  came  to  deliver,  and  the  blessed  effects 
of  that  deliverance.  1.  Their  actual  condition  is  represented  as  very  deplorable ; 
for  what  image  can  express  greater  misery  than  that  of  captives  treated  with  the 
barbarous  rigour  of  those  times ;  immured  in  dungeons  ;  loaded  with  fetters ;  bruised 
with  stripes;  perhaps  like  Zedekiah,  the  unfortunate  king  of  Judah,  deprived  of 
sight  as  well  as  liberty.  Yet  this  is  a  very  just  image  of  every  man's  condition  who 
is  under  the  power  of  sin.  2.  Yet  it  is  possible  that  there  may  be  this  state  of  sin, 
comprehending  all  these  awful  circumstances  of  misery  and  danger,  without  any 
concern  about  it,  or  even  any  distinct  perception  of  it.  This,  however,  is  by  no 
means  the  case  with  the  persons  here  represented.  They  are  not  only  captives,  bat 
they  are  broken-hearted  in  their  bondage.  All  such  expressions  denote  the  true 
Christian  temper,  that  which  our  Lord  inculcated  under  the  names  of  humility  and 
poverty  of  spirit ;  and  which  both  Christ  and  His  apostles  meant  by  the  more  sig- 
nificant word,  "  repentance."  It  includes  a  consciousness  of  demerit ;  a  due  sense 
of  the  evil  of  sin.  This  frame  of  mind  may  comprehend  different  degrees,  or  even 
kinds,  of  uneasiness,  on  account  of  sin.  The  metaphors  which  are  here  used  illus- 
trate these.  It  is  one  kind  of  distress  to  feel  the  pressure  of  poverty ;  it  is  another 
to  endure  the  yoke  of  bondage;  and  a  third,  to  lose  the  organ  of  sight.  II.  Blbsbbd 
BB  God,  however,  there  abb  somb  who  enow  their  unworthinbss,  and  abb 
HDUBLED  ON  ACCOUNT  OF  IT.  These  are  the  persons  intended  in  my  text,  and 
such  will  gladly  hear  the  gracious  office  which  the  £edeemer  sustains  to  save 
them.  This  office  is  here  delineated  under  several  views.  Is  the  state  of 
sinners  described  as  a  state  of  great  suffering  ?  Christ  brings  them  deliverance. 
As  a  state  of  bondage?  He  grants  them  liberty.  Under  the  image  of  a 
broken  heart?  He  communicates  peace  and  consolation.  Or  under  that  of 
poverty  ?  He  tells  them  of  recovered  birthrights,  and  of  a  glorious  inheritance 
above.  Let  us  briefly  consider  these  several  offices.  1.  Christ  takes  away  the  sin 
of  those  who  truly  repent  and  apply  to  Him  by  faith.  2.  They  are  freed  also  from 
the  power  of  sin.  3.  It  is  the  oiSce  of  the  Saviour  to  impart  peace  to  the  soul.  4. 
The  title  to  a  glorious  inheritance  is  also  conferred  by  Him  upon  those  that  believa 
As  in  the  year  of  jubilee  every  inheritance  which  had  been  sold  reverted  to  its  original 
owners ;  as  every  debt  was  cancelled  and  every  captive  set  free — in  the  same  way  does 
the  gospel  proclaim  a  j  nbilee  to  repenting  sinners.  It  institutes  a  new  order  of  things 
for  them ;  with  new  resources,  and  hopes,  and  privileges,  and  prospects.  {J.  Venn,  M.A .) 
The  gospel  jubilee  : — Such  is  the  tendency  of  Christianity;  such  are  the  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  poured  out  upon  the  Church;  and  such  is  the  spiritual  jubilee;  such 
the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  which  Christianity  proclaims  to  the  world  and  the 
misery  thereof.  I.  Consider  the  jdbileb  of  the  gospel  as  regards  the  first 
FBOMCLOATioN  by  Christ  and  His  apostles.     U.  The  PRooREssrvB  oonvebsion  of 

KANEIND.      m.  ThB  UI8EBT  AND  80BB0W  THIS  DISPENSATION  HAS  BEEN  INSTB0HBNTAI. 

mou  TiHB  TO  TiMB  IN  BBLiEViNO.  The  tendency  of  Christianity  and  the  gospel  is 
to  infose,  in  proportion  as  it  is  understood,  brotherly  love,  and  sympathy  with 
•very  effort  which  is  made  for  the  relief  of  individual  suffering,  as  well  as  for  the 
•mancipation  of  the  world.  It  is  directly  opposed  to  oppression  and  cruelty ;  it 
abstains  from  questions  of  earthly  politics  and  disputes  about  particular  forma  of 


.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  44a 

gOTemment;  it  avoids  all  faotioas  and  dangerous  innovations,  and  goes  to  the 
support  of  existing  order,  which,  although  it  may  in  some  cases  be  defective,  is 
infinitely  better  than  the  wild  disorder  of  uncontrolled  passion  and  fierce  self-love. 
It  therefore  enjoins  obedience  to  the  magistrates,  and  calls  upon  its  followers  to 
"  fear  God  and  honour  the  king,"  giving  thanks  always  for  all  things  unto  God  the 
Father,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  I  apprehend  the  union  of  these 
two  points  shows  the  tendency  of  Christianity  to  dispose  all  governors,  propagators 
of  laws,  and  all  in  authority,  towards  all  measures  of  relief,  justice,  equity,  and  the 
consideration  of  the  poor.  It  is  the  means  of  communicating  every  blessing  to  society, 
and  insensibly  tends  to  break  every  yoke,  and  set  right  every  disorder.  {Bishop 
Daniel  Wilson.)  Preaching  the  gospel : — I.  Let  us  notice  that  Jesus  Chbibt 
BBOAN  His  wobe  is  Nazabeth  with  a  quotation  fbom  the  Bible.  The  source 
of  all  Christian  power  is  in  *•  preaching  the  Word."  II.  It  is  well  to  keep  in  mind 
that  WE  HAVE  A  MUCH  LAEQEB  BiBLE  THAN  Jesus  HAD.  Wo  havo  the  Ncw  Testa- 
ment as  well  as  the  Old  Testament :  what  He  spoke  as  well  as  what  He  expounded. 
It  is  not  what  we  say  about  the  truth  that  helps  and  saves  souls,  but  the  truth. 
ni.  When  people  come  to  us  for  help,  the  thing  to  do  is  simply  to  find  something  in 

THE  WOED  FOE  THEM.  IV.  CUEIOUS  AND  DIFFICULT  QUESTIONS  THAT  ChEISTIANS 
ASK   HAVE   THE   SIMPLEST   SOBT    OF    ANSWERS    IN    THE    WOED.      As    tO    grounding   OUr 

hope  firmly,  Matt.  vii.  24  is  better  than  anything  we  can  say  ourselves.  To 
encourage  a  man  who  fears  ridicule,  Mark  x.  48  is  excellent  and  effective. 
Exodus  ii.  1-10  is  a  far  better  illustration  of  God's  care  for  children  than  that  stock 
story  of  the  "  Uttle  child  in  the  corn-field."  Once  a  member  of  our  Church  came  to 
me  to  ask  what  she  ought  to  try  to  look  at  when  she  shut  her  eyes  in  prayer.  And 
all  I  eould  think  of  was  to  read  her  two  or  three  verses  about  Bartimaeus.  A  smile 
ran  over  her  whole  face  as  she  rose  suddenly,  and  said,  "  Good  morning."  Then  I 
asked  whether  her  question  had  got  the  answer.  •*  Oh,  yes  I  "  she  replied,  grate- 
fully ;  "  I  ought  to  see  what  the  blind  man  did  before  his  eyes  were  opened ;  he 
saw  he  was  blind,  and  he  seemed  to  see  Jesus  there  waiting  to  be  prayed  to."  V. 
We  must  BE  EXCEEDINGLY  FAMrLiAE  WITH  God's  Word  in  Order  to  use  it  skilfully. 
The  times  arrive  often  very  suddenly  in  which  we  are  called  to  make  answer  or  to 
give  advice ;  and  to  work  powerfully  one  must  work  ingeniously.  The  gifted 
authoress  of  "  English  Hands  and  Hearts  "  once  saw  a  man  close  by  the  brink  of  a 
river,  and  believed  he  was  going  to  commit  suicide.  It  seemed  perfectly  clear  to  her 
that  if  she  should  appear  to  suspect  his  purpose,  he  would  avoid  her,  and  wait  till  she 
passed  out  of  sight.  So  she  quietly  kept  on  her  walk,  but,  as  it  approached  the  spot 
where  he  was  watching,  she  said  aloud,  as  if  just  to  herself,  Psalm  xlvi.  4.  It  was 
all  she  could  do.  Two  years  afterwards  a  speaker  in  Exeter  Hall  related  the 
incident  in  his  own  sad  life,  and  told  how  the  text  saved  him  and  converted  him, 
and  now  he  added  the  wish  that  he  might  some  time  know  the  Christian  woman 
who  had  done  him  the  favour.  So  they  met  and  clasped  hands,  and  thanked  God 
together.  But  how  did  she  happen  to  know  the  right  verse,  then  ?  Such  a  thing 
did  not  happen:  that  lady  knew  her  Bible  thoroughly.  VI.  We  should  be  patient 
AND  HELPFUL  IN  INSTRUCTING  OTHERS  how  and  where  to  find  the  proper  passages 
for  Christian  effort.  VII.  We  can  find  here  the  explanation  we  seek  for  bomb 
FAILURES  that  appear  so  mysterious,  and  for  some  successes  that  are  so  admirable. 
Those  Christians  have  done  most  service  who  have  in  every  instance  trusted  the 
Word  for  the  power  of  the  truth  in  it.  Dr.  James  W.  Alexander  put  in  one  of  his 
letters,  near  the  end  of  his  career,  the  statement  that,  if  he  were  to  live  his  public 
life  over  again,  he  would  dwell  more  upon  the  familiar  parts  and  passages  of  the 
Bible,  like  the  story  of  the  ark,  the  draught  of  fishes,  or  the  parable  of  the  prodigal 
son.  That  is,  he  would  preach  more  of  the  Word  of  God  in  its  pure,  clear  utter- 
ances of  truth  for  souls.  When  the  saintly  Dr.  Cutler  of  Brooklyn  died,  the 
Sunday  School  remembered  that  he  used  to  come  in  every  now  and  then  during  the 
years  of  his  history  and  repeat  just  a  single  verse  from  the  superintendent's  desk  ; 
and  the  next  Lord's  Day  after  the  funeral  they  marched  up  in  front  of  it  in  a  long 
line,  and  each  scholar  quoted  any  of  the  texts  that  he  could  recoUect.  The  grown 
people  positively  sat  there  and  wept,  as  they  saw  how  much  there  was  of  the  Bible 
in  the  hearts  of  their  children  which  this  one  pastor  had  planted.  Yet  he  was  a 
▼ery  timid  and  old-fashioned  man  ;  he  said  he  Jiad  no  gift  at  talking  to  children ;  he 
eould  only  repeat  God's  Word.  Is  there  anybody  now  who  is  ready  to  say  that  was 
not  enough  for  some  good  ?  (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Christ  the  fulfilment  of 
prophecy : — On  an  artist's  table  some  colours  are  lying.  You  glance  at  them,  and 
that  is  all,  for  to  you  they  have  no  meaning.    A  mouth  after  you  come  in,  and  yoa 


U*  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  it. 

are  attracted  by  a  beautiful  picture.  The  picture  has  been  painted  with  the  ooloarft 
you  saw  before,  but  how  different  is  it  now  when  they  are  harmoniously  blended. 
So  Jesus  Christ  gathers  into  harmony  in  Himself  the  before  ill-understood  prophe- 
cies  and  types  of  the  Old  Testament ;  only  then  we  see  what  they  f uUy  mean.  It 
is  like  the  children's  picture-block  puzzles.  Take  the  pieces  from  the  box,  and  you 
have  a  number  of  blocks  of  all  sizes,  colours,  and  shapes.  Build  them  back,  care- 
fully fitting  them  into  each  other,  and  when  each  is  in  its  proper  place,  you  find 
you  Lave  a  complete  picture.  So  the  types  and  prophecies  are  only  understood 
when  they  are  fitted  into  Christ.  Jesus,  then,  takes  some  pictures  from  the  Book 
of  Isaiah,  and  declares  that  these  show  forth  His  mission.  The  first  picture  is  that 
of  a  messenger  bringing  good  news  to  the  poor — news  of  a  kingdom  prepared  for 
them ;  the  next  shows  a  message  of  consolation  brought  to  those  in  sorrow ;  the 
third  is  the  picture  of  one  promising  liberty  to  some  men  shut  up  in  a  narrow  cell ; 
in  the  fourth  a  blind  man  is  receiving  his  sight  at  the  healing  touch  of  a  prophet ; 
in  the  fifth  the  bonds  are  being  struck  from  the  feet  of  men  whose  limbs  have  been 
bruised  by  the  irons ;  and  the  sixth  shows  the  open  gate  of  heaven.  [Sunday  School 
Times.)  A  full  text : — When  we  have  once  measured  these  words,  we  shall  be 
reminded  of  the  tent  of  the  Arab  chief :  when  folded  it  could  be  carried  in  his 
hand,  but  when  spread  it  was  wide  enough  to  shelter  his  whole  tribe.  A  study  of 
the  incident  under  which  they  were  spoken  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth  is 
peculiarly  rewarding,  because  it  looks  off  in  so  many  directions ;  into  remote 
Jewish  history,  into  present  customs,  to  the  nature  of  the  gospel,  to  its  manifold 
methods  of  working,  to  the  heart  of  God,  to  the  inspiration  of  Christ ;  and,  finally, 
it  discloses  the  weakness  and  evil  of  human  nature  when  its  prejudices  and  tradi- 
tional thoughts  are  assaulted.  It  is  as  rich  in  material  and  association  that  a  book 
could  legitimately  be  made  from  it.  It  would  be  a  book  historical,  ecclesiastical, 
political,  theological,  ethical,  psychological,  and  the  treatment  would  not  be  forced. 
(T.  T.  Munger.)  Deliverance  both  physical  and  moral : — The  peculiar  feature  of 
this  quotation  from  Isaiah,  which  Christ  makes  His  own,  is  its  doubleness.  "  The 
poor  " — but  men  are  poor  in  condition  and  in  spirit.  "  The  captives  " — but  men 
may  be  in  bondage  under  masters  or  circumstances,  and  also  under  their  own  sin. 
"The  blind" — but  men  may  be  blind  of  eye  and  also  in  spiritual  vision.  "The 
bruised  "—but  men  are  bruised  in  the  struggles  of  this  rough  world,  and  also  by 
the  havoc  of  their  own  evil  passions.  Which  did  Christ  mean  ?  Both,  but  chiefly 
the  moral,  for  He  always  struck  through  the  external  forms  of  evil  to  the  moral 
root,  from  which  it  springs,  and  of  whose  condition  it  is  the  general  exponent. 
And  He  always  passed  on  to  the  spiritual  end  to  which  external  betterment  points. 
He  was  no  reformer  playing  about  the  outward  forms  of  evil — hunger,  poverty, 
disease,  oppression — giving  ease  and  relief  for  the  moment.  He  does  indeed  deal 
with  these,  but  He  puts  under  His  work  a  moral  foundation,  and  crowns  it  with  a 
spiritual  consummation.  Dealing  with  these,  He  was  all  the  while  inserting 
the  spiritual  principle  which  He  calls  "  faith."  Unless  He  can  do  this  He  is  nearly 
indifferent  whether  He  works  or  not.  If  you  cannot  heal  a  man's  spirit,  it  is  a 
small  thing  to  heal  his  body.  If  you  cannot  make  a  man  rich  in  his  heart  and 
thought,  it  is  a  slight  matter  to  relieve  his  poverty.  At  the  same  time,  Christ 
will  not  separate  the  two,  for  they  are  the  two  sides  of  one  evil  thing.  Poverty  and 
disease  and  misery  mostly  spring  out  of  moral  evil.  They  are  not  the  limitations 
of  the  finite  nature,  but  are  the  fangs  of  the  serpent  of  sin.  .  .  .  And  so  Christ  sets 
Himself  as  the  Deliverer  from  each,  the  origin  and  the  result,  the  sin  at  the  root, 
and  the  misery  which  is  its  fruitage.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  true  Liberator  and 
Enlightener  of  the  world: — Bartholdi's  gigantic  statue  of  "Liberty  Enlightening 
the  World "  occupies  a  fine  position  on  Bedloes  Island,  which  commands  the 
approach  to  New  York  Harbour.  It  holds  up  a  torch,  which  is  to  be  lit  at  night  by 
an  immense  electric  light.  The  statue  was  cast  in  portions  in  Paris.  The  separate 
pieces  were  very  different  in  appearance,  and,  taken  apart,  of  uncouth  shape.  It 
was  only  when  all  were  brought  together,  each  in  its  right  place,  that  the  complete 
design  was  apparent.  Then  the  omission  of  any  one  would  have  left  the  work 
imperfect.  In  this  it  was  an  emblem  of  Holy  Scripture.  We  do  not  always  see  the 
object  of  different  portions ;  nevertheless  each  has  its  place,  and  the  whole  is  a 
magnificent  statue  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  true  "  Liberty  enlightening  the 
world,"  casting  illuminating  rays  across  the  dark  rocky  ocean  of  time,  and  guiding 
anxious  souls  to  the  desired  haven.  {Freeman.)  Christ  alone  can  heal  the  broken' 
hearted : — I  could  build  a  Corlears  engine,  I  could  paint  a  Eaphael's  "  Madonna,** 
J  oould  play  a  Beethoven's  *'  Heroic  Symphony  "  as  ea«iljr  e.s  this  world  can  ooraioti 


€Bxr.  IT.]  8T.  LUKE.  US 

%  broken  heart.  And  yet  yon  have  been  comforted.  How  was  it  done?  Did 
Christ  come  to  you  and  say :  "  Get  your  mind  off  this ;  go  and  breathe  the  fresh 
air;  plunge  deeper  into  business"?  No.  There  was  a  minute  when  He  came  to 
yoQ,  perhaps  in  the  watches  of  the  night — perhaps  in  your  place  of  business, 
perhaps  along  the  street — and  He  breathed  something  into  your  soul  that  gave 
peace,  rest,  infinite  quiet,  so  that  you  could  take  out  the  photograph  of  the  departed 
one  and  look  into  the  eyes  and  face  of  the  dear  one  and  say :  '•  It  is  all  right ;  she 
is  better  oft ;  1  would  not  call  her  back.  Lord,  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast 
comforted  my  poor  heart.  I  thought  I  should  go  crazy  for  a  while,  but  the  rough 
sea  has  become  the  smooth  harbour.  Oh,  how  hard  it  was  for  me  to  give  her  up, 
and  I  shall  never  be  the  man  that  I  was  before ;  but  the  Lord  gave  and  the  Lord 
taketh  away,  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  There  are  Christian  parents  here 
to-night  who  are  willing  to  testify  to  the  power  of  this  gospel  to  comfort.  Your  son 
had  just  graduated  and  was  going  into  business,  and  the  Lord  took  him.  Or  your 
daughter  had  just  left  the  young  ladies'  seminary,  and  you  thought  she  was  going  to 
be  a  useful  woman  and  of  long  life ;  but  the  Lord  took  her,  and  you  were  tempted  to 
say:  "All  this  culture  for  nothing."  Or  the  little  child  came  home  from  school 
■with  the  hot  fever  that  stopped  not  for  the  agonized  prayer,  or  for  the  skilful 
physician,  and  the  little  child  was  taken.  Or  the  babe  was  lifted  out  of  yo  ir  arms 
by  some  quick  epidemic,  and  you  stood  wondering  why  God  ever  ga\  e  yoa  that 
child  at  all,  if  so  soon  He  was  to  take  it  away.  And  yet  yon  are  not  repining,  you 
are  not  fretful,  yon  are  not  fighting  against  God.  What  has  enabled  you  to  stand 
all  the  trial  t  " Oh,"  you  say,  " I  took  the  medicine  that  God  gave  my  sick  soul; 
in  my  distress  I  threw  myself  at  the  feet  of  a  sympathising  Saviour,  and  when  I 
was  too  weak  to  pray,  or  to  look  up,  He  breathed  into  me  a  peace  that  I  think  must 
be  the  foretaste  of  that  heaven  where  there  is  neither  tear,  nor  a  farewell,  nor  a 
grave."  Come,  all  ye  who  have  been  out  to  the  grave  to  weep  there — come,  all  ye 
comforted  souls,  get  up  off  your  knees.  Is  there  power  in  this  gospel  to  soothe  the 
heart  t  Is  there  power  in  this  religion  to  quiet  the  worst  paroxysm  of  grief  f  TeU 
me.  There  comes  up  an  answer  to  comforted  widowhood,  and  orphanage,  and 
childlessness,  saying:  "Ay,  ay,  we  are  witnesses  I"  {Dr.  Talmage.)  Christ 
the  Healer  of  the  broken-hearted: — I.  Thb  condition  ov  the  peesons  spokes 
or  IN  THE  TEXT  is  oue  of  extreme  distress  and  misery.  They  are  broken-hearted. 
All  their  happiness  is  gone.  All  their  hopes  are  blasted.  Nothing  is  left  to 
them  but  wretchedness  and  despair.  1.  It  implies  that  they  have  a  sorrowfol 
consciousness  of  the  existence  of  this  evil  within  them.  2.  They  are  also  dis- 
satisfied with  their  condition,  and  earnestly  desire  deliverance  from  it.  Like  men 
oppressed  with  sickness,  they  are  not  in  a  state  in  which  they  can  be  at  ease.  8. 
They  are  sensible  hkewise  of  the  deadly  nature  of  the  disease  under  which  they  are 
suffering.  They  know  that  it  is  a  mortal  disease ;  not  merely  painful  and  loath- 
some, but  dangerous  and  fatal.  4.  To  this  sorrowful  consciousness  of  their  sinful- 
ness, this  dissatisfaction  with  their  condition,  and  this  dread  of  futurity,  ia  added  a 
despair  of  healing  their  spiritual  diseases  by  any  means  of  their  own,  II.  But  why 
does  the  Physician  of  souls  thus  deal  with  us  ?  Why  cannot  He  apply  His  healing 
balm  at  once  to  our  wounds  ?    Why  must  we  be  brought  into  so  disconsolate  a 

STATE,  BEFOBB  WE  ABB  MADE  ACQUAINTED  WITH   PAEDON  AND   PEACE?      1,    In  aUSWCr  tO 

this  inquiry  we  may  observe,  that  God  thus  afflicts  His  penitent  children,  in  order 
that  Bin  may  be  embittered  to  them  ;  that  they  may  have  a  heartfelt  knowledge  of 
the  misery  and  shame  which  it  is  able  to  produce,  and  thus  learn  to  regard  it  with 
hatred  and  fear.  2.  The  sinner  is  made  broken-hearted,  that  he  may  be  willing  to 
be  healed  by  Christ  in  His  way  and  on  His  terms.  3.  A  further  reason  why  the 
returning  sinner  is  thus  torn  and  smitten,  may  be,  that  the  deliverance  vouchsafed 
to  him  may  be  more  highly  valued.  4.  It  may  also  be  the  will  of  God  to  give  the 
penitent  a  deep  sense  of  his  wretchedness,  in  order  that  the  great  Physician  of  his 
soul  may  be  more  warmly  loved.     III.  Let  ns  proceed  to  consider  the  snooubaob- 

KENT  WHICH  THE  DBOIiABATION  BEFORE  US  IS  CALCULATED  TO  ATFOBD  TO  EVEBT  BBOKEN- 

HBABTED  MouBNEE.  1.  It  plainly  implies  that  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  broken* 
hearted  should  be  healed.  He  has  sent  a  Messenger  from  heaven  to  bring  peace  to 
them.  2.  The  declaration  in  the  text  teaches  us  also,  that  God  has  given  to  Christ 
authority  and  power  to  heal  the  broken-hearted.  3.  The  declaration  before  as 
assures  as,  too,  that  Christ  is  willing  to  heal  all  the  broken-hearted  who  apply  for 
His  aid ;  that  He  is  ready  to  exercise  the  authority  and  power  which  He  has  received. 
Here,  then,  ia  a  rich  source  of  encouragement  to  every  monmer.  The  God  againit 
whom  he  hiu  sinned,  has  sent  a  Messenger  from  heaven  to  heal  him ;  and  He  whooi 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHA».  IT, 

He  has  sent,  rejoices  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted.  He  has  infinite  compassion 
to  pity,  as  well  as  infinite  power  to  relieve.  A  review  of  oar  subject  points  out  to 
us,  first,  the  persona  to  whom  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  are  to  administer  comfort. 

2.  The  text  affords  us,  secondly,  a  test  by  which  we  may  try  our  spiritual  comfort. 

3.  We  may  infer  also  from  the  text,  that  true  contrition  of  heart  is  one  of  the 
greatest  blessings  which  God  can  bestow  on  man.  4.  The  text  reminds  as, 
lastly,  of  the  sin  and  folly  of  despair.     {C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 

Vers.  22-24.  Te  will  surely  say  unto  Me  this  proverb,  Physician,  heal  ThjBtHL — 
The  treatment  of  Christ  by  the  Nazarenes  : — 1.  No  man  should  be  undervalued  on 
account  of  humble  parentage.  If  a  man  behave  well  himself,  even  the  sins  of  his 
parents  ought  not  to  be  imputed  to  him  as  a  fault,  much  less  ought  their  lowly 
condition  in  life.  Indeed,  the  greater  the  obscurity  from  which  a  man  has  emerged, 
and  the  more  numerous  and  formidable  the  difficulties  with  which  he  has  had  to 
struggle,  the  more  praise  is  due  to  him  for  aiming  at  honourable  distinction.  Let 
us  be  ready  to  acknowledge  ability,  and  to  esteem  worth,  wherever  found.  And 
let  not  those  who  have  risen  in  life  be  ashamed  of  their  humble  parentage,  or 
undervalue  or  forget  their  kindred  and  early  friends.  2.  We  should  not  neglect 
the  lessons  taught  in  the  proverb,  "  No  prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own  country,  or 
of  his  own  kindred."  Honourable  exceptions  there  may  be  to  this;  but  it  states 
what  is  generally  the  case  among  men.  (1)  Prejudice  against  those  who  have  risen 
above  the  station  in  which  they  were  born.  (2)  Envy  at  their  rising  above  one's 
own  position.  (3)  Curiosity,  and  desire  for  novelty  influence  men  against  those 
they  are  well  acquainted  with.  What  comes  from  a  great  distance  is  generally 
reckoned  of  great  value.  3.  The  sinfulness  of  objecting  to  the  more  extensive  dif- 
fusion of  religious  privileges,  and  of  refusing  to  rejoice  in  the  good  of  other  oountries, 
under  the  pretence  that  all  our  exertions  should  be  limited  to  our  own  country. 
Home  has  the  first,  but  not  the  only  claim.  We  ought  not  to  shut  our  hearts 
against  any  call  to  attend  to  the  spiritual  welfare  of  men.  There  is  a  tide  in  the 
affairs  of  men  and  of  the  Church — a  tide,  not  of  chance,  bat  of  providential  influ- 
ence and  arrangement ;  that  tide  of  favourable  circumstances  we  cannot  command ; 
it  is  our  duty,  therefore,  to  avail  ourselves  of  its  flow,  lest  it  ebb  away,  and  the 
opportunity  be  lost.  And  as  neither  at  Nazareth,  nor  at  Capernaum,  was  the 
ministry  oiE  our  Lord  without  some  success,  so  may  we  hope  that  no  Scriptural 
attempts,  whether  at  a  distance  or  at  our  own  door,  will  ultimately  prove  altogether 
in  vain.  4.  Let  us  beware  of  resembling  in  any  way  the  Nazarenes  in  their  more 
violent  hatred  of  Christ,  and  of  the  tru&,  here  described ;  and  beware  also  of  the 
causes  which  led  to  that  hatred.  They  began  by  cavilling  at  His  plans,  and  ended 
by  raging  and  setting  themselves  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed.  They  were 
too  proud  to  submit  to  the  righteousness  of  Ood.  This  spirit  is  rife  stiU.  Let  as 
remember  we  have  no  "  rights  "  with  respect  to  God ;  let  us  gladly  fall  in  with  His 
plans,  and  thankfully  accept  of  His  offered  mercy.  Submission  to  free  grace  is  the 
only  way  of  safety,  and  of  holiness  and  comfort;  it  changes  the  slavish  and 
mercenary  spirit  into  the  spirit  of  the  freedman  and  child ;  and  the  obedience  of 
the  life  will  be  secured  as  the  cheerful  homage  of  the  reconciled  and  grateful  heart. 
{Jama  Foote,  M.A.)  The  preaching  of  Christ  a  pattern  for  Hit  minitter$ : — ^L 
Thb  ohabm  of  Chbist'b  pbeachino.  1.  He  was  not  simply  a  human  teacher. 
Hence  the  tone  of  authority  which  He  alone  might  assume.  2.  Preaching  was  in 
His  hands  altogether  a  new  thing.  8.  A  singular  gracefulness  in  His  manner.  4. 
Popular  style  of  discourse.  6.  Evangelical  doctrine,  suited  to  men's  needs.  He 
spoke  of  those  Divine  truths  which  are  the  hope  of  gaUty  captives,  and  the  balm  of 
the  broken-hearted ;  He  brought  tidings  of  great  joy,  messages  of  mercy  suited  to 
their  nature  as  intelligent,  immortal,  responsible  creatures,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  their  circumstances  as  lost  sinners.  II.  Some  of  the  chief  QCAiiirixs  bequibitb 
10  SBCUBE  SUCCESS  to  a  human  ministry.  1.  It  should  give  a  prominent  exhibition 
to  the  great  peculiarities  of  the  gospel.  Redemption  through  the  Cross  of  Christ 
must  be  the  preacher's  constant  theme.  2.  This  prominent  exhibition  of  the  Cross 
should  always  be  combined  with  a  tender  sohcitude  for  the  salvation  of  souls. 
Eternal  consequences  are  at  stake.  With  all  earnestness  the  message,  therefore^ 
must  be  urged.  3.  Simplicity  of  style.  Brilliant  images  and  pompous  language 
may  excite  wonder,  bat  will  not  instruct  or  convince.  Plain  truths  should  be  oon- 
vqred  in  plain  words.  lUastrations  may  be  ased,  bat  only  sach  as  add  oleameii 
to  the  discourse.  III.  Bt  what  iouhb  such  a  huostbt  uat  bb  fobmbo  jlhs  iui* 
tusMD.    1.  ▲  profound  eoquaintanoe  with  the  gospel,  in  its  adaptation  t»  all  tbc 


4JH4».  IT.]  8T,  LUKE.  447 

▼arieties  of  hnman  clwracter  and  oondition.  2.  Entire  consecration  to  the  minis* 
terial  ofiSce.  3.  Eminence  in  personal  piety.  4.  The  habitual  recognition  of 
scriptural  encouragements  and  motives,  and  especially  the  anticipation  of  the 
final  results  of  the  ministry,  will  not  fail  to  exert  a  beneficial  influence  on  the  mind 
of  the  minister.  (E.  Steane.)  The  rejection  of  God's  prophets  and  its  results: — 
L  1.  The  spirit  of  detraction  is  the  surest  sign  of  a  small  and  vulgar  souL  2. 
Jesus  goes  on  to  anticipate  the  objection  with  which  His  opponents  will  meet  thia 
announcement  of  Himself,  and  in  which  they  will  demand  a  miracle  as  proof  of 
His  claim.  To  such  a  spirit  He  could  vouchsafe  no  sign  ;  indeed,  miracles  would 
have  been  no  sign  to  such.  3.  At  the  same  time  He  would  warn  them  that  God 
ever  finds  work  for  His  prophets  to  do.  If  their  own  countrymen  will  not  receive 
them,  there  are  others  who  will.  The  widows  and  the  lepers  of  Israel  may  not 
care  to  be  comforted  or  healed  by  them,  but  there  are  widows  in  Sarepta  and  lepers 
in  Syria  who  enter  upon  the  blessings  which  are  despised  by  the  children  of  the 
kingdom.  4.  The  passive  rejection  of  the  Christ  cannot  for  long  remain  passive. 
They  jvho  reject  Him  passively  are  miserably  conscious  that  it  is  He  who  is  rejecting 
them.  Roused  to  anger  (which  is,  in  reality,  terror),  they  actively  rebel  against  Him, 
and  seek  to  destroy  Him.  II.  Not  infrequently  we  are  conscious  that  the  voice  of 
God  is  speaking  to  us  through  one  whom  we  have  known  familiarly,  who,  it  may  be, 
is  inferior  to  us  in  age  or  worldly  position,  or  whom  in  past  years  we  ourselves  have 
patronized.  There  is  a  temptation  to  weaken  the  force  of  the  call  by  depreciating  the 
instrument  through  which  it  comes.  {Canon  Vernon  Hutton,  M.A.)  Self-heal- 
ing : — In  one  of  his  familiar  epistles  to  Eome's  greatest  orator,  then  dejected  at  the 
loss  of  TuUia,  Snlpicius  made  this  appeal:  "Do  not  forget  that  you  are  Cicero;  one 
who  has  been  used  always  to  prescribe  for  and  give  advice  to  others ;  do  not  imitate 
those  paltry  physicians  who  pretend  to  cure  other  people's  diseases,  yet  are  not  able 
to  cure  their  own  ;  but  suggest  rather  to  yourself  the  same  lesson  which  you  would 
give  in  the  same  case."  Dr.  South  asks  in  one  of  his  sermons,  adverting  to  the  study 
of  physio,  "  Do  not  many  shorten  their  days,  and  lose  their  own  health,  while  they 
are  learning  to  restore  it  to  others  ?  "  But  the  proverb  invites  to  a  larger  than 
merely  professional  application.  Selden,  in  his  Table-talk,  says,  "  Preachers  say.  Do 
as  I  say,  not  as  I  do.  But  if  a  physician  had  the  same  disease  upon  him  that  I  have, 
and  he  should  bid  me  do  one  thing,  and  he  do  quite  another,  could  I  believe  him  ?  " 
The  practice  of  men,  says  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  in  his  "Eeligio  Medici,"  holds  not 
an  equal  part  with,  yea,  often  runs  contrary  to,  their  theory  :  "  we  naturally  know 
what  is  good,  but  naturally  pursue  what  is  evil ;  the  rhetoric  wherewith  I  persuade 
another  cannot  persuade  myself."  Byron  chuckled  crowingly  over  Beccaria,  when 
he  was  told  in  Italy  of  that  philosopher,  who  had  published  "  such  admirable  things 
against  the  punishment  of  death,"  that  as  soon  as  his  book  was  out,  his  servant, 
"having  read  it,  I  presume,"  stole  his  watch,  and  the  master  while  correcting  the 
proofs  of  a  second  edition,  did  all  he  could  to  have  the  man  hanged.  Angelo,  in 
"  Measure  for  Measure,"  with  all  his  fair  show  in  the  flesh,  of  superiority  to  it, 
was  no  such  perfect  practitioner.  Bather  he  was  to  be  consigned  to  the  category 
of  those  "  ungracious  pastors  "  of  whom  Ophelia  spoke,  when  she  thanked  Laertes 
for  his  excellent  counsel,  and  hoped  withal  he  would  abide  by  it  in  his  own  life  and 
couveraatiou. 

"  But,  good  my  brother, 
Do  not,  as  some  ungracious  pastors  do. 
Show  me  the  steep  and  thorny  way  to  heayen ; 
Whilst,  like  a  pult'd  and  reckless  libertine, 
Himself  the  primrose  path  of  dalliance  treads, 
And  recks  not  his  own  read."  {FrameU  Jaeox.) 

The  art  of  healing : — Our  Lord's  choice  of  this  proverb  in  reference  to  Himself  was 
peculiarly  appropriate,  when  we  remember  how  large  a  portion  of  his  work  con- 
sisted of  healing  the  sick.  It  is  probable  that  already  His  fame  had  gone  abroad, 
not  only  as  a  teacher  but  as  a  healer,  and  that  the  wonderful  cures  which  He  had 
effected  caused  His  name  to  be  in  all  men's  mouths,  and  led  to  the  expectation  in 
Nazareth  to  which  He  referred,  that  He  would  do  in  His  own  home  what  He  had 
already  been  doing  elsewhere.  All  through  His  career  He  represents  Him- 
self as  the  great  physician.  He  is  the  wise  physician  who  can  combine  with  his 
knowledge  of  the  body  the  more  subtle  knowledge  of  the  soul.  Few  men  depend  for 
effective  work  more  upon  their  character  than  doctors.  Perhaps  the  only  class  of 
persons  whose  labour  becomes  useless  when  character  is  departed,  to  a  more  marked 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {aaxf.  rr. 

degree  than  that  of  physicians,  is  that  of  ministers  of  religion.  Of  coarse  thert 
have  been  cases,  well-known  to  fame,  of  physicians  failing  utterly  in  the  moral  side 
of  their  nature,  and  yet,  by  reason  of  a  peculiar  genius  and  indomitable  energy,  still 
gaining  a  name,  and  becoming  wealthy  and  influential.  But  such  persons  are  rather 
the  marks  and  beacons  whereby  we  must  direct  our  way,  and  avoid  the  dangerous 
places  where  we  may  become  utterly  wrecked.  As  a  general,  almost  universal  rule, 
the  reputation  of  the  physician  must  be  spotless.  He  must  know  no  fear  and  be 
subject  to  no  reproach.  Where  can  be  found  a  better  strength  and  inspiration  for 
such  noble  life  than  in  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ?  {LI.  D.  Bevan,  LL.D.) 
The  proverb  applied  to  our  relation  to  foreign  missions: — Is  it  not  a  fact,  and  is  not 
the  slow  progress  of  missioa-work  among  the  heathen  to  be  accounted  for,  to  some 
extent,  by  the  fact,  that  we,  and  other  so-called  Christian  nations  supply  in  our 
relations  to  heathen  peoples,  and  in  the  aspect  which  much  of  our  own  national 
and  social  life  presents  to  them,  the  very  worst  commentary  imaginable  apon  the 
truths  which  our  missionaries  teach  them?  Can  we  expect  to  be  able  to  win  the 
world  for  Christ  so  long  as  it  is  evident  that  we  have  not  submitted  ourselves  to  His 
gracious  yoke,  and  do  not  carry  into  practice  the  precepts  He  enjoined  ?  Have  not 
many  of  these  heathen  nations  a  right  to  turn  round  upon  us,  when  we  send  them 
missionaries,  attack  their  systems  of  religion,  and  make  long  prayers  for  their  con- 
version, and  to  address  us  in  the  words  of  our  text,  "  Physician,  heal  thyself  "  ?  1. 
Take  first  the  figure  we  cut  in  the  matter  of  our  interuational  relations.  2.  Are 
■we  as  a  mercantile  community  possessed  of  clean  hands  in  the  matter  of  the 
fabrics  we  send  out  into  the  markets  which  these  people's  necessities  provide.  3. 
What  do  Chinese,  and  Hindoos,  and  Japanese,  find  among  us,  in  our  own  land, 
■when  they  -visit  us  ?  Should  we  have  any  right  to  resent  the  taunt,  if,  when  we 
bid  them  embraf  e  our  religion,  they  should  point  the  finger  of  scorn  at  us,  and  say, 
♦'  Physician,  heal  thyself  "  ?  4.  But  it  may  be  said,  "  It  is  a  merely  nominal 
Christian  nation  or  society  which  exhibits  these  wide  and  gross  departures  from  the 
spirit  and  practice  of  the  Christian  religion.  It  is  the  Christian  Church  which 
Bends  out  missionaries  to  the  heathen.  Well,  what  is  likely  to  be  the  feeling  with 
which  intelligent  heathens  regard  the  attempts  of  the  Christian  Church  to  convert 
them  ?  Are  they  not  sure  to  smile  at  our  efforts,  and  to  say  to  us,  "  Heal  your- 
selves before  you  undertake  to  cure  us.  Apply  the  knife  to  the  cancer  which 
festers  at  the  heart  of  your  own  society,  before  you  undertake  the  ameUoration  of 
the  condition  of  ours  ;  convert  your  own  countrymen  first  and  then  shall  you  have 
free  access  to  ours  ;  then  will  you  prove  to  us,  in  the  most  convincing  way,  that 
your  religion  is  all  that  you  profess  it  to  be  "  ?  5.  Have  not  our  denominational 
rivalries  been  often  transplanted,  and  set  in  operation  among  peoples  who  cannot 
understand  the  merits  of  our  disputes,  or  the  grounds  of  our  contending  polities ; 
and  have  they  not  inclined  them,  confused  and  confounded  as  they  must  be  by  dis- 
tinctions and  cLiims  which  are  to  them  incomprehensible,  to  wash  their  hands  of 
the  responsibility  of  deciding  between  so  many  conflicting  opinions,  and  to  say  to 
na,  "  Learn  to  agree  among  yourselves  as  to  what  your  religion  is  :  learn,  above  all, 
to  manifest  more  of  its  spirit  in  your  relations  to  one  another,  before  bringing  it  to 
us,  and  trying  to  persuade  us  to  accept  it "  ?  6.  What,  then,  is  the  practicjil  outcome 
of  all  this  ?  Not  that  we  should  withdraw  a  single  missionary  from  his  work,  or  relax  a 
single  aggressive  endeavour,  or  reduce  by  a  single  penny  the  amount  of  our  contribu- 
tions to  the  missionary  cause.  No  I  let  us  rather  redouble  our  zeal  and  multiply  our  gifts. 
But  above  all  let  us  see  to  it,  that  as  a  people,  as  Churches,  as  members  of  Christ's 
Church,  we  no  longer  belie  our  teachings  and  profession  by  our  example  and 
our  life.  {J.  K.  Bailey.)  To  the  inconsistent  Christian: — I.  Bt  whom  abe  thb 
INCONSISTENCIES  OF  CHRISTIANS  CHIEFLY  DENOUNCED  ?  1.  By  infidels.  2.  By  ration- 
aUzing  believers.  3.  By  eminent  Christians.  II.  Fob  what  pukpose  abe  thb 
INCONSISTENCIES  OF  Cheistians  denodnced  ?  1.  To  invalidate  the  evidence  of  the 
Divine  origin  of  Christianity.  2.  To  bring  discredit  on  evangelical  religion.  3.  To 
elevate  the  standard  of  Christian  attainment.  III.  Cheistians  are  not  so  incon- 
BiSTENT  AS  THEY  ARE  EEPEESENTED  TO  BE.  1.  All  are  uot  Christians  who  usurp 
the  name,  2.  All  Christians  are  not  responsible  for  the  shortcomings  even  of 
genuine  Christians.  3.  All  Christians  are  men,  and  in  trying  them  by  the  standard 
of  their  religion,  the  same  allowance  must  be  made  for  them  as  for  other  men.  4. 
Christians  should  be  judged  by  their  general  conduct,  and  not  by  individual  actiona, 
6.  Christians  should  be  compared  with  men  who  are  their  peers  in  everything 
except  their  religion.  IV.  The  inconsistencies  of  Christians  fcbnish  no  vaud 
OBJECTION  i.0AiNST  THK  DiviNs  oBioiN  07  Chbistianixy.    1.  It  does  not  leooxnmend^ 


CHA».  /▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  449 

or  palliate,  or  defend  them.  2.  It  makes  ample  provision  for  their  removal  by  the 
doctrines  it  teaches,  by  the  precepts  it  delivers,  by  the  motives  it  presents,  by  the 
spiritual  influence  it  promises.  3.  It  has  produced  many  of  the  finest  specimens 
of  human  character  the  world,  throughout  the  whole  course  of  its  history,  has  ever 
witnessed.  4.  It  has  exercised  an  indirect  influence,  of  a  most  elevating  description, 
on  multitudes  who  are  strangers  to  its  saving  power,  6.  It  has  exercised  on  ita 
most  inconsistent  disciples  an  ameliorating  efficacy,  to  which  no  system  of  philo- 
Bophy  or  rehgion  can  adduce  parallels.    V.  The  inconsistencies  of  Cheistians 

FUBNISH   no     valid     OBJECTION    TO     THE    D0CTEINE8   OF  GEACE,   AS   THEY  ARE    CAliLED. 

1.  These  doctrines  leave  all  the  usual  arguments  for  a  holy  life  untouched.  2. 
They  remove  that  invincible  obstruction  to  a  holy  life  which  arises  from  a  sense  of 
guilt,  and  from  a  self-righteous  and  superstitious  attempt  to  earn,  by  personal 
merit,  pardon  and  acceptance.  3.  They  furnish,  in  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  the 
most  powerful  motive  to  a  holy  life  that  has  ever  been  urged.  4.  They  secure  an 
adequate  supply  of  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    VI.  The  grief  which  the 

INCONSISTENCIES  OF   CHRISTIANS  SHOULD  AWAKEK  IN  FELLOW- CHRISTIANS.      1.   BecaUSe 

inconsistent  professors  bring  dishonour  on  the  names  of  God  and  of  the  Saviour. 

2.  Because  inconsistent  professors  lower  the  general  standard  of  Christian  attain- 
ment. 3.  Because  inconsistent  professors  hang  as  a  dead  weight  on  the  energies 
of  the  Church.  4.  Because  inconsistent  professors  are  little  likely  to  be  brought  to 
a  saving  acquaintance  with  Chrisl.  YII.  The  duties  which  the  inconsistencies 
OF  Christians  impose  on  the  friends  of  Christ.  1.  A  habitual  watchfulness 
over  their  conduct.  2.  A  conscientious  discharge  of  relative  duty.  3.  A  foregoing 
of  certain  rights  and  privileges  for  the  good  of  others.  4.  Thorough  adoption  of 
the  great  principles  of  Christianity.  6.  Prayer.  VIII.  Eeal  inconsistencies  of 
Christians.  1.  It  is  inconsistent  to  live  in  the  wilful  and  habitual  practice  of  known 
Bin.  2.  It  is  inconsistent  to  pursue  a  doubtful  course  of  action,  without  seeking  to 
ascertain  whether  it  is  right  or  wrong.  3.  It  is  inconsistent  to  conform  to  worldly 
habits  of  thinking  and  acting.  4.  It  is  inconsistent  to  be  chargeable  with  vices 
which  respectable  men  of  the  world  abhor.  5.  It  is  inconsistent  to  be  indifferent  to 
the  progress  and  prosperity  of  the  cause  of  Christ.     (G.  Brooks.) 

Ver.  26.  Save  xmto  Sarepta. — Description  of  Sarepta : — The  mins  of  Sarepta  are 
Bcattered  over  the  plain,  at  intervals,  for  more  than  a  mile :  one  group  is  on  the 
eoast,  and  may  be  the  remains  of  the  ancient  harbour.  These  lie  on  a  tongue  of 
land  which  forms  a  small  bay,  and  pleasantly  varies  the  monotony  of  the  otherwise 
unbroken  coast  line.  Fine  crops  brighten  part  of  the  plain  around,  though  only 
the  small  village  of  Surafend,  the  modem  representative  of  the  ancient  town,  is 
actually  surrounded  by  green.  Sarepta  was  famous  for  its  wine  in  the  early 
Christian  centuries,  but  it  got  its  name  in  the  Hebrew  Bible — Zarpath — from  its 
being  in  still  older  days  a  chief  centre  of  the  glass  works  of  Phoenicia — the  word 
meaning  "melting-houses."  It  belonged  to  the  territory  of  Sidon,  and  must 
have  been  a  large  place,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  number  of  rock-tombs  at  the 
foot  of  the  hills.  Its  supreme  interest,  however,  to  all  Bible  readers  lies  in  its 
connection  with  the  great  Prophet  Elijah.  A  place  is  still  shown  at  the  old  har- 
bour where  a  Christian  Church  once  stood,  on  the  alleged  site  of  the  widow's  house 
in  which  the  prophet  lived.  But  no  value  is  to  be  attached  to  such  a  localization, 
though  the  spot  is  still  called  "The  Grave  of  Elijah,"  in  the  belief  that  he  finally 
died  there.  During  the  reign  of  the  Crusaders,  Sarepta  was  strongly  fortified,  and 
made  the  seat  of  a  bishop,  who  was  subject  to  the  Archbishop  of  Sidon ;  but  as  early 
as  the  end  of  the  thirteenth  century  it  had  sunk  into  utter  desolation.  Legend  has  tried 
to  identify  it  with  the  home  of  the  Syrophoenician  woman  whose  daughter  Christ 
healed,  but  there  is  no  ground  for  this  fancy.  Its  fame  must  always  rest,  for 
Christians,  on  the  noble  lesson  of  faith  in  God  taught  by  the  prophet  on  the  one 
hand,  and  by  the  great-hearted  widow  on  the  other.  (G.  Geikie,  D.D.)  All  men 
are  thought  of  by  God : — There  is  a  place  in  each  mother's  heart  for  every  child 
that  is  given  her,  and  do  you  not  suppose  there  is  a  place  in  God's  heart  for  every 
child  that  He  has  created  ?  Do  you  not  suppose  that  all  men  stand  before  Him 
plain,  and  individual,  and  distinct  ?  Yes,  you  stand  before  God  as  if  there  were 
not  another  man  in  the  universe.  As  men  stand  before  us  without  mistake  of 
identity,  and  as  all  that  we  think  and  feel  of  them  we  think  and  feel  of  them  as 
individuals,  so  we  stand  before  God,  and  all  that  He  thinks  and  feels  of  us  He 
thinks  and  feels  of  as  as  individuals.  He  calls  every  one  of  as  by  name,  and  He 
does  it  a  great  deal  more  than  we  know.    How  much  does  the  ofalld  know  of  tbo 


4S0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  it, 

thoughts  of  the  mother  who  sings  and  rocks  its  cradle  while  it  sleeps,  and  hreatheg 
its  name  7  When  the  child  is  gone  from  home  for  a  visit  or  for  school,  how  much 
does  it  know  of  the  thoughts  that  are  beaded  and  strung,  pearl-like,  before  God,  on 
its  account,  or  of  the  frequency  with  which  its  name  is  uttered  ?  If  the  child  could 
follow  its  father's  and  mother's  voice,  in  the  closet  and  elsewhere,  how  often  would 
it  hear  its  own  sweet  name  sounding  all  the  way  up  to  heaven  I  And  if  this  is  so 
with  earthly  parents,  may  we  not  suppose,  when  we  remember  the  boundlessness  of 
God's  love,  that  there  is  not  a  child  of  His  on  which  He  does  not  bestow  special 
thought  and  attention  ?     {H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  28,  31.  And  all  they  In  the  Bynagogue,  when  they  beard  these  things, 
were  flUed  with  wrath. — Nazareth;  or,  Jeszis  rejected  by  His  friends: — I.  Who 
WERE  THESE  REJECTORS  OF  Christ  ?  They  have  their  types  and  representatives 
now.  1.  They  were  those  who  were  nearest  related  to  the  Saviour.  They  were 
the  people  of  His  own  town.  2.  They  were  those  who  knew  most  about  Christ. 
The  whole  story  of  the  wondrous  Child  was  known  to  them.  3.  They  were  people 
who  supposed  that  they  had  a  claim  upon  Christ.  They  no  doubt  argued,  "  He  ia 
a  Nazareth  man,  and  of  course  He  is  in  duty  bound  to  help  Nazareth. "  II.  Why 
THEY  THUS  REJECT  THE  Messiah.  1.  I  should  uot  wonder  but  what  the  ground- 
work of  their  dissatisfaction  was  laid  in  the  fact  that  they  did  not  feel  themselvea 
to  be  the  persons  to  whom  the  Saviour  claimed  to  have  a  commission.  Observe, 
He  said,  in  the  eighteenth  verse,  that  He  was  "  anointed  to  preach  the  gospel  to 
the  poor."  Now,  the  poorest  ones  in  the  synagogue  may  have  felt  pleased  at  that 
word;  but  as  it  was  almost  a  maxim  with  the  Jewish  doctors  that  it  did  not 
signify  what  became  of  the  poor — for  few  but  the  rich  could  enter  heaven — the 
very  announcement  of  a  gospel  for  the  poor  must  have  sounded  to  them  awfully 
democratical  and  extreme,  and  must  have  laid  in  their  minds  the  foundation  of 
a  prejudice.  Did  not  some  of  them  say,  "  We  have  worn  our  phylacteries,  and 
made  broad  the  borders  of  our  garments ;  we  have  not  eaten  except  with  washen 
hands  ;  we  have  strained  out  all  gnats  from  our  wine ;  we  have  kept  the  fasts,  and 
the  feasts,  and  we  have  made  long  prayers,  why  should  we  feel  any  poverty  of 
spirit  J  "  Hence  they  felt  there  was  nothing  in  Christ's  mission  for  them.  When 
He  next  mentioned  the  broken-hearted,  they  were  not  at  all  conscious  of  any  need 
of  a  broken  heart.  They  felt  heart-whole,  self-satisfied,  perfectly  content.  What 
is  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  to  us,  if  it  is  only  for  bruised  captive  ones  ? 
We  are  not  such.  At  a  glance  you  perceive,  my  brethren,  the  reason  why  in  these 
days  Jesus  Christ  is  rejected  by  so  many  church-going  and  chapel-going  people. 
2.  I  entertain  little  doubt  but  what  the  men  of  Nazareth  were  angry  with  Christ 
because  of  His  exceeding  high  claims.  He  said,  "  The  spirit  of  Jehovah  is  upon 
Me."  They  started  at  that.  And  so  men  now  reject  Christ  because  He  sets  Him- 
self too  high,  and  asks  more  of  them  than  they  are  willing  to  give.  3.  Another 
reason  might  be  found  in  the  fact  that  they  were  not  for  receiving  Christ  until  He 
had  exhibited  some  great  wonder.  They  craved  for  miracles.  Their  minds  were 
in  a  sickly  state.  A  young  man  yonder  has  said  to  himself,  "  If  I  had  a  dream,  as 
I  hear  So-and-so  had,  or  if  there  should  happen  to  me  some  very  remarkable 
event  in  providence,  which  should  just  meet  my  taste ;  or  if  I  could  feel  to-day 
some  sudden  shock  of  I  know  not  what,  then  I  would  believe."  Thus  you  dream 
that  my  Lord  and  Master  is  to  be  dictated  to  by  you  I  You  are  beggars  at  His 
gate,  asking  for  mercy,  and  you  must  needs  draw  up  rules  and  regulations  as  to 
how  He  shall  give  that  mercy.  4.  Again,  and  perhaps  this  time  I  may  hit  th^ 
head  ol  the  nail  in  some  cases,  though  I  suppose  not  in  many  in  this  place,  part 
of  the  irritation  which  existed  in  the  minds  of  the  men  of  Nazareth  was  caused 
by  the  peculiar  doctrine  which  the  Saviour  preached  upon  the  subject  of  election. 
He  laid  it  down  that  God  had  a  right  to  dispense  His  favours  just  as  He  pleased, 
and  that  in  doing  so  He  often  selected  the  most  unlikely  objects.  They  did  not 
like  this.  The  doctrine  of  free  grace  to  the  needy  is  ever  a  stumbling-block  to 
men.  5.  They  loved  not  such  plain  personal  speaking  as  the  Saviour  gave  them. 
6.  They  could  not  bear  to  hear  Him  hint  that  He  meant  to  bless  the  Gentiles. 
III.  And  now,  What  came  of  it  7  1.  They  thrust  the  Saviour  out  of  the  synagogue, 
and  then  they  tried  to  hurl  Him  down  the  brow  of  the  hill.  These  were  His  friends, 
good,  respectable  people :  who  would  have  believed  it  of  them  ?  Yoo  saw  that 
goodly  company  in  the  synagogue  who  sang  so  sweetly,  and  listened  so  attentively, 
would  you  have  guessed  that  there  was  a  murderer  inside  every  one  of  their 
eoata  ?    It  only  needed  the  opportunity  to  bring  the  murderer  out ;  for  there  they 


CHAP,  nr.]  ST.  LUKE,  451 

are  all  trying  to  throw  Jesus  down  the  hill.  We  do  not  know  how  much  devil 
xliere  is  inside  any  one  of  us ;  if  we  are  not  renewed  and  changed  by  grace,  w« 
are  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others.  2.  But  what  came  of  it  ?  Why,  though  they 
thus  thrust  Him  out,  they  could  not  hurt  the  Saviour.  The  hurt  was  all  their 
own.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Men  seldom  see  the  great  in  what  is  about  them  : — We 

ride  without  eyes  under  Greylock,  and  go  to  the  White  Mountains  for  sublimity. 
The  moon  in  Venice,  and  the  sky  in  Naples,  have  more  charm  than  here  at  home. 
The  weeds  of  other  climates  become  our  flowers,  and  our  flowers  seem  to  us  but 
weeds.  There  is  little  heroism,  little  devotion  and  nobility  on  our  square  mile ; 
there  are  no  epics  or  lyrics  of  human  deed  and  feeling  sung  in  our  streets ;  the 
great,  the  beautiful,  the  excellent,  is  at  a  distance.  Why  we  think  thus  it  may  be 
bard  to  tell,  unless  it  is  from  instinctive  reverence  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the 
other  because  the  realization  of  greatness  makes  us  aware  of  our  own  littleness, 
and  so  provokes  us  to  every  danger.  So  that  what  we  read  of  here  is  no  strange 
history,  but  only  an  illustration  of  a  daily  fact :  a  great  spirit  rejected  by  fiiende 
and  neighbours ;  it  is  only  the  carpenter's  Son,  the  boy  who  grew  up  in  the  midst 
of  us,  and  now,  forsooth,  claiming  to  be  a  prophet  I  And  so  they  drive  Him  out  of 
their  city.  (T.  T.  Hunger.)  Cause  of  the  Nazarenes' wrath : — What  was  actually 
the  cause  of  the  sudden  upboil  of  these  men's  wrath  ?  It  was  that  their  self- 
esteem  was  wounded.  Christ  declared  that  only  the  humble  and  meek  would  be 
able  to  receive  Him.  Elijah  was  persecuted,  and  received  only  by  one  poor  widow. 
Naaman  was  unworthy  to  be  healed  till  he  humbled  himself  to  dip  in  despised 
Jordan.  The  men  of  Nazareth  understood  the  inference.  It  was  not  flattering  to 
their  pride ;  they  could  not  be  fed  and  healed  unless  they  became  humble,  and 
submitted  to  th#  Lord's  Christ.  This  they  would  not  do — and  they  cast  Him  out 
of  their  city.  As  with  Christ,  so  with  His  Church,  and  with  His  messengers.  As 
long  as  they  preach  a  gospel  which  does  not  touch  man's  pride  and  lower  his  self- 
esteem,  they  wonder  at  the  graeiousness  of  the  gospel ;  but  the  moment  it  bids 
them  not  to  be  wise  in  their  own  conceits,  insists  on  submission  of  body,  soul,  and 
reason  to  Christ,  and  calls  to  a  lowly  walk  and  self-abasement,  then  men  rise  up 
against  the  Church,  and  its  ministers,  and  against  the  true  gospel  of  Christ,  and 
would,  if  they  could,  cast  it  out  of  their  city,  and  hurl  it  from  their  thoughts. 
(S.  Baring -Gould,  31.  A.)  Capernaum: — It  lay  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Sea 
of  Galilee,  and  was,  in  Christ's  day,  a  thriving,  busy  town.  The  highway  to  the 
sea,  from  Damascus  to  Ptolemais — now  Acre — ran  through  it,  bringing  no  little 
local  traffic,  and  also  opening  the  markets  of  the  coast  to  the  rich  yield  of  the 
neighbouring  farms,  orchards,  and  vineyards,  and  the  abundant  returns  of  the 
fisheries  of  the  lake.  The  townsfolk  thus,  as  a  rule,  enjoyed  the  comfort  and 
plenty  we  see  in  the  homes  of  Peter  and  Matthew,  and  were  even  open  to  the 
charge  of  being  "  winebibbers  and  gluttonous,"  which  implied  generous  enter- 
tainments. They  were  proud  of  their  town,  and  counted  on  its  steady  growth  and 
unbounded  prosperity,  little  dreaming  of  the  ruin  which  would  one  day  make  even 
its  site  a  question.  {Dr.  Geikie.)  Dr.  Eobinson,  Captain  Conder,  and  others 
place  the  site  of  Capernaum  at  Khan  Mingeh,  a  spot  of  unique  interest  and  beauty. 
Captain  Conder  certainly  adduces  strong  reasons  in  favour  of  this  hypothesis.  (L. 
Oliphant.)  Not  far  from  the  banks  of  the  Jordan  stands  Capernaum  (now  Tell- 
Hiim),  and  here  we  find  ourselves  in  the  very  centre  of  the  Lord's  Galilean 
ministry.  It  was  at  Capernaum  that  He  dwelt.  This  was  the  starting- 
point  of  His  journeys,  and  to  this  He  returned  after  going  about  from 
place     to    place     doing     good.      (E.     Stopfer,     D.D.)  Blindness    of    pre- 

judice : — A  lady  who  excelled  in  making  wax  flowers  and  fruit  was  often 
criticised  severely  by  her  friends,  and  her  work  decried,  as  she  thought, 
unjustly.  She  convicted  them  by  showing  an  apple,  which  they  as  usual  found 
fault  with,  one  as  to  the  shape,  another  as  to  colour,  and  so  on.  When  they  had 
finished,  the  lady  cut  the  apple  and  ate  it.  (Baxendale's  Arucdotes.)  Overawed 
ly  the  Spirit: — The  Eev.  Charles  G.  Finney  gives,  in  the  words  following,  an 
account  of  the  effects  of  a  Christian  look  on  a  certain  occasion : — "  I  once  preached, 
for  the  first  time,  in  a  manufacturing  village.  The  next  morning  I  went  into  a 
manufacturing  establishment  to  view  its  operations.  As  I  passed  into  the  weaving 
department,  I  beheld  a  great  company  of  young  women,  some  of  whom,  I  observed, 
were  looking  at  me  and  then  at  each  other,  in  a  manner  that  indicated  a  trifling 
spirit,  and  that  they  knew  me.  I,  however,  knew  none  of  them.  As  I  approached 
nearer  to  those  who  had  recognized  me,  they  seemed  to  increase  in  their  manifesta- 
tions of  lightness  of  mind.     Their  levity  made  a  pecuUar  impression  upon  me ;  I 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

felt  it  to  my  very  heart.  I  stopped  short  and  looked  at  them,  I  know  not  how,  ai 
my  whole  mind  was  absorbed  with  their  guilt  and  danger.  As  I  settled  my 
countenance  upon  them,  I  observed  that  one  of  them  became  very  much  agitated. 
A  thread  broke.  She  attempted  to  mend  it ;  but  her  hands  trembled  in  such  a 
manner  that  she  could  not  do  it.  I  immediately  observed  that  the  sensation  was 
spreading,  and  had  become  universal  among  that  class  of  triflers.  I  looked  steadily 
at  them,  until  one  after  another  gave  up,  and  paid  no  more  attention  to  their  looms. 
They  fell  on  their  knees,  and  the  influence  spread  throughout  the  whole  room.  I 
had  not  spoken  a  word,  as  the  noise  of  the  looms  would  have  prevented  my  being 
heard  if  I  had.  In  a  few  minutes  all  work  was  abandoned,  and  tears  and  lamen- 
tations filled  the  room.  At  this  moment  the  owner  of  the  factory,  who  was  himself 
an  unconverted  man,  came  in,  accompanied,  I  believe,  by  the  superintendent,  who 
was  a  professed  Christian.  When  the  owner  saw  the  state  of  things,  he  said  to 
the  superintendent,  ♦  Stop  the  mill.'  What  he  saw  seemed  to  pierce  him  to  the 
heart.  '  It  is  more  important,'  he  hurriedly  remarked,  •  that  these  souls  should  be 
saved  than  that  this  mill  should  run.'  As  soon  as  the  noise  of  the  machinery  had 
ceased,  the  owner  inquired,  •  What  shall  we  do  ?  We  must  have  a  place  to  meet 
where  we  can  receive  instruction.'  The  superintendent  replied,  •  The  mule-room 
will  do.'  The  mules  were  run  up  out  of  the  way,  and  all  the  hands  were  notified, 
and  assembled  in  that  room.  We  had  a  marvellous  meeting.  I  prayed  with  them, 
and  gave  them  such  instructions  as  at  the  time  they  could  bear.  The  Word  waa 
with  power ;  and  within  a  few  days,  as  I  was  informed,  nearly  every  hand  in  that 
great  establishment,  together  with  the  owner,  had  hope  in  Christ."  {Bate^t 
Influence  of  Mind  on  Mind.)  Remarkable  change  in  the  conduct  of  a  mob  : — A 
missionary  who  had  been  sent  to  a  strange  land  to  proclaim  the  "  gospel  of  the 
kingdom  of  God  "  and  who  had  passed  through  many  hardships  and  was  often  in 
danger  of  losing  his  life,  through  the  persecutions  excited  against  him,  came  to  a 
place  where  he  had  often  before,  at  no  small  risk,  preached  Christ  crucified.  About 
fifty  people  who  had  received  good  impressions  from  the  Word  of  God,  assembled : 
he  began  his  discourse ;  and  after  he  had  preached  about  thirty  minutes,  an 
outrageous  mob  surrounded  the  house,  armed  with  different  instruments  of  death, 
and  breathing  the  most  sanguinary  purposes.  The  preacher  then  addressed  hia 
little  flock  to  this  effect,  "  These  outrageous  people  seek  not  you  but  me.  if  I  con- 
tinue in  the  house,  they  will  soon  pull  it  down  and  we  shall  be  aU  buried  in  its 
ruins,  I  will  therefore  in  the  name  of  God  go  out  to  them  and  you  will  be  safe.  As 
soon  as  the  preacher  made  his  appearance  the  savages  became  instantly  as  silent 
and  as  still  as  night :  he  walked  forward  and  they  divided  to  the  right  and  to  the 
left,  leaving  a  passage  about  four  feet  wide  for  himself  and  a  young  man  who 
followed  him  to  walk  in.  The  narrator  who  was  present  on  the  occasion  goes  on 
to  say,  This  was  one  of  the  most  affecting  spectacles  I  ever  witnessed,  an  infuriated 
mob  without  any  visible  cause  (for  the  preacher  spoke  not  one  word)  became  in  a 
moment  as  calm  as  lambs.  They  seemed  struck  with  amazement  bordering  on 
stupefaction ;  they  stared  and  stood  speechless,  and  after  they  had  fallen  back  to 
right  and  left  to  leave  him  a  free  passage,  they  were  as  motionless  as  statues.  They 
assembled  with  the  full  purpose  to  destroy  the  man  who  came  to  show  them  the 
way  of  salvation,  but  he,  passing  through  the  midst  ol  them,  went  his  way.  {Dr. 
Adam  Clarke.) 

Ver.  32.  For  His  word  was  with  power. — The  word  and  pover: — Witness  the 

ministry  of  Chalmers.  It  is  said  that  Professor  Young,  who  occupied  the  chair  of 
Greek  in  the  university,  on  one  occasion  "  was  so  electrified  that  he  leaped  up  from 
his  seat  upon  the  bench  near  the  pulpit,  and  stood,  breathless  and  motionless, 
gazing  at  the  preacher,  until  the  burst  was  over,  the  tears  all  the  while  rolling 
down  his  cheeks."  Dr.  Wardlaw  describes  one  scene  he  witnessed  as  follows : — 
*♦  It  was  a  transcendently  grand,  a  glorious  burst.  The  energy  of  the  Doctor's 
action  corresponded.  Intense  emotion  beamed  from  his  countenance.  I  cannot 
describe  the  appearance  of  his  face  better  than  by  saying,  as  Foster  said  of  Hall's, 
it  was  '  lighted  np  almost  into  a  glare.'  The  congregation — in  so  far  as  the  spell 
under  which  I  was  allowed  me  to  observe  them — were  intensely  excited,  leaning 
forward  in  the  pews  like  a  forest  bent  under  the  power  of  the  hurricane,  looking 
steadfastly  at  the  preacher  and  listening  in  breathless  wonderment.  One  young 
man,  apparently  by  his  dress  a  sailor,  started  to  his  feet  and  stood  till  it  was  over. 
As  soon  as  it  was  concluded  there  was  (as  invariably  was  the  case  at  the  close  of 
the  Doctor's  bursts)  a  deep  sigh,  or  rather  a  gasp  for  breath,  accompanied  by  a 


IT.]  8T.  LUKE.  458 

movement  through  the  whole  audience."  (Bishop  Simpson.)  His  word  was  with 
power : — We  remember  having  heard  a  departed  friend  tell  how,  when  a  boy,  he 
was  taken  by  his  father,  one  still,  summer  evening  across  the  Northamptonshire 
fields — I  believe  it  was  to  the  little  village  of  Thrapstone — to  hear  Kobert  HaU.  It 
was  one  of  those  old  village  chapels,  with  the  square  galleries.  As  in  the  instance 
of  Chalmers,  the  place  was  crowded  with  plain  farmer  folk  and  a  sprinkling  of 
intelligent  ministers  and  gentry  from  the  neighbourhood.  The  minister  came  in,  a 
simple,  heavy,  but  still  impressive-looking  man,  one  whose  presence  compelled  you 
to  look  at  him.  In  due  course  he  announced  his  text,  "  The  end  of  all  things  is  at 
hand ;  be  sober  and  watch."  Quite  unlike  Chalmers,  his  voice  was  not  shattering, 
but  thin  and  weak.  There  was  no  action  at  all,  or  only  a  kind  of  nervous  twitching 
of  the  fingers ;  more  especially  as  the  hand  moved  and  rested  upon  the  lower  part 
of  the  back,  where  the  speaker  was  suffering  almost  incessant  pain.  As  he  went 
on,  beneath  the  deepening  evening  shades  falling  through  the  windows  of  the  old 
chapel,  his  voice  first  chained  and  then  charmed  and  fascinated  his  hearers  one 
after  another ;  the  whole  place  seemed  as  if  beneath  a  great  spell.  As  he  talked 
about  "  the  end,"  the  spell  upon  the  people  seemed  to  begin  to  work  itself  out  into 
an  awful,  fearful  restlessness ;  first  one,  then  another,  rose  from  their  seats,  and 
stood  stretching  forward  with  a  kind  of  fright  and  wonder.  Still  there  was  no 
action,  only  the  following  on  of  that  thin  voice,  with  a  marvellous  witchery  of  apt 
and  melodious  words,  but  through  them  "the  end  of  all  things"  sounded  like 
Bome  warning  bell.  More  people  rose,  stretching  forward.  Many  of  those  who 
rose  first,  as  if  they  felt  some  strange  power  upon  them,  they  knew  not  what,  got 
up  and  stood  upon  their  seats  until,  when  the  great  master  ceased,  closing  his 
passionate  and  pathetic  accents,  the  whole  audience  was  upon  its  feet,  intensely 
alive  with  interest,  as  if  each  one  had  heard  in  the  distance  the  presages  and  pre- 
ludes of  the  coming  end,  and  felt  that  it  was  time  to  prepare.  My  friend  used  to 
speak  of  that  never-forgotten  moment,  that  summer  evening  in  the  old  chapel  as 
one  of  the  most  memorable  of  his  life.  (E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Spiritual  power  known 
only  by  its  effects  : — Nor  is  it  the  only  exhibition  of  power.  Consider  the  chemical 
afiinity  that  draws  together  the  acids  and  alkalies.  Think  of  the  magnetic  power 
which  makes  the  steel  filings,  though  in  the  midst  of  dust  and  rubbish  and 
clippings  of  tin  and  brass,  leave  them  all  and  fly  up  and  kiss  the  magnet.  It 
touches  the  pivoted  needle,  and  men  and  treasures  are  secure  upon  the  stormy 
ocean  by  its  unerring  guidance.  The  winds  blow  ever  so  fiercely;  the  waves  roll 
ever  so  furiously ;  the  vessel  pitches  as  though  it  would  founder ;  and  yet  that 
strange  influence,  unseen,  unheard,  unfelt,  holds  the  needle  in  its  place.  Who  can 
tell  what  is  power?  We  see  it  in  its  effects ;  we  measure  it  in  its  results,  (Bishop 
Simpson.)  The  presence  of  Christ  a  source  of  power: — There  is  a  beautiful 
legend  of  St.  Chrysostom.  He  had  been  educated  carefully  ;  was  a  man  of  culture, 
and  devoted  to  his  calling;  and  yet  in  his  earlier  ministry  he  was  not  remarkable 
for  his  success.  At  one  time  he  had  what  seemed  to  be  a  vision.  He  thought  he 
was  in  the  pulpit,  and  in  the  chancel  and  round  about  him  were  holy  angels.  In 
the  midst  of  them  and  directly  before  him  was  the  Lord  Jesus;  and  he  was  to 
preach  to  the  congregation  assembled  beyond.  The  vision  or  the  reverie  deeply 
affected  his  spirit.  The  next  day  he  ascended  the  pulpit  he  felt  the  impression  of 
the  scene.  He  thought  of  the  holy  angels  as  if  gathered  around  him ;  of  the 
blessed  Saviour  as  directly  before  him — as  listening  to  His  words,  and  beholding 
His  Spirit.  He  became  intensely  earnest ;  and  from  that  day  forward  a  wonderful 
power  attended  his  ministrations.  Multitudes  gathered  around  him  wherever  he 
preached.  Though  he  had  the  simple  name  of  John  while  he  lived,  the  ages  have 
called  him  Chr:vsostom,  the  "  golden-mouthed."  (Ibid.)  The  cmiscs  considered 
that  made  our  Lord's  word  with  power  : — I  shall  endeavour  to  show,  therefore,  that 
the  word  of  our  blessed  Lord  was  always  attended  with  power — I.  From  the  truth 
and  disinterestedness  of  His  doctrines,  and  the  superior  excellence  of  His  senti- 
ments. II.  From  the  gracious  manner  in  which  those  sentiments  were  delivered. 
III.  From  the  openness  and  sincerity  of  His  reproof ;  and — IV.  From  His  example. 
(J.  Hewlett,  D.D.) 

Vers.  33-37.  And  In  the  synagogue  there  was  a  man,  which  had  a  iplrlt  of  an 
unclean  devlL — The  expulsion  of  the  unclean  sjnrit : — I.  Observe  thk  oonfkssiou 
THE  UNCLEAN  SPIRIT  MADE  Concerning  the  Kedeemer.  Here  Christ's  righteousness 
»nd  purity  are  admitted.  1.  He  is  declared  to  be  "  the  Holy  One  of  God."  (1)  Ood'a 
Son — God's  Servant.     (2)  Having  God's  holy  nature  and  attributes.     (3)  Formed 


«54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  it. 

as  to  EKb  manhood  by  the  overshadowing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (4)  Coming  into  the 
world  to  exhibit  in  all  its  complete  excellency  God's  holy  law.  (5)  On  the  holy 
mission  of  redeeming  men  from  sin,  and  bringing  them  to  the  blessedness  of 
personal  holiness.  (6)  In  the  world  for  the  express  purpose  of  setting  up  a  holy 
kingdom — a  kingdom  of  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Thi& 
confession  was  bold  and  public.  3.  It  was  deprecatory.  The  language  of  dread. 
The  demons  knew  their  time  was  limited,  their  power  circumscribed,  and  that  theu 
hellish  rule  and  dominion  was  to  be  overthrown  by  the  Son  of  God.  II.  Observe 
THB  couBSB  Ghrist  ADOPTED.  1.  Bebuko.  2.  Expulsion.  III.  Notice  the  besults 
WHICH  FOLLOWED.  1.  The  imclcan  spirit  gives  a  last  struggle  to  injure  his  victim. 
2.  He  came  out  of  the  man.  3.  The  people  gave  homage  and  glory  to  Ghrist. 
4.  The  fame  of  Christ  was  spread  abroad.  Application  :  1.  The  unrenewed  mind 
is  under  the  power  of  the  unclean  spirit.  2.  Those  who  are  thus  influenced  are  in 
circumstances  of  misery  and  peril.  3,  Christ  alone  has  power  to  save  and  deliver. 
4.  In  the  gospel  this  deliverance  is  proclaimed.  (Jabez  Burnt,  D.D,)  Demoniacal 
possession  : — Should  the  possessed  mentioned  by  the  evangelists  be  regarded  simply 
as  persons  afflicted  after  the  same  manner  as  our  lunatics,  whose  derangement  was 
attributed  by  Jewish  and  heathen  superstition  to  supernatural  influence  ?  Or  did 
God  really  permit,  at  this  extraordinary  epoch  in  history,  an  exceptional  display  of 
diabolical  power  f  Or,  lastly,  should  certain  morbid  conditions,  now  existing, 
which  medical  science  attributes  to  purely  natural  causes,  either  physical  or  psychical, 
be  put  down,  at  the  present  day  also,  to  the  action  of  higher  causes  ?  These  are 
the  three  hypotheses  which  present  themselves  to  the  mind.  Several  of  the 
demoniacs  healed  by  Jesus  certainly  exhibit  symptoms  very  like  those  which  are 
observed  at  the  present  day  in  those  who  are  simply  afflicted ;  «.<?.,  the  epileptic 
child  (Luke  ix.  37).  These  strange  conditions  in  every  case,  therefore,  were  basetl 
on  a  real  disorder,  either  physical  or  physico-psychical.  The  evangelists  are  so  far 
from  being  ignorant  of  this,  that  they  constantly  class  the  demoniacs  under  th& 
category  of  the  sick,  never  under  that  of  the  vicious.  The  possessed  have  nothing 
in  common  with  the  "  children  of  the  devil."  Nevertheless  these  afflicted  persons 
are  constantly  made  a  class  by  themselves.  On  what  does  this  distinction  rest  ? 
On  this  leading  fact,  that  those  who  are  simply  sick  enjoy  their  own  personal 
consciousness,  and  are  in  possession  of  their  own  will ;  while  in  the  possessed 
these  faculties  are,  as  it  were,  confiscated  to  a  foreign  power,  with  which  the  sick 
person  identifies  himself.  How  is  this  peculiar  system  to  be  explained  ?  Josephus, 
under  Hellenic  influence,  thought  that  it  should  be  attributed  to  the  souls  of  wicked 
men  who  came  after  death  seeking  a  domicile  in  the  living.  In  the  eyes  of  the 
people  the  strange  guest  was  a  demon,  a  fallen  angel.  This  latter  opinion  Jesus 
must  have  shared.  Strictly  speaking.  His  colloquies  with  the  demoniacs  might  be 
explained  by  an  accommodation  to  popular  prejudice,  and  the  sentiments  of  those 
who  were  thus  afflicted ;  but  in  His  private  conversations  with  His  disciples.  He 
must,  whatever  was  true,  have  disclosed  His  real  thoughts,  and  sought  to  enlighten 
them.  But  He  does  nothing  of  the  kind ;  on  the  contrary,  He  gives  the  apostles 
and  disciples  power  to  "cast  oat  devils"  (Luke  ix.  1),  and  to  tread  on  "all  the 
power  of  the  enemy "  (Luke  x.  19).  In  Mark  ix.  29  He  distinguishes  a  certain* 
class  of  demons  that  can  only  be  driven  out  by  prayer  and  fasting.  In  Luke  xi.  21 
He  explains  the  facility  with  which  He  casts  out  demons  by  the  personal  victory 
which  He  had  achieved  over  Satan  at  the  beginning.  He  therefore  admitted  the 
intervention  of  this  being  in  these  mysterious  conditions.  If  this  is  so,  is  it  not 
natural  to  admit  that  He  who  exercised  over  this,  as  over  all  other  kinds  of  maladies,. 
such  absolute  power,  best  understood  its  nature,  and  that  therefore  His  views  upon 
the  point  should  determine  ours?  Are  there  not  times  when  God  permits  a 
superior  evil  power  to  invade  humanity  ?  Just  as  God  sent  Jesus  at  a  period  in 
history  when  moral  and  social  evil  had  reached  its  culminating  point,  did  not  He 
also  permit  an  extraordinary  manifestation  of  diabolical  power  to  take  place  at  the 
same  time  f  By  this  means  Jesus  could  be  proclaimed  externally  and  visibly  as 
the  conqueror  of  the  enemy  of  men,  as  He  who  came  to  "  destroy  the  works  of  the 
devil  "  in  the  moral  sense  of  the  expression.  As  to  the  present  state  of  things,  it 
must  not  be  compared  with  the  times  of  Jesus.  Not  only  might  the  latter  have 
been  of  an  exceptional  character ;  but  the  beneficent  influence  which  the  gospel 
has  exercised  in  restoring  man  to  EUmself,  and  bringing  his  conscience  under  th& 
power  of  the  holy  and  true  God,  may  have  brought  about  a  complete  change  in  the 
epiritaal  world.  Lastly,  apart  from  all  this,  is  there  nothing  mysterious,  from  a 
•oientifio  point  of  view,  in  certain  cases  of  mental  derangement,  partioolarly  ixk 


CHAJ.  IV.]  ST.  LUKE.  45& 

those  conditions  in  which  the  will  is,  as  it  were,  confiscated  to,  and  paralyzed  by, 
an  unknown  power  ?  And  after  deduction  has  been  made  for  all  those  forms  of 
mental  maladies  which  a  discriminating  analysis  can  explain  by  moral  and  physical 
relations,  will  not  an  impartial  physician  agree  that  there  is  a  residuum  of  cases 
respecting  which  he  must  say :  Non  liquet  ?  Possession  is  a  caricature  of  inspira- 
tion. The  latter,  attaching  itself  to  the  moral  essence  of  a  man,  confirms  him  for 
ever  in  the  possession  of  his  true  self ;  the  former,  while  profoundly  opposed  to 
the  nature  of  the  subject,  takes  advantage  of  its  state  of  morbid  passivity,  and 
leads  to  the  forfeiture  of  personaUty.  The  one  is  the  highest  work  of  God ;  the 
other,  of  the  devil.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  demoniac  in  the  synagogue  .-—Strange 
men  in  strange  places !  Think  of  a  devil  being  in  the  synagogue  1  It  is  the  same 
to-day.  The  sanctuary  draws  into  itself  all  sorts  of  human  character ;  not  only 
the  rich  and  the  poor,  but  the  best  and  the  worst  are  there.  Evil  knows  good  and 
hates  it.  Evil  is  not  so  powerful  in  reality  as  goodness,  though  apparently  much 
mightier.  Jesus  is  greater  than  all  evil  spirits.  "  Art  Thou  come  to  destroy  us?  " 
is  a  significant  inquiry.  "  For  this  purpose  was  He  manifested,  that  He  might 
destroy  the  works  of  the  devil."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  King  casting  out  evil 
spirits : — The  superstition  which  connects  demons  with  a  wilderness  has  been  used 
to  explain  our  Lord's  temptation.  That  explanation  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
story  given  us  by  the  evangelists.  They  describe  the  encounter  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  with  the  spirit  of  evil ;  the  test  of  their  veracity  lies  in  the  experience  of 
human  beings  in  cities  as  much  as  in  deserts,  in  one  period  as  much  as  another. 
It  seems  to  me,  then,  most  reasonable,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  anything  which 
may  have  been  peculiar  to  that  time,  but  for  the  sake  of  every  time,  that  the 
evangelist  should  give  these  victories  over  demons  a  prominent  place  in  the  history 
of  Eedemption.  The  impression  produced  in  the  synagogue  of  Capernaum  is  the 
simplest  testimony  to  the  nature  of  such  a  sign.  "  What  a  word  is  this?  "  they 
said.  There  was  the  sense  of  One  who  did  not  charm  away  evils  by  •  look 
or  a  touch.  The  calm  Divine  energy  with  which  He  declared  that  the  kingdom  of 
God  was  indeed  among  men — that  God's  power  was  manifesting  itself  as  of  old  in 
breaking  fetters,  in  setting  captives  free — this  came  forth  in  the  command  that  the 
unclean  spirit  should  depart.  The  evil  spirit  was  not  the  man's  lord.  The  king- 
doms of  this  world  and  the  glory  of  them  were  not  his.  Holiness  was  mightier. 
(F.  D.  Alaiirice.)  Possessed  by  the  devil :  —  An  affecting  case  was  that  of 
William  Pope,  of  Bolton,  in  Lancashire.  At  this  place  there  is  a  considerable 
number  of  deistical  persons,  who  assemble  together  on  Sundays  to  confirm  each 
other  in  their  infidelity.  The  oaths  and  imprecations  that  are  uttered  in  that 
meeting  are  too  horrible  to  relate,  while  they  toss  the  Word  of  God  upon  the  floor, 
kick  it  round  the  house,  and  tread  it  under  their  feet.  This  William  Pope,  who 
had  been  a  steady  Methodist  for  some  years,  became  at  length  a  professed  Deist, 
and  joined  himself  to  this  hellish  crew.  After  he  had  been  an  associate  of  this 
company  some  time,  he  was  taken  ill,  and  the  nature  of  his  complaint  was  such, 
that  he  confessed  the  hand  of  God  was  upon  him,  and  he  declared  he  longed  to 
die,  that  he  might  go  to  hell,  many  times  praying  earnestly  for  damnation.  Two 
of  the  Methodist  preachers,  Messrs.  Rhodes  and  Barrowclough,  were  sent  for  to 
talk  to  and  pray  with  the  unhappy  man.  But  he  was  so  far  from  being  thankful 
for  their  advice  and  assistance,  that  he  spit  in  their  faces,  threw  at  them  whatever 
he  could  lay  his  hands  upon,  struck  one  of  them  upon  the  head  with  all  his  might, 
and  often  cried  out,  when  they  were  praying,  "  Lord,  do  not  hear  their  prayers  I  " 
If  they  said,  "  Lord,  save  his  soul  I  "  he  cried,  "  Lord,  damn  my  soul ! "  often 
adding,  "  My  damnation  is  sealed,  and  I  long  to  be  in  hell  1  "  In  this  way  he  con- 
tinued, sometimes  better  and  sometimes  worse,  till  he  died.  He  was  frequently 
visited  by  his  deistical  brethren  during  his  illness,  who  would  fain  have  persuaded 
the  public  he  was  out  of  his  senses,  which  was  by  no  means  the  case.  The  writer 
of  this  account  saw  the  unhappy  man  once,  but  never  desired  to  see  him  again. 
Mr.  Rhodes  justly  said  he  was  as  fuU  of  the  devil  as  he  could  hold.  {Simpton't 
"  Plea  for  religion.")  The  testimony  of  the  evil  spirit  to  Christ,  and  His  refusal  to 
accept  it : — Earth  has  not  recognized  her  King ;  but  heaven  has  borne  witness  to 
Him,  and  now  hell  must  bear  its  witness  too.  But  what  could  have  been  the 
motive  to  this  testimony,  thus  borne  ?  It  is  strange  that  the  evil  spirit  should, 
without  compulsion,  proclaim  to  the  world  the  presence  in  the  midst  of  it  of  the 
Holy  One  of  God,  of  Him  who  should  thus  bring  all  the  unholy,  on  which  he 
battened,  and  by  which  he  lived,  to  an  end.  Might  we  not  rather  expeet  that  he 
aboold  have  denied,  or  sought  to  obscure,  the  glory  of  Christ's  person  ?    It  cannoi 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 


be  replied  that  this  was  an  unwilling  confession  to  the  truth,  forcibly  extorted  by 
Christ's  superior  power,  seeing  that  it  displeased  Him  in  whose  favour  it  professed 
to  be  borne,  and  this  so  much  that  He  at  once  stopped  the  mouth  of  the  utterer. 
It  remains,  then,  either  to  understand  this  as  the  cry  of  abject  and  servile  fear, 
that  with  fawning  and  flatteries  would  fain  avert  from  itself  the  doom  which, 
with  Christ's  presence  in  the  world,  must  evidently  be  near  ;  or  else  to  regard  this 
testimony  as  intended  only  to  injure  the  estimation  of  Him  in  whose  behalf  it  was 
rendered.  There  was  hope  that  the  truth  itself  might  be  brought  into  suspicion 
and  discredit,  thus  receiving  attestation  from  the  spirit  of  lies ;  and  these  con- 
fessions of  Jesus  as  the  Christ  may  have  been  meant  to  traverse  and  mar  His  work. 
The  fact  that  Christ  would  not  allow  the  testimony  goes  some  way  to  make  this  the 
preferable  e>:planation.  Observe  it  is  not  here  as  elsewhere,  "  The  Lord  rebuke 
thee,"  but  He  rebukes  in  His  own  name  and  by  His  own  authority.  {Archbishop 
Trench.)  Christ  at   Capernaum  : — I.   His   preaching  —  "  He  came  down   to 

Capernaum,  a  city  of  Galilee,  and  taught  them  on  the  Sabbath  days.  And  they 
were  astonished  at  His  doctrine:  for  His  Word  was  with  power."  1.  Observe  the 
place— Capernaum.  2.  The  season — "  The  Sabbath  days."  Not  that  He  forebore 
on  other  days ;  His  lips  always  "  dropped  like  an  hooey-comb."  3.  Then  the 
impression.  II.  Let  us  pass  from  His  teaching  to  His  miracle.  I.  Let  ua 
glance  at  the  subject  of  this  miracle.  It  was  "  a  man  who  was  possessed  of  a 
spirit  of  an  unclean  devil."  Satan  has  much  to  do  in  the  synagogue — much  more 
than  in  many  other  places.  In  Macgowan's  "  Dialogues  of  Devils  "  there  is  this 
relation.  Two  infernal  spirits  having  met,  one  of  them  very  warm  and  weary, 
and  the  other  cool  and  lively ;  after  a  little  explanation  it  was  found  that  he  who 
was  cool  and  lively,  had  been  at  the  playhouse  where  he  had  nothing  to  do,  where 
they  were  all  with  him,  where  they  were  all  of  one  mind,  all  doing  his  work : 
whereas  the  other  who  was  warm  and  weary,  said,  "  I  have  been  at  a  place  of 
worship,  and  I  had  much  to  do  there ;  to  make  some  sleep ;  to  induce  some  to  hear 
for  others  instead  of  themselves ;  to  lead  the  thoughts  of  some,  like  the  fool's  eye, 
onto  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  to  pick  up  as  fast  as  I  could  the  seed  which  was  sown 
in  the  heart ;  and  to  turn  away  the  point  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the 
Word  of  God,  lest  it  should  pierce  even  to  the  dividing  of  soul  and  body,  and  of 
the  joints  and  marrow,  and  be  adi^cerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart." 
I  hope,  none  of  you  employ  him  thus.  (1)  First,  aversion.  "Let  us  alone"— as 
it  is  in  the  margin,—"  away  "  ;  be  off.  Satan  wished  to  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Christ.  (2)  Then  it  expressed  fear— "Art  Thou  come  to  destroy  us?"  (3)  It 
expressed  commendation — "I  know  Thee,  who  Thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of  God." 
Here,  you  see,  the  devil  not  only  believed  much,  but  talked  well.  2.  Let  us  look  at 
the  Author  of  this  miracle,  and  we  shall  see  how  the  enemy  of  souls  is  under  the 
dominion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  that  though  an  adversary,  yet  he  is  restrained,  he  is 
chained.  3.  Then,  as  to  the  ppectators — "They  were  all  amazed,  and  fpake  among 
themselves,  saying,  What  a  Word  is  this  I  for  with  authority  and  power  He  com- 
mandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  come  out."  Oh  !  if  they  had  but  improved 
BS  well  as  admired  1  III.  Then  here  is  His  fame — "  And  the  fame  of  Him  went 
out  into  every  place  of  the  country  round  about."  Who  does  not  rejoice  in  this 
spread  of  His  fame?  Who  does  not  wish  His  fame  everywhere  spread  abroad? 
Gratitude  requires  you  to  be  thus  employed.  For  benevolence  requires  you  to  be 
thus  employed.  Many  are  perishing ;  and  they  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge, 
and  the  knowledge  of  Him ;  for  ••  to  know  Him  is  eternal  life."    {W.  Jay.) 

"Vet.  37.  And  the  fame  of  Him  -went  out  Into  every  place  of  the  country  ronnd 
abont. — The  fame  of  Jesus : — I.  Now,  you  will  plainly  perceive  that  my  drift  is  as  usual 
this  morning.  I  want  all  my  time,  and  strength,  and  power  to  spread  the  fame  of  Jesus 
in  every  place  throughout  the  country.  Well,  then,  we  wtLL  notice  three  ob  fodb 
THINGS  IN  WHICH  He  18  AND  MUST  BE  FAMED.  Fiist  of  all,  His  fame  is  spread  abroad 
with  regard  to  the  majesty  of  His  Person.  Moreover,  He  is  famed  for  the  offices 
which  He  sustains.  Here  a  multitude  will  rush  on  my  attention,  but  I  will  Umit  my- 
self to  the  three  which  are  well  known  and  constantly  dwelt  upon.  He  is  far-famed 
as  a  Prophet.  And  is  He  not  famed  as  a  Priest?  Moreover,  He  is  far-famed  in  Hia 
office  as  a  Potentate.  But  we  hasten  on  just  to  mark  that  our  precious  Christ  ia 
famed  in  the  relative  ties  which  He  condescends  to  own.  He  is  not  ashamed  to 
call  His  Church  brethren.  But  let  me  just  touch  upon  the  extraordinary  works 
which  seem  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the  expression — "His  fame  was  spread  in 
every  place  of  that  country  roand  about."    What  had  He  done  ?    He  had  cast  oat 


CRAP.  IT.J 


ST.  LUKE.  457 


devils,  He  had  raised  the  dead,  He  had  restored  Simon's  wife's  mother  from  the 
fever,  He  had  removed  the  uncleanness  of  those  who  were  possessed  by  an  unclean 
spirit.  He  had  wrought  prodigies  and  miracles;  and  yet,  though  He  had  done  so 
many  mighty  works  among  them,  the  enemies  believed  not  on  Him.  And  yet  this 
caused  Him  to  be  far-famed.  Moreover,  His  fame  was  not  only  to  be  published  on 
account  of  tiie  mighty  works  which  He  had  done,  but  they  were  only  typical, 
though  real  in  their  instances,  of  the  greater  work  pertaining  to  His  errand  upon 
earth.  And  here  I  must  limit  myself  to  three  things  He  does  for  sinners,  that  baa 
spread  His  fame  down  to  this  hour,  and  shall  do  it  while  I  have  a  voice  to  utter  it, 
and  to  all  eternity.  He  has  redeemed  sinners,  He  has  rescued  sinners,  and  He  has 
received  sinners,  and  all  these  acts  pubhsh  his  fame.     H.  Now  let  trs  glance,  in 

THE    SECOND    PLACE,  AT  THE    AGENTS   EMPLOYED   TO    SPBEAD   HiS    FAME.       I  CaunOt  help 

mentioning,  in  the  first  place,  His  kindred,  when  He  was  sought  for  among  His 
kinsfolks,  and  could  not  be  found.  And  so  in  many  other  instances  of  His  literal 
history  which  we  now  pass  over  to  come  to  the  point  spiritually.  It  is  His  kindred 
that  publish  His  fame.  That  is,  those  who  are  allied  to  Him  by  grace.  Moreover, 
I  beseech  you  to  mark  that  no  partaker  of  life  Divine  can  consider  it  a  matter  of 
little  importance  in  his  lifo,  that  the  fame  of  Jesus  should  be  spread  by  him.  And 
if  you  are  doing  nothing  or  saying  nothing  to  spread  the  fame  of  Jesus,  do  not  tell 
me  you  are  related  to  Him.  But  not  only  do  His  kindred  spread  His  fame;  even 
His  enemies  must  do  it.  I  put  this  in  contrast.  You  will  recollect  the  Apostle 
Paul  rejoiced  in  this:  "There  are  some  that  preach  Christ  of  good- will,  and  some 
that  preach  Christ  out  of  envy  and  strife."  Further,  mark  that  this  precious, 
glorious,  far-famed  Jesus  is  exalted,  and  His  fame  is  spread  by  the  objects  of  His 
attention,  for  whom  He  wrought  so  much.  III.  But  I  must  hasten  to  a  close  with 
A  WORD  OB  TWO  RELATIVE  TO  THE  RESULTS.  And  I  wiU  ouly  mention  two — the  results 
among  the  wicked  surroundiug  Him,  and  the  results  among  the  objects  of  the 
Father's  love  given  to  Him.     {J.  Irons.) 

Vers.  38,  39.  And  He  arose  out  of  the  synagogue  and  entered  into  Simon's  houBO. 

— Simon's  wife's  niother  : — Suffering  is  to  be  found  everywhere,  in  the  public  syna- 
gogue  and  in  the  private  house.  Even  Peter's  house  was  not  exempt.  The  chosen 
ones  are  tried  as  by  fire,  and  the  rod  proves  their  election.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Simon's  house : — How  came  Peter  to  have  a  house  at  Capernaum  ?  Poor 
fishermen  do  not  often  have  two  houses.  May  it  not  be  that,  finding  the  Lord 
Jesus  wag  frequently  at  Capernaum,  Peter  thought  it  best  to  have  a  dwelling 
there,  that  he  might  be  always  present  when  the  Master  was  preaching,  and 
that  he  might  do  his  best  to  entertain  Him  between  whiles?  I  like  to  think 
that  the  servant  changed  his  place  of  abode  for  the  Master's  sake.  Would  it  not 
be  well  if  many  Christian  people  had  some  little  consideration  when  they  are 
choosing  a  house,  as  to  whether  it  will  be  convenient  for  the  hearing  of  the  Word  ? 
(C  H.  Spxirgeon.)  Sickness  produces  seriousness: — Professor  Henry  Drummond, 
the  author  of  "  Natural  Law  in  the  Spiritual  World,"  has  been  very  earnestly  at 
work  in  the  revival  in  the  Edinburgh  University.  His  addresses  have  been 
intensely  evangelical,  and  have  been  wondrously  powerful  in  their  effects  on  the 
students.  One  anecdote  seemed  to  have  touched  them  deeply.  Substantially  it 
was  to  this  effect  : — Some  years  ago,  in  the  University,  there  was  a  fine,  manly 
fellow,  a  medical  student,  a  very  Hercules  in  strength,  but  as  gentle  and  lovable  as 
he  was  strong.  He  was  immensely  popular,  the  captain  of  the  football  club,  and 
not  a  cricket  match  was  considered  complete  without  him.  He  was  a  man  of  good 
intellectual  gifts  as  well.  He  caught  typhoid  fever  while  attending  the  Boyal 
Infirmary,  and  soon  he  lay  dying  in  a  private  ward.  One  of  the  house  physicians, 
an  earnest  Christian  and  successful  soul-winner,  spoke  to  him  about  God  and 
eternity.  The  dear  fellow  listened,  became  anxious,  and  eagerly  heard  the  story  of 
redeeming  love.  "Will  you  give  yourself  to  Jesus?  "  asked  the  doctor.  He  did 
not  answer  for  a  space,  and  then,  earnestly  regarding  the  man  of  God,  he  said, 
"  But  don't  you  think  it  would  be  awful  mean  just  to  make  it  up  now,  at  my  last 
gasp,  with  One  I  have  rejected  all  my  Ufe  ?  "  "  Yes,  it  would  be  mean ;  but,  dear 
fellow,  it  would  be  far  meaner  not  to  do  it.  He  wants  you  to  do  it  now,  for  He  has 
made  you  willing,  and  it  would  be  doubly  mean  to  reject  a  love  that  is  pursuing  you 
even  to  death."  The  dying  man  saw  the  point,  and  apprehending  the  greatness  of 
that  exceeding  love,  he  cast  himself  upon  the  Eternal  Heart  of  Mercy  and  passed 
away  in  sweet  peace  and  blessedness.  Blessed  results  of  sickness : — When  God 
would  rescue  a  man  from  that  unreal  world  of  names  and  mere  knowledge,  He  doeg 


45i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [emir,  if, 

what  He  did  with  Job — He  etrips  him  of  his  flocks,  and  his  herds,  and  his  wealth ; 
or  else,  what  is  the  equivalent,  of  the  power  of  enjoying  them — the  desire  of  hig 
eyes  falls  from  him  at  a  stroke.  Things  become  real  then.  Trial  brings  man  face 
to  face  with  God — God  and  he  touch ;  and  the  flimsy  veil  of  bright  cloud  that  htmg 
between  him  and  the  sky  is  blown  away ;  he  feels  that  he  is  standing  outside  the 
earth  with  nothing  between  him  and  the  Eternal  Inflnite.  Oh  !  there  is  something 
in  the  sick-bed,  and  the  aching  heart,  and  the  restlessness  and  the  languor  of 
shattered  health,  and  the  sorrow  of  affections  withered,  and  the  stream  of  life 
poisoned  at  its  fountain,  and  the  cold,  lonely  feeling  of  utter  rawness  of  heart  which 
is  felt  when  God  strikes  home  in  earnest  that  forces  a  man  to  feel  what  is  real  and 
what  is  not.  This  is  the  blessing  of  affliction  to  those  who  will  lie  still  and  not 
struggle  in  a  cowardly  or  a  resentful  way.  It  is  God  speaking  to  Job  out  of  the 
whirlwind,  and  saying :  "  In  the  sunshine  and  the  warmth  you  cannot  meet  Me ; 
but  in  the  hurricane  and  the  darkness,  when  wave  after  wave  has  swept  down  and 
across  the  soul,  you  shall  see  My  Form,  and  hear  My  Voice,  and  know  that  your 
Redeemer  liveth."  (F.  W.  RoberUon.)  The  ministry  of  gratitude : — I.  The  fact 
that  this  restored  woman  began  at  once  to  minister  to  Christ  and  to  His  disoiplea 
proves  THE  CEBTAiNTT  OF  H£B  CUBE ;  and  there  are  no  better  ways  of  proving  the 
thoroughness  of  our  conversion  than  by  conduct  similar  to  hers.  Suppose  th« 
patient  had  lain  there  and  had  begun  to  talk  about  how  she  felt,  how  much  better 
she  was,  what  a  strange  sensation  passed  through  her  when  the  Saviour  rebuked 
the  disease,  and  how  strangely  well  she  felt ;  yet  if  she  had  not  risen  up,  but  had 
lain  there  still,  there  would  have  been  no  evidence  of  her  restoration,  at  any  rate 
none  that  jou  or  I  could  judge  of.  So  when  persons  tell  us  that  they  have  felt 
great  changes  of  heart,  we  must  see  their  outward  ministerings  for  Christ.  If  their 
actions  be  holy,  if  their  lives  be  purified,  then  shall  we  know,  but  not  till  then,  that 
their  nature  is  renewed.  Suppose  this  good  woman,  still  lying  upon  her  bed,  had 
begun  to  say,  "  Well,  I  hope  I  am  healed,"  and  had  begun  to  express  some  feeble 
expectation  that  one  day  she  would  be  able  to  exercise  the  functions  of  health,  we 
could  not  have  known  that  she  was  restored.  Something  more  was  wanted  than 
mere  hopes  and  expectations.  Note  the  nature  of  the  acts  which  this  restored 
woman  performed,  because  they  are  symbolical  of  the  best  form  of  actions  by  which 
to  judge  of  a  person  being  renewed.  1.  Her  duties  were  humble  ones.  She  was 
probably  the  head  of  the  household,  and  she  began  at  once  to  discharge  the  duties 
of  a  housewife  :  duties  unostentatious  and  commonplace.  Attention  to  humble 
duties  is  a  better  sign  of  grace  than  an  ambition  for  lofty  and  elevated  works. 
2.  Eemember,  too,  that  this  good  woman  attended  to  home  duties.  She  did  not  go 
down  the  street  a  hundred  yards  off  to  glorify  Christ ;  she,  I  daresay,  did  that 
afterwards;  but  she  began  at  home:  charity  begins  there,  and  so  should  piety. 
That  is  the  best  religion  which  is  most  at  home  at  home.  Grace  which  smiles 
around  the  family  hearth  is  grace  indeed.  3.  She  attended  to  suitable  duties, 
duties  consistent  with  her  sex  and  condition.  She  did  not  try  to  be  what  God  had 
not  made  her,  but  did  what  she  could,  4.  One  other  point  before  leaving  this  ; 
these  things  become  a  conclusive  proof  of  grace  in  the  heart,  when  they  are 
voluntarily  rendered  as  this  good  woman's  ministry  was,  I  do  not  read  that  she 
was  asked  to  do  anything  for  Christ,  but  it  suggested  itself  to  her  at  once,  without 
command  or  request.  Her  work  was  done  promptly,  for  "  immediately  she  arose  " 
and  did  it.  Promptness  is  the  soul  of  obedience.  II,  This  woman's  ministry 
showed  THE  PEBFECTioN  OF  HEB  CUBE,  And,  belovcd,  it  is  one  mark  of  a  work  of 
grace  in  the  soul  when  the  converted  man  becomes  at  once  a  servant  of  Christ. 
The  human  theory  of  moral  reformations  makes  time  a  great  element  in  its 
•operations.  If  you  are  to  reclaim  a  great  offender  you  must  win  him  from  one  vice 
first,  and  then  from  another ;  you  must  put  him  through  a  process  of  education  by 
■which  he  gradually  perceives  that  what  he  has  been  accustomed  to  do  is  bad  for 
himself,  and  wakes  up  to  the  conviction  that  honesty  and  sobriety  will  be  the  best 
for  his  own  profit.  Time  is  required  by  the  moral  reformer,  or  he  cannot  develop 
his  plans.  He  ridicules  the  idea  of  effecting  anything  in  an  hour  or  two.  III. 
Peter's  wife's  mother,  in  ministering  to  Christ  proved  heb  own  geatitudb.  Her 
acts  of  hospitality  were  an  exhibition  of  her  thankfulness.  Brethren,  if  we  want  to 
evidence  our  gratitude  to  Christ  we  had  better  do  it  in  the  same  way  as  she  did. 
IV.  Thig  woman's  ministering  to  Christ  proved  the  condescension  of  thh 
Phtsioun.  He  who  healed  her  of  the  fever  did  not  need  her  to  minister  to  Him  ; 
He  who  had  power  to  heal  diseases  had  certainly  power  to  subsist  without  humac 
aoinistiy.    If  Christ  could  raise  her  up,  He  must  be  omnipotent  and  Divine ;  what 


«HAP.  IT.]  ST.  LUKE.  459 

seed,  then,  had  He  of  a  woman's  service?  Yet  He  condescended  to  accept  it. 
What  condescension  that  He  should  accept  ministry  from  His  own  creatures ;  what 
gentleness  that  He  so  often  chose  woman's  ministry.  He  came  to  earth,  and  the 
first  garments  of  His  infancy  were  wrapped  about  Him  by  a  woman's  hands,  and 
here  He  dwelt  till  at  last  He  died,  and  holy  women  bound  Him  up  in  the  cerements 
of  the  tomb  and  laid  Him  in  the  sepulchre.  It  seems  easy  enough  to  believe  that 
the  Blessed  Virgin  and  Mary  Magdalene  and  other  holy  women  were  honoured  of 
God  ;  but  that  you,  dear  sister,  should  be  allowed  to  take  a  part  in  His  service — ia 
not  this  marvellous  ?  Will  you  not  bless  Him,  and  minister  with  the  utmost  cheer- 
fulness because  you  feel  it  to  be  so  great  a  grace  ?  (CM.  Spurgeon.)  All  may 
minister  for  God : — On  our  birthdays  our  httle  children  love  to  give  their  father 
something,  if  it  is  only  a  bunch  of  flowers  out  of  the  garden,  or  a  fourpenny  piece 
with  a  hole  in  it ;  they  hke  to  do  it  to  show  their  love ;  and  wise  parents  will  be 
Bore  to  let  their  children  do  such  things  for  them.  So  isi  it  with  our  great  Father 
in  heaven.  What  are  our  Sunday-school  teachings  and  our  preachings,  and  all 
that,  but  these  cracked  fourpenny  pieces  7  Just  nothing  at  all ;  but  the  Lord  allows 
OS  to  do  His  work  for  His  own  love's  sake.  His  love  to  us  finds  a  sweetness  in  our 
love  to  Him.  I  am  most  thankful  that  in  the  Church  there  is  room  for  such  a 
variety  of  ministries.  Some  brethren  are  so  queerly  constituted  that  I  cannot  tell 
what  they  were  made  for  ;  but  I  behave  if  they  are  God's  people  there  is  a  place  for 
them  in  His  spiritual  temple.  A  man  who  was  accustomed  to  buy  timber  and 
work  it  up,  on  one  occasion  found  a  very  crooked  stick  of  wood  in  his  bargain,  and 
flaid  to  his  son  as  he  put  it  aside,  "  I  cannot  tell,  John,  whatever  I  shall  do  with  it ; 
it  is  the  ugliest  shaped  piece  I  ever  bought  in  my  life  "  ;  but  it  so  happened  while 
building  a  barn  that  he  wanted  a  timber  exactly  of  that  shape,  and  it  fitted  in  so 
thoroughly  well  that  he  said,  "  It  really  seems  as  if  that  tree  grew  on  purpose  for 
that  corner."  So  our  gracious  Lord  has  arranged  His  Church,  so  that  every 
crooked  stick  will  fit  in  somewhere  or  other,  if  it  be  only  a  tree  of  His  own  right 
hand  planting :  He  has  made  it  with  a  purpose,  and  knows  when  it  will  answer 
that  purpose.  How  this  ought  to  rebuke  any  who  say,  "  I  do  not  see  what  I  can 
do."  Dear  friend,  there  is  a  peculiar  work  for  you  ;  find  it  out — and  methinks  it 
will  not  be  far  off :  the  exercise  of  a  little  reflection  will  soon  enable  you  to  discover 
it.  Be  grateful  that  this  is  a  certain  fact,  without  exception,  that  every  child  of 
God  who  has  been  healed  has  some  ministry  which  he  can  render  to  Christ,  and 
which  he  oaght  to  render  at  once.  Bless  God,  dear  brother,  that  He  counts  you 
worthy  to  suffer  for  His  name's  sake.  You  know  the  old  story  of  Sir  Walter 
Raleigh.  When  Queen  Elizabeth,  one  day,  came  to  a  miry  place  in  the  road,  he 
took  off  his  cloak  for  her  to  walk  upon.  Did  he  regret  it  ?  No,  he  was  delighted  at 
it,  and  half  the  court  wished  for  another  muddy  place  that  they  might  be  able  to  do 
the  same.  Oh,  you  that  love  your  Lord,  be  willing  to  lie  down  for  Chiist'B  sake, 
and  pave  the  miry  parts  of  the  way  by  being  despised  for  His  name's  sake.  This 
honour  you  should  covet,  and  should  not  shun.  Arise  and  minister,  ye  healed 
ones ;  and  as  for  you  who  are  not  healed,  may  you  believe  in  Him  who  ia  able  to 
restore  you  with  His  touch.  He  is  mighty  to  save.  Believe  in  Him  and  you  shall 
live.  {Ibid.)  A  tympathetic  physician : — The  pious,  good-natured  Dr.  Heim  had 
no  time,  as  he  was  wont  to  say,  "to  get  ill."  Always  busy,  ever  pleased  to  visit 
the  cottage  of  the  poorest  as  the  mansions  of  the  rich,  all  classes  of  BerUn  joined 
to  do  honour  to  the  good  old  man  on  the  jubilee  of  his  fiftieth  year  of  service.  The 
festivities  lasted  three  days.  The  constant  noise  and  excitement  had  made  th« 
doctor  more  than  usually  tired.  Late  at  night  a  poor  woman  came  to  beg  him  to 
visit  her  child,  who  was  taken  suddenly  ill.  The  servants  had  orders  to  send  all 
applications  away,  as  the  doctor  felt  he  needed  rest ;  but  the  woman,  knowing  the 
house,  managed  to  get  to  the  doctor's  private  room  to  plead  her  cause.  Still  Dr. 
Heim  said  he  could  not  go.  After  all  had  retired  to  rest  Madame  Heim  said  to  her 
husband,  "  What  is  the  matter  with  you,  doctor  ?  Why  don't  you  sleep  ?  " 
"Because  I  can't,"  he  said;  "  it's  a  curious  thing  with  my  conscience;  I  must  go 
and  see  that  child."  He  rang  the  bell,  and  forgetting  his  fatigue,  ran  to  the  sick 
child,  whom  he  was  the  means  of  restoring  to  health.  After  the  visit  he  returned 
and  slept  soundly.     (Baxendale'i  Anecdotes.) 

Vers.  40,  42.  Now  when  the  sun  was  setting,  all  they  that  had  any  sick. — Nam 
when  tlie  sun  was  setting : — When  the  sun  set  another  sun  arose.  The  eventide  of 
nature  brought  the  morning  of  restoration.  Nature  perishes :  Grace  is  eternal. 
Come  to  Christ  when  you  can — early  in  the  day,  or  in  the  shades  of  eveiiing — Ha 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  rr^ 

is  ever  ready.  In  ver.  42  mark  an  attempt  to  localise  Christ.  This  is  often  done 
even  now.  But  He  is  not  to  be  parochially  or  congregationally  shut  in.  He  is  the 
light  of  every  life.  He  must  gather  His  sheep  from  every  hill,  and  call  His  owa 
from  unexpected  places.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  miracles  oj  healing  at  Caper- 
naum : — These  words  form  a  very  vivid  contrast  with  what  is  recorded  in  the  former 
part  of  this  chapter.  In  Nazareth  He  did  no  mighty  works.  Could  not,  not  would 
not.  It  was  not  because  the  people  there  didn't  want  help.  It  was  as  bad  to  be  sick 
up  there  as  in  Capernaum.  But  it  was  because  of  their  unbelief.  Then  in  wonderful 
contrast  comes  this  story  of  Capernaum.  That  contrast  we  can  still  make.  We  may 
have  this  Nazareth,  Jesus  in  the  midst  with  all  His  healing  power,  and  yet  our  hearts 
unblessed  ;  or  it  may  be  to  us  Capernaum,  and  Jesus  moving  in  and  out  amongst 
us,  laying  His  hands  on  every  one  of  us  and  making  us  whole.  I.  The  scene  hekb 
PICTURED.  The  sun  was  setting ;  the  mountains  were  lifting  up  their  heads  into  the 
golden  crimson,  and  the  lake  was  bathed  in  the  sunset  hues.  Across  the  rocky  path» 
came  wearied  ones  from  the  inland  villages  with  withered  limbs  ;  blind  men  groping 
their  way  and  asking  piteously  if  they  were  right ;  deaf  men  trying  to  read  the  signs 
of  His  coming  in  everybody's  face ;  and,  across  the  lake,  boat-loads  of  sick  ones,  the 
glassy  surface  of  the  lake  just  broken  by  the  ripple  of  the  oar ;  and  thus  they  came, 
until  what  a  sight  it  was  about  the  gate  of  the  city !  II.  Follow  the  Master 
THBODGH  THE  WARDS  OF  His  HOSPITAL.  Now  the  whisper  runs  through  the  crowd, 
"  He  comes."  He  comes — those  eyes  of  His  all  filled  with  compassion  ;  and 
moving  about  amongst  them,  "  He  laid  His  hands  on  every  one  of  them."  No 
poor  woman  was  thrust  away  outside ;  no  poor  little  child  was  forgotten.  1.  Notice 
that  the  power  of  the  Lord  is  a  healing  power — "  not  to  condemn  the  world."  And 
2.  See  how  the  Lord  uses  this  power — with  what  gentleness.  3.  Notice  how  the 
Lord  deals  with  men  in  their  individuality — "  every  one  of  them."  III.  Look  at  the 
SICK  ones.  First,  here  is  a  heathen  woman.  Here  stands  a  sturdy  Roman  soldier 
who  has  been  maimed  in  some  fight,  &c.  In  Christ's  hospital  every  case  is  peculiar. 
(New  Outlines  of  Sermons  onNew  Testament.)  God's  Kingdom  : — Which  kingdom? 
There  is  (1)  the  kingdom  of  nature;  (2)  that  of  providence  ;  (3)  that  of  glory.  But 
none  of  these  is  the  kingdom  I  am  going  to  talk  about.  There  is  another  kingdom, 
the  kingdom  of  His  grace,  the  kingdom  in  the  hearts  of  men,  called  the  kingdom 
of  God  in  my  text.  I.  This  kingdom  is  one  ;  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  ake  manv. 
The  kingdom  of  God  does  not  resemble  any  of  these.  It  is  a  spiritual  kingdom. 
II.  The  kingdoms  of  this  wobld  are  not  happy,  the  kingdom  of  grace  is.  III. 
The  kingdoms  of  earth  are  maintained  by  force  ;  the  throne  of  God's  kingdom 
IB  established  in  the  affections  of  ITS  subjects.  III.  The  kingdoms  of  earth 
DECAY ;  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD  NEVER.  IV.  Practical  questions  :  1.  Are  we  members 
of  this  kingdom?  2.  If  not,  are  we  willing  to  become  members?  {E.  G.  Gauge.} 
Imposition  of  hands  : — This  rite  is  a  symbol  of  any  kind  of  transmission,  whether 
of  a  gift  or  an  office  (Moses  and  Joshua,  Deut.  xxxiv.  9),  or  of  a  blessing  (the 
patriarchal  blessings),  or  of  a  duty  (the  transfer  to  the  Levites  of  the  natural  func- 
tions of  the  eldest  son  in  every  family),  or  of  guilt  (the  guilty  Israelite  laying  his 
hands  on  the  head  of  the  victim),  or  of  the  sound,  vital  strength  enjoyed  by  the 
person  who  imparts  it  (cures).  It  is  not  certainly  that  Jesus  could  not  have  worked 
a  cure  by  His  mere  word,  or  even  by  a  simple  act  of  volition.  But,  in  the  first 
place,  there  is  something  profoundly  human  in  this  act  of  laying  the  hand  on  the 
head  of  any  one  whom  one  desires  to  benefit.  It  is  a  gesture  of  tenderness,  a  sign 
of  beneficial  communication  such  as  the  heart  craves.  Then  this  symbol  might  be 
morally  necessary.  Whenever  Jesus  avails  Himself  of  any  material  means  to  work 
a  cure — whether  it  be  the  sound  of  His  voice,  or  clay  made  of  His  spittle — His  aim 
is  to  cstabUsh  in  the  form  best  adapted  to  tbe  particular  case,  a  personal  tie  between 
the  sick  person  and  Himself ;  for  He  desires  not  only  to  heal,  but  to  effect  a  restora- 
tion to  God,  by  creating  in  the  consciousness  of  the  sick  a  sense  of  union  with 
Himself,  the  organ  of  Divine  grace  in  the  midst  of  mankind.  This  moral  aim  ex- 
plains the  variety  of  the  means  employed.  Had  they  been  curative  means  (of  the 
nature  of  magnetic  passes,  for  example)  they  could  not  have  varied  so  much.  But 
as  they  were  addressed  to  the  sick  person's  soul,  Jesus  chose  them  in  such  a  way 
that  His  action  was  adapted  to  its  character  or  position.  In  the  case  of  a  deaf 
mute,  He  puts  His  fingers  into  his  ears;  He  anointed  the  eyef  of  a  blind  man  with 
His  spittle,  &c.  Thus  their  healing  appeared  as  an  emanation  from  His  person, 
and  attached  them  to  Him  by  an  indissoluble  tie.  Their  restored  life  was  felt  to 
be  dependent  on  His.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  The  Great  Physician  : — We  have  here  a 
picture  of  Jesus  as  the  Great  Physician  of  soul  and  body,  the  Divine  restorer  of 


tmkf.  zv.]  8T.  LUKE.  461 

health  to  both  body  and  miud.  It  is  never  to  be  forgotten  how  He  thus  met  the 
Bufferings  of  humanity,  and  brought  effective  deliverance  as  none  other  ever  could 
or  ever  will  bring,  to  a  world  ever  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain.  And  what  He 
did  then,  He  is  doing  still.  We  cannot  now  see  His  earthly  Form,  nor  do  we  look 
for  miracles  to  be  wrought  upon  us  ;  but  each  of  us  has  his  own  peculiar  care  or 
trouble,  and  needs  the  Divine  Physician  to  relieve  his  distress.  1.  True,  there  are 
earthly  reliefs,  and  it  is  our  duty  to  make  proper  use  of  them;  but  they  are  all 
more  or  less  temporary  and  fleeting.  (1)  For  the  body:  medical  relief  and  advice, 
&c.  Yet  these  can  give  no  immunity  from  disease.  And  most  remedies  soon  lose 
their  power.  (2)  For  the  mind  :  distraction,  pleasure,  &c.  These  also  are  but  the 
results  of  the  experience  of  others,  but  they  have  no  last  in  them,  and  they  may 
only  make  the  pain  worse  to  bear  than  before.  2.  True  also,  that  if  present  relief 
is  not  to  be  had,  we  may  still  be  buoyed  up  by  earthly  hope.  But  alas !  how  often 
is  this  but  "  hope  deferred,"  which  '*  makes  the  heart  sick  "  ;  and  how  often  is  the 
miserable  and  weary  sufferer  brought  to  such  a  state  that  the  only  earthly  hope  left 
him  is  the  hope  that  he  may  soon  be  done  with  earth  altogether,  and  his  poor 
pained  body  be  laid  to  rest  in  the  grave  1  Oh,  how  vain  are  all  earthly  hopes,  and 
how  doomed  to  disappointment  are  those  who  trust  in  them.  But,  thank  God ! 
our  Christian  philosophy  is  not  so  cold.  We  have  more  than  this.  I.  A  present 
EELP.  We  have  learned  that  present,  earthly,  personal  comfort  is  not  such  a  grand 
object  after  all ;  that  there  are  higher  things,  and  better  things,  within  our  reach. 
What  are  these  ?  Growing  better,  being  sanctified,  making  this  life  not  an  end  but 
a  beginning  and  preparation  for  a  higher  and  better  Ufe.  Not  only  so,  but  we 
can  go  to  Jesus  as  truly  as  could  the  friends  at  Capernaum,  and  help  to  take  our 
sufferers  there.  Nor  have  we  far  to  go.  He  is  always  at  hand,  and  always  acces- 
sible. Moreover,  He  is  unchangeable  ;  not  like  earthly  friends  and  comforts,  but 
always  the  same ;  the  truest  help  in  any  and  every  kind  of  suffering — whether  of 
mind,  body,  or  estate,  as  many  a  soul  has  proved,  in  sickness,  poverty,  anxiety, 
loneliness.  H.  A  future  hope.  If,  in  spite  of  every  aid,  the  burdens  of  hfe  press 
heavily  on  us,  we  have  more  than  the  silence  of  the  grave  to  look  for  ;  we  know 
that  while  our  body  sleeps,  our  soul  is  with  Christ  in  paradise,  and  that  one  day 
there  will  be  a  happy  reunion.  Conclusion :  Let  us  first  find  the  way  ourselves  t'^ 
this  present  help  and  future  hope,  and  then  we  shall  be  able  to  point  our  friends 
to  it  and  to  Jesus  who  is  indeed  our  only  help  and  our  only  hope.  And  then,  one 
word  more  for  our  comfort.  You  will  remember  that  our  blessed  Lord  was  not 
done  with  the  sufferers  when  He  laid  His  hands  upon  them  and  conferred  present 
relief  in  trouble.  They  might  go  home  with  glad  hearts,  and  enjoy  the  blessing  of 
God,  but  a  time  would  come  when  they  might  again  suffer  in  body  or  in  mind,  and 
when  they  would  at  last  have  to  give  up  all  hope  of  earthly  remedy.  But  Jesus 
■was  not  forgetting  them.  Tired  and  wearied  as  He  was.  He  rose  up  a  great  while 
before  day,  and  departed  into  a  solitary  place,  and  there  prayed.  He  was  blessing 
them  even  more  in  His  absence  than  while  with  them  in  bodily  presence.  Even  so 
is  it  BtUl  with  the  sufferers  and  with  the  healed.  Jesus  is  not  only  ever  blessing  us 
with  divine  comfort  and  strength,  but  He  is  pleading  for  us  with  the  Father.  He 
knows  the  pain  of  each  heart,  and  He  will  bless  us  and  it  for  oar  good  if  we  will 
but  go  to  Him.    (Oeorge  Low,  M.A.) 

Yer.  42.  That  He  would  not  depart  ttom  them. — How  to  prolong  the  gracious 

visits  of  Christ : — ^I.  What  means  should  be  employed  to  prolong  the  GBACiona 
VISITS  OP  Christ  y  I  answer,  generally,  we  must  endeavour  to  render  His  con- 
tinuance with  us  agreeable  to  Himself ;  and  to  avoid  or  banish  from  among  as 
everything  which  tends  to  render  it  otherwise.  When  we  wish  to  induce  an 
earthly  friend  to  reside  with  us  as  long  as  possible,  we  naturally  endeavour  to 
render  his  residence  with  us  agreeable;  for  no  person  will  voluntarily  continue 
long  in  a  disagreeable  place,  or  in  unpleasant  society.  But  more  particularly ;  if 
we  would  prolong  our  Saviour's  gracious  visits,  either  to  ourselves,  to  our  habita- 
tions, or  to  the  place  in  which  we  reside,  we  must  show  Him  that  we  greatly  desire 
and  highly  value  His  presence.  No  person  will  consent  to  stay  long  with  those  by 
whom  his  presence  is  not  desired.  Least  of  all  will  those  consent  to  this  who  are 
sensible  of  their  own  worth,  and  who  know  that  there  are  other  places  where  they 
would  be  more  welcome.  Now  our  blessed  Saviour  is  perfectly  sensible  of  His  own 
worth.  He  knows  that,  great  and  powerful  as  He  is.  He  can  confer  no  favoar  apon 
a  Church  or  upon  individuals  more  valuable  than  His  gradoui  presence.  He, 
therefore,  justly  expects  that  we  should  prize  it  accordingly,  and  consider  erery' 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHi*.  it. 

thing  else  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  this.  The  fact  is,  that,  when  we  prefer 
any  object  to  Christ,  we  make  an  idol  of  that  object,  and  set  up  that  idol  in  Hia 
presence.  And  can  we  expect  that  He  will  continue  long  with  those  who  prefer  an 
idol  before  Him  ?  1.  The  more  He  seems  to  depart  from  us,  the  more  earneslily  must 
we  follow  Him  with  our  prayers  and  supplications,  saying,  with  Jacob,  We  will  not 
let  Thee  go,  except  Thou  bless  us ;  and,  like  the  persons  mentioned  in  oar  text, 
stayiug  Him  that  He  may  not  forsake  us.  2.  With  prayer  we  must  unite  penitence. 
Especially  must  we  repent  of  those  sins  which  have  been  the  probable  cause  of  Hia 
beginning  to  withdraw.  Without  this,  even  prayer  will  not  avail,  as  is  evident 
from  the  case  of  Joshua,  when  his  army  was  repulsed  before  Ai.  3.  If  we  would 
prevent  the  Saviour  from  depriving  us  of  His  gracious  visits,  we  must  receive  them 
with  profound  humility  and  a  deep  sense  of  our  unworthiness  of  such  a  favour. 
4.  If  we  would  prevent  the  Saviour  from  leaving  us,  we  must  assign  sufficient 
reasons  why  He  should  prolong  His  stay.  The  glory  of  His  Father,  the  honour  of 
His  great  name,  the  welfare  of  His  people,  the  prosperity  of  His  cause,  are  each  of 
them  reasons  of  sufficient  weight  to  influence  His  conduct ;  and  while  either  of 
these  reasons  requires  His  stay  we  may  be  sure  that  He  will  not  leave  us.  5.  If 
we  would  prevent  Christ  from  leaving  us,  we  must  famish  Him  with  employments, 
and  with  such  kind  of  employments  as  are  suited  to  His  character.  Now  the 
ruling  passion  of  our  Saviour  is  the  love  of  doing  good.  '*  My  meat,"  says  He,  "  is 
to  do  the  will  of  My  Father  and  to  finish  His  work."  And  again  He  says,  *'I(  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  Agreeably,  we  find  that,  when  on  earth,  Ha 
went  about  doing  good,  aud,  where  He  found  opportunities  of  doing  the  most  good, 
there  He  always  made  the  longest  stay.  II.  Some  or  thb  beasons  which  bhoxtu) 
INDUCB  us  to  employ  THESE  UEAMS.  1.  We  ought  to  employ  these  means,  because 
a  neglect  of  them  will  infallibly  grieve  and  offend  oar  Redeemer.  2.  The  blessed 
effects  which  result  from  the  gracious  visits  of  Christ,  furnish  another  reason  why 
we  should  employ  all  proper  means  and  make  every  possible  exertion  to  induce 
Him  to  prolong  them.  3.  Another  reason  which  should  induce  us  to  employ  these 
means,  may  be  found  in  the  evils  which  result  from  the  Saviour's  departure. 
These  evils  are  in  full  proportion  to  the  benefits  which  result  from  His  presence. 
4.  The  conduct  of  impenitent  sinners  affords  another  reason  why  we  should  do 
this.     (£.  Pay$on,  D.D.) 

Yer.  43.  I  must  preach  the  kingdom  of  God  to  other  dtleL — A  precedent 

for  preachers : — Christ  thus  admired  and  desired  to  stay  in  Capernaum,  would 
not  so  do,  as  having  an  eye  to  His  ease  or  conveniency  there,  but  must 
be  at  the  pains  to  preach  elsewhere.  Teaching  as  that  we  must  not  measure 
our  services  from  ourselves  or  conveniences,  nor  in  them  seek  oar  own  ease 
or  acceptance  among  men;  but  so  carry  them  as  may  be  most  for  God's  glory 
«nd  our  own  sound  comfort.  Our  Saviour  Christ  admitted  not  their  motion,  but 
made  them  this  answer  in  the  words  of  the  text,  "  Surely  I  mast  also  preach." 
Wherein  consider  five  points.  1.  The  work  which  Christ  must  do — He  must 
"  preach."  2.  The  necessity  of  it — "  I  must."  3.  The  matter  what  He  must 
preach — "  the  kingdom  of  God."  4.  The  object  or  people  to  whom — "  to  other  cities 
also."  6.  The  bond  of  this  necessity — "  For  therefore  I  am  sent."  I.  Thb  wobk  is 
PBEACHiNO.  Thus  preaching  is  called  the  setting  out  of  the  mystery  of  Christ,  and 
a  publishing  of  the  mystery  of  the  gospel,  and  the  revealing  of  a  mystery  hid  since 
the  world  began.  Hence  observe  the  greatness  of  the  work  of  preaching,  and  the 
great  estimation  of  it,  for  which  end  the  Son  of  God  Himself  came  from  heaven. 
The  great  work  of  God  considered  in  the  means  seems  vile  and  base,  and  nothing 
more  stunneth  the  minds  of  carnal  men  than  the  baseness  of  the  means,  compared 
with  the  magnificence  of  the  effects.  It  might  seem  ridiculous  to  the  men  of 
Jericho  that  the  blast  of  rams'  horns  and  sound  of  trumpets  should  batter  down 
stone  walls,  and  no  marvel  but  that  they  smiled  at  such  unhkely  means ;  bat  yet  it  was 
BO :  so  this  work  of  preaching  in  the  eye  of  a  carnal  man  is  but  foohshness,  as 
1  Cor.  i.  21,  but  yet  "  to  them  that  are  called,  it  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation." 
Here  behold  wetness  encountering  and  overmastering  strength,  simpUcity  over- 
reaching policy,  and  God's  power  prevailing  in  His  own  weak  means.  II.  The 
second  part  of  the  text  is  the  necessity  of  pbeachinq — "I  must  preach."  It  depends 
not  upon  His  will,  or  left  to  His  discretion  ;  but  He  must  do  it.  Now,  muoh  mora 
necessity  Ueth  on  us  His  ministers.  Now  if  we  be  bound  to  preach,  ye  are  bound 
to  hear;  if  we  be  bound  to  deliver  the  Word,  ye  are  bound  to  reoeive  the  Word,  not 
as  the  word  of  man ;  but  as  it  i«  indeed  the  Word  of  God,  with  all  reverence,  duty, 


4HAP.  y.]  ST.  LUKE,  463 

&nd  piety.  III.  The  third  point  is  the  matter  of  this  pbeachino  :  the  kingd(Mn  of 
God.  The  Icingdom  of  God  is  twofold.  1.  Of  grace.  2.  Of  glory.  In  the  former 
God  reigneth  in  us.  In  the  latter  we  reign  with  God.  The  former  is  in  this  life,  the 
latter  in  the  life  to  come.  The  one  issuing  into  the  other,  and  both  of  them 
becoming  one :  for  we  read  not  of  God's  kingdoms  in  the  plural,  but  of  His 
kingdom,  which  is  but  one.  This  is  that  tabernacle  of  God  which  is  with  men. 
To  this  kingdom  God  calleth  us  by  preaching,  and  here  it  must  be  begun  by 
rigbteonsness,  repentance,  mortification,  and  shall  have  fulness  hereafter.  All  men 
desire  to  partake  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  glory,  but  few  will  be  subject  to  his 
Father  in  the  kingdom  of  grace.  We  to  whom  God  hath  committed  the  preaching 
of  His  Word  must  have  care  to  further  this  kingdom  and  bring  in  many  to  be 
subjects  of  it,  expecting  that  glorious  recompense  of  shining  as  the  stars  in  the 
firmament  for  ever  and  ever.  IV.  The  pebsons  to  whom  Chbist  must  preach — "  to 
other  cities."  As  the  sun  compasseth  the  world  and  stayeth  in  no  one  part,  so 
Christ  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness  never  settleth  in  any  one  place,  but  seeketh  to 
disperse  everywhere  His  blessed  light.  It  had  been  in  Christ's  power  Himself  to 
have  kept  one  place  always,  and  have  sent  His  disciples  to  aU  other,  but  He  would 
not :  that  we  should  by  His  example  learn  not  to  shun  labour,  but  employ  our 
pains  and  diligence  in  building  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  in  seeking  and  saving  that 
which  is  lost.  Thus  was  Christ  as  a  compassionate  Physician,  who  not  being  sent 
for,  offereth  His  care  and  pains,  as  willing  to  save  such  as  are  in  danger.  Y.  The 
bond  of  this  necessity — "  for  therefore  am  I  sent."  He  should  betray  the  end  of 
His  coming  if  He  should  not  preach.  The  point  we  must  here  learn  is  that  every 
man  must  serve  the  end  and  use  that  he  is  called  unto,  and  carefully  discharge  the 
trust  committed  onto  him  (Bom.  zii.  7,  8).  The  heathen  held  it  as  shameful  and 
dangerous  to  faU  in  matter  of  trost,  as  if  the  party  had  committed  theft.    (T. 


OHAPTIB  V. 

TsBS.  1,  S.  And  It  came  to  pass,  that,  as  the  people  pressed  vpon  Elm  to  hear  the 
Word  of  God. — The  gospel  and  the  masset : — What  could  have  been  the  wonderful 
secret  power  by  which  the  great  Prophet  of  Galilee  drew  all  men  after  Him  ?  1. 
One  simple  and  very  intelligent  element  in  it  was  the  way  in  which  he  recognized 
ttie  wholeness  of  human  nature,  that,  at  the  bottom,  peer  did  not  di£fer  from 
peasant,  nor  monarch  from  villager.  2.  And  not  only  did  He  recognize  the 
wholeness  of  human  nature,  but  also  its  many  diversified  needs.  3.  He  was 
sinless,  and  yet  He  never  had  a  harsh  word  for  the  sinners — provided  they  were 
not  hypocrites.  4.  He  had  the  tenderest  feelings  for  those  who  enjoyed  fewest 
c^portunities.  5.  He  recognized  the  natural  or  social  wants  which  are  common  to 
all  men.  Feeding  five  thousand ;  making  wine  at  wedding.  6.  He  disdained  no 
man.  Application.  Oh  that  God  would  give  us  grace  to  preach  fully,  faithfully, 
wisely,  lovingly  this  gospel  in  the  spirit,  and  with  the  simplicity  and  abounding 
sympathy  with  which  it  was  first  preached  in  the  cities  and  on  the  mountain  slopes 
and  by  the  lake  shores  of  Galilee ;  and  then  I  believe  the  people  would  be  found 
pressing  to  hear  it  as  they  pressed  then.  (BUhop  Fraser.)  The  Word  of  God : — 
I.  The  Wobd  op  God  that  is  now  pbeached  amono  us.  II.  The  existing  hbobnot 
TO  HEAB  n.  Of  difiasive  religion  we  have  abundance ;  a  concentrative  Christianity 
is  what  we  require.  III.  The  people  who  abe  its  pavoubed,  and  too  opten  its 
POBOETFUL  BEARXB8.  Two  great  classes ;  those  who  know  the  revelation  of  the 
will  of  God  through  Christ  as  a  mass  of  doctrines  and  commands  demanding  from 
our  understandings  a  simple  assent  to  their  truth ;  and  those  who  know  it  in  such 
a  sense  and  degree,  as  that  it  becomes  the  pervading  principle  of  all  their  actions. 
Beware  of  the  Christianity  of  the  formalist.  When  rightly  received,  ••  the  Word  of 
God  is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword."  {W.A.  Butler, 
M.A.)  To  hear  the  Word  of  God  : — One  of  the  finest  conceivable  pictures  pre- 

sented in  this  verse — people  pressing  to  hear  the  Word  of  Godl  They  often 
pressed  to  see  Christ's  miracles,  and  to  listen  to  His  parables,  with  more  or  less 
of  mere  curiosity ;  but  in  this  case  the  motive  was  spiritual  and  pare.  Why  do 
people  attend  >he  sanctuary?     To  hear  the  word  of  man?    Then  will  there  be 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

debate,  opposition,  doubt,  or  at  best,  admiration,  fickle  and  selfish.  The  remedy  is 
partly  in  the  hands  of  ministers  themselves.  When  they  insist  upon  delivering 
the  message  of  God  without  any  admixture  of  human  speculation,  their  spiritual 
reverence  and  earnestness  may  carry  a  holy  contagion  amongst  the  people.  God'a 
Word  should  always  be  supreme  in  God's  house.  "  Them  that  honour  Me,  I  vdll 
honour."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Tlie  Lake  of  Gennesaret : — It  is  the  centre  of  the 
ministry  of  our  Lord ;  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  of  it  what  Dean  Stanley  has 
said,  "  It  is  the  most  sacred  sheet  of  water  that  the  earth  contains."  The  Eabbins 
say,  "  I  have  created  seven  seas,  saith  the  Lord,  but  out  of  them  I  have  chosen 
none  but  the  sea  of  Gennesaret."  In  the  day  of  our  Lord,  it  was  a  scene  of 
teeming  life  as  well  as  the  centre  of  a  peculiarly  hushed  and  hallowed  solitude.  No 
doubt,  as  compared  with  many  quarters  of  the  globe,  it  was  secluded ;  but  still  its 
shores  and  its  waves  were  the  way  of  traffic.  It  was  situated  in  the  midst  of  the 
Jordan  valley,  or  the  great  thoroughfare  from  Babylon  and  Damascus  into  Pales- 
tine :  hence  it  was  "  the  way  of  the  sea  beyond  Jordan."  Along  its  banks  a 
wondrous  vegetation  spread,  and  fuU  of  especially  beautiful  birds  and  flowers  and 
fruits.  What  a  scene  it  must  have  presented — fishermen  by  hundreds  on  the 
Lake  ;  in  hamlets  around  the  numerous  shipbuilders  ;  and  the  sails  and  boats  of 
pleasure  flying  before  the  frequent  gusts  from  the  mountains.  There  was  no  other 
spot  which  would  so  instantly  have  been  a  conductor  to  the  words  of  our  Lord. 
There  is  a  Divine  providence  in  even  the  very  spot  itself.  The  dwellers  of  the  Sea 
of  Galilee  were  free  from  most  of  the  strong  prejudices  which,  in  the  south  of 
Palestine,  raised  a  bar  to  Christ's  reception.  There  were  the  people  of  Zabulon 
and  Nephthalim,  by  the  way  of  the  sea  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles. 
They  had  sat  in  darkness  ;  but  for  that  very  reason  they  saw  more  clearly  the  great 
light  when  it  came  to  them  in  the  region  of  the  shadow  of  death.  There  He  came, 
to  that  spot,  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  the  weary,  and  the  heavy  laden,  to 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  Where  could  He  find  what  He  sought  so 
readily  as  in  the  ceaseless  turmoil  of  those  busy  waters  and  teeming  villages  ? 
Eoman  soldiers,  centurions  quartered  with  their  slaves ;  here,  too,  the  palaces  of 
the  princes.  Hardy  boatmen,  publicans,  and  tax-collectors  sitting  at  the  receipt  of 
custom,  women  who  were  sinners  from  neighbouring  Gentile  cities  and  villages. 
Thus  all  was  prepared  to  concentrate  and  give  effect  to  the  power  of  His  teaching 
by  the  Lake.  {E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Description  of  the  lake : — The  Sea  of  Galilee 
is  shaped  like  a  pear,  with  a  width  at  the  broadest  part  of  6|  miles,  and  a  length 
of  12i  miles ;  that  is,  it  is  about  the  same  length  as  our  owp  Windermere,  but 
considerably  broader,  though  in  the  clear  air  of  Palestine  it  looks  somewhat 
smaller.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  bright  clearness  of  the  water,  which  it  is 
delightful  to  watch  as  it  runs  in  small  waves  over  the  shingle.  Its  taste,  moreover,  is 
sweet,  except  near  the  hot  springs  and  at  Tiberias,  where  it  is  polluted  by  the 
sewerage  of  the  town.  There  is  much  more  level  ground  on  the  eastern  side  than 
the  western,  yet  the  western  side  was  always,  in  Bible  times,  much  more  thickly 
peopled  by  the  Hebrews  than  the  other;  partly  from  the  fact  that  "beyond 
Jordan  "  was  almost  a  foreign  country  ;  partly  because  the  land  above  the  lake  on 
the  east  was  exposed  to  the  Arabs;  and  in  some  measure  also  because  it  always  had 
a  large  intermixture  of  heathen  population.  (Geikie's  ''Holy  Land  and  the  Bible.") 
Description  of  the  surrounding  scenery: — The  original  population  of  the  shores  of  the 
lake  was  Sidonian,  and  when  Tyre  and  Sidon  were  founded  on  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean  they  moved  westward,  but  the  town  of  Bethsidon  still  retained  the 
name  given  it  by  its  first  inhabitants.  The  richest  part  of  the  shores  was  at  the 
north-west,  where  is  a  luxuriant  plain  of  half-moon  shape,  walled  out  from  the  north 
and  west  winds  by  mountains,  and  exposed  to  the  sun.  This  was  where  the  princes 
and  the  nobles  had  their  country  residences,  and  the  gardens  were  filled  with  all  kinds 
of  flowers  and  fruit.  The  lake  was  called  by  its  first  colonists,  Cenuereth,  or  the 
Haip,  from  its  shape.  The  Jews  thought  so  highly  of  its  beauty  that  they  said, 
•'  God  created  seven  seas — but  for  Himself  He  elected  but  one,  and  that  the  Lake 
Gennesareth  " ;  and  again,  "  It  is  the  Gate  of  Paradise."  Josephus  says,  "  It  is  a 
district  where  Nature  seems  to  have  constrained  herself  to  create  an  eternal 
spring,  and  to  gather  into  one  spot  the  products  of  every  one."  To  the  present  day 
the  date-palm,  citrons,  pomegranate,  indigo,  rice,  sugar-cane,  grow  there  ;  cotton, 
balsams,  vines,  thrive ;  the  purple  grapes  are  as  big  as  plums,  and  the  bunches 
weigh  twelve  pounds.  Here  also  the  fig-tree  yields  her  fruit  throughout  the 
year,  ripening  every  month.  The  Jews  call  Gennesareth  the  Garden  Lake,  and  if 
there  were  any  place  in  Palestine  that  could  recall  the  lost  Paradise,  it  was  this 


««AP.  v.]  ST.  LUKE.  465 

fniitfal,  beaatifol  tract, Tratered  with  its  five  streams.  At  Chammath,  about  two  milea 
south  of  Tiberias,  are  hot  springs,  of  old  much  used  for  baths,  and  half  an  hour's 
walk  above  Tiberias  a  cold  spring  of  beautiful  water  bursts  out  of  the  mountainside, 
and  pours  down  to  the  lake  in  five  or  six  streams.  At  Tabigha  also  are  hot  springs, 
that  gush  streaming  down  into  the  blue  waters  of  the  lake.  Now  the  neglect  of 
mismanagement  of  the  Turkish  Government  have  led  to  the  devastation  of  this 
beautiful  comer  of  the  world,  and  many  of  the  foreign  plants  once  introduced  into 
it  have  died  out,  or  are  disappearing.  We  can  only  guess  what  a  garden  of  delight 
it  must  have  been  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  when  the  aqueducts  were  in  working 
order,  and  canals  carried  water  to  all  the  gardens  and  fields,  (S.  Baring-Gould, 
M.A.)  Attractivene$s  of  the  true  preacher : — Let  a  man  be  a  true  preacher,  really 
ottering  the  truth  through  his  own  personality,  and  it  is  strange  how  men  wiU 
gather  to  listen  to  him.  We  hear  that  the  day  of  the  pulpit  is  past,  and  then  some 
morning  the  voice  of  a  true  preacher  is  heard  in  the  land,  and  all  the  streets  are 
full  of  men  crowding  to  hear  him,  just  exactly  as  were  the  streets  of  Constantinople 
when  Chrysostum  was  going  to  preach  at  the  Church  of  the  Apostles,  or  the  streets  of 
London  when  Latimer  was  bravely  telling  the  truth  at  St.  Paul's.  {Phillipit  Brooks, 
D.D.)  The  personal  power  in  preaching : — The  nameless  and  potent  charm  of  intense 
personality  cannot  all  go  down  into  a  dead  book.  Truth  in  personality  is  where 
the  hidings  of  power  are.  We  look  in  vain  along  the  pages  of  Whitefield  for  the 
secret  of  his  mighty  effectiveness.  We  search  the  famous  sermon  of  Edwards,  and 
wonder  what  there  was  in  it  that  moved  men  so.  It  was  not  the  sermon  on  the 
printed  page ;  it  was  the  sermon  in  the  living  preacher.  While  men  are  men,  a 
living  man  before  living  men  will  always  be  more  than  white  paper  and  black  ink. 
And  therein  will  for  evermore  lie  the  supremest  possibilities  of  pulpit  power,  which  no 
competing  press,  however  enterprising  and  ubiquitous,  can  rival.  The  Founder  of 
Christianity  made  no  mistake  when  He  staked  its  triumphal  progress  down  through 
•11  ages,  and  its  victorious  consummation  at  "  the  end  of  the  ;World,"  on  "  the 
foolishness  of  preaching."  He  chose  the  agency  in  full  view  of  the  marvels  of 
these  later  centuries,  and  the  pulpit  is  not  therefore  likely  to  be  despoiled  of  ita 
peculiar  glory  and  made  impotent  to  its  work  by  any  device  born  of  the  inventive 
genius  of  man.  {Dr.  Herrick  Johnson,  of  Chicago.)  A  remarkable  pulpit : — I 
have  seen  in  different  countries  some  very  wonderful  pulpits,  some  of  them 
exquisitely  carved  in  stone  or  wood,  some  of  them  richly  inlaid  with  the  choicest 
mosaics,  some  of  them  illustrating  scenes  from  the  Bible.  Perhaps  the  loveliest 
pulpit  I  have  ever  seen  is  in  a  place  where  you  would  least  expect  to  find  it.  In 
Italy  you  often  see  places  that  are  called  Baptisteries — that  is,  places  built 
Bpecially  for  the  baptism  of  children.  In  the  old  city  of  Pisa  there  is  a  most  lovely 
Baptistery,  and  in  it  the  most  beautiful  pulpit,  which  every  one  who  sees  greatly 
admires ;  but,  strange  to  say,  it  cannot  be  used,  because  there  is  such  a  wonderful 
echo  in  the  building  that  the  preacher's  voice  could  not  be  heard.  If  you  speak 
quite  softly  in  it  you  hear  a  sound  as  of  a  great  choir  right  up  in  the  roof,  and  so 
the  pulpit  can  only  be  admired  and  not  used.  But  the  pulpit  from  which  Christ 
preached  on  this  occasion  was  a  very  simple  one ;  it  was  not  richly  carved,  nor 
beautifully  decorated,  nor  of  massive  form.  It  was  only  a  tiny  boat  resting  upon 
the  bosom  of  a  lake.  (W.  A.  Harder.)  Thi preaching  of  Christ : — The  form  of 
the  preaching  of  Jesus  was  essentially  Jewish.  The  Oriental  mind  does  not  work  in 
the  same  way  as  the  mind  of  the  West.  Our  thinking  and  speaking,  when  at  their 
best,  are  fluent,  expansive,  closely  reasoned.  The  kind  of  discourse  which  we 
admire  is  one  which  takes  up  an  important  subject,  divides  it  out  into  different 
branches,  treats  it  fully  under  each  of  the  heads,  closely  articulates  part  to  part, 
and  closes  with  a  moving  appeal  to  the  feeUngs,  so  as  to  sway  the  will  to  soma 
practical  result.  The  Oriental  mind,  on  the  contrary,  loves  to  brood  long  on  a 
single  point,  to  turn  it  round  and  round,  to  gather  up  all  the  truth  about  it  into  a 
focus,  and  pour  it  forth  in  a  few  pointed  and  memorable  words.  It  is  oon- 
eise,  epigrammatic,  oracular.  A  Western  speaker's  discourse  is  a  systematic 
structure,  or  like  a  chain  in  which  link  is  firmly  knit  to  link  ;  an  Oriental's  is  like 
the  sky  at  night,  full  of  innumerable  burning  points  shining  forth  from  a  dark 
background.  Such  was  the  form  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus.  It  consisted  of 
numerous  sayings,  every  one  of  which  contained  the  greatest  possible  amount  of 
truth  in  the  smallest  possible  compass,  and  was  expressed  in  language  so  oonoise 
and  pointed  as  to  stick  in  the  memory  like  an  arrow.  Bead  them,  and  you  will  find 
that  every  one  of  them,  as  you  ponder  it,  sucks  the  mind  in  and  in  like  a  whirl- 
pool, till  it  is  lost  in  tiie  depths.    Yon  will  find,  too,  that  there  are  very  few  of 

80 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAP.  T. 

them  which  yon  do  not  know  by  heart.  They  have  found  their  way  into  tht 
memory  of  Christendom  as  no  other  words  have  done.  Even  before  the  meaning 
has  been  apprehended,  the  perfect,  proverb-like  expression  lodges  itself  fast  in  the 
mind.  {James  Stalker.)  Attention  to  the  Word  of  God: — 1.  The  circumstance 
mentioned  in  the  first  verse  of  the  text  was  a  natural  consequence  op  cub  Lobd'b 
OFFICE  AND  CHABACTER.  "  The  people  presscd  upon  Him  to  hear  the  Word  of  God.** 
Jesus  Christ  was  '•  that  Prophet  which  should  come  into  the  world."  He  brought 
down  a  message  of  mercy  from  heaven  to  earth ;  a  message  of  pardon  for  the  guilty, 
of  life  to  the  dead,  and  of  salvation  to  those  who  were  utterly  and  eternally  lost. 
They  were  astonished  at  His  doctrine;  for  He  taught  them  as  one  having 
authority.  They  "  pressed  upon  Him  to  hear  the  Word  of  God."  And  surely  it  is 
not  too  much  for  us  to  expect  to  witness  a  continuance  of  the  same  spirit.  If  God 
has  indeed  sent  His  Son  and  His  servants  to  communicate  an  authentic  revelation 
of  His  will  to  man,  these  teachers  must  be  listened  to  by  all  who  understand  theix 
own  character  and  circumstances,  and  the  great  ends  for  which  they  live.    II.  Sdcb 

AN  ATTENTION  TO  THE  WOBD  OP    GOD  18  MATTER  OP  ABSOLUTE  AND  UNIVERSAL  DUTY  AND 

OBLIGATION.  We  are  all  bound  to  receive  Divine  instruction,  and  to  receive  it  in 
the  mode  contemplated  in  the  text.  The  law  of  Moses  directed  that,  at  stated 
seasons,  there  were  to  be  holy  convocations  of  the  people ;  when  they  were  to  be 
collected  in  masses,  to  engage  in  holy  duties,  to  enjoy  holy  delights,  to  receive  holy 
light  and  power,  and  thereby  to  be  filled  for  those  high  and  holy  ends  for  which 
they  existed  as  a  separate  people.  In  the  gospel,  Christians  are  commanded  not 
to  forsake  the  assembling  of  themselves  together.  They  are  to  "exhort  one 
another."  Along  with  these  commands,  there  are  "  given  unto  ua  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promises."  "  In  all  places  where  I  record  My  name  I  will  come  unto 
thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee  "  (Exod.  xx.  24 ;  Matt,  xviii.  20).  We  are  bound  to  give 
this  attendance  on  the  word  and  worship  of  God,  because  He  requires  it.  We  are 
bound  to  do  this,  because  we  ourselves  have  need  of  it.  If  the  highest  archangel 
in  heaven  were  commanded  to  frequent  religious  assemblies,  as  a  learner,  and  as  a 
worshipper,  he  would  not  refuse.  This  was  done  by  Him  who  has  received  "  ft 
name  which  is  above  every  name."  As  the  Mediator,  Jesus  Christ  was  subject  to 
the  Father ;  and  He  testified  that  subjection  by  a  devout  regard  for  His  ordinances. 
He  was  a  stated  attendant  on  the  services  of  the  Temple.  But  we  are  not  merely 
creatures  :  we  are  also  sinners.  We  are  not  only  subject  to  our  Maker's  authoritv ; 
we  need  our  Maker's  mercy.  If  we  would  obtain  His  blessing,  we  must  seek  it  in  the 
way  of  His  own  appointment.  In  any  other  way  He  has  not  promised  it;  in  any  other 
way  we  have  no  right  to  expect  it.  It  does  not  mean  that  the  vulgar  and  illiterate 
must  go  to  Church,  but  that  men  of  science  and  hterature  are  at  liberty  to  stay 
away.  A  man  may  be  as  great  a  philosopher  as  Socrates  or  Plato ;  but  then  he  is  a 
creature  and  a  sinner.  He  must  therefore  attend  to  his  Creator's  word ;  he  must 
kneel  at  his  Creator's  feet.  Neither  can  political  rank  at  all  free  us  from  this  great 
obligation.  A  man  may  be  a  lord,  a  duke,  a  king,  or  an  emperor ;  yet  he  must 
imitate  the  example  of  Him  who  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings.  No  man  is 
excused  on  the  ground  of  poverty  and  meanness.  It  may  mortify  him  excessively 
to  exhibit  his  rags  before  a  large  and  respectable  congregation ;  but  Christ  hath  left 
us  an  example  that  we  should  tread  in  His  steps.  His  piety  and  poverty  were 
great  and  manifest.  The  plea  of  a  high  and  refined  spirituaUty  of  mind  will  be 
equally  unavailing.  It  is  useless  to  say,  "  I  have  no  need  to  observe  the  mere  formi 
of  piety,  since  I  enjoy  its  spirit  and  its  power."  III.  The  men  of  bustle  and 
business  are  sometimes  disposed  to  look  upon  all  this  attendance  on  the  Word  of  God 

AS  so  MUCH    LOST   TIME,  AND  AN  INCONTENIBNT   INTERPEBENCB  WITH  THE  C0NCEBN8   OV 

LIFE.  If  such  excuses  could  ever  be  seasonable,  they  might  have  been  urged  by  the 
fishermen  of  Galilee,  on  the  occasion  referred  to  in  the  text.  They  had  toiled  all 
the  night  before,  and  caught  nothing.  They  were  now  in  the  act  of  washing  their 
nets,  in  order  at  the  earliest  opportunity  to  go  to  sea  again  and  make  another 
attempt.  Several  of  them,  it  is  probable,  had  families  dependent  on  their  industry 
and  success.  Under  such  circumstances  they  might  have  said,  "  Lord,  we  have  no 
time  to  hear  sermons  now.  It  is  impossible  for  ua  to  comply  with  your  request, 
and  to  spare  our  boat  for  preaching  purposes  at  present.  We  must  follow  our  em- 
ployment, or  our  debts  cannot  be  paid,  nor  our  children's  wants  supplied."  But 
not  a  word  of  objection  or  excuse  was  heard.  What  follows  proves  that  in  the  end 
they  suffered  no  loss.  Know,  therefore,  that  there  is  a  providence ;  a  blessing  of 
the  Lord  which  maketh  rich.  IV.  The  Word  op  God  deserves  to  be  implicitly 
bsusvkd  and  obeyed.    We  may  always  venture  to  carry  out  its  instructions  into 


CHAT.  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  467 

practical  effect  in  the  face  of  every  difficulty  and  disconragement.  But  Peter 
reasoned  on  a  different  principle,  and  came  to  a  different  conclusion.  He  called 
Jesns  '*  Master,"  and  was  consistent  with  himself.  Many  of  us  talk  like  servants 
while  we  act  like  masters.  We  say,  "Lord,  Lord,"  but  do  not  the  things  which  He 
enjoins.  But  Peter  understood  his  duty  better.  When  the  Master  commands,  the 
servant's  business  is,  not  to  argue,  but  to  obey.     V.  That  Word  desebves  our 

ATTENTION  ON  ACCOUNT  OF   ITS  POWER  TO  REACH  AND  CONTROL  THE  HUMAN  HEART.       The 

Author  of  the  Bible  knows  what  is  in  man.  He  can  speak  to  the  heart  of  His  own 
creatures.  His  Word  touches  the  hidden  springs  of  thought  and  feeling,  and  thus 
turns  us  about  whithersoever  Hewill  (Heb.iv.l2).  Peter  found  this  by  experience.  The 
sermon  was  heard,  and  such  was  the  silent  and  secret  but  powerful  effect  of  Divine 
truth  upon  his  heart,  that  he  saw  his  unutterable  guilt  and  depravity  as  in  the  light 
of  open  day ;  and  became  so  agitated  with  grief  and  terror,  that,  in  the  end,  he  fell 
down  at  Jesus'  knees,  exclaiming,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O 
Lord  "  (ver.  8).  You  will  soon  be  brought  to  the  same  temper,  if  you  listen  to  the 
same  Teacher.  VI.  It  is  not  intended,  however,  to  intimate  that  this  matchless 
Word  will  introduce  ua  to  a  rest  and  peace,  which  implies  an  exemption  from 
worldly  calamities.  When  the  disciples  were  favoured  with  the  immediate 
presence  of  Christ,  and  were  in  the  very  act  of  receiving  a  miraculous  blessing  at 
His  hands,  we  scarcely  expected  to  hear  anything  of  a  broken  net  and  a  sinking 
boat.  Yet  both  these  inconveniences  were  experienced  on  this  memorable  occasion. 
The  afflictions  of  a  good  man  only  tend  to  heighten  his  gratitude,  by  more  abundant 
displays  of  the  Divine  faithfulness  and  love.  It  was  wonderful  that  the  net  ahould 
be  suffered  to  break  ;  but  it  was  more  wonderful  that,  after  this  accident,  the  fishes 
were  not  lost.  It  was  wonderful  that  the  boat  should  be  suffered  to  begin  to  sink  ; 
but  it  was  more  wonderful  that,  in  such  a  state,  they  should  all  come  safe  to  land. 
God  often  reduces  His  people  to  the  last  extremities,  and  then  shows  them  His 
salvation.  The  vessel  which  bears  the  saints  to  glory  is  often  in  a  leaky  and  sinking 
state.  All  hope  of  being  saved  is  not  unfrequently  taken  away.  Yet,  while  they 
have  an  ear  to  hear,  and  a  heart  to  obey,  they  continue  to  float.  VII,  The  benefits 

ARISING  FROM  AN  ATTENTION  TO  THE  WoBD  OF    GOD  ARE  NOT   CONFINED    TO   OURSELVES  : 

THEY  EXTEND  TO  OTHERS.  While  attention  to  the  Word  of  God  teaches  us  the  duty 
of  instructing  others,  it  also  gives  us  the  disposition  to  make  the  attempt.  Piety 
and  charity  are  inseparably  connected.  {Samuel  Jackson.)  The  attractive  power 
of  the  gospel : — Jesus  as  a  preacher  "  drew."  What  was  the  attraction  ?  He  used 
no  rhetorical  device  to  produce  an  effect.  His  method  was  startling  in  its  novelty. 
He  did  not  follow  the  customs  of  His  age.  Though  claiming  to  be  a  religious 
teacher.  He  did  not  adopt  the  conventional  role  of  a  priest  or  scribe.  But  to  really 
appreciate  the  spirit  of  the  Preacher  we  must  understand  His  doctrine.  The 
message  He  brought  men  made  it  imperative  that  His  attitude  towards  them  should 
be  that  of  large-hearted  sympathy.  Now,  there  are  some  things  I  want  you  to 
see  as  the  result  of  this  exposition.  1.  The  first  is  that  the  gospel  ol  Christ,  when 
proclaimed  in  the  proper  spirit,  never  fails  to  touch  the  heart.  In  a  sermon  of 
Bishop  Fraser's  I  read  the  following  story :  A  well-known  Anglican  Bishop  was 
announced  to  preach  in  a  certain  church.  A  tradesman  in  the  parish,  the  leader  of 
a  set  of  Atheists,  made  up  his  mind  to  go  and  hear  him.  He  listened  attentively, 
and  after  the  sermon  he  said  to  some  one,  "  If  that  bishop  had  argued,  I  would 
have  fought  with  him ;  but  there  was  no  arguing  about  him ;  he  preached  to  us 
simply  about  the  love  of  God,  and  that  touched  me."  Let  the  gospel  be  preached 
with  the  simplicity  and  sympathy  with  which  it  was  first  preached  in  Galilee,  and 
people  will  still  be  found  pressing  to  hear.  2.  The  next  thing  I  want  you  to  see  is, 
that  the  gospel  and  spirit  of  Christ  are  the  powers  that  have  been  refining  and 
elevating  society  ever  since  He  lived  and  taught.  Slowly,  almost  insensibly,  the 
gospel  has  been  making  its  way  in  society.  3.  The  last  thing  I  want  you  to  see  is, 
that  the  gospel  and  spirit  of  Jesus  alone  have  the  power  to  make  humanity  noble  and 
good.  What  a  principle  this  is  on  which  to  base  individual,  social,  and  political 
life — God  is  the  Father  of  all  men  and  has  given  His  Son  to  redeem  them  from 
death  ;  all  men  are  the  sons  of  God,  bound  to  obey  Him  with  loving  and  filial 
spirit ;  each  man  owes  to  every  other  man  the  duties  of  a  brother.  Were  that 
principle  realized  the  happiness  of  the  world  would  far  surpass  the  dreams  of  the 
most  ardent  sociaUst.  Getting  rich  by  methods  that  injure  others  would  be  on- 
known.    {S.  H.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 

yn.  4.   Launcb  out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  drauglil'-' 


46B  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cinr.  ▼. 

(hit  of  the  deep : — I.  Recall  the  historic  event.  1.  It  is  not  work  that  tries  men 
and  women,  half  as  much  as  it  is  the  disappointment  which  unsuccess  brings.  2. 
The  best  and  only  real  recreation  which  any  soul  can  find  is  that  which  comes  from 
resting  in  the  Lord,  and  in  abiding  patiently  upon  Him,  in  the  faith  that  He  doeth 
all  things  well,  even  when  He  asks  us  to  labour  on  without  finding  any  immediate 
reward.  II.  Christ  takes  His  people  into  the  deep.  There  was  in  the  arisis- 
hour  of  St.  Peter's  personal  history  a  striking  coincidence  between  his  outward  and 
his  inward  experience — a  parable  of  all  Divine  dealings  with  men.  1.  Think  of  the 
present  attitude  of  the  world  towards  revealed  truth.  It  shrinks  from  launching  out 
into  the  deep.  The  prevailing  tendency  is  towards  the  superficial  rather  than  the 
substantial.  We  aim  at  greatness  instead  of  thoroughness.  Men  have  pushed 
their  investigations  in  every  direction  ;  but  they  are  disposed  to  stop  just  where  the 
problem  deepens  into  anything  like  mystery,  and  where  faith  must  take  the  place 
of  sight.  Whenever  I  meet  with  one  of  these  flippant  retailers  of  modern  objectiona 
to  Holy  Scripture,  and  hear  him  making  light  of  revealed  truth,  and  ventilating  with 
imperiousness  his  opinion  that  the  Bible  is  largely  a  myth,  I  always  feel  like  asking 
such  a  man :  "  My  friend,  have  you  ever  pushed  out  from  the  shallow  into  the 
depth  of  these  questions  ?  Have  ever  your  knees  touched  the  waters  of  God's 
mighty  sea  ?  Have  you  ever  gone,  alone  with  Christ,  away  from  the  shore  and  its 
noisy  multitude,  to  where  His  waves  are  mountains?"  2.  In  the  workings  and 
leadings  of  His  providence,  God  sometimes  takes  us  out  of  the  region  of  shallow, 
everyday  experiences,  into  those  which  are  very  deep  and  solemn.  There  are 
depths  of  sorrow,  of  affliction,  and  doubt  and  depression,  of  poverty  and  bodily  sick- 
ness, of  temptation,  of  penitence  and  shame,  and  of  spiritual  weakness  ;  and  some 
of  them  are  mysterious,  unfathomable.  There  is,  in  such  cases,  no  use  in  trying 
to  see  bottom.  Now  and  then  the  soul  is  tempted  to  think  that  chance,  or  accident, 
or  lack  of  foresight,  or  an  enemy  of  some  kind,  has  lured  him  out  there,  just  to 
drown  him  or  to  fill  him  with  terror.  Nay,  it  was  a  loving  Guide  who  led  you 
thither.  (E.  E.  Johnson,  M.A.)  Advancement  in  prayer: — Prayer  has  small 
beginnings ;  but  it  should  be  progressive,  never  stationary.  It  is  a  science  needing 
practice,  and  practice  in  it,  as  in  other  sciences,  will  make  perfect.  Our  Lord  bade 
St.  Peter  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land ;  then  He  made  him  launch  out  into 
the  deep.  Our  first  prayers  are  a  thrusting  out  a  little  from  the  land,  a  little  dis- 
engagement of  the  thoughts,  of  the  affections,  from  earth.  But  if  we  would  gain 
anything,  we  must  not  rest  satisfied  with  this,  but  must,  at  Christ's  word,  launch 
forth  into  the  deep  of  spiritual  communion  with  God.  I.  Prayer,  to  be  efficacious, 
must  be  recollected.  All  the  powers  of  the  mind  must  be  drawn  off  from  other 
matters,  and  concentrated  on  Him  whom  you  are  addressing.  The  wandering 
imagination  has  to  be  recalled  from  those  objects  about  which  it  plays,  like  a 
butterfly  round  garden  flowers,  that  it  may  rest  on  God.  The  memory  is  called 
away  from  the  aSairs  of  ourselves,  that  it  may  be  used  to  supply  food  for  the 
meditation  in  which  we  are  engaged.  The  understanding  is  withdrawn  from 
musing  and  irrelevant  objects,  that  it  may  reason  and  reflect  on  the  matter  of  our 
prayer  and  on  the  nature  of  Him  to  whom  we  pray.  Finally,  the  will,  which  nma 
after  a  thousand  objects  which  it  desires,  loves,  and  takes  pleasure  in,  is  fixed  on 
God,  and  strives  to  conform  itself  to  the  Divine  will,  producing  affections  and 
forming  resolutions  such  as  the  subject  of  meditation  and  devotion  exacts.  II. 
Prayer  should  be  disengaged.  After  St.  Peter  had  received  Jesns  into  his  vessel, 
he  thrust  out  a  little  from  the  land.  So,  in  prayer,  the  thoughts  which  are 
attached  to  earth,  like  the  moorings  of  a  boat,  must  be  flung  loose,  or  the  vessel 
cannot  put  to  sea.  III.  Prayer  must  be  earnest.  While  disengagement  resemblea 
a  sportsman  raising  his  gun  to  his  shoulder,  and  recollection  represents  him 
sighting  his  object,  earnestness  is  the  charge  of  powder  with  which  his  gun  is 
loaded.  IV.  Prayer  must  be  definite.  Vague  prayer  vrithoot  a  purpose  is  never 
very  earnest,  nor  can  it  be  effectual.  A  good  plan  is  to  take  one  grace  at  a  time, 
and  ask  for  that,  then  another,  and  so  on.  Definiteness  is  the  bullet  to  hit  the 
mark.  V.  Prayer  must  be  persevering.  This  proves  that  we  are  in  earnest,  that 
we  really  desire  that  for  which  we  ask.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  Launching  out 
into  the  deep : — We  have  toiled  in  the  narrows  too  long,  and  have  taken  little  by 
oar  toil.  Look  rocnd  you  in  this  nineteenth  century  of  Christendom,  and  snrvey 
what  ought  to  be  a  kingdom  of  heaven.  We  must  launch  out  into  the  deep,  the 
great  human  deep,  which  is  in  Christ's  dominion,  and  not  in  the  devil's,  and  let 
down  our  nets  for  a  draught.  We  have  learnt  wisdom  perhaps  from  our  faults,  our 
(bllies,  our  faUures.   The  Church  has  toiled  in  the  shallows  surrounding  her  coastsj 


.  r.)  ST.  LUKE.  4W 


among  the  Bonls  she  could  get  within  her  pale.  But  rarely  has  man,  in  his  simpl# 
human  relations  and  activities,  been  suffered  to  feel  that  as  man  he  was  dear  to 
Christ,  and  a  subject  of  His  kingdom.  The  great  evangelical  movement  began  with 
a  noble  attempt  to  fulfil  this  command.  The  evangelists  saved  our  State.  Voltaire 
wrote  to  d'Alembert,  when  the  revolutionary  yeast  was  beginning  to  work :  "  We 
have  never  pretended  to  enlighten  the  cobblers  and  the  maid-servants ;  we  leave 
that  to  the  apostles."  In  a  few  years  those  cobblers  and  maid-servants  were  flooding 
the  gutters  of  Paris  with  the  best  blood  of  France  ;  while  in  England  the  apostles 
had  tamed  them.  But  the  evangelical  movement,  as  the  years  passed  on,  shut 
itself  up  more  and  more  to  its  Churches,  and  treated  the  great  human  world,  the 
world  of  secular  thought,  activity,  and  interest,  as  quite  outside  its  pale.  Christ 
points  us  to  the  broad  ocean,  the  great  human  deep — the  relations,  the  energies, 
the  industries,  and  the  interests,  the  thoughts,  and  the  sympathies  of  men,  in  their 
physical,  intellectual,  social,  and  pohtical  life ;  these  we  claim  for  His  kingdom, 
these  be  it  ours  to  win  to  His  love.  Instead  of  saving  souls  out  of  the  world,  let  us 
save  the  world  with  the  souls  in  it.  [J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B. A.)  Encouragement  to 
work  far  God,  though  unsuccessful : — 1.  Have  we  to  contend  in  our  work  with  a 
ieeling  of  its  having  been  fruitless  ?  In  the  case  of  sensible  labour,  there  always  is 
some  result.  How  different,  on  the  contrary,  is  the  case  of  the  labourer  in  the 
world  of  mind  1  Does  the  feeling  of  the  fruitlessness  of  our  spiritual  work  oppress 
and  summon  us  to  conflict,  or  do  we  bear  it  lightly  ?  There  are  men  who  know  this 
f eeUng  very  well,  but,  in  a  certain  measure,  feel  comfortable  in  it.  2.  If  the  feeling 
of  dejection  is  now  threatening  to  overcome  us,  let  us  not  indulge  it;  let  us  ask 
rather  how  to  change  it  into  the  joyful  confidence  of  success  1  And  whither  shall 
we  go  ?  Where  Peter  went ;  with  Jesus  we  find  help.  The  same  Peter  who  now 
complains,  "  Lord,  we  have  toiled,"  Ac,  how  differently  he  had,  -a  few  momenta 
after,  to  judge  1  But  still  more.  Had  he  not  laboured  in  vain,  the  Lord  had  not 
found  him,  nor  he  the  Lord.  We  see  here,  in  a  very  evident  example,  how  deceit- 
ful the  feeling  of  fruitlessness  is,  and  how  we  should  not  let  ourselves  be  taken  in 
by  it.  But  not  only  that — we  have  also  a  security  for  it  that  labour  for  spiritual 
purposes  can  never  be  in  vain.  {Professor  Rothe.)  Finhing  too  near  shore: — 
"  LanaclLQ.Qt  into-lha-deep."  I.  This  Divine  counsel  comes,  first,  to  all  those  who 
are  paddling  in  the  mabgin  of  bible  eeseakch.  My  father  read  the  Bible  through 
three  times  after  he  was  eighty  years  of  age,  and  without  spectacles ;  not  for  the 
mere  purpose  of  saying  he  had  been  through  it  so  often,  but  for  his  eternal  profit. 
John  Colby,  the  brother-in-law  of  Daniel  Webster,  learned  to  read  after  he  was 
eighty-four  years  of  age,  in  order  that  he  might  become  acquainted  with  the 
Scriptures.  There  is  no  book  in  the  world  that  demands  so  much  of  our  attention 
as  the  Bible.  Yet  nine-tenths  of  Christian  men  get  no  more  than  ankle-deep. 
Walk  all  up  and  down  this  Bible  domain  I  Try  every  path.  Plunge  in  at  the 
prophecies,  and  come  out  at  the  epistles.  Go  with  the  patriarchs,  until  you  meet 
the  evangelists.  Bummage  and  ransack,  as  children  who  are  not  satisfied  when 
they  come  to  a  new  house,  until  they  know  what  is  in  every  room,  and  into  what 
every  door  opens.  Open  every  jewel-casket.  Examine  the  sky-lights.  For  ever 
be  asking  questions.  Put  to  a  higher  use  than  was  intended  the  Oriental  proverb, 
"Hold  all  the  skirts  of  thy  mantle  extended  when  Heaven  is  raining  gold."  The 
sea  of  God's  Word  is  not  like  Gennesaret,  twelve  miles  by  six,  but  boundless ;  and 
in  any  one  direction  you  can  sail  on  for  ever.  Why,  then,  confine  yourself  to  a 
short  psalm,  or  to  a  few  verses  of  an  epistle  ?  The  largest  fish  are  not  near  the 
shore.  Sail  away,  oh  ye  mariners,  for  eternity  I  Launch  out  into  the  deep.  II. 
The  text  is  appropriate  to  all  Cheistians  of  shallow  experience.  ^  Doubts  and 
fears  have  in  our  day  been  almost  elected  to  the  Parliament  of  Christian  graces. 
Doubts  and  fears  are  not  signs  of  health,  but  festers  and  carbuncles.  You  have  a 
valuable  house  or  farm.  It  is  suggested  that  the  title  is  not  good.  You  employ 
counseL  You  have  the  deeds  examined.  You  search  the  record  for  mortgages, 
judgments,  and  liens.  You  are  not  satisfied  until  yon  have  a  certificate,  signed  by 
the  great  Seal  of  the  State,  assuring  you  that  the  title  is  good.  Yet  how  many 
leave  their  title  to  heaven  an  undecided  matter !  Christian  character  is  to  come  up 
to  higher  standards.  We  have  now  to  hunt  through  our  Hbrary  to  find  one  Robert 
M'Cheyne,  or  one  Edward  Payson,  or  one  Harlan  Page.  The  time  wiU  come  when 
we  will  find  half  a  dozen  of  them  sitting  in  the  same  seat  with  as.  The  grace  of 
God  can  make  a  great  deal  better  men  than  those  I  have  mentioned.  Christians  seem 
afraid  they  will  get  heterodox  by  going  too  far.  IH.  The  text  is  appropriate  to  all 
vbo  *«^  XBOASBO  n  Chbibtux  wobk.    The  Charoh  of  God  has  been  fishing  alonf 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA?.  r. 

the  shore.  We  set  our  net  in  a  good,  cabn  place,  and  in  sight  of  a  fine  chapel,  and 
we  go  down  every  Sunday  to  see  if  the  fish  have  been  wise  enough  to  come  into  one 
net.  We  might  learn  something  from  that  boy  with  his  hook  and  line.  He  throws 
his  line  from  the  bridge :  no  fish.  He  sits  down  on  a  log  :  no  fish.  He  stands  in. 
the  sunlight  and  casts  the  line :  but  no  fish.  He  goes  up  by  the  mill-dam,  and 
stands  behind  the  bank,  where  the  fish  cannot  see  him,  and  he  has  hardly  dropped 
the  hook  before  the  cork  goes  under.  The  fish  come  to  him  as  fast  as  he  can  throw 
them  ashore.  In  other  words,  in  our  Christian  work,  why  do  we  not  go  where  the 
fish  are  7  It  is  not  so  easy  to  catch  souls  in  church,  for  they  know  that  we  are 
trying  to  take  them.  With  the  Bible  in  one  pocket,  and  the  hymn-book  in  another 
pocket,  and  a  loaf  of  bread  under  your  arm,  launch  out  into  the  great  deep  of  this 
world's  wretchedness.  IV.  The  text  is  appropriate  to  all  the  unfobqiven.  Every 
sinner  in  this  house  would  come  to  God  if  he  thought  that  he  might  come  just  as 
he  is.  People  talk  as  though  the  pardon  of  God  were  a  narrow  river,  like  the 
Kennebec  or  the  Thames,  and  that  their  sin  draws  too  much  water  to  enter  it.  No ; 
it  is  not  a  river,  nor  a  bay,  but  a  sea.  I  should  like  to  persuade  you  to  launch  out 
into  the  great  deep  of  God's  mercy.  I  am  a  merchant.  I  have  bought  a  cargo  oi 
spices  in  India.  I  have,  through  a  bill  of  exchange,  paid  for  the  whole  cargo.  Yoa 
are  a  ship-captain.  I  give  you  the  orders,  and  say, "  Bring  me  those  spices."  Ton- 
land  in  India.  Yoa  go  to  the  trader  and  say,  "  Here  are  the  orders  "  ;  and  yon  find 
everything  all  right.  You  do  not  stop  to  pay  the  money  yourself.  It  is  not  your 
business  to  pay  it.  The  arrangements  were  made  before  you  started.  So  Christ 
purchases  your  pardon.  He  puts  the  papers,  or  the  promises,  into  your  hand.  I» 
it  wise  to  stop  and  say,  "  I  cannot  pay  for  my  redemption  "  t  God  does  not 
ask  yoa  to  pay.  Beijing  on  what  has  been  done,  launch  oat  into  the  deep.  (Dr, 
Talmage.) 

Yer.  5.  UMter,  we  have  tolled  an  the  night,  and  have  taken  nothing :  neyertbe- 
less,  at  Thy  word. — Obedience  to  Vie  word  of  Christ : — How  very  much  may  simple 
obedience  partake  of  the  sublime !  Peter  here  appeals,  quite  naturally,  to  one  of 
the  grandest  principles  which  rule  among  intelligent  beings,  and  to  the  strongest 
force  which  sways  the  universe.  Great  God,  it  is  "  at  Thy  word  "  that  seraphs  fly 
and  cherubs  bow  1  Acting  in  conformity  with  ••  Thy  word,"  we  feel  ourselves  to  be 
in  order  with  all  the  forces  of  the  on  i verse,  travelHng  on  the  main  track  of  all  real 
existence.  Is  not  this  a  sublime  condition,  even  though  it  be  seen  in  the  common 
deeds  of  oar  everyday  life  ?  I.  "  At  Thy  word  "  should  apply  to  aiJj  thb  ATFAiaa 
OF  OBDiNABT  LXFB.  1.  I  mean,  first,  as  to  continuance  in  honest  industry  (1  Cor.  vii. 
20j.  Be  diligent.  Labour  on  in  hope.  Your  best  endeavours  vnll  not  of  themselves 
brmg  yoa  prosperity ;  still,  do  not  relax  those  endeavours.  God  has  placed  yoa 
where  you  are ;  move  not  till  His  providence  calls  yoa.  Do  not  ran  before  the 
eloud.  Let  not  despondency  drive  you  to  anjithing  rash  or  unseemly.  2.  As  to 
seeking  for  employment,  if  you  have  none.  Go  on  seeking.  Let  men  see  that  a 
Christian  is  not  readily  diiven  to  despair ;  nay,  let  them  see  that  when  the  yoke  ia 
made  more  heavy  the  Lord  has  a  secret  way  of  strengthening  the  backs  of  His 
children  to  bear  their  burdens.  8.  It  may  be  that  you  have  been  endeavouring  in 
your  daily  life  to  acquire  skill  in  your  business,  and  yoa  have  not  succeeded,  or  yoa 
have  tried  to  acquire  more  knowledge,  so  that  yoa  could  better  fulfil  your  vocation, 
bat  hitherto  yoa  have  not  prospered  as  you  could  wish.  Do  not,  therefore,  cease 
from  your  efforts.  Christians  must  never  be  idlers.  Our  Lord  Jesus  would  nevee 
have  it  said  that  His  disciples  are  a  sort  of  cowards  who,  if  they  do  not  succeed  the 
first  time,  will  never  try  again.  At  His  word  let  down  the  net  once  more :  He  may 
intend  largely  to  bless  you  when  by  trial  you  have  been  prepared  to  bear  the  bene- 
diction.  11.  In  hatters  or  spibitual  PBOFiTraa  we  mast  at  the  word  of  Christ  let 
down  the  net  again.  III.  The  great  principle  of  our  text  should  be  applied  to  ouft 
LIFE-BUSINESS — soul-winning.  Our  method  of  catching  men  is  by  letting  down  the 
net  of  the  gospel.  Each  believer  has  a  warrant  to  seek  the  conversion  of  his 
fellows.  The  word  of  the  Lord  is  a  warrant  which  justifies  the  man  who  obeys  it.  It 
will  leave  us  guilty  if  we  do  not  obey.  This  warrant  from  Christ  is  one  which,  if 
we  be  in  the  state  of  heart  of  Simon  Peter,  will  be  omnipotent  with  as.  It  was  very 
powerful  with  Simon  Peter.  1.  He  was  under  the  influence  of  a  great  disappoint- 
ment. Yet  he  let  down  the  net.  2.  This  command  in  Peter  overcame  his  love  of 
ease.  8.  The  command  of  Christ  was  so  supreme  over  Peter  that  he  was  not  held 
back  by  carnal  reason.  Reason  would  say,  "  If  you  could  not  catch  fish  in  the 
Bight,  yoo  will  certainly  not  do  so  in  the  day."    But  when  Christ  comraands,  the 


«AF.  v.]  8T.  LUKE.  47> 

most  unlikely  time  is  likely,  and  the  most  unpromising  sphert  becomes  hopeful, 
4.  The  lesson  to  you  and  me  is  this  :  Let  us  do  as  Peter  did,  and  let  down  the  net. 
personally,  for  the  apostle  said,  '•  I  will  let  down  the  net."  Cannot  you  do  some- 
thing yourself — ^with  your  own  heart,  lips,  hands  ?  5.  And  you  had  better  do  it  at. 
once.  You  may  never  have  another  opportunity ;  your  zeal  may  have  evaporated,. 
or  your  life  may  be  over.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  power  of  Ood's  word ;— "  At 
Thy  word  " — ^here  is  the  cause  of  causes,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God.. 
••  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made,"  and  by  that  word  was  the  present 
constitution  of  this  round  world  settled  as  it  stands.  When  the  earth  was  fruitless, 
and  dark.  Thy  voice,  O  Lord,  was  heard,  saying,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  and  "  at  Thy 
word  "  light  leaped  forth.  "  At  Thy  word  "  day  and  night  took  up  their  places,  and 
•*  at  Thy  word  "  the  waters  were  divided  from  the  waters  by  the  firmament  of 
heaven.  "  At  Thy  word  "  the  dry  land  appeared,  and  the  seas  retired  to  their 
channels.  •'  At  Thy  word  "  the  globe  was  mantled  over  with  green,  and  vegetable 
life  began.  "  At  Thy  word  "  appeared  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars,  "  for  signs,  and 
for  seasons,  and  for  days,  and  years."  "  At  Thy  word  "  the  living  creatures  tilled  the 
sea,  and  air,  and  land,  and  man  at  last  appeared.  Of  all  this  we  are  well  assured,, 
for  by  faith  we  know  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God.  Nor  is  it  in- 
creation  alone  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  is  supreme,  but  in  providence,  too,  its. 
majestic  power  is  manifested,  for  "  the  Lord  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of 
His  power."  Snow  and  vapour  and  stormy  wind  are  all  fulfilling  His  word.  Hi»> 
word  runneth  very  swiftly.  When  frost  binds  up  the  life-floods  of  the  year,  the 
Lord  sendeth  forth  His  word  and  melteth  them.  Nature  abides  and  moves  by  the. 
word  of  the  Lord.  So,  too,  all  matters  of  fact  and  history  are  beneath  the  suprema 
word.  Jehovah  stands  the  centre  of  all  things,  as  Lord  of  all  He  abides  at  the 
ealuting-point,  and  all  the  events  of  the  ages  come  marching  by  at  His  word,  bowing 
to  His  sovereign  will.  "  At  Thy  word,"  0  God,  kingdoms  arise  and  empires  flourish  ; 
♦•  at  Thy  word  "  races  of  men  become  dominant,  and  tread  down  their  fellows ;  "  at 
Thy  word  "  dynasties  die,  kingdoms  crumble,  mighty  cities  become  a  wilderness, 
and  armies  of  men  melt  away  like  the  hoar  frost  of  the  morning.  Despite  the  sin  of 
men  and  the  rage  of  devils,  there  is  a  sublime  sense  in  which  all  things  from  the 
beginning,  since  Adam  crossed  the  threshold  of  Eden  even  until  now,  have  happened 
according  to  the  purpose  and  will  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Prophecy  utters  her  oracles, 
and  history  writes  her  pages,  "  at  Thy  word,"  0  Lord.  (Ibid.)  Peter  and  nature 
in  harmony  : — It  is  wonderful  to  think  of  the  fisherman  of  Galilee  letting  down  his. 
net  in  perfect  consonance  with  all  the  arrangements  of  the  ages.  His  net  obeys  the 
law  which  regulates  the  spheres.  His  hand  consciously  does  what  Arcturus  and 
Orion  are  doing  without  thought.  This  little  bell  on  the  Galilean  lake  rings  out  in 
harmony  with  the  everlasting  chimes.  "  At  Thy  word,"  saith  Peter,  as  he  promptly 
obeys,  therein  repeating  the  watchword  of  seas  and  stars,  of  winds  and  worlds.  It 
is  glorious  thus  to  be  keeping  step  with  the  marchings  of  the  armies  of  the  King  of 
kings.  {Ibid.)  "At  Thy  ward  "  the  watchword  of  the  saints  : — "  At  Thy  word  "" 
has  been  the  password  of  all  good  men  from  the  beginning  until  now.  Saints  have 
acted  upon  these  three  words,  and  found  their  marching  orders  in  them.  An  ark  is 
bnilded  on  dry  land,  and  the  ribald  crowd  gather  about  the  hoary  patriarch,  laugh- 
ing at  him ;  but  he  is  not  ashamed,  for,  lifting  his  face  to  heaven,  he  saith,  "  I  have- 
builded  this  great  vessel,  O  Jehovah,  at  Thy  word."  Abraham  quits  the  place  of 
his  childhood,  leaves  his  family,  and  goes  with  Sarah  to  a  land  of  which  he  knows, 
nothing,  crossing  the  broad  Euphrates,  and  entering  upon  a  country  possessed  by  th©; 
Canaanite,  in  which  he  roams  as  a  stranger  and  a  sojourner  all  his  days.  He  dwells. 
in  tents  with  Isaac  and  Jacob.  If  any  scoff  at  him  for  thus  renouncing  the  comforts, 
of  settled  life,  he  lifts  also  his  calm  face  to  heaven,  and  smilingly  answers  to  the- 
Lord,  "  It  is  at  Thy  word."  Ay,  and  even  when  his  brow  is  furrowed,  and  the  hot, 
tear  is  ready  to  force  itself  from  beneath  the  patriarch's  eyelid,  as  he  lifts  his  hand, 
with  the  knife  to  stab  Isaac  to  the  heart,  if  any  charge  him  with  murder,  or  think, 
him  mad,  he  lifts  the  same  placid  face  towards  the  majesty  of  the  Most  High  and. 
saith,  "  It  is  at  Thy  word."  At  that  word  he  joyfully  sheathes  the  sacrificial  knife, 
for  he  has  proved  his  willingness  to  go  to  the  utmost  at  the  word  of  the  Lord  his 
God.  If  I  were  to  introduce  you  to  a  thousand  of  the  faithful  ones  who  have  shown. 
the  obedience  of  faith,  in  every  case  they  would  justify  their  acts  by  telling  you  that 
they  did  them  "  at  God's  word."  Moses  lifts  his  rod  in  presence  of  haught5< 
Pharaoh,  "  at  Thy  word,"  great  God  I  Nor  does  he  lift  that  rod  in  vain  at^ 
Jehovah's  word,  for  thick  and  heavy  fall  the  plagues  upon  the  children  of  Ham. 
They  are  made  to  know  that  God's  word  retameth  not  to  Him  void,  but  fulfilletb. 


4ta  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {<mA».  T. 

His  purpose,  whether  it  be  of  threatening  or  of  promise.  See  Moses  lead  tbt 
people  out  of  Egypt,  the  whole  host  in  its  myriads  I  Mark  how  he  has  brooght 
them  to  the  Red  Sea,  where  the  wilderness  doth  shut  them  in.  The  heights  frown 
on  either  side,  and  the  rattle  of  Egypt's  war-chanots  is  behind.  How  came  Moaea 
10  to  play  the  fool  and  bring  them  here  ?  Were  there  no  graves  in  Egypt  that  thus 
he  brought  them  forth  to  die  on  the  Red  Sea  shore  ?  The  answer  of  Moses  is  the 
quiet  reflection  that  he  did  it  at  Jehovah's  word,  and  God  justifies  that  word,  for 
tiie  sea  opens  wide  a  highway  for  the  elect  of  God,  and  they  march  joyfully  through, 
and  with  timbrels  and  dances  on  the  other  side  they  sing  unto  the  Lord  who  hath 
triumphed  gloriously.  If  in  after  days  you  find  Joshua  compassing  Jericho,  and 
not  assailing  it  with  battering  rams,  but  only  with  one  great  blast  of  trumpets, 
his  reason  is  that  God  has  spoken  to  him  by  His  word.  And  so  right  on,  for  time 
would  fail  me  to  speak  of  Samson,  and  Jephthab,  and  Barak  :  these  men  did  what 
they  did  at  God's  word ;  and,  doing  it,  the  Lord  was  with  them.  (Ibid.)  A  net 
for  each  one  to  let  down : — Peter  only  let  down  one  net,  and  there  was  the  pity  of  it. 
If  John  and  James  and  all  the  rest  had  let  down  their  nets,  the  result  would  have 
been  much  better.  •*  Why  ?  "  say  you.  Because,  through  there  being  only  one 
net,  that  net  was  overstrained,  and  broke.  If  all  the  nets  had  been  used,  they 
might  have  taken  more  fish,  and  no  net  would  have  been  broken.  I  was  reading 
some  time  ago  of  a  take  of  mackerel  at  Brighton;  when  the  net  was  full,  the 
mackerel  sticking  in  all  the  meshes  made  it  so  heavy  that  the  fishermen  could  not 
raise  it,  and  the  boat  itself  was  in  some  danger  of  going  down,  so  that  they  had  to 
out  away  the  net  and  lose  the  fish.  Had  there  been  many  nets  and  boats,  they 
might  have  buoyed  up  the  whole  of  the  fish  ;  and  so  they  might  have  done  in  this 
ease.  As  it  was,  many  fish  were  lost  through  the  breaking  of  the  net.  If  a  Church 
ean  be  so  awakened  that  each  individual  gets  to  work  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  all  the  individuals  combine,  then  how  many  souls  will  be  captured  for 
JesoB !  Multitudes  of  souls  are  lost  to  the  blessed  gospel  because  of  our  broken 
nets,  and  the  nets  get  broken  because  we  are  not  well  united  in  the  holy  service, 
and  by  our  unwisdom  cause  loss  to  our  Master's  cause.  Ministers  need  not  become 
worn  out  with  labour  if  all  would  take  their  share :  one  boat  would  not  begin  to 
sink  if  the  other  boats  took  a  part  of  the  blessed  load.  {Ibid.)  Many  are  in  need 
through  their  own  fault : — "  We  have  toiled  all  the  night,  and  have  taken  nothing." 
This  complaint  is  often  heard  nowadays,  also.  Although  many  poor  people  may 
assert,  with  perfect  truth,  that  they  have  laboured  hard,  yet  there  are  many  others 
whose  poverty  is  through  their  own  fault.  Some  of  the  faulty  occasions  are  the 
following.  I.  Laziness.  Many  show  neither  zeal  nor  industry  in  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  of  their  calling.  Poverty  is  the  necessary  consequence.  1.  According  to 
the  testimony  of  Scripture  (Prov.  xviii.  9;  xxi.  5).  2.  Reason  and  experience.  How 
can  he  catch  fishes  who  will  not  let  down  his  net  ?  II.  Lavishness.  1.  Many  dis- 
sipate their  property  through  folly.  (1)  They  have  not  learned  how  to  save.  (2) 
They  do  not  live  according  to  their  means.  (3)  They  attempt  rash  speculations, 
through  greed  of  gold.  2.  Through  extravagance  in  food  and  dress  (Prov.  xxi.  17  ; 
xxiii.  11).  III.  Want  of  feab  of  God.  1.  God  deprives  those  who  do  not  fear 
Him  of  His  blessing.  2.  He  visits  them  with  sickness,  and  aU  kinds  of  misfortune. 
{J.  J.  Haubs.)  Christ's  words,  and  not  our  own  judgment,  are  our  law  : — "  Sir," 
said  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  an  officer  who  urged  the  impossibility  of  executing 
the  directions  he  had  received,  •'  I  did  not  ask  your  opinion;  I  gave  you  my  orders, 
and  I  expect  to  have  them  obeyed."  Such  should  be  the  obedience  of  every 
follower  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  words  which  He  has  spoken  are  our  law,  not  our 
judgment  or  fancies.  Perseverance  necessary  : — The  fishermen  at  Mentone  keep 
on  fishing  with  their  great  net ;  ay,  by  the  score  these  fishermen  take  it  out  and 
haul  it  in  again,  and  frequently  they  get  no  more  than  one  little  sardine  for  their 
pains.  Many  and  many  a  time  no  more  than  they  can  hold  m  their  hand  is  the 
produce  of  the  casting  of  a  net  which  covers  acres  of  the  sea.  But  why  do  they  go 
on  ?  Because  they  are  fishermen,  and  cannot  do  anything  else.  Now,  we  are  pray- 
ing men,  and  there  is  nothing  else  we  can  do  but  wait  upon  the  Lord.  So  if,  after 
many  a  throw  of  the  net  of  prayer,  we  get  but  one  small  answer,  we  will  try  again, 
for  this  is  all  we  can  do.  Let  us  continue  instant  in  prayer.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
At^  Thy^  word : — These  fishermen  are  not  the  men  who  could  be  charged  with 
originating  the  gospel.  Yet  let  us  not  suppose  that  there  was  no  fitness  in  them 
for  the  work  they  had  to  do.  Their  very  occupation  was  one  which  bred  and 
nourished  those  veiy  qualities  which  would  stand  them  in  good  stead  as  the 
ftpostles  of  Christ.    Their  calling  was  one  which  demanded  observation,  that  thej 


«HA».  T.)  ST.  LUKE.  471 

might  discern  the  times  most  favourable.  They  had  to  scan  narrowly  the  sky,  ani 
discern  whether  there  were  signs  of  a  coming  tempest,  for  the  Sea  of  Galilee  wag 
treacherous,  and  would  often  rise  into  fury  in  a  few  moments.  Hence  they  needed 
both  prudence  and  courage.  And  they  needed  both  patience  and  perseverance  too. 
The  previous  night  had  been  one  of  no  new  experience  to  them.  The  new  day  waa 
to  be  the  greatest  in  their  Uves.  They  were  to  be  clothed  with  a  new  mission,  and 
strengthened  for  it  by  a  new  experience.  The  secret  of  their  success  was  to  be 
revealed  to  them  by  a  miracle,  the  memory  of  which  would  nerve  and  strengthen 
them  in  the  days  to  come.  The  command,  '*  Launch  out,"  &c.,  was  a  strange  one, 
but  still  it  was  the  command  of  the  Lord.  I.  Obedience  to  the  wobd  of  Cheist. 
Wise  to  have  authority  for  every  work  we  undertake.  Enough  for  the  soldier  that 
he  has  the  authority  of  his  officer,  for  the  officer  that  he  has  the  authority  of  his 
general,  for  the  ambassador  that  he  has  the  authority  of  his  king,  and  for  the 
Christian  labourer  that  he  has  the  authority  of  Christ.  "Nevertheless,"  said  Peter 
— that  is,  not  because  of  success,  but  in  spite  of  failure — •'  at  Thy  word  I  will  let 
down  the  net."  And  still  the  word  '•  nevertheless  "  is  on  the  lips  of  the  Church. 
Diflicultles  in  the  way  of  missionary  enterprise.  Arguments  of  those  who  hold  that 
heathen  races  should  be  allowed  to  remain  undisturbed  in  their  religions.  The 
slow  progress  we  are  making.  "  Nevertheless,  at  Thy  word,"  &c.  We  must  walk 
by  faith,  not  by  sight,  not  only  in  our  own  personal  Ufa,  but  in  looking  at  the 
progress  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  "  It  is  not  given  to  you  to  know."  These  are 
the  Saviour's  words.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  feel  assured  that  patient  labour  cannot, 
will  not,  fail,  and  to  say,  amid  all  discouragement  and  delay,  "Nevertheless,"  &c. 
II.  The  result  of  this  obedience.  It  had  in  it  not  much  of  cheerfulness,  nor 
perhaps,  any  faith,  but  it  was  obedience  under  trying  circumstances,  and  as  such  it 
was  crowned  with  success.  The  failure  of  the  previous  night  was  not  unforeseen  or 
nnarranged.  Christ  was  in  that  failure  as  much  as  in  the  success  that  followed  it. 
The  lesson  was — empty  nets  without  His  blessing  and  full  nets  with  it.  And  this 
lesson  they  were  to  remember  henceforth  when  they  should  become  fishers  of  men. 
Be  sure  thiat  Peter  would  remember  that  morning  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  at 
the  first  casting  of  the  gospel-net  he  enclosed  3,000  souls ;  and  a  few  days  after, 
when,  on  casting  the  net  again,  there  were  added  to  the  Church  5,000  souls.  The 
night  of  failure  was  not  without  its  lesson  and  benefit.  We  can  do  worse  than  fail — 
we  can  succeed  and  be  proud  of  our  success,  and  burn  incense  to  our  net,  and  despise 
those  who  fail,  and  forget  the  Hand  whose  it  is  to  give  or  to  withhold.  {E.  Mellor,  D.D.) 
The  spiritual  fishing  : — First,  the  state  of  the  world,  which  is  as  the  sea.  Secondly, 
the  state  of  the  Church,  which  is  as  a  ship  or  boat  in  the  sea.  Thirdly,  the  state 
of  men  by  nature,  who  be  as  fishes,  ranging  after  their  own  disposition  uncaught. 
Fourthly,  the  state  of  ministers,  who  be  as  fishers.  Fifthly,  the  state  of  the  gospel 
preached,  which  is  the  hook,  or  bait,  or  net  to  take  souls.  I.  And  tee  state  of  thb 
WORLD  IS  AS  the  bea  IN  A  FOUR-FOLD  RESPECT.  1.  Because  of  the  general  unstableness 
of  the  things  thereof.  The  unsettledness  of  that  vast  creature,  the  sea,  is  well  knovm. 
It  is  in  a  continual  motion  (it  cannot  rest),  it  ebbs  and  flows  perpetually:  sometimes 
(at  a  spring  tide)  it  swells  to  that  bigness  that  the  banks  cannot  contain  it ;  some- 
times, again,  it  falls  back  so  low,  that  a  man  must  go  far  from  the  bank  before  he  can 
come  near  it.  It  is  (under  God)  chiefly  governed  by  the  moon,  the  which  there  is 
no  one  thing  more  subject  unto  chance,  it  being  never  beheld  two  nights  together  in 
one  proportion.  Thus  is  the  world,  whether  we  look  upon  the  general  states  of  king- 
doms or  the  personal  estates  of  particular  men,  either  for  their  goods  or  for  their 
bodies,  we  see  nothing  but  a  continual  alteration.  Crowns  are  translated  from  head 
to  head,  and  sceptres  pass  from  one  hand  to  another  ;  fenced  cities  are  made  heaps, 
and  walled  towns  become  as  the  ploughed  fields  ;  they  which  were  once  fastened  as 
with  a  nail  in  a  sure  place,  and  having  set  their  nests  on  high,  dreamed  of  nothing 
but  perpetuities  for  them  and  theirs,  are  suddenly  thrown  out  of  all,  and  rolled  and 
turned  like  a  ball.  2.  Because  of  the  tumultuousness  of  it.  Who  is  ignorant  of  the 
storms  and  grievous  tempests  which  are  at  sea  ?  3.  The  world  resembles  the  sea 
by  the  oppression  that  is  in  it.  At  sea  the  lesser  fishes  are  a  prey  to  the  great  ones ; 
and  in  the  world  the  rich  and  mighty  swallow  up  the  poor ;  one  man  bites  and 
devours  another.  4.  In  respect  of  the  sway  the  devil  bears  in  it.  Observe  what  is 
in  the  Psalm,  "  The  sea  is  great  and  wide,  there  is  that  leviathan  whom  the  Lord 
hath  made  to  play  therein."  Now,  look  how  this  monster  domineers  in  the  sea,  so 
doth  Satan  here  in  the  world ;  therefore  he  is  called  the  god  of  this  world.  11.  The 
next  thing  is  touching  the  Church.  The  state  thereof  in  the  world  is  like  the 
■TATx  or  A  SHIP  OB  BOAT  UPON  THE  SEA;  aud  that  especially  in  this  respect — bocaus* 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

it  is  subject  to  continual  tossings.  1.  The  troubles  of  His  Ghuroh  and  the  afflie- 
tions  of  His  people  do  make  His  power  and  mercy  to  be  known ;  even  as  the  skill  ol 
a  pilot  is  most  to  be  seen  in  a  storm  :  "  My  power  is  made  perfect  through  weak- 
ness." 2.  For  their  good.  First,  it  makes  them  to  look  upward  with  the  greater 
fervency.  The  second  use  serves  to  teach  us  (because  the  Church  of  God  is  as  a 
ehip  in  this  sea  of  the  world)  the  necessity  of  furnishing  ourselves  with  such  things 
418  appertain  to  this  spiritual  voyage.  Not  to  insist  upon  many,  two  things  especially 
tnust  be  looked  to.  III.  Thb  thibd  THma  is  coNCBBMiMa  the  state  of  uen.  The 
fish  to  be  catched  out  of  this  sea  and  to  be  brought  into  this  ship  are  men.  *<  Thou 
ehalt  catch  men  from  henceforth."  And  well  in  this  are  we  compared  unto  the 
£sh.  For  as  the  fishes  skip  and  play  and  take  their  pleasure  in  the  sea  and  are  un> 
willingly  taken  in  the  net,  and  labour  to  get  out,  and,  being  in  the  boat,  would  fain, 
if  they  could,  leap  back  into  the  sea,  so  naturally  we  take  pleasure  in  our  sinful 
ways.  IV.  The  fodbth  thing  is  of  the  state  of  the  minister.  Here  are  two 
ihings.  1.  The  state  of  the  minister.  2.  The  labour,  business,  and  work  of  the 
minister.  Of  tbe  first  thus  we  see  :  That  is  no  superfluous  or  needless  function,  but 
a  calling  of  great  necessity  for  the  winning  and  saving  of  men's  souls.  Secondly, 
thus  :  That  the  calling  of  the  minister  is  no  idle  calling,  but  a  calling  of  labour,  a 
calling  of  much  business  and  of  great  employment.    V.  The  last  thing  is.  That  the 

NET  IN  which  men  MUST  BE  TAKEN  IS  THE  PBEACHING  OF  THE  GOSPEL.    The  Comparison 

agreeth  fitly  after  this  manner.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  like  to  a  net — 1. 
In  the  general  drift  and  use.  The  use  of  a  net  is  to  take  fish,  the  drift  of  preaching 
is  to  bring  in  souls.  2.  In  the  ordering  of  it.  It  is  not  that  net  lapped  up  together 
that  bringeth  in  the  draught,  but  hailed  out  at  length,  and  spread  forth,  that  closeth 
the  fish ;  it  is  the  opening  and  unfolding  of  the  gospel,  the  stretching  it  out  by 
preaching,  which  doth  encompass  souls.  There  may  a  fish  or  two  hang  in  the  net, 
being  let  down  on  a  heap,  but  that  is  a  chance,  and  is  no  wise  adventuring.  The 
Word  read,  and  so  brought  in  (as  it  were)  in  gross,  may  (by  the  mercy  of  God) 
take  some  ;  but  we  have  no  warrant  from  thence  to  make  a  rule  general.  Again, 
it  is  need  that  the  net  be  strong,  otherwise  the  greater  kind  will  break  through  and 
make  all  the  labour  and  charge  to  be  in  vain  ;  so  it  is  meet  that  the  doctrine  be 
well  strengthened  out  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  it  it  be  well  proved,  that  it  be  well 
pressed  and  applied,  that  the  consciences  of  the  hearers  may  be  convicted,  and 
that  they  may  see  it  is  God  and  not  man  with  whom  they  have  to  do  :  for,  a  man 
shall  meet  with  many  froward  and  wilful  and  violent  natures  that  will  not  be  held 
in,  but  when  they  feel  themselves  within  the  net  will  cry,  "  Let  us  break  their 
lands,  and  cast  their  cords  from  us  "  :  so  that  even  a  kind  of  violence  may  be  used 
to  keep  them  from  destruction.  3.  In  the  success  of  it.  Many  a  draught  the  poor 
fisherman  makes  and  taketh  nothing,  yet  he  leaveth  not  off.  Many  a  time  is  the 
net  of  preaching  shot  forth,  and  yet  none  converted  thereby  ;  so  it  pleaseth  God  to 
•exercise  the  patience  of  Hia  servants.  Yet  still  the  work  must  be  followed,  and  the 
Lord's  leisure  must  be  waited  for.  Often  doth  the  net  enclose  many  which  yet  after 
l)reak  away,  and  many  are  at  first  drawn  in  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  which  yet 
•fterwards  slide  back  and  return  again  to  their  own  profaneness.  (fii.  Hieron.) 
Unsuccessful  fishing  persevered  in : — ^I,  Consider  the  fatlube  indicated.  1.  They 
had  "  toiled."  Everything  in  this  world  comes  to  be  a  "  toil "  after  a  time.  Any 
kind  of  labour,  whether  of  mind  or  body,  and  even  pleasure,  is  devoid  of  permanent 
satisfaction.  2.  "All  the  night."  Incessant  labour,  with  no  result  but  failure. 
"The  process  is  familiar — (1)  In  personal  life.  After  all  our  efforts  and  struggles, 
we  confess  with  a  sigh  that  we  do  not  seem  to  grow  any  better.  (2)  In  work  for 
God  in  various  spheres.  Only  failure  seems  to  meet  us.  No  decrease  in  moral 
«vil ;  little  advance.  U.  There  must  be  reason  fob  such  failure.  The  general 
reason  is  the  absence  of  Divine  blessing.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,"  &o. 
He  alone  is  the  Author  of  all  good.  But  there  are  further  considerations  to  be 
taken  into  account.  1.  Perhaps  God  has  not  been  present  in  our  efforts.  They 
may  have  lacked — (1)  Simplicity  of  motive.  (2)  Earnestness  of  devotion.  (3) 
Humble  dependence  and  prayerfulness.  2.  Human  perversity  may  for  a  time 
be  permitted  to  have  its  way.  The  reason  for  this  is  hidden  now ;  we  shall  know 
one  day  why  it  is  so.  Or — 3.  God  may  have  withheld  His  blessing — (1)  To  try  our 
faith.  (2)  To  teach  as  how  better  to  labour.  (8)  In  order  to  some  greater  and 
more  blessed  result,  e.g.,  Jacob.  III.  Note  the  pebsevebino  obedience  of  faith. 
In  spite  of  failure  the  apostles  did  not  despair.  So  should  it  be  with  us.  1.  The 
command  of  Christ  is  our  warrant  for  labour.  2.  And  suggests  the  better  perform- 
anoe  of  work.    (1)  Better  preparation  —  "cleaning  nets."    (2)  Greater  skill  and 


OHA*.  T.]  8T.  LUKE.  471 

«are.  (8)  Deeper  hnmility.  Thinking  less  of  onr  own  part  in  the  work.  (4)  More 
perseverenoe.  (6)  Stronger  faith  in  the  Great  Worker  whose  instruments  we  are. 
8.  Such  labour  is  bound  to  be  ultimately  suocessfal.  Because  of  His  Word  and  our 
obedience.  When,  and  how,  we  know  not.  In  His  time  and  way.  But  surely  and 
certainly.  {George  Low,  M.A.)  The  disappointed  teamen: — Now,  if  we  search 
into  the  grounds  and  reasons  of  these  disappointments  by  the  hand  of  Providence,  we 
shall  find  them  reducible  to  a  threefold  cause  and  reason.  1.  The  sovereign  plea- 
sure of  God  BO  disposes  it.  2.  The  good  of  the  people  of  God  requires  it.  8.  The 
manifold  sins  of  men  in  their  callings  provoke  it.  1.  The  sovereign  pleasure  of 
God  BO  disposes  it.  He  is  the  Eector  of  the  universe,  and  as  such  will  still  assert 
His  dominion.  If  Providence  had  alike  prospered  every  man's  designs,  and  set 
ihem  upon  a  level,  there  had  been  no  occasion  to  exercise  the  rich  man's  charity 
or  the  poor  man's  patience.  Nay,  without  frequent  disappointments,  itself  would 
scarcely  be  owned  in  successes,  nor  those  successes  be  half  so  sweet  to  them  that 
receive  them,  as  now  they  are.  The  very  beauty  of  Providence  consists  much  in 
these  various  and  contrary  effects.  2.  And  if  we  consider  the  gracious  ends  and 
designs  of  God  towards  His  own  people,  it  appears  needful  that  all  of  them,  in  some 
things,  and  many  of  them  in  most  things  (relating  to  their  outward  condition  in 
this  world),  should  be  frustrated  in  their  expectations  and  contrivances.  For  if  all 
things  here  should  succeed  according  to  their  wish,  and  a  constant  tide  of  prosperity 
should  attend  them — (1)  How  soon  would  sensuality  and  earthliness  invade  their 
hearts  and  affections  1  Much  prosperity,  like  the  pouring  in  of  much  wine,  intoxi- 
eates,  and  overcomes  our  weak  heads  and  hearts.  Can  a  Christian  keep  his  heart 
«s  loose  from  the  smiling,  as  from  the  frowning  world  ?  (2)  How  soon  would  it 
estrange  them  from  their  God,  and  interrupt  their  communion  with  Him  !  He  had 
rather  you  should  miss  your  desired  comforts  in  these  things,  than  that  He  should 
miss  that  delightful  fellowship  with  you  which  He  so  desires.  (3)  How  loth  should 
we  be  to  leave  this,  if  constant  success  and  prosperity  should  follow  our  affairs  and 
designs  here  1  8.  And  as  disappointments  fall  out  as  the  effects  of  sovereign  plea- 
eore,  and  are  ordered  as  preventive  means  of  such  mischief,  which  prosperity  would 
occasion  to  the  people  of  God ;  so  it  comes  as  a  righteous  retribution  and  punish- 
ment of  the  many  evils  that  are  committed  in  our  trading  and  dealings  with  men. 
It  is  a  hard  thing  to  have  much  business  pass  through  our  hands,  and  no  iniquity 
oleave  to  them  and  defile  them.  And,  from  among  many,  I  will  here  select  these  fol- 
lowing evils,  which  have  destroyed  the  estates  and  hopes  of  many.  (1)  Irreligious 
and  atheistical  neglect  and  contempt  of  God  and  His  worship,  especially  in  those 
that  have  been  enlightened  and  made  profession  of  religion.  (2)  Injustice  and 
fraud  is  a  blasting  sin.  A  little  unjust  gain  mingled  with  a  great  estate  will  con- 
sume it  like  a  moth.  (3)  Oppression  is  a  blasting  sin  to  men's  estates  and  employ- 
ments. (4)  Falsehood  and  lying  is  a  blasting  sin  to  our  employments ;  a  sin  which 
tends  to  destroy  all  converse  and  disband  all  civil  societies.  (5)  Perjury,  or  false 
swearing,  is  a  blasting  sin.  The  man  cannot  prosper  that  Ues  under  the  guilt 
thereof.  It  now  remains  that  we  apply  it.  Inference  1.  Doth  God  sometimes  dis- 
appoint the  most  dihgent  labours  of  men  in  their  lawful  callings  ?  Then  this 
teacheth  you  patience  and  submission  under  your  crosses  and  disappointments. 
Consideration  1.  And,  in  the  first  place,  if  thou  be  one  that  fearest  God,  consider 
that  disappointments  in  earthly  things  fix  no  mark  of  God's  hatred  upon  thee. 
The  bee  makes  a  sweeter  meal  upon  two  or  three  flowers,  than  the  ox  that  hath 
so  many  mountains  to  graze  upon.  Consideration  2.  And  what  if  by  these  dis- 
appointments God  be  carrying  on  the  great  design  of  His  eternal  love  apon  thy 
soul  ?  This  may  be  the  design  of  these  providences ;  and  if  so,  sure  there  is  no 
eause  for  thy  despondencies.  Consideration  8.  Be  patient  under  disappointments  ; 
for  if  yoQ  meekly  submit  and  quietly  wait  upon  God,  He  can  quickly  repair  all  that 
you  have  lost  and  restore  it  by  other  providences  double  to  you.  Consideration  4. 
And  why  should  it  seem  so  hard  and  grievous  to  yoa  for  God  to  disappoint  your 
hopes  and  purposes,  when  you  cannot  but  know  that  you  have  disappointed  His 
expectations  from  you  so  often,  and  that  in  greater  and  better  things  than  these  ? 
Inference  2.  If  it  be  so,  then  labour  to  make  sura  of  things  eternal,  lest  yoa  be 
eternally  disappointed  there  also.    (J.  Flavel.) 

Vers.  6, 11.  And  when  they  had  thus  done,  tbey  enclosed  a  great  multitude  of 
flehes,  and  the  net  brake. — The  desponding  encouraged : — I.  In  dischaboino  txb 
Dnriss  or  lite  oub  best  kkduavoubs  hat  appeab  fbuitlbbs.  Always  disoooraging 
to  toil  without  success  :  in  learning,  business,  religion.    Oar  failores  often  i 


i76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ^ohif.  t^ 

(1)  through  Inexperience ;  (2)  through  indolence ;  (3)  through  impatience.  None  of 
these  the  case  with  Peter  however.  An  experienced  fisherman,  and  had  toiled  all 
the  night.  Continued  fruitlessness  ought  to  awaken  candid  investigation.  Are  we 
in  a  right  sphere  of  labour  ?  Are  we  labouring  in  a  right  spirit  ?  We  may  be,  and 
yet  oor  best  endeavours  appear  fruitless.  II.  In  dischaboino  the  duties  of  livb, 
yrn  must  obet  the  coumamds  of  Cebist.  1.  In  obeying  Christ,  Peter's  faith  rose  above 
natural  difHculties.  2.  In  obeying  Christ,  Peter's  faith  rested  on  Christ's  command — 
"  At  Thy  word."  No  one  else  could  have  persuaded  him  to  let  down  the  net.  8. 
In  obeying  Christ,  Peter's  faith  led  to  decisive  action — "  I  will  let  down  the  net." 
Cultivate  the  habit  of  decision.  The  decisive  man  will  catch  his  fish  while  the 
negligent  man  is  preparing  his  nets.  III.  In  DiscHAsaiNO  the  duties  of  ijfe,  wb 
BHAiiL  ULTIMATELY  BE  SDCCESBFCL.  Success  may  be  delayed  for  a  tim«  ;  but  it  will 
eome.  At  the  very  moment  of  oor  failure  God  purposes  to  fill  oor  neti.  (/.  Wood^ 
htnu$.) 

**  The  livelong  night  we've  toiled  in  vftiii» 

But  at  Thy  gracious  word 
I  will  let  down  the  net  again  : 

Do  Thou  Thy  will,  0  Lord." 

8o  spake  the  weary  fisher,  spent 

With  bootless,  darkling  toil, 
Tet  on  his  Master's  bidding  bent, 

For  love  and  not  for  spoil. 

8o  day  by  day,  and  week  by  week, 

In  sad  and  weary  thought. 
They  muse,  whom  God  hath  set  to  seek 

The  souls  ELis  Christ  hath  bought. 

Full  many  a  dreary,  anxious  honr 

We  watch  our  nets  alone 
In  drenching  spray  and  driving  shower, 

And  hear  the  night-bird's  moan. 

At  morn  we  look  and  nought  is  there 

Sad  dawn  of  cheerless  day ! 
Who  then  from  pining  and  despair 

The  sickening  heart  can  stay  7 

There  is  a  stay — and  we  are  strong| 

Our  Master  is  at  hand. 
To  cheer  our  solitary  song, 
And  guide  us  to  the  strand. 

In  His  own  time ;  but  yet  awhile 

Our  bark  at  sea  must  ride 
Cast  after  cast,  by  force  or  guile 

All  waters  must  be  tried. 

Should  e'er  Thy  wonder-working  graot 

Triumph  by  our  weak  arm, 
Let  not  our  sinful  fancy  trace 

Anght  human  in  the  charm. 

Or,  if  for  our  unworthiness. 

Toil,  prayer,  and  watching  fail, 
Li  disappointment  Thou  canst  bless. 

So  love  at  heart  prevail.  {J,  KehJ$») 

Wearineu  and  faith : — I.  It  is  a  voice  of  fatique  and  lassitude  trvino  to  bteadv 

mXLV  FOB  ITBESH  EFFOBT.      II.   It  is  THE  VOICE,  ALSO,  OF  DEFEAT  AND  DISAPPOINTMENT 

fBTiHO  TO  BALLY  ITSELF  FOB  FBESH  BNTEBFBisE.  III.  The  word  "Nevertheless" 
introduces  thb  oband  contbast  and  antithesis  of  the  text.  Gather  into  one  al! 
the  heads  and  threads  of  discourse — ^we  are  weary  of  the  monotony  of  life,  weaiy  ci 


CBAi.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  477 

the  perpetual  round  of  doing  and  being,  disappointed  with  the  result  of  life,  with 
what  we  are  to-day  in  Thy  sight — beings  occupying  a  point  and  not  more,  between 
two  eternities.  Nevertheless,  at  Thy  word,  because  Thou  speakest  in  our  ears  to- 
day and  sayest,  "Launch  out  into  the  deep,  the  inscrutable  future,  the  future  of  time 
and  of  eternity";  yes,  at  Thy  word — otherwise  we  were  languid  and  depressed  and 
disappointed  and  could  not — at  Thy  word  we  will  once  again,  to-day,  let  down  the 
net.  (Dean  Vattghan.)  The  Galilean  fisliers : — Our  subject  is  perseverance  in 
duty  in  the  absence  of  seeming  success.  1.  Illustrate  it  by  the  circumstances  of 
our  earthly  life.  Let  duty  always  take  precedence  of  pleasure ;  let  recreation 
never  be  thought  of  till  it  is  fairly  earned:  let  no  engagements  be  entered  into 
beyond  what  can  be  met,  and  no  expenditure  be  indulged  in  beyond  a  man's  income. 
Let  no  neglect  of  our  own  prudence,  and  our  own  duty,  be  excused  by  the  idle 
plea  of  relying  upon  God's  providence  without  ourselves  exercising  the  self-help 
on  which  God's  providence  is  conditional.  On  such  principles,  as  a  general  rule, 
success  will  reward  effort,  and  the  net  judiciously  cast  will  not  fail  to  enclose 
the  fish.  There  are,  of  course,  exceptions.  Without  any  fault  on  the  part  of  the 
workman  his  labour  may  be  in  vain.  What  shall  those  do  who  may  truly  say, 
••  we  have  toiled  all  night,"  &c.  7  Give  up  in  despair?  Nay.  Let  down  the  net 
again.  2.  Apply  this  to  higher  industries.  The  case  of  a  soul  seeking  heaven. 
The  work  of  preacher,  Sunday-school  teacher,  Bible-woman,  tract-distributor. 
Christian  missionary.  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Faith  triumphant  in  failure  :— 
Miracles  of  our  Lord  are  parables.  Because  the  record  is  literally  true  that  it  ii 
spiritually  instructive.  The  terms  success  and  failure  have  a  large  range  in  human 
life.  Some  men  are  born,  we  say,  to  succeed.  Nothing  that  man  possesses  can, 
however,  guarantee  results.  Circumstances  which  man  controls  not,  changes  which 
he  cannot  foresee,  have  a  wide  operation,  and  under  their  infiuence  it  is  seen  again 
and  again  that  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong.  Failure 
comes  where  success  was  certain ;  success  where  every  one  foresaw  failure.  K  a  man 
has  found  heaven  he  may  bear  to  have  lost  earth.  But  is  it  not  true  that  failure 
has  place  also  in  spiritual  things  ?  Is  there  no  such  thing  as  a  toiling  all  the  night 
and  taking  nothing  in  the  matters  of  that  world  which  is  of  the  soul  and  of  eternity  t 
The  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  f  uU  of  answers  to  that  question.  What  long 
dark  nights  has  it  had  to  toil  through  I  But  of  this  we  are  sure,  that  the  long  tou 
of  the  night,  however  little  rewarded,  was  essential  to  the  marvellous  success  of  the 
morning.  The  attitude  of  the  true  Church  on  earth  has  ever  been  characterized  by 
the  brief  words  selected  as  the  topic  of  this  sermon,  "  Faith  triumphant  in  failure." 
And  how  shall  we  say  that  the  case  stands  now  for  ns  7  Are  we  Uving  in  a  night  or 
in  a  morning  ?  It  is  far  better  to  be  labouring  in  the  blackest  night,  than  to  fancy 
ourselves  gathering  with  Christ  when  we  are  indeed  scattering  without  Him.  But 
for  ourselves,  and  for  others,  let  faith  triumph  over  failure.  I  know  that 
every  failure  is  a  proof  of  the  want  of  faith.  I  know  that  if  faith  were 
present,  failure  could  not  be.  But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  faith,  after  defeats, 
returning  to  the  charge,  and  it  is  in  that  that  the  test  of  our  Christianity  lies.  A 
man  who  can  come  back  to  Christ,  and  say,  "  Lord,  I  have  slept  at  my  post ;  I  have 
let  my  oars  drop ;  I  have  often  left  my  net  nnmended  until  it  could  enclose  nothing  i 
I  have  suffered  weariness  to  make  me  indolent,  and  long  disappointment  to  make 
me  hopeless.  I  have  done  all  this,  but  yet — even  now — even  thus  late — I  will,  once 
again,  at  Thy  word,  let  down  my  net,  and  wait  Thy  blessing,"  that  man  may  have 
many  faults,  he  may  be  much  behindhand,  he  may  he  full  of  infirmity  and  of  sin, 
but  he  has  the  root  of  the  matter  in  him  ;  he  has  a  little  faith,  and  according  to 
that  faith  shall  it  be  to  him.  That  man  knows  something,  however  little,  of  a  faith 
triumphant  in  failure.  Christ  stands,  as  of  old,  upon  the  shore,  and  asks  us  of  oar 
welfare.  He  enters,  as  of  old,  into  the  little  vessel  which  contains  oar  fortanea : 
He  feels  for  its  frailness.  He  will  guide  its  flittings.  He  will  steer  it  for  as  into  the 
haven  where  we  would  be.  Hitherto  we  may  have  toiled  and  taken  nothing  ;  bat 
ii,  at  His  word,  we  will  now  let  down  the  net.  He  will  bring  into  it  that  which  shall 
be  sufficient  for  us,  and  man's  failure  shall  be  Christ's  success.  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
A  night  of  toil  :  the  philosophy  of  failure  : — The  sea-shore  was  often  the  Lord's 
retreat.  By  the  shore  lines  of  Galilee  He  wandered,  and  amid  the  Toiceful  hush  ol 
nature  His  soul  found  rest.  Our  scene  opens  in  the  morning  on  that  sea  made  so 
sacred  with  associations  of  our  Lord.  On  the  beach,  drawn  ap  a  little,  were  two 
fishing-boats.  They  had  been  out  all  night,  trying,  but  ansuccessfully,  all  waters. 
The  fishermen  were  washing  their  nets  some  little  distance  away  with  disconsolate 
faces.    A  night  spent  in  toiling,  and  the  morning  dawning  upon  no  froit  of  effort, 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha*.  t. 

might  well  make  them  ead.  These  men  had  apparently  failed,  but  there  were  ele> 
ments  in  tiieir  failure  which  led  to  success.  I.  Christ  cams  to  them  whxn  ihbt 
WEBE  FEELING  THEiB  FAiLUBB.    But  He  found  them  working.     II.  Theib  workin» 

THUS  IN  FAUiDBE  AND  THEIB  WHjUNQNESS  TO  TBT  AOAIM   SHADOWED  THEIB  JTITNESS  VOB 

BiOBEB  woBE.  The  Lord  was  choosing  gospel-pioneers.  There  was  in  these  men 
— 1.  Natural  aptitude.  2.  Industry.  3.  Foresight.  4.  Willinghood.  lU.  Lei 
us  HEAR  Christ's  wobds  of  oouuandinq  bffobt  as  addbessed  to  us — "Launch 
out  into  the  deep."  1.  There  are  prayers  onanswered  and  we  are  weary.  Ton 
have,  perhaps,  been  hugging  the  shore  of  self — throw  yourself  and  yours  more  upon 
the  deep  of  God's  unfailing  faithfulness  and  mercy.  2.  You  have  been  fishing 
in  shallow  waters,  teaching  your  children,  your  scholars,  your  people,  with  that 
which  was  cheaply  got  and  therefore  little  worth.  Launch  out  into  the  ocean  of 
God's  truth.  3.  Tou  have  had  your  religious  crotchets.  Launch  out  into  broader 
spiritednees,  deeper  sympathies,  more  catholic  charity* 

*•  0,  stirring  words  of  living  power. 

Ye  speak  to  every  heart ; 
Ye  bid  all  selfishness  away, 

And  slothful  ease  depart. 
Where'er  there  is  a  soul  to  cheer. 

Where'er  the  mourners  weep, 
There,  bear  the  healing  balm  of  lovek 

'  Launch  out  into  the  deep  1 ' 

O,  watchword  brave  for  those  who  sail 

Across  the  sea  of  life, 
Steer  far  away  from  every  rock 

With  awful  dangers  rife. 
Leave  all  the  shallows  and  the  neap  ; 

Far  in  the  distance  keep  ; 
Strike  boldly  right  amid  the  waves— 

'  Launch  out  into  the  deep  1 ' "  {W.  Scott.) 

Gospel  for  the  fifth  Sunday  after  Trinity  .-—'This  was  the  final  call  of  the  disciples. 
Notice  with  what  exquisite  skill  it  is  managed.  I.  There  is  the  cbowd  pbessino 
UPON  Christ  to  hear  the  Word  of  God.  To  a  shepherd  they  might  seem  sheep  to  be 
folded  ;  to  a  gardener,  plants  to  be  tended  ;  but  to  a  fisherman  they  would  suggest 
swarming  fish,  ready  to  be  swept  into  a  net.  Then  comes  the  miraculous  draught, 
the  "  great  multitude  of  fishes  "  corresponding  with  the  multitude  of  the  people. 
What  could  be  more  appropriate  ?    II.  Then  we  have  the  Divine  power  of  Chbisi 

OVEB    THE    denizens   OF   THE    DEEP,    SYMBOLIZINQ    HiS    POWER   OVER   THE   HEARTS   AND 

MINDS  OP  MEN.  Probably  Peter  (whom  we  may  take  as  representative  of  the  rest) 
may  have  smiled  when  he  heard  the  command  (ver.  4).  But  he  obeyed.  And  when 
he  saw  the  draught  of  fishes,  and  caught  a  glimpse  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
human  beings  drawn  into  the  meshes  of  the  gospel-net.     III.  The  effect  or  thx 

MIRACLE  WAS   TO   REVEAL   THE    TRUE  CHARACTER  OF   ChRIST   TO   PeTEB  AND  TO  BEVEAI. 

Peteb  TO  HIMSELF.  Before  Isaiah  could  go  as  a  messenger  to  the  people  he  must- 
have  a  vision  of  the  Holy  God,  and  be  bowed  down  under  a  sense  of  his  own  sinful- 
ness. So  with  Peter.  Whether  he  clearly  saw  at  this  time  the  whole  truth  of  the 
Godhead  of  Christ  it  may  be  hazardous  to  affirm.  But  this  is  clear,  that  he  felt 
himself  in  the  presence  of  One  who  represented  the  holiness  of  God.  And  he 
shrank  from  Him,  yet  was  attracted  towards  Him.  "  Depart  from  me  " ;  but  his 
inner  heart  says,  "  Stay  with  me."  The  work  was  done.  "  They  forsook  all  and 
followed  Him"  (ver.  11).  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  The  miraculous  draught  offi,8he$  : — 
I.  We  have  here  encouragement  to  pbeseveranoe.  II.  Learn  that  conviction  or 
BIN  is  deepened  BY  KNOWLEDGE  OF  Christ.     IU.  Leam  that  humility  is  the  best 

preparation  FOR  ENTERING  UPON  CHRISTIAN  WOBE.      IV.   Leam  HOW  TO  BESPOND  TO  A 

GREAT  CALL — BY  FORSAKING  ALL.  (D.  Longwill.)  Ploce  of  the  miracle  in  the 
history  : — The  interest  in  this  case  centres  not  in  the  miraculous  element,  but  i» 
the  two  questions  :  Is  the  incident  historical  ?  and  is  it  in  its  true  place  in  the 
history  ?  The  circumstances  that  the  narrative  is  found  only  in  one  of  the 
Synoptical  Gospels,  and  that  not,  as  we  might  have  expected,  the  one  containing 
the  Petrine  tradition  ;  that  an  incident  is  recorded  in  the  appendix  to  the  fourth 
Gospel  so  nmilar  as  to  suggest  the  hypothesis  of  a  duplicate  ;  and  that  an  embla- 


mu.  T.]  ST.  LUKS.  47« 

tnatic  significance  is  assigned  to  the  oconrrence  in  the  words  reported  to  have  been 
spoken  by  Jesus,  lend  plausibility  to  the  notion  that  we  have  to  do  here  not  with  an 
actual  event,  but  simply  with  a  symbolic  story  invented  to  embody  the  promise 
made  to  Peter  by  his  Master  that  he  should  become  a  fisher  of  men.  Of  those  who 
are  prepared  to  recognize  in  the  incident  something  more  than  a  metaphor  trans- 
formed into  a  fact,  some  have  doubted  whether  it  is  in  its  true  place  in  Luke's 
Gospel,  and  ought  not  rather  to  be  assigned  to  the  post-resurrection  period,  as  in 
the  fourth  Gospel.  In  this  connection  stress  is  laid  on  the  exclamation  of  Peter  on 
seeing  the  great  draught  of  fish,  ••  Depart  from  me,"  &c.,  which,  as  connected  with 
the  period  of  the  first  call  to  the  discipleship,  seems  to  lack  point  and  appropriate- 
ness, but  gains  deep  meaning  when  conceived  of  as  spoken  by  Peter  when  his 
humiliating  denial  of  his  Lord  was  fresh  in  his  recollection.  But  one  has  no  great 
difficulty  in  imagining  such  an  excitable,  impressionable  man  as  Peter  uttering  the 
words  at  any  time,  without  any  special  occasion  for  calling  his  sin  to  mind,  viewing 
them  simply  as  an  expression  of  reverence.  Strauss  characterizes  Peter's  fear  as 
superstitious,  and  not  at  all  New-Testament  like.  Granted,  but  what  then  t  Was 
it  to  be  expected  that  the  disciples  at  the  time  of  their  first  call  should  be  men  of 
the  New  Testament  in  their  thoughts  and  feeUngs  ?  On  the  contrary,  was  it  not  the 
very  aim  of  their  vocation  that  they  might  be  associated  with  Christ,  and  in  His 
eompany  gradually  imbibe  the  spirit  of  the  new  Christian  era,  the  era  of  the  better 
hope,  when  we  no  longer  stand  off  in  fear,  but  draw  nigh  to  God  in  filial  trust  ? 
Peter's  exclamation,  as  reported  by  Luke,  is  in  keeping  with  the  initial  period  of 
discipleship,  and  just  on  that  account  it  supplies  no  ground  for  transferring  the 
incident  to  the  later  period  when  discipleship  was  about  to  pass  into  apostleship. 
At  that  late  time  Peter  might  have  more  reason  than  ever  before  for  calling  himself 
a  sinful  man,  but  his  sense  of  nnworthiness  was  not  so  likely  then  to  express  itself 
in  the  form  of  a  "  Depart  from  me."  Looking  at  the  incident  in  connection  with  its 
probable  aim,  it  seems  equally  appropriate  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end 
of  the  history.  Christ's  purpose  was  to  inspire  Peter  with  enthusiasm  for  his 
spiritual  vocation.  There  was  a  need  for  this  at  both  periods,  and  in  view  of  this 
fact  it  becomes  credible  that  the  narratives  of  Luke  and  John  are  not  variations  of 
the  same  history,  but  records  of  distinct  events.    The  earlier  event  served  the  pnr- 

Sose  of  winning  Peter  to  the  life  of  discipleship,  the  later  of  inspiring  him  with 
evotion  to  the  heroic  career  of  the  apostolate.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  The  nature 
of  the  miracle : — As  for  the  nature  of  the  action  recorded,  it  has  been  variously  con- 
ceived as  a  miracle  of  power  controlling  the  movements  of  the  fish  and  directing 
them  into  a  particular  course,  or  of  supernatural  knowledge  of  the  place  where  the 
fish  were  to  be  found  at  a  certain  moment,  or  of  prophetic  clairvoyance  in  the  exer- 
cise of  a  faculty  natural  to  man,  but  possessed  by  Jesus  in  a  preternatural  degree, 
or  HO  far  as  Jesus  was  concerned  a  mere  act  of  trust  in  a  special  providence  of  God 
making  itself  subservient  to  His  designs.  It  is  not  necessary,  and  the  narrative 
does  not  enable  us,  to  decide  peremptorily  between  these  various  views.  We  are 
not  even  absolutely  shut  up  to  the  belief  that  there  was  a  miracle  in  the  case  in  any 
form  or  degree.  It  is  not  an  impossible  supposition  that  the  knowledge  possessed 
by  Jesus  was  such  as  might  be  obtained  by  observation.  Traces  of  such  a  great 
shoal  of  fish  might  be  visible  on  the  surface  to  any  one  who  might  be  looking  in  the 
proper  direction.  A  well-known  writer  [Canon  Tristram]  remarks,  "  The  density  of 
the  shoals  of  fish  in  the  Sea  of  Galilee  can  scarcely  be  conceived  by  those  who  have 
not  witnessed  them.  Frequently  tbese  shoals  cover  an  acre  or  more  of  the  surface, 
and  the  fish,  as  they  slowly  move  along  in  masses,  are  so  crowded,  with  their  back 
fins  just  appearing  on  the  level  of  the  water,  that  their  appearance  at  a  little 
distance  is  that  of  a  violent  shower  of  rain  pattering  on  the  surface."  But,  while 
this  description  clearly  proves  the  possibility  of  becoming  aware  of  the  presence  of 
a  shoal  by  observation,  the  supposition  that  our  Lord  acquired  the  knowledge  which 
enabled  Him  to  give  directions  to  the  fishermen  in  this  way,  is  rendered  very  im- 
probable by  the  fact  that  the  draught  of  fish  appeared  to  Peter  marvellous  not  only 
in  itself,  but  in  connection  with  the  agency  of  Jesus  ;  for  that  he  recognized  Jesus 
as  somehow  the  cause  of  the  extraordinary  and  utterly  unlooked-for  success  is  mani- 
fest in  his  words.  Tet  it  is  noticeable  that  the  narrative  does  not  lay  stress  on  that 
agency  in  explaining  the  emotions  of  Peter  and  his  companions,  but  simply  on  the 
quantity  of  fish  taken  (ver.  9).  And  it  may  be  admitted  that  the  purpose  of  tht 
transaction  did  not  absolutely  demand  a  miracle.  Christ's  aim  was  not  merely  to 
attach  the  disciples  to  Himself,  but  to  fire  them  with  zeal  for  their  new  vocation. 
For  that  end  what  was  wanted  was  not  a  mere  miracle  as  displaying  supernatural 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

power  or  knowledge,  bat  an  experience  in  connection  with  their  old  vocation  which, 
whether  brought  about  miraculously  or  otherwise,  should  take  possession  of  their 
imagination  as  an  emblem  of  the  great  future  which  lay  before  them  in  their  new 
career  as  apostles,  or  fishers  of  men.  The  phenomenal  draught  of  fish,  however 
brought  about,  fulfilled  this  purpose  better  than  a  small  take  would  have  done,  even 
though  the  fish  had  been  expressly  created  before  the  eyes  of  the  disciples.  Such  a 
miracle  would  have  filled  them  with  astonishment  and  wonder,  but  it  would  not 
have  awakened  in  their  breasts  wondering  thoughts  and  high  hopes  in  nferenoe  te 
the  work  and  progress  of  the  Divine  Kingdom.    (Ibid.) 

All  through  the  long  night's  mist  and  rain* 

In  open  sea  or  near  the  shore, 
They  cast  their  nets,  yet  still  in  vain  ; 

They  found  but  failure  evermore. 

Twas  time  to  cleanse  from  tangled  weed* 

And  lay  them  on  the  beach  to  dry  : 
When  lo  1  in  hour  of  utmost  need, 

They  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus  nigh. 

They  cast  their  nets  again,  and  lo  I 

So  large  the  haul  of  fish  they  take. 
The  meshes  gape,  and  scarce  they  know 

If  they  shall  land  them  ere  they  break. 

And  then  a  chill  of  sudden  fear, 

As  though  the  veil  of  sense  were  rent. 
And  they,  frail  men,  were  brought  too  netf 

The  scope  of  some  Divine  intent. 

Oh,  could  they  bear  that  presence  dread, 

Before  whose  keen  and  piercing  sight 
Lie  bare  the  hearts  of  quick  and  dead. 

The  world's  great  Teacher,  Light  of  light  f 

What  wonder  if  from  pallid  lips 

The  cry  bursts  out,  "Depart  from  me"? 
Too  bright  that  full  apocalypse 

For  man's  sin-darkened  eyes  to  see. 

**  Sin-stained  am  I,  and  Thou  art  pure| 

Oh,  turn  Thy  steps  some  other  wayj 
How  shall  I  dare  Thy  gaze  endure  ? 

How  in  Thy  stainless  presence  stay.** 

Tet  chiefly  when  unlooked-for  gains 

Our  skill-less,  planless  labours  bleCit 
And  we,  for  weary  labour's  pains, 

Beap  the  full  harvest  of  success  ; 

We  wonder  at  the  dranght  we  take. 

The  latent  powers  that  bud  and  gioW| 
Ah,  can  we  dare  our  work  forsake, 

And  follow  where  He  bids  us  go  t 

*'Tes,  fear  ye  not,"  so  ran  His  speech  f 

•'  Fishers  of  men  ye  now  must  be. 
Where'er  the  world's  wide  waters  reach. 
By  gUding  stream  or  stormiest  sea." 

80  only  can  we  hope  restore, 

So  only  conquer  shame  and  fear, 
And  welcome,  from  the  eternal  shore, 

The  voice  l^t  tells  "  our  Lord  is  near." 

{Dean  Plumptr*  in  «*2^Mf«  BQti/'l 


<JHAF.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  481 

Christ  with  the  Oalilean  fishermen  : — 1.  The  rank  of  life  from  which  Jesus 
Christ  chose  the  men  who  were  to  be  the  chief  ministers  of  His  religion,  is 
worthy  of  particular  notice.  We  see  that  His  ministers  were,  in  general,  of 
lowly  station ;  and  yet  we  at  the  same  time  know  that  their  instructions  and 
influence  far  surpassed  those  of  the  most  learned  and  powerful  men  the  world  had 
ever  seen.  Principles  were  disseminated  by  fisherman  and  tent-makers,  which, 
from  the  very  first,  excited  the  admiration  of  many,  and  which,  in  the  process  of 
time,  effected  a  complete  revolution  in  the  religious  sentiments  of  the  civilized 
world.  Does  not  this  afford  an  irrefragable  argument  for  the  Divine  origin  of  the 
gospel?  Whence  had  such  men  such  things?  "Let  us  beware  of  neglecting  anything 
they  delivered.  2.  Let  us  mark  the  honour  here  put  on  honest  industry.  Duty 
requires  as  to  be  diligent  in  the  proper  duties  of  our  station  and  profession  in  life. 
No  matter  how  humble  our  employmeut,  Christ  will  accept  ub  in  it,  visit  us  in  it,  and 
bless  us  in  it.  3.  The  success  of  human  industry  depends  on  the  blessing  of  Provi- 
dence. If  given,  let  us  thank  God  for  it ;  if  withheld,  let  us  not  murmur,  but  cheer- 
fully acquiesce  in  the  Divine  will.  4.  An  encouraging  example  of  implicit  and  per- 
severing obedience  to  the  Divine  commandment.  6.  Instruction  to  ministers,  in 
their  employment  being  compared  to  that  of  fishermen.  (1)  Arduous.  (2)  Requir- 
ing watchfulness.  (3)  Exercising  patience.  6.  The  necessity  of  forsaking  aU,  in 
order  to  follow  Christ.  {James  Foote,  M.A.)  The  blessed  fishermen : — Blest — (1) 
by  the  gracious  presence  of  Jesus ;  (2)  by  the  rich  gift  of  Jesus ;  (3)  by  the  gracious 
call  of  Jesus,  [Ueubner.)  The  just  means  of  gaining  temporal  blessing  : — 1.  God's 
word.  2.  Labour.  3.  Trust  in  God.  4.  Acknowledgment  of  personal  unworthi- 
ness.  5.  Right  use  of  the  blessing.  {Ibid.)  The  remarkable  transitioru  in  the 
life  of  faith: — 1.  From  disappointment  to  surprise.    2.  From  want  to  plenty. 

3.  From  joy  to  terror.  4.  From  fear  to  hope.  {Van  Oosterzee.)  The  faith  of 
Peter: — Peter's  faith — (1)  was  tried;  (2)  endured;  (3)  was  changed  into  sight.  {Ibid.) 
The  obedience  of  faith:— 1.  Its  ground.  2.  Its  nature.  3.  Its  blessing. 
{ibid.)  An  image  of  the  preaching  of  the  gospel: — 1.  The  wide-reaching 
command  (ver.  4).    2.  The  hard  labour  (ver.  50).     3.  The  sole  might  (ver.  56). 

4.  The  rich  fruit  (vers.  6,  7).  S.  The  right  temper  (ver.  8).  6.  The  highest 
requirement  of  the  evangelical  function  (vers.  10,  11).  {Ibid.)  Peter  an  example 
for  us : — 1.  Hear  when  the  Lord  speaks.  2.  Labour  when  the  Lord  commands. 
8.  Believe  what  the  Lord  promises.  4.  Follow  whither  the  Lord  calls.  {Fucks.) 
Blessing  in  our  temporal  calling  : — 1.  On  what  it  depends.  2.  Of  what  nature  it  is. 
8.  For  what  it  inspirits  us.  {Liico.)  Failure  and  success : — I.  The  fishermen's 
FAILURE.  1.  It  was  simply  failure ;  disgrace  did  not  attend  it.  They  had  done 
their  best,  and  it  was  not  their  fault  that  they  were  unsuccessful.  Better  to  say, 
"  I  toiled  all  the  night,  and  caught  nothing,"  than,  "  I  cast  in  the  net,  and  caught 
one  thousand  fish  without  an  effort."  2.  It  was  overruled  for  good.  God  often 
teaches  that  the  years  of  plenty  are  from  Him,  by  prefacing  them  with  years  of 
famine.  3.  It  did  not  produce  despair.  4.  No  faithful  toil  is  without  reward. 
What  we  call  failure  is,  in  God's  account,  oftentimes  brightest  success.  II.  The 
fishermen's  success.  1.  It  was  miraculous.  In  two  respects — that  they  caught 
BO  many,  and,  though  the  net  brake,  saved  all.  2.  But  by  ordinary  means.  No 
success  without  diligent  labour.  3.  They  had  much  anxiety — "  The  net  brake." 
Yet  this  apparent  accident  was  a  source  of  good — co-operatio*.  4.  Their  minds 
seem  to  have  been  pervaded  by  deepest  awe.  "  They  beckoned  " — not  shouted,  as 
in  ordinary  circumstances  they  would  have  done.  6.  To  enjoy  success,  we  muse 
have  a  present  Lord.  6.  Success  should  lead  us  to  follow  Christ  more  fully.  {R,  A, 
Oriffin.)  The  two  draughts  of  fishes : — We  have  heard  of  some  ministers  who 
oould  say  that  they  had  often  preached  from  the  same  text,  but  they  had  never 
delivered  the  same  discourse.  The  Uke  may  be  said  of  Christ.  He  often  preached 
upon  the  same  truth,  but  it  was  never  precisely  in  the  same  manner.  We  have 
read  in  your  hearing  this  morning  the  narrative  of  two  miracles  (Lake  y.  and 
John  xxl.)  which  seem  to  the  casual  observer  to  be  precisely  alike ;  but  he  who 
shall  read  dihgently  and  study  carefully,  wiU  find  that  though  the  text  is  the  same 
in  both,  yet  the  discourse  is  full  of  variations.  In  both  the  miraculous  draughts  of 
fishes,  the  text  is  the  mission  of  the  saints  to  preach  the  gospel — the  work  of  man- 
eatohing — the  ministry  by  which  souls  are  caught  in  the  net  of  the  gospel,  and 
brought  oat  of  the  element  of  sin  to  their  eternal  salvation.  I.  Ix  thesb  two 
lOBACiiES  THKBB  ABB  MANY  POINTS  OF  UNIFORMITY.  They  are  both  intended  to  set 
forth  the  way  in  which  Christ's  kingdom  shall  increase.  1.  First  yon  will  pereeivs 
that  in  both  miracilM  w*  are  taught  that  the  means  must  be  used.    In  Um  AnA 

dl 


4&t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  «. 

case,  the  fish  did  not  leap  into  Simon's  boat  to  be  taken ;  nor,  in  the  second  ease, 
did  they  swarm  from  the  sea  and  lay  themselves  down  upon  the  blazing  coals  that 
they  might  be  prepared  for  the  fisherman's  feast.  No,  the  fishermen  must  go  out 
in  their  boat,  they  must  cast  the  net ;  and  after  having  cast  the  net,  they  must 
either  drag  it  ashore,  or  fill  both  boats  with  its  contents.  Everything  is  done  her» 
by  human  agency.  It  is  a  miracle,  certainly,  but  yet  neither  the  fisherman,  nor 
his  boat,  nor  his  fishing  tackle  are  ignored  :  they  are  all  used  and  all  employed. 
Let  us  learn  that  in  the  saving  of  souls  God  worketh  by  means  ;  that  so  long  as  the 
present  economy  of  grace  shall  stand,  God  will  be  pleased  by  the  foolishness  ol 
preaching  to  save  them  that  believe.  Every  now  and  then  there  creeps  up  in  the 
Church  a  sort  of  striving  against  God's  ordained  instrumentality.  God  getteth  the 
most  glory  through  the  use  of  instruments.  2.  Again,  in  both  our  texts  there  is 
another  truth  equally  conspicuous,  namely,  that  means  of  themselves  are  utterly 
unavailing.  In  the  first  case  you  hear  the  confession,  ••  Master,  we  have  toiled  aU 
the  night  and  have  taken  nothing."  In  the  last  case  you  hear  them  answer  to  the 
question,  "  Children,  have  ye  any  meat  ?  "  "  No  " — a  sorrowful  No.  What  was  the 
reason  of  this  t  Were  they  not  fishermen  plying  their  special  calling  ?  Verily, 
they  were  no  raw  hands ;  they  understood  the  work.  Had  they  gone  about  the  toil 
unskilfully?  No.  Had  they  lacked  industry?  No,  they  had  toiled.  Had  they 
lacked  perseverance  ?  No,  they  bad  toiled  all  the  night.  Was  there  a  deficiency  of 
fish  in  the  sea  ?  The  Great  Worker  who  does  not  discard  the  means  would  still 
have  His  people  know  that  He  uses  instrumentality,  not  to  glorify  the  instrument, 
but  for  the  sake  of  glorifying  Himself.  He  takes  weakness  into  His  hands  and 
makes  it  strong,  not  that  weakness  may  be  worshipped,  but  that  the  strength  may 
be  adored  which  even  makes  weakness  subservient  to  His  might.  3.  Thirdly,  there 
is  clearly  taught  in  both  these  miracles  the  fact  that  it  is  Christ's  presence  that  con- 
fers success.  Christ  sat  in  Peter's  boat.  4.  In  both  instances  the  success  which 
attended  the  instrumentality  through  Christ's  presence  developed  human  weakness. 
We  do  not  see  human  weakness  more  in  non-success  than  in  success.  In  the  first 
instance,  in  the  success  yon  see  the  weakness  of  man,  for  the  net  breaks  and  the 
ships  begin  to  sink,  and  Simon  Peter  falls  down  with — '•  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am 
a  sinful  man,  0  Lord."  He  did  not  know  so  much  about  that  till  his  boat  was 
filled ;  but  the  very  abundance  of  God's  mercy  made  him  feel  his  own  nothingness. 
In  the  last  case,  they  were  scarcely  able  to  draw  the  net  because  of  the  multitude  of 
fishes.  Brethren,  if  you  or  I  would  know  to  the  fullest  extent  what  utter  nothings 
we  are,  if  the  Lord  shall  give  us  success  in  winning  souls  we  shall  soon  find  it  out. 
II.  There  are  also  several  points  of  dissimilarity.  The  first  picture  represents 
the  Church  of  God  as  we  see  it ;  the  second  represents  it  as  it  really  is.  The  first 
pictures  to  us  the  visible,  the  second  the  invisible.  Luke  tells  us  what  the  crowd 
Bee ;  John  tells  us  what  Christ  showed  to  His  disciples  alone.  Th#  first  is  common 
truth  which  the  multitude  may  receive  ;  the  next  is  special  mystery  revealed  only 
to  spiritual  minds.  Observe,  then,  carefully,  the  points  of  divergence.  1.  First, 
there  is  a  difference  in  the  orders  given.  In  the  first,  it  is,  "  Launch  oat  into  the 
deep,  and  let  down  your  nets  for  a  draught."  In  the  second  it  is,  "Cast  the  net 
on  the  right  side  of  the  ship."  The  first  is  Christ's  order  to  every  minister ;  the 
second  is  the  secret  work  of  His  Spirit  in  the  word.  The  first  shows  us  that  the 
ministry  is  to  fish  anywhere  and  everywhere.  All  the  orders  that  the  Christian  has, 
as  to  his  preaching,  is,  "  Launch  out  into  the  deep,  and  let  down  your  net."  He  is 
not  to  single  out  any  particular  character ;  he  is  to  preach  to  everybody.  The 
secret  truth  is,  that  when  we  are  doing  this,  the  Lord  knows  how  to  guide  us,  so 
that  we  "  cast  the  net  on  the  right  side  of  the  ship."  That  is  the  secret  and  in- 
visible work  of  the  Spirit,  whereby  He  so  adapts  our  ministry,  which  is  in  itself 
general,  that  He  makes  it  particular  and  special.  2.  In  the  first  instance  yon  will 
clearly  see  that  there  is  a  distinct  plurality.  The  fishermen  have  nets — in  the 
plural ;  they  have  boats — in  the  plural.  There  is  plurality  of  agency  employed. 
3.  Thirdly,  there  is  another  difference.  In  the  first  case,  how  many  fish  were 
caught?  The  text  says,  "a  great  multitude."  In  the  second  case,  a  great  multi- 
tude are  taken  too,  but  they  are  all  counted  and  numbered.  "  A  hnndred  and  fifty 
and  three."  What  was  Peter's  reason  for  counting  them  ?  We  cannot  tell.  But 
I  think  I  know  why  the  Lord  made  him  do  it.  It  was  to  show  as  that  though  in 
the  outward  instrumentality  of  gathering  the  people  into  the  Church  the  number  oi 
the  saved  is  to  us  a  matter  of  which  we  know  nothing  definitely,  yet  secretly  and 
invisibly  the  Lord  has  counted  them  even  to  the  odd  one.  He  knoweth  well  how 
many  the  gospel  net  shall  bring  in.     I,  as  a  preacher,  have  nothing  to  do   with 


'.  T.J  BT.  LUKE.  483 

eonnting  fish.  My  bneiness  is  with  the  great  multitude.  Splash  goes  the  net  again . 
Oh  Master  1  thoa  who  hast  taught  us  tc  throw  the  net  and  bring  in  a  multitude,  goid* 
into  it  the  hnndred  and  fifty  and  three !  4.  Yet  again,  notice  another  difference. 
The  fish  that  were  taken  the  first  time  appear  to  have  been  of  all  sorts.  The  net 
was  broken,  and  therefore,  doubtless  some  of  them  got  out  again  ;  there  were  some 
so  little  that  they  were  not  worth  eating,  and  doubtless  were  thrown  away.  "  They 
shall  gather  the  good  into  vessels  and  throw  the  bad  away."  In  the  second  case, 
the  net  was  full  of  great  fishes  ;  they  were  all  great  fishes,  all  good  for  eating,  all 
the  one  hundred  and  fifty -three  were  worth  the  keeping,  there  was  not  one  little 
fellow  to  be  thrown  back  into  the  deep  again.  The  first  gives  us  the  outward  and 
visible  effect  of  the  ministry.  We  gather  into  Christ's  Church  a  great  number. 
And  there  will  always  be  in  that  number  some  that  are  not  good,  that  are  not 
really  called  of  God.  Sometimes  we  have  Church-meetings  in  which  we  have  to 
throw  the  bad  away.  We  have  many  blissful  meetings  where  it  is  gathering-in  the 
fiBh — and  what  big  hauls  of  fish  has  God  given  to  us !  Glory  be  to  His  name  t 
Bat  at  other  times  we  have  to  sit  down  and  tell  our  fish  over,  and  there  are  some 
who  must  be  thrown  away ;  neither  God  nor  man  can  endure  them.  Thus  is  it  in 
the  outward  and  visible  Church.  Let  no  man  be  surprised  if  the  tares  grow  up  with 
the  wheat — it  is  the  order  of  things,  it  must  be  so.  5.  Yet  again,  you  notice  in  the 
first  case  the  net  broke,  and  in  the  second  case  it  did  not.  Now,  in  the  first  case, 
in  the  visible  Church  the  net  breaks.  My  brethren  are  always  calUng  out,  "  the 
net  is  broken  1 "  No  doubt  it  is  a  bad  thing  for  nets  to  break ;  but  you  need  not 
wonder  at  it.  We  cannot  just  now,  when  the  net  is  full,  stop  to  mend  it ;  it  will 
break.  It  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  our  being  what  we  are  that  the  net  will 
break.  There  are  several  other  points  of  difference,  but  I  think  we  have  hardly  time 
to  enlarge  upon  them.  I  will  only  hint  at  them.  In  the  first  case,  which  is  the 
visible  Church,  you  see  the  human  weakness  becomes  the  strongest  point ;  there  is 
the  boat  ready  to  sink,  there  is  the  net  broken,  there  is  the  men  all  ont  of  heart, 
frightened,  amazed,  and  begging  the  Master  to  go  away.  In  the  other  case  it  is  not 
BO  at  all.  There  is  human  weakness,  but  still  they  are  made  strong  enough.  They 
have  no  strength  to  spare,  as  you  perceive,  but  still  they  are  strong  enough,  the  net 
does  not  break,  the  ship  goes  slowly  to  land  dragging  the  fish ;  and  then,  lastly, 
Simon  Peter  pulls  the  fish  to  shore.  Strong  he  must  have  been.  They  were  just 
strong  enough  to  get  their  fish  to  shore.  So  in  the  visible  Church  of  Christ  yon 
will  often  have  to  mourn  over  human  weakness ;  but  in  the  invisible  Church,  God 
will  make  His  servants  just  strong  enough — just  strong  enough  to  drag  their  fish 
to  shore.  The  agencies,  means,  instrumentalities,  shall  have  just  sufficient  force 
to  land  every  elect  soul  in  heaven,  that  God  may  be  glorified.  Then,  notice,  in  the 
first  case,  in  the  visible  Church  they  launched  out  into  the  deep.  In  the  second 
case,  it  says  they  were  not  far  from  the  shore,  but  a  little  way.  So  to-day  our 
preaching  seems  to  us  to  be  going  out  into  the  great  stormy  deep  after  fish.  We 
appear  to  have  a  long  way  to  reach  before  we  shall  bring  these  precious  souls  to 
land.  But  in  the  sight  of  God  we  are  not  far  from  shore ;  and  when  a  soul  is  saved, 
it  is  not  far  from  heaven.  To  us  there  are  years  of  temptation,  and  trial,  and  con- 
flict ;  but  to  God,  the  Most  High,  it  is  finished — "  it  is  done."  They  are  saved ; 
they  are  not  far  from  shore.  In  the  first  case,  the  disciples  had  to  forsake  all  and 
follow  Christ.  In  the  second,  they  sat  down  to  feast  with  Him  at  the  dainty  ban- 
quet which  He  had  spread.  So  in  the  visible  Church  to-day  we  have  to  bear  trial 
and  self' denial  for  Christ,  but  glory  be  to  God,  the  eye  of  faith  perceives  that  we 
shall  soon  drag  our  net  to  land,  and  then  the  Master  will  say,  "  Gome  and  dine"  ; 
and  we  shall  sit  down  and  feast  in  His  presence,  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.    HI.  The  time  is  gone,  and  I  close  by  moticino  omx  amono 

HANT  LBSSONS  WHICH  THE  TWO  MABRATIVES  IN   COMMON   SEEM   TO   TBAOH.      In   the  first 

OMe,  Chriit  was  in  the  ship.  Oh,  blessed  be  God,  Christ  is  in  His  Church,  though 
she  launch  out  into  the  deep.  In  the  second  case,  Christ  was  on  the  shore. 
Blessed  be  God,  Christ  is  in  heaven.  He  is  not  here,  but  He  has  risen  ;  He  has 
gone  up  on  high  for  us.  But  whether  He  be  in  the  Church,  or  whether  He  be  on 
the  shore  in  heaven,  all  our  night's  toiling  shall,  by  His  presence,  have  a  rich 
reward.  That  is  the  lesson.  (C.  U.  Spur g eon.)  The  disappointing  night  and 
the  tucceisful  mom : — I.  The  night  of  disappointmxnt.  1.  A  most  unlikely  dis- 
appointment. 2.  The  disappointment  of  skilled  men.  8.  A  disappointment  in 
spite  of  devoted  labour.  4.  This  disappointment  was  most  disheartening.  U.  Thi 
uoBNiNO  or  snocESB.  1.  It  was  saccess  that  was  not  very  probable.  The  best 
nme  for  fishing  had  gone — the  night.    Not  onfrequently,  the  work  of  which  we 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

have  least  hope  in  the  end  gives  us  most  joy.  History  of  missions,  e.g.,  to  Sooth 
Sea  Islands.  "  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,"  <&o.  2.  It  was  success  through  th« 
use  of  the  old  means.  8.  It  was  success  in  the  old  sphere.  4.  It  was  succesa 
realized  by  the  very  men  who  had  previously  failed.  5,  It  was  scucess  consequent 
on  the  Lord's  presence  and  on  a  believing  obedience  to  His  word.  6.  It  was  suc- 
cess of  the  most  complete  character.  7.  It  was  success  in  the  Joy  and  blessing  of 
which  others  shared.  Those  in  «'  the  other  boat "  were  called  upon  to  help, 
8.  It  was  success  which  had  the  most  gracious  results.  (1)  Led  to 
the  adoiing  recognition  of  the  Lord's  presence  and  power  (ver.  8).  (2) 
Filled  the  miiids  of  all  with  grateful  astonishment  (vers.  9,  10).  (3)  Was 
the  pledge  and  promise  of  greater  things  (ver.  10),  (4)  Led  to  com- 
pletest  devotion  on  the  part  of  those  concerned  (ver.  11).  (B.  M.  Spoor.) 
The  sinking  fishing -boat  a  symbol  of  the  ruinous  tendency  of  abounding  prosperity  : — 
When  is  a  man  most  likely  to  go  wrong  morally?  When  he  is  in  suffering?  Hardly 
so.  Prosperity  puts  him  to  a  far  severer  test.  On  the  ground  nobody  gets  giddy 
and  falls,  but  on  a  pinnacle  many  a  one,  having  lost  the  steady  nerve  and  firm 
foothold,  has  trembled,  reeled,  and  rolled  down.  How  few  can  bear  success  1  Let 
a  man  steal  a  march  on  his  fellows,  outstrip  them  in  the  boisterous  race  for  riches, 
"  get  on  in  the  world,"  as  we  phrase  it,  and  the  chances  are  that  he  will  deteriorate. 
Noble  exceptions  there  are  to  the  rule,  never  more  than  in  our  own  day.  Many  ria* 
in  character  as  they  rise  in  circumstances.  But,  alasl  numbers  do  the  exact 
opposite :  as  they  go  up  in  possessions,  they  go  down  in  mind,  down  in  heart,  down 
in  conscience.  Gray,  in  his  charming  Elegy,  speaks  of  "  chill  penury  "  freezing 
"  the  genial  current  of  the  soul."  It  may  do,  but  the  pleasant,  soothing  zephyr  of 
wealth  certainly  tends  to  relax  manly  vigour  and  induce  baneful  lethargy.  There 
are  certain  fish  which  flourish  best  when  lowest  in  the  sea;  severe  pressure  is 
evidently,  in  some  way,  adapted  to  their  nature ;  when  raised  near  the  surface 
they  invariably  degenerate.  It  is  so,  too  often,  with  men ;  when  raised,  they  descend. 
Alexander  the  Great  was  all  right  as  long  as  he  had  to  cope  with  his  enemies ; 
difficulty  did  not  daunt  but  develop  him.  On  he  went  from  strength  to  strength, 
carrying  everything  before  him.  But  the  day  that  saw  his  final  obstacle  removed 
beheld  the  first  step  taken  in  a  retrograde  direction.  Conquest  surrounded  him 
with  luxuries ;  all  &ie  elaborate  appliances  of  civilization  were  placed  within  hia 
reach  ;  he  had  but  to  lift  his  hand,  and  the  prolific,  varied  resources  of  distant  and 
neighbouring  lands  were  at  his  command.  The  enervating  influences  of  these 
things  were,  however,  only  too  speedily  manifested.  The  Macedonian  hero  dwarfed 
into  the  effeminate  bon  vivant ;  Spartan  simplicity  gave  way  to  requirements  as 
multitudinous  as  they  were  vicious,  and  to  make  his  ruin  complete,  the  world's  con- 
queror died  from  the  effects  of  a  disgraceful  drunken  brawl!  (T.  B.  Stevenson.) 
A  new  year's  tcord  for  business  people : — "  Out  of  the  ship."  The  Lord  Jesus  had 
been  preaching  in  synagogues ;  but  there  were  very  many  outside  who  wanted  to 
hear  Him,  and  whom  He  wanted  to  reach.  So  He  entered  into  a  boat  belonging  to 
one  of  His  disciples  that  was  drawn  np  on  the  beach,  and  when  it  was  thrust  • 
little  way  from  the  shore  He  sat  down  and  taught  the  people.  L  Jesus  seeeb  a 
PULPIT  RIGHT  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  DAILY  LIFE.  He  comes  to  cach  of  xxB  and  asks  as 
to  let  Him  have  our  daily  occupation  as  His  preaching-place.  II.  Look  at  thb 
BOATS  WHICH  the  Lobd  Jesub  USES.  1.  It  was  the  boat  of  a  disciple.  He  never 
thrusts  Himself  upon  any.  Can  we  afford  to  receive  the  Lord  aboard  of  our  ship  ? 
2.  It  was  the  boat  of  an  ardent  and  loving  disciple.  How  eagerly  Simon  received 
Him  into  the  boat  1  3.  It  was  the  boat  of  a  busy  disciple.  Hard-working  disciples 
who  can  toil  all  night,  if  need  be — their's  is  the  business  from  which  Christ  will 
preach.  IIL  Look  at  thb  nsHEBMEH.  They  were  washing  their  nets.  The  Lord 
win  never  help  ns  to  catch  fish  with  dirty  nets.  IV.  Then  as  to  the  sermon  which 
the  Lord  would  preach  from  the  daily  occupation.  1.  Considerateness  for  other 
people.  These  men  would  have  to  go  off  again  at  sunset  to  fish,  and  they  had  toiled 
all  the  previous  night.  But  that  others  might  see  and  hear  Jesus,  they  leave  their 
nets,  they  thrust  out  the  ship,  and  they  wait  upon  the  Lord.  A  sermon  that  was 
never  so  much  needed  as  it  is  to-day.  2.  Faithfulness.  The  crying  want  of  our 
times  is  this,  that  men  should  see  and  hear  Jesus  in  the  boat  of  every  disciple. 
Faithfulness  on  the  part  of  His  disciples  goes  furthest  to  give  men  faith  in  their 
Lord  and  Master.  Y.  Then  there  are  two  or  three  other  tbouohts  that  grow  out 
07  THE  incident.  1.  It  goes  well  with  the  boat  when  Christ  is  on  board.  2.  Notice 
that  while  the  Lord  said  "nets  "  (ver.  4),  Simon  said  "  net "  (ver.  6).  And  he  took 
Dp  the  first  that  eame  to  hand.    Ah,  Simou,  the  blessed  Master  knows  more  abovl 


flHAV.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKB.  485 

iflslimg  than  yon  think.  And,  mj  brethren,  He  knows  as  much  about  your  businesa 
as  about  Simon's.  Their  net  brake  (ver.  6),  so  they  needed  the  Tiets  after  all.  3. 
x^hink  of  the  fishing-net  giving  the  disciples  the  most  amazing  manifestation  of 
f  esus  they  had  seen.  Ah,  so  it  is  when  Jesus  is  in  the  business,  the  common  daily 
work  of  life  shall  bring  glorious  manifestations  of  the  Lord's  presence  and  power. 
4.  The  fisherman  who  takes  Christ  on  board  is  promoted  to  the  rank  of  an  apostle. 
To  serve  Jesus  in  the  common  round  of  daily  life  is  the  way  up  to  the  highest  and 
most  splendid  service  for  the  King.  5.  When  Jesus  is  in  the  ship  everything  is 
in  its  right  place.  The  cargo  is  in  the  hold,  not  in  the  heart.  Cares  and  gains, 
fears  and  losses,  yesterday's  failure  and  to-day's  success,  do  not  thrast  themselves 
in  between  us  and  His  presence.  "Goodness  and  mercy  shall  follow  me,"  sang 
the  Psalmist.  Alas  when  the  goodness  and  mercy  come  before  us,  and  our  blessings 
shut  Jesus  from  view  1  Here  is  the  blessed  order — the  Lord  ever  first,  I  following 
Him,  His  goodness  and  mercy  following  me.  [Mark  &uy  Pearse.)  Failure,  faith, 
and  fortune : — I.  Failure.  •'  Toiled — nothing."  Failure  may  be  caused  by  (a)  lack 
of  aptitude ;  (6)  deficiency  of  energy ;  or  (c)  want  of  perseverance.  Notwith- 
standing skill,  exertion,  and  persistence,  here  was  failure.  1.  The  plea  of  disap- 
pointment. 2.  That  plea  urged  as  a  reason  for  rehnquishing  toil.  H.  Faith. 
"  Nevertheless,  at  Thy  word,"  &o.  The  fishermen  were  learning  of  Christ ;  their 
confidence  and  hope  were  growing.  They  had  Christ's  word  to  rely  on,  and  have 
not  we?  1.  Faith  in  exercise.  2.  A  right  resolve  taken.  3.  A  new  venture  made. 
in.  FoBTtJNB.  1.  Unexpected  abundance.  2.  An  act  of  kindness  compensated. 
8.  Plenty  the  reward  of  obedience.  4.  Success  the  providence  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  IV.  Note  the  besdlts  op  the  miracle.  1.  The  perception  of  Christ's 
glory.  2.  Christ's  majesty  producing  humihty.  3.  A  new  vocation  indicated.  4. 
Abandonment  of  all  for  Christ's  service.      (M.  Braithwaite.)  The  three  F's — a 

parable  of  fishing : — 1.  Through  a  long  weary  night  four  men  sat  in  their  boats  on 
the  Sea  of  Galilee.  They  are  not  novices  in  the  art  of  fishing,  but  old  experienced 
hands.  They  do  not  idle  away  their  time.  They  toil  hard.  They  toil  hard — 
dropping  their  nets  and  drawing  them  up  again,  empty.  The  story  of  that  vexatious 
night  of  disappointment  is  told,  next  day,  by  one  of  their  number  in  this  one 
sentence,  "  Master,  we  have  toiled,"  <fec.  It  could  all  have  been  compressed  into 
the  one  sad  word,  failure.  And  this  is  the  word  which  many  pastors  and  Christian 
workers  may  feel  themselves  obliged  to  write  underneath  many  of  their  undertakings 
and  efforts.  But  God  holds  us  responsible  only  for  duties,  never  for  results.  Not 
by  human  might,  or  power,  but  by  His  Spirit,  is  success  to  be  reached.  A  Paul 
may  plant,  or  a  Peter  may  fish,  but  God  only  can  give  the  increase.  2.  Now  let  us 
turn  over  the  leaf,  and  begin  Chapter  II.  It  is  no  longer  midnight,  but  morning. 
The  early  sun  sparkles  on  the  blue  waves  of  Gennesareth.  Two  fishermen  are  on 
the  beaoh,  washing  their  nets ;  two  others,  John  and  James,  are  mending  theirs  in 
a  boat.  Jesus  comes  in  sight,  followed  by  a  jostling  crowd-  He  wants  elbow-room, 
and  space  to  address  the  throng,  and  so  He  calls  for  Peter's  boat  and  makes  it  His 
floating  pulpit.  As  soon  as  His  discourse  is  over,  He  begins  to  think  of  His  hungry 
and  disappointed  disciples.  So  H<  gives  the  order  to  Simon.  There  was  a  great 
deal  of  human  nature  in  Peter.  He  felt  just  as  you  and  I  have  felt  a  hundred 
times.  He  said,  "  We  have  been  toiling  all  night,  and  have  taken  nothing."  Had 
he  stopped  short  right  there  he  would  have  got  a  rebuke  for  the  shameful  sin  of 
giving  ap.  He  was  despondent  over  the  past ;  but  he  was  not  despairing  for  the 
future.  So  out  bolts  that  ringing  reply,  "  Nevertheless,"  <fec.  Noble  words !  There 
spake  ont  a  resolute  and  a  relying  faith.  Faith  set  the  bow  of  Peter's  little  smaok 
right  towards  the  deep  water,  and  then  laid  hold  of  the  oar.  This  is  precisely  the 
same  thing  which  we  pastors,  and  Sunday-school  teachers,  and  parents  must  do 
straightway.  Invite  Jesus  into  our  undertakings,  for  we  cannot  fail  if  He  is  with 
us  in  the  boat.  Then  let  us  pull  out  into  the  deep  water  of  thorough,  conscientious, 
faithful  work.  The  fish  are  in  the  deep  water,  not  near  the  shore.  3.  What  will 
be  the  result  sooner  or  later  ?  Look  at  those  disciples  in  the  boat  and  yon  will  see. 
They  have  lowered  their  net,  just  as  Jesus  told  them  to  do.  Lo,  a  multitude  of 
fishes  swarming  in  I  The  net  is  breaking.  Peter  signals  to  John  to  bring  his  boat 
alongside  and  help  to  save  the  prodigious  haul.  Up  comes  the  other  smack.  The 
two  vessels  are  soon  so  overloaded  that  they  begin  to  sink ;  and  Peter  throws  himself 
down  in  awe-stmok  wonder,  and  cries  out  that  he  is  unworthy  of  such  a  miraonlooi 
blessing.  That  was  Peter's  way  of  saying  just  what  we  pastors  have  often  said 
when  the  revival  was  glorious,  and  we  felt  how  maoh  more  God  had  done  for  os 
than  we  deserved.   How  sweet  was  Christ's  answer  1    "  Follow  Me,  and  I  will  maka 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  r, 

yoa  a  fisher  of  men."  And  so  the  loaded  boats  are  pulled  ashore,  and  the  happy 
day's  work  ends  in  a  fulness  of  blessings.  Here  are  the  three  F's.  The  first  is 
a  sad  one,  and  teaches  us  that  when  we  rely  upon  an  arm  of  flesh  our  hardest 
toils  may  end  in  Failure.  The  second  is  the  ;watchword  of  all  wise  action,  and 
all  holy  endeavour — it  is  the  golden  word  Faith.  And  when  we  take  Jesus  with 
us  in  obedient  trust,  we  bring  back  a  Fulness  of  success.  (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.} 
This  paragraph — 1.  Illustrates  Christ's  indirect  method  of  working.  He  often  gives 
commands,  the  exact  bearing  of  which  it  is  difficult  ori  mpossible  to  see.  2.  Illus- 
trates the  proper  treatment  of  the  Divine  word  on  the  part  of  man.  3.  Shows  the 
proper  effect  of  God's  rule  over  inferior  things.  There  is  enough  in  any  display  of 
Divine  power  to  humble  us,  if  we  did  but  open  our  eyes  to  see  the  way  of  the  Most 
High.  4.  Illustrates  the  ever-heightening  and  ever-widening  vocation  of  mankind. 
(1)  "  Thou  shalt  catch  men."  God  does  not  call  men  downward  but  upward,  when 
they  are  faithful  to  their  trust.  (2)  Men  need  to  be  caught,  for  they  have  gone 
astray  from  God.  (3)  Man  must  catch  men.  (4)  The  art  of  catching  men  is  & 
Divine  art.  It  is  easy  to  amuse  them,  and  not  difficult  to  instruct  them;  but  to 
catch  them  in  the  holy  sense  of  this  promise  to  Peter,  is  an  art  taught  only  by  th© 
Master  Himself.  5.  Shows  that  Jesus  Christ  does  not  put  men  into  the  ministry 
simply  because  they  are  unfortunate  in  secular  concerns.  Peter  had  caught  nothing 
all  night,  and  in  the  morning  he  was  turned  into  a  minister  1  Do  not  people  plan 
to  put  their  least  gifted  and  least  successful  children  into  the  Church  ?  It  is  some- 
times said  that  they  do.  Christ  seemed  to  say  to  Peter,  "  See,  there  are  fish  enough 
yet  in  the  water;  but  yon  leave  your  occupation  at  the  very  moment  of  your  highest 
success.  I  don't  make  a  minister  of  yoa  because  there  is  no  other  way  in  which 
you  can  make  a  morsel  of  bread,  but  for  infinitely  higher  reasons."  So  to-day  there 
are  men  in  the  ministry  who  could  have  caught  fish  enough  and  been  highly  suc- 
cessful in  the  ordinary  work  of  Ufe.  Give  them  credit  for  good  motives.  {J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Lord  of  nature: — We  must  not  minimize  this  miracle 
by  deeming  that  Christ,  either  by  marvellous  sagacity  or  superhuman  omniscience, 
knew  of  the  presence  of  this  great  shoal  at  that  time  and  spot.  Rather,  we  must 
not  only  see  in  Jesus  "  the  Lord  of  nature,  able,  by  the  secret  yet  mighty  magic  of 
His  will,  to  guide  and  draw  the  unconscious  creatures,  and  make  them  minister  to 
the  higher  interests  of  His  kingdom";  but  we  must  also  recognize  in  Him  the 
second  Adam  exercising  that  dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  which  was  part  of 
the  grant  of  empire  given  originally  to  man.  That  there  should  be  this  great  herd  of 
fish  was  not  in  itself  miraculous ;  what  was  miraculous  was  that  its  appearance 
ehould  be  thus  timed,  that  it  should  coincide  with  Christ's  word  and  subserve  His 
purpose.  (W.  J.  Deane,  M.A.)  Reasons  for  the  miracle  : — Various  reasons  have 
been  offered  for  the  special  applicability  of  this  miracle.  1.  Thus  was  Peter  repaid 
for  the  loan  of  his  boat,  even  as  the  widow  of  Sarepta  was  rewarded  for  her  charity 
to  Elijah  by  the  unfailing  resources  of  the  bari  el  of  meal  and  the  cruise  of  oil ;  as 
the  Shunamite  hostess  was  requited  for  her  kindness  to  Elisha  by  the  restoration 
of  her  son  to  life  ;  as  the  house  of  Obed-Edom  was  blessed  when  it  gave  shelter  to 
the  ark  of  the  Lord;  as  Christ  Himself  testified  that  a  cup  of  cold  water  given  to 
one  of  His  disciples  should  not  lose  its  reward.  2.  Also,  Jesus  was  thus  preparing 
His  apostles  for  their  coming  call  ;  they  might  see  that  in  casting  in  their  lot  with 
Him  and  in  abandoning  their  gainful  trade,  they  were  entering  the  service  of  One 
who  was  able  to  provide  for  their  bodily  life  as  well  as  for  the  wants  of  their  soul ; 
One  who  taught  them  that  "  godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things,  having  promise 
of  the  life  which  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  3.  Still  more  might  Simon 
see  herein  a  prophecy  of  the  future,  an  adumbration  of  the  success  that  awaited  the 
preachers  of  the  gospel,  as  they  in  obedience  to  the  word  of  Christ  cast  their  nets 
into  the  sea  of  the  world.  4.  Here,  too,  is  a  lesson  for  all ;  how  little  we  can  do 
by  oar  own  skill  or  wisdom,  how  much  when  we  take  Christ  with  us  in  our  work. 
His  Word  teaches  us  how,  and  where,  and  when  to  labour,  and  following  that  Divine 
Teacher  we  are  sure  of  success.  (Ibid.)  A  broken  net : — "  The  net  brake."  That 
net  is  the  Church ;  and  the  history  of  the  Church  is,  alas !  a  history  of  the  tearing 
of  its  meshes,  and  the  breaking  away  of  its  fish.  Heresy  and  schism  have  troubled 
the  Church  from  the  apostolic  period ;  and  Christ  in  this  miracle  showed  that  it 
would  be  so,  lest  we  should  be  discouraged ;  but  He  also  showed  the  remedy  for  it 
— a  remedy  we  have  not  sufficiently  taken  to  heart.  When  the  net  was  torn,  then 
Peter  beckoned  to  his  partners  to  help  to  receive  the  draught.  And  by  this  we 
•re  shown  that  the  true  remedy  for  heresy  and  schism  is  unity.  Sad  it  is  that 
there  should  be  ao  much   separation  among  the  Apostolic  Chorches  ;  t)iat  the 


fWAP.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  487 

Eastern  Church,  and  the  Church  which  claims  to  be  founded  by  St.  Peter,  and 
our  own  English  Church,  should  all  be  engaged  in  fishing  on  our  own  several 
accounts,  with  mangled  nets,  from  which  many  escape,  and  in  which  only  few  ar« 
MTed.  When  the  Churches  recoguize  the  real  cause  of  their  failure,  repent  of  theii 
haughty  and  narrow  isolation,  and  draw  together,  and  call  to  each  other  to  help, 
then,  and  then  only,  will  they  be  filled  to  the  bulwarks,  so  that  they  seem  almost 
about  to  sink.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  Use  of  partners : — There  cannot  be  s^ 
better  improvement  of  society  than  to  help  us  in  gain,  to  relieve  us  in  our  profitable 
labours,  to  draw  up  the  spiritual  draught  into  the  vessel  of  Christ  and  His  Church. 
Wherefore  hath  God  given  us  partners,  but  that  we  should  beckon  to  them  for  their 
aid  in  our  necessary  occasions  ?  Neither  doth  Simon  slacken  his  hand,  because  he 
had  assistants.  Wliat  shall  we  say  to  those  lazy  fishers,  who  can  see  others  to  the 
drag,  while  themselves  look  on  at  ease,  caring  only  to  feed  themselves  with  the  fish, 
uot  willing  to  wet  their  hands  with  the  net  ?  what  shall  we  say  to  this  excess  oi 
gain  ?     (Bishop  Hall.) 

Yer.  8.  When  Simon   Peter  saw  It  he  fell  at  Jesus'  knees,  sajring,  Depart  trom. 

me. —  What  it  was  that  Peter  saw: — To  understand  the  action  and  the  words  of 
Simon  Peter,  we  must  know  what  it  was  that  he  saw.  The  place  was  the  shore  of 
the  Lake  of  Galilee,  and  the  time  was  early  in  the  first  year  of  the  ministry  of 
Christ.  Already  men  were  talking  of  the  great  prophet,  and  wondering  who  and 
what  He  was  ;  and  no  doubt  the  fishermen  had  thought  and  spoken  much  of  Him. 
One  day  Christ  came  ;  He  went  straight  to  Simon's  ship,  and  from  it  He  taught 
the  people,  while  Simon  Peter  listened.  And  then  followed  that  great  wonder  of 
the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes,  which  astounded  all  beholders.  That  was  what 
Peter  saw.  But  he  saw  more  ;  he  saw  in  all  this  what  was  like  a  call  to  him  ;  not 
yet  a  direct  one,  but  one  which  he  could  not  help  but  understand.  When  you  see 
a  grand  action,  it  is  a  call  to  you  to  imitate  it ;  when  you  hear  of  a  noble  deed,  it 
is  a  call  to  you  to  correct  whatever  of  littleness  or  meanness  may  be  in  your  own 
Boul;  when  you  see  others  walking  with  God,  it  is  a  call  to  you  to  join  them,  and 
to  walk  even  as  they.  Sympathetic  natures  need  no  explanation  at  such  times ; 
they  take  in  at  once  the  meaning  of  the  voices  which  they  hear  as  they  go  on 
through  life.  Simon  Peter  felt  what  he  saw  ;  he  felt  how  it  bore  on  him ;  and  feel- 
ing it,  instantly  and  profoundly,  his  first  motion  was  to  draw  back  in  alarm,  and  to 
pray  the  Lord  to  depart  from  him.  (Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  Two  kinds  of  shrink' 
ing  from  Christ: — Does  this  remind  you  of  another  scene?  It  must,  if  you  are 
thoughtful,  and  accustomed  to  interpret  scripture  by  scripture.  It  was  the  very 
thing  that  the  Gadarenes  and  Gergesenes  did,  when  Christ  revealed  Himself  to 
them  in  His  hoUness,  and  manifested  forth  His  glory.  Compare  the  narratives  ; 
they  run  almost  exactly  parallel.  The  place  was  the  same — the  Lake  of  Gennesaret 
or  its  immediate  shores.  The  main  personage  in  each  scene  is  the  same — Christ, 
the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  The  state  of  preparation  in  human 
minds  is  the  same — the  Gadarenes  had  heard  of  Christ,  and  so  had  Peter.  The 
time  was  the  same— just  after  a  startling  miracle.  The  act  in  each  case  was  the 
same,  nay  the  very  words  are  the  same ;  the  people  of  Gadara  prayed  Him  that 
He  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts ;  and  Simon  Peter  cried,  "  Depart  from  me,  O 
Lord.*'  But  yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  correspondences,  in  time,  in  place,  in 
deed,  in  result,  in  word,  there  was  a  difference  which  outweighs  all  agreement* 
Not  farther  asunder  are  the  poles  of  this  globe,  not  wider  apart  are  east  and  west^ 
than  were  the  spirit  of  the  men  of  Gadara  and  the  soul  of  Simon  Peter.  Nor 
could  the  final  results  have  been  more  diverse.  The  men  of  Gadara  never  saw 
Christ  again;  Peter  never  left  Him.  They  kept  all  they  had,  and  lost  the  Lord; 
he  kept  the  Lord,  and  lost  all  else.  And  then  the  histories  diverge,  as  stream* 
part,  never  again  to  be  united,  but  to  flow  farther  and  farther  away  from  each 
other.  On  the  one  hand  a  low,  material,  worldly  life  drags  sluggishly  forward, 
passing  into  darkness  and  silence,  and  descending  into  shame  and  everlasting  con- 
tempt :  while  the  other,  fixed  on  Jesus,  and  developed  in  Him,  groweth  more  and 
more  unto  the  perfect  day  ;  the  name  becomes  an  immortal  name,  the  man  is  num- 
bered with  the  saints  in  glory  everlasting,  and  the  very  record  of  his  life  tells  with 
tremendous  moral  force,  even  down  to  this  far-ofiE  day,  and  here  in  this  remote 
land,  and  is  helpful,  and  precious,  and  stands  Uke  a  tower  of  strength  amidst  the 
waves  of  this  troublesome  world.  (Ibid.)  Peter's  cry  of  despairing  love  : — The 
feeling  of  St.  Peter,  as  he  uttered  this  cry,  is  not  unmixed  with  sensations  of 
zeverence  and  Jove.    True,  it  contains  within  it  elements  of  terror ;  it  is  not  tho- 


48S    •  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  t. 

language  of  that  perfect  love  which  casts  out  fear ;  it  is  lower  than  the  awe  which 
inspires  angels  and  just  men  made  perfect  as  they  are  conscious  of  the  imperfec- 
tions and  limitations  of  creaturely  existence  in  the  presence  of  the  great  Alpha 
and  Omega  of  all  creation.     But  it  is  the  cry  of  despairing  love,  not  of  despairing 
hate ;  the  cry  of  one  who  yearns  after  an  unattainable  height,  not  of  one  who  is 
content  to  wallow  in  the  mire  of  his  sins.    I.  Undoubtedly  it  was  the  effect  of 
yKAB  PEODucED  BY  A  SENSE  OF  SIN.    The  consciousness  of  standing  before  a  Being 
of  infinite  holiness  produces  in  sinful  man  a  thrill  of  moral  agony ;  the  force  of 
contrast  brings  into  strong  relief  the  hideous,  intolerable  deformity  of  sin  ;  in  the 
light  of  that  presence  sin  becomes  exceeding  sinful,  and  the  yawning  depths  of 
iniquity  which  lie  hid  in  man's  nature  are  no  longer  veiled  by  the  mists  of  custom 
«nd  long  habit.    Man  for  the  most  part  is  unconscious  of  the  real  foulness  of  his 
Bin  ;  the  moral  atmosphere  around  him  is  charged  therewith  ;  he  imbibes  its  taint 
at  every  breath ;  the  world  around  him  is  penetrated  with  it ;  it  enters  into  him  at 
every  pore,  it  suffuses  itself  more  or  less  over  his  whole  nature.    Hence  arises  the 
further  realization  of  sin  which  results  from  growth  in  holiness,  the  explanation 
of  the  seeming  difficulty  that  the  saintliest  of  mankind  confess  themselves  the 
greatest  sinners.    Men  living  at  a  distance  from  God  are  actually  without  any 
standard  by  which  to  measure  their  deflection  from  the  Divine  law.     Only  when  a 
man  begins  to  ascend  the  hill  of  God,  to  make  his  way  out  of  the  foul  miasma 
amid  which  he  has  been  living  and  moving,  can  he  in  any  measure  discover  the 
real  proportions  of  things,  or  bring  home  to  his  heart  the  miserable  and  loathsome 
forms  of  evil  by  which  he  has  been  hitherto  surrounded.    II.  St.  Peter's  words 
seem  to  arise  out  of  some  feeling  of  kepugnance  between  his  human  will  and  the 
WILL  OF  AN  ALL-HOLT  GoD.     There  is,  alas  1  even  in  regenerate  nature,  a  certain 
amount  of  antagonism  towards  the  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God. 
We  can  none  of  us  be  brought  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God  without  being 
conscious  of  the  claim  which  is  made  upon  us  thereby  of  striving  after  a  more 
complete  renunciation  of  our  own  lusts  and  desires,  a  more  entire  conformity  to 
that  likeness  which  we  instinctively  feel  to  be  the  law  and  pattern  of  redeemed 
humanity.     At  this,  man's  nature  rebels.     III.  These  words  seem  to  spring  also 
from  a  bwverent  hdmilitt.     An  intensified  form  of  the  centurion's  faithful  saying 
(Matt.  viii.  8).     St.  Peter  had  been  treatins;  our  Blessed  Lord  too  much  as  a  mere 
man ;  he  had  been  mingling  familiarly  in  His  company,  listening  to  Him  as  a  mere 
human  teacher  ;  and  now  the  consciousness  lights  up  within  him  that  God  was  in 
that  place  and  he  knew  it  not — that  he  had  been  standing  at  the  very  gate  of 
heaven.     Conclusion  :    Wounded  with  a  sense  of  exceeding  sinfulness,  or  con- 
scious of  a  will  struggling  against  the  Divine  purpose,  or  penetrated  with  a  feeling 
of  unworthiness,  you  may  be  ready  to  exclaim,  "  Depart  from  me,"  &o.    Yet  in 
that  cry  is  the  earnest  of  your  acceptance,  not  of  your  rejection.    In  that  cry  lies 
a  sure  augury  of  future  success.    It  is  the  first  step  towards  penitence,  self-exami- 
nation, confession,  and  God's  absolving  word.     (S.  W.  Skeffington,  M.A.)       Peter's 
confession  of  sin : — Observe  well  what  it  was  which  led  to  this  conviction  of  guilt 
in  Peter's  soul.    Not  terror,  or  judgment ;  not  any  view  of  the  anger  and  justice  of 
the  Being  with  whom  he  had  to  do.    It  was  simply  the  reception  and  conscious - 
nesB  of  a  very  great  and  exceeding  kindness.    This  made  him  love  what  he 
admired ;  and  the  love  and  the  admiration  which  he  felt  to  God  became,  by  an 
«asy  change,  hatred  and  detestation  against  himself.    He  was  softened  at  the 
moment  that  he  was  convinced ;   and  upon  his  melted  heart  and  conscience  ha 
wrote  the  large,  deep  characters  of  sin.     1.  The  greatest  and  surest  test  of  every 
man's  state  before  God  is  this — How  does  he  feel  toward  sin  ?    It  is  a  great  thing 
to  have  faith  enough  to  see  the  requirements  of  a  holy  God ;  faith  enough  to  be 
conscious  that  there  is  a  distance ;  faith  enough  to  fear.    2.  There  is  no  feeling 
in  Peter's  breast  akin  to  the  desire  to  get  rid  of  his  religious  thought.    He  was 
asking  rather  that  which  he  thought  he  ought  to  ask,  than  what  he  wanted  to 
ask.    The  humility  was  real ;  but  it  was  not  enlightened.     It  was  exactly  what 
every  man  ought  to  say  and  feel,  if  he  saw  only  his  own  breast,  and  did  not  see  the 
bosom  of  God.    8.  This  feeling  operates  differently,  according  to  the  moral  tem- 
perament, or  according  to  the  stage  in  which  a  man  may  happen  to  stand  in  the 
Divine  life.    ^1)  In  one,  it  becomes  despair.     The  soul  dares  not  to  admit  the 
thought  that  it  could  ever  be  received  into  the  love  of  God.     The  dread  of  the  sin 
of  presomption — from  which  it  is  the  farthest  off — is  always  haunting  it.     Th« 
very  name  and  joys  of  heaven  seem  a  mockery  to  him.    (2)  In  another  man  it 
destroys  all  sense  of  God's  mercy.    Peace,  instead  of  being  a  fact,  established  by 


cmr.  T.]  ST.  LUKS.  48f 

the  Cross,  and  eimply  taken,  is  always  a  thing  pnt  off  and  off  to  some  distant 
future.  What  is  this  but  putting  Christ  away  ?  (3)  Others  seek  an  intermediate' 
agency  between  Christ  and  their  soul.  4.  It  is  an  unspeakable  comfort  to  know 
that  this  awful  prayer,  which  Peter  made  in  ignorance,  was  not  answered.  Christ 
did  not  depart  from  him.  Thank  God,  He  knows  when  to  refuse  a  prayer.  He 
never  leaves  those  who  are  only  ignorant.  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  sense  of  sin 
in  the  Saviour's  presence  : — Such  has  ever  been  the  effect  of  God's  presence  felt  and; 
realized  by  a  human  soul.  Even  the  sinless  angels  veil  their  faces,  and  worship 
with  an  awful  reverence  before  the  throne  on  high;  how  much  less  can  man's 
nature,  penetrated  with  the  mystery  of  sin,  endure  without  agony  the  blinding^, 
light  and  holiness  of  God  I  Thus  Adam  aud  his  wife,  in  the  first  moments  of  self- 
conscious  guilt,  hid  themselves  among  the  trees  of  the  garden  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  God ;  the  people  of  Israel  trembled  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  and  entreated  to 
hear  the  voice  of  God  no  more  ;  Manoah  fears  death  as  the  consequence  of  the 
vision  of  God;  the  blameless  Daniel  falls  prostrate  and  weakened  before  the  great 
Angel  of  the  Covenant ;  Isaiah  is  oppressed  with  a  painful  sense  of  guilt  after 
witnessing  the  adoration  of  the  Eternal.  And  even  when  God  Incarnate  on  earth 
had  concealed  beneath  the  tabernacle  of  our  humanity  the  rays  of  His  Divine  glory, 
and  talked  with  man  face  to  face,  yet  there  were  moments  when  the  glory  of  the 
Divine  nature  flashed  forth  from  behind  the  thin  veil  of  flesh,  and  confounded  the 
awe-struck  senses  of  the  beholders.  There  were  moments  at  which  even  His 
enemies  were  driven  back,  and  fell  before  His  presence ;  and  many  more  occasions 
on  which  the  hearts  of  apostles  and  friends  failed  them  for  fear  when  they  felt  that 
God  was,  indeed,  in  the  midst  of  them.  (S.  W.  Skeffington,  M.A.)  The  terror 
of  the  law : — This  is  a  cry  which  has  a  long  story  behind  it.  It  carries  us  far  back 
as  we  trace  it  step  by  step  along  the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament.  St.  Peter  is  tes- 
tifying to  his  hold  on  the  significance  of  the  law.  His  words  carry  us  back  to  the 
voice  of  Adam  as  he  saw  God  draw  near  in  the  evening  amid  the  pleasant  garden, 
and  he  knew  the  chill  of  a  terrible  fear  and  hid  himself  among  the  trees.  Ever 
since  that  dismal  day  there  had  been  in  man  a  blind  terror  lest  his  Father  should 
come  too  near  him.  This  is  the  terror  which  passes  hke  a  shudder  through  primi- 
tive faiths,  and  turns  savage  religions  into  acts  of  alarm,  into  rituals  of  panic. 
Men  are  nervous,  discouifitpd,  when  their  God  is  near ;  and  the  very  cruelties  c,f 
these  savage  faiths  are  cruelties  of  fear.  They  know  not  the  secret  of  their  dread  ;. 
they  cannot  syllable  the  confession,"  "I  am  a  sinful  man."  They  only  know  the 
fear,  and  passionately,  and  at  any  cost,  beseech  God  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts. 
This  is  the  terror  which  is  at  work  to  purge  witchcraft.  Jacob  fleeing  from  his 
home,  when  he  awakes  at  Bethel,  exclaims,  "  How  dreadful  is  this  place ;  this  is 
none  other  but  the  house  of  God."  It  is  the  terror,  this  terror  with  its  deep 
ground-tone,  which  meets  us,  in  its  simplest  and  most  natural  fashion,  in  Manoah, 
when  the  vision  of  the  angel  did  wondrously  and  vanished,  and  he  cried  to  his 
wife,  "  We  shall  surely  die,  becau?e  we  have  seen  God."  And  we  know  its 
utterance,  its  stormy  utterance,  in  the  mouths  of  Israel,  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  as 
they  cried  to  Moses,  not  "  Bring  us  near  to  God,"  but  •'  Set  bounds  lest  He  break 
forth  upon  us.  Why  should  we  die  ?  If  we  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God 
any  more,  we  shall  die."  {Canon  Scott  Holland.)  The  nearer  to  God,  the 
sharper  the  anguish : — It  is  not  the  gross  and  carnal  only,  or  the  ignorant,  who 
know  this  start,  this  touch  of  shame.  The  cry  breaks  from  the  lips  of  the  purest 
and  the  highest;  and  it  breaks  from  them  with  intenser  violence,  and  with  more 
startling  passion.  The  nearer  to  God,  the  sharper  the  anguish,  and  the  more 
vehement  the  protestation,  "Depart  from  me."  It  is  Job,  with  his  whole  heart; 
aflame  with  righteousness,  after  a  life  which — as  it  lay  there  under  his  human, 
review — looked  so  fair  and  high  and  blameless ;  it  is  he  who  is  stricken  with  the 
ancient  fear  as  he  sees  God  with  the  seeing  of  the  eye,  and  thus  abhors  himself. 
And  it  is  Isaiah,  the  evangelical  prophet,  who  crowds  into  hot  words  the  fullest 
passion  of  the  old  cry  (Isa.  vi.  1-5).  So  has  it  ever  been,  until  the  last  word  of  the 
last  prophet  is  there  to  tell  us  how  he  wondered  lest  He,  for  whom  they  had  all, 
one  after  another,  so  ardently  waited,  should  consume  them  by  His  very  coming  i 
"Who  shall  abide  the  day  of  His  coming?  Who  shall  stand  when  He  ap- 
peareth  ?  for  He  is  like  a  refiner's  fire."  (Ibid.)  Peter's  surprise  and  fear : — It 
was  not  at  all  surprising  to  him  that  Jesus  should  draw  very  near,  and  should  ask 
for  his  boat,  and  with  him  launch  out.  He  was  not  alarmed  or  disturbed  at  such 
an  invitation ;  rather,  everything  in  it  to  him  was  most  natural  and  most  habitual. 
There  seemed  nothing  to  herald  a  spiritual  crisis  ;  it  is  the  old  task  of  the  fidier 


E90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  T. 

man  to  which  he  is  nsed,  the  task  familiar  to  him  all  his  days.    From  earliest 
childhood  he  had  lived  with  the  nets  and  the  boats  on  the  edge  of  those  hom# 
waters.    It  is  the  old  art  that  would  be  his  surely  till  death  should  lay  him  to 
sleep,  or  till  be  became  too   old   to  do  more  than  watch  the  younger  men  take 
his  place  in  the  old  haunts.    Everything  stood  for  him  that  morning  as  it  had  eve» 
been  ;  nothing  seemed  ready  for  any  great  shock  or  surprise.     No  word  of  ex- 
pectancy gathered  over  that  sleeping  scene.     There  lay  the  broad  waters  as  they 
had  lain  a  thousand  times  before  under  his  eyes  ;  there  stood  the  hills,  quiet  and 
ancient  and  unmoved ;  and  the  same  sky  bent  over  him  as  had  ever  bent  over  him, 
familiar  and  dear;   and  the  same  shores  spread  away  with  the  old  curves  and 
creeks  and  headlands,  and  villages  greeting  him  with  all  that  motionless  image 
of  home.    What  symptom  was  there  of  that  coming  joy?    How  should  he  expect 
anything  at  all  7    He  was  too  weary  to  expect  much,  for  he  had  toiled  long  and 
taken  nothing.     It  was  but  in  a  dull,  passive  acquiescence  that  he  pushed  out  his 
boat.     Aimless  and  dispirited  as  he  was,  how  could  he  guess  that  it  was  to  be  the 
very  last  time  that  he  would  ever  be  as  he  had  always  been,  the  very  last  time 
that  he  would  sit  there  on  the  shore  mending  his  nets.     Suddenly,  like  a  flash  of 
lightning,  the  moment  is  upon  him  ;  there  is  a  start,  a  wonder,  as  the  fish  swarm 
into  the  net.    What  is  it,  this  strange  draught?     What  is  it  but  a  stroke  of  luck? 
"Nay,  a  finger  is  upon  him,  admonitory  and   masterful,  a  thrill   shoots  through 
him,  and  he  tingles  as  with  a  touch  of  fiame.     He  tarns  to  look  at  Him  who 
sits  there  close  by  him  in   the  boat.     Who  is  He,  and  what?      So  quiet  He 
seems,  so  human,  so  near,  so  serene ;  yet  an  awe  has  fallen  upon  Peter,  and  a 
terror  shakes  him.    Very  near  and  very  intimate  the  Master  is,  and  yet  how  is 
it  that  behind  these  steady  human  eyes  there  grows  a  terror — a  terror  as  of  the 
fires  of  Sinai  or  the  thunderings  of  Horeb?    How  is  it  that  within  that  quiet, 
gentle  voice  of  His,  there  seems  to  be  ringing  the  sound  of  that   trumpet  that 
grows  louder  and  louder,  until   Israel   fell   on  their  faces  afraid?      The   Master 
eits  as  He  had  always  sat,  and  looked  as  He  had  always  looked ;  and   yet  this 
tremor,  tbis  dread,  as  of  a  guilty  thing  surprised  1     It  is  the  old-world  fear,  it  is 
tbe  ancient  dismay  that  has  fallen  upon  him,  such  as  fell  upon  Isaiah  when  he  saw 
ihe  Lord  high  and  lifted  up  between  the  cherubim.    He  cannot  be  mistaken  ;  his 
ime  and  pure  spirit  reads  off  the  secret  at  a  glance  and  at  a  flash.     How,  he  knows 
not ;  but  it  is  God  upon  whom  He  is  looking.    He  is  sure  of  it.     He  is  seeing  God, 
and  therefore  he  cannot  endure  it ;  God  very  near ;  he  sees  Him  with  the  seeing  of 
an  eye,  as  Job  of  old,  and  therefore  he  abhors  himself  in  dust  and  ashes.     (Ibid.) 
The  awakening  of  St.  Peter: — After  his  first  interview  with  Christ,  Peter  went  home 
to  his  daily  work.     The  words  Christ  had  spoken  to  him  were  allowed  to  sink  deep 
into  his    heart.     There  was  a  pause  in  life  before  the  next  impression  was  made 
upon  him.    For  the  first  time  in  his  life  the  unlearned  fisherman  had  been  recog- 
nized by  one  greater  than  himself.    We  may  imagine  in  some  degree  what  were  his 
thoughts  as  he  lay  at  night  within  his  boat,  rocked  on  the  indolent  surge  of  the 
lake,   letting  his  thoughts  wander  with  his  eyes  among  the  stars,   and  hearing 
nothing  but  the  cry  of  the  wild  fowl  on  the  lake,  and  the  rustle  of  the  oleander  on 
the  shore :  "  ShaU  I  meet  Jesus  once  again,  or  will  He  forget  me  in  the  greatness  of 
His  work  ? "    And  one  fair  morning,  as  he  sat  on  the  glittering  beach  of  shells, 
mending  his  nets,  his  desire  was  answered.    By  all  that  Peter  had  gone  through 
there  had  been  kindled  in  his  soul  the  first  sparks  of  love  to  Christ,  fitly  mingled 
with  veneration.    But  as  yet  there  had  been  no  spiritual  element  connected  with 
them,  and  Christ's  object  was  to  awaken   more   than  friendship.      Peter  loved, 
reverenced,  believed  ;  but  he  had  not  linked  his  love  and  reverence  and  faith  to  any 
profound  feeling  such  as  knits  the  forgiven  sinner  to  a  forgiving  Father.    And  it  is 
m  what  now  took  place,  in  the  awakening  of  the  slumbering  forces  of  the  spirit, 
that  Peter  was  lifted  into  another  and  a  higher,  though  a  more   sorrowful  and 
more  tempted  life.    Peter's  expression  of  his  emotion  reveals  one  of  those  states  of 
mingled  feelings  which  seem  too  strange  to  be  understood,  but  which  we  feel  to  be 
true  to  our  human  nature.    It  was  a  mixture  of  repulsion  and  attraction,  of  fear 
that  repelled,  of  love  that  drew.    •'  Depart  from  me,"  &c.,  that  was  the  cry  of  his 
lips,  and  it  rose  half  out  of  fear  at  the  revelation  of  holiness,  half  out  of  shame  at 
the  revelation  of  his  own  sinfulness.    But  with  this  was  something  more.     His  fear 
and  shame  sprang  out  of  his  lower  sell ;  but  he  could  not  remain  in  fear  or  shame 
with  that  wonderful  and  tender  face  looking  down  upon  him,  as  he  knelt  among  the 
nets.     His  higher  being  rose  in  passion  to  meet  the  encouragement  of  Christ.    That 
whioh  was  akin  to  Christ  in  him  saw  and  recognized  with  joy — ^joy  that  to^k  the*t 


<WA».  T.J  ST.  LUKE.  491 

the  garments  of  a  noble  sorrow,  the  beauty  of  holiness  in  Christ ;  remembered  that 
this  hohness  had  come  to  meet  him,  sought  him  out  and  loved  him — and  at  the 
thought,  all  his  nobler  nature  darted  forward  with  a  cry,  repelled  the  lower  that 
would  have  exiled  Christ  through  fear,  and  threw  him  down,  forgetting  all  else  in 
titter  love  and  broken-hearted  humbleness,  at  the  feet  of  Christ.  "  Depart  from  me 
— no,  never,  my  Lord  and  Master,  never  leave  me.  There,  in  Thy  holiness,  can  I 
-alone  find  rest ;  in  being  with  Thee  always  alone  salvation  from  my  wrong-doing ; 
in  loving  Thee  with  all  my  heart  alone  the  strength  I  need  to  conquer  fear,  and 
passionate  impulse,  and  weakness  in  the  hour  of  trial."  Yes,  that  is  the  great  step 
which  takes  us  over  the  threshold  into  the  temple  of  a  spiritual  life  with  God.  And 
the  life  which  succeeds  that  revelation  of  holiness  and  sin  is  no  life  of  mere  feeling. 
" Follow  Me,"  said  Christ,  "and  I  will  make  you  a  fisher  of  men  " ;  and  Peter  left 
all  and  followed  Him.  This  part  of  the  story  does  not  tell  us  to  throw  aside  our 
daily  work,  unless  it  should  happen  that  we  have  a  special  apostolic  call ;  but  it 
does  tell  as  to  change  our  motives,  our  ideas,  oar  aims :  to  live  the  life  of  Christ,  tha 
life  that  gives  up  Hfe  to  others.  {Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  Conviction  of  sin  in 
the  mind  of  Peter : — We  have  here  a  specimen  of  the  Bedeemer's  method  of  teaching. 
He  taught  by  actions.  His  miracles  had  a  voice.  The  advantage  of  this  symbolio 
teaching  twofold :  1.  It  was  a  living  thing.  2.  It  saves  us  from  dead  dogmas.  Our 
thoughts  branch  off  into  two  divisions.  I.  The  meaning  and  object  of  thb 
MIRACLE.  More  than  all  others  it  taught  God's  personality.  The  meaning  and 
intention  of  every  miracle  is  to  break  through  the  tyranny  of  the  words  "  law  " 
and  "Nature."  II.  The  effects  produced  on  Peter's  mind.  The  sense  of 
personal  sin.  1.  When  we  come  to  look  at  the  cause  of  this  we  see  that  the  im- 
pression was  (a)  partly  owing  to  the  apostle's  Jewish  education.  The  Jews  always 
recognized  the  personality  of  God,  therefore  this  only  awoke  what  was  acknowledged 
before;  (b)  partly  also  it  was  produced  by  the  pure  presence  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Wherever  the  Redeemer  went,  He  elicited  a  strange  sense  of  sin.  And  this  is  not 
the  case  only  in  our  Redeemer's  personal  ministry,  but  it  is  so  wherever  Christianity 
is  preached.  2.  The  nature  of  this  conviction  of  sin  in  Peter's  bosom.  There  is 
a  remorse  which  is  felt  for  crime,  but  this  was  not  Peter's  case.  The  language  of 
holy  men  when  they  speak  of  sin  is  startling.  In  order  to  understand  it,  and  to 
comprehend  Peter's  conviction  of  guilt,  we  must  look  at  the  three  principles  which 
guide  the  life  of  three  different  classes  of  men.  (a)  Obedience  to  the  opinion  of  the 
■world ;  (b)  The  standard  of  a  man's  own  opinion  ;  (c)  The  light  of  the  life  of  God. 
The  first  of  these  makes  the  man  of  honour ;  the  second,  the  man  of  virtue  ;  the 
third,  the  man  of  saintliness.  Up  to  this  time  Peter  had  lived  an  upright  man, 
full  of  self-reliance ;  from  this  time  he  began  to  walk  lowly  and  learnt  self-forgetful- 
Bess.  This  is  the  way  in  which  Christ  produces  conviction  of  sin — by  placing  before 
us  infinite  love,  infinite  loving-kindness,  and  a  perfect  humanity.  We  fall  in  the 
dust  before  this,  and  say,  "  We  are  sinful  men,  0  Lord."  We  are  sinners,  we  have 
erred  exceedingly,  and  we  have  seen  the  infinite  charity  of  God  stream  forth  in  the 
majesty  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  bear  the  splendour  of  that  presence 
only  when  love  has  taken  the  place  of  fear,  and  we  feel  that  we  need  fear  nothing, 
neither  death  nor  hell  nor  men.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  31. A.)  Humility  : — Few 
stories  in  the  New  Testament  are  as  well  known  as  this.  Few  go  home  more  deeply 
to  the  heart  of  man.  Most  simple,  most  graceful  is  the  story,  and  yet  it  has  in  it 
depths  unfathomable.  Great  painters  have  loved  to  draw,  great  poets  have  loved  to 
«ing,  that  scene  on  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret.  The  clear  blue  water,  land-locked  with 
mountains;  the  meadows  on  the  shore,  gay  with  their  lihes  of  the  field  ;  the  rich 
gardens,  olive-yards,  and  vineyards  on  the  slopes ;  the  towns  and  villas  scattered 
along  the  shore,  all  of  bright  white  lime-stone  gay  in  the  sun  ;  the  crowds  of  boats, 
fishing  continually  for  the  fish  which  swarm  to  this  day  in  the  lake ;  everywhere 
beautiful  country  life,  busy  and  gay,  healthy  and  civilized — and  in  the  midst  of  it, 
the  Maker  of  all  heaven  and  earth  sitting  in  a  poor  fisher's  boat,  and  condescending 
to  tell  them  where  the  shoal  of  fish  was  lying.  It  is  a  wonderful  scene.  Let  as 
thank  God  that  it  happened  once  on  earth.  Though  our  God  and  Saviour  no 
longer  walks  this  earth  in  human  form.  He  is  neat  us  now  and  here.  There  is  in 
OS  the  same  heart  as  there  was  in  St.  Peter  fcr  evil  and  for  good.  When  he  found 
suddenly  that  it  was  the  Lord  who  was  in  his  boat,  his  first  feeling  was  one  of  fear. 
Do  we  never  feel  the  thought  of  God's  presence  a  burden  ?  God  grant  to  us  all,  that 
after  that  first  feeling  of  dread  and  awe  is  over,  we  may  go  on,  as  Peter  did,  to  the 
better  feelings  of  admiration,  loyalty,  worship  ;  and  say  at  last,  as  Peter  said  after- 
wards, "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  for  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life." 


49J  •  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  % 

But  do  I  blame  St.  Peter  for  ssying,  "  Depart  from  me,"  <fca.    Who  am  I,  to  blams 
St.  Peter  ?    Especially  when  even  the  Lord  Jesus  did  not  blame  him,  but  only  bade 
him  not  to  be  afraid.    And  why  did  the  Lord  not  blame  him,  even  when  he  asked 
Him  to  go  away  ?    Because  St.  Peter  was  honest.    He  said  frankly  and  naturally 
what  was  in  his  heart.    He  spoke  not  from  dislike  of  our  Lord,  but  from  modesty ; 
from  a  feeling  of  awe,  of  uneasiness,  of  dread,  at  the  presence  of  One  who  waa 
infinitely  greater,  wiser,  better  than  himself.    And  that  feeling  of  reverence  and 
honesty  is  a  Divine  and  noble  feeling — the  beginning  of  all  goodness.    Peter  felt 
unworthy  to  be  in  such  good  company.    He  felt  unworthy — he,  the  ignorant  fisher- 
man— to  have  such  a  guest  in  his  poor  boat.    "  Go  elsewhere.  Lord,"  he  tried  to 
say,  "  to  a  place  and  to  companions  more  fit  for  Thee.     I  am  ashamed  to  stand  in 
Thy  presence.    I  am  dazzled  by  the  brightness  of  Thy  countenance,  crushed  down 
by  the  thought  of  Thy  wisdom  and  power,  uneasy  lest  I  say  or  do  something  unfit 
for  Thee ;  Thou  knowest  not  what  a  poor  miserable  creature  I  am  at  heart — Depart 
from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  O  Lord."  There  spake  out  the  truly  noble  soul, 
who  was  ready  the  next  moment,  as  soon  as  he  had  recovered  himself,  to  leave  all 
and  follow  Christ ;  who  was  ready  afterwards  to  wander,  to  suffer,  to  die  upon  th« 
cross  for  his  Lord ;  and  who,  when  he  was  led  out  to  execution  asked  (it  is  said)  to 
be  crucified  with  his  head  downwards,  seeing  that  it  was  too  much  honour  for  him 
to  die  looking  to  heaven,  as  his  Lord  had  died.    Do  you  not  understand  me  yet  ? 
Then  think  what  you  would  have  thought  of  Peter,  if,  instead  of  saying  what  he  did, 
he  had  said,  "  Stay  with  me,  for  I  am  a  holy  man,  O  Lord.     I  am  just  the  sort  of 
person  who  deserves  the  honour  of  Thy  company ;  and  my  boat,  poor  though  it  is, 
more  fit  for  Thee  than  the  palace  of  a  king."    {Gharlet  Kingsley.)        The  sense  of 
sin  evoked  by  Christ  and  Christianity : — When  Simeon,  on  the  verge  of  hfe,  uttered 
his  parting  hymn  within  the  Temple,  he  told  Mary,  with  the  infant  Jesus  in  hia 
arms,  that,  by  that  child,  "  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  should  be  revealed." 
Never  was  prophecy  more  true ;  nor  ever  perhaps  the  mission  of  our  religion  more 
faithfully  defined.     For  wherever  it  has  spread,  it  has  operated  like  a  new  and 
Diviner  conscience  to  the  world ;  imparting  to  the  human  mind  a  profounder  insight 
into  itself ;    opening  to  its  consciousness  fresh  powers  and  better   aspirations ; 
and  penetrating  it  with  a  sense  of  imperfection,  a  concern  for  the  moral  frailties  of 
the  will,  characteristic  of  no  earlier  age.     The  spirit  of  religious  penitence,  the 
solemn  confession  of  unfaithfulness,  the  prayer  for  mercy,  are  the  growth  of  our 
nature  trained  in  the  school  of  Christ.     The  pure  image  of  His  mind,  as  it  has 
passed  from  land  to  land,  has  taught  men  more  of  their  own  hearts  than  all  the 
ancient  aphorisms  of  self-knowledge,  has  inspired  more  sadness  at  the  evil,  more 
noble  help  for  the  good  that  is  hidden  there ;  and  has  placed  within  reach  of  even 
the  ignorant,  the  neglected,  and  the  young,  severer  principles  of  self-scrutiny  than 
philosophy  had  ever  attained.  The  radiance  of  so  great  a  sanctity  has  deepened  the 
shades  of  conscious  sin.    The  savage  convert  who  before  knew  nothing  more  sacred 
than  revenge  and  war,  is  brought  to  Jesus,  and,  as  he  listens  to  that  voice,  feels  the 
stain  of  blood  growing  distinct  upon  his  soul.    The  voluptuary,  never  before  dis- 
turbed from  his  self-indulgence,  comes  within  the  atmosphere  of  Christ's  spirit ;  and 
it  is  as  if  a  gale  of  heaven  fanned  his  fevered  brow,  and  convinced  him  that  he  is  not 
in  health.  The  ambitious  priest,  revolving  plans  for  using  men's  passions  as  tools  of 
his  aggrandisements,  starts  to  find  himself  the  disciple  of  One  who,  when  the  people 
would  have  made  Him  King,  fled  direct  to  solitude  and  prayer.    The  froward  child 
bluslies  to  think  how  little  there  is  in  him  of  the  infant  meekness  which  Jesua 
praised ;  and  feels  that,  had  he  been  there,  he  must  have  missed  the  benediction, 
or  more  bitter  still,  have  wept  to  know  it  misapplied.    Nay,  so  deep  and  solemn  did 
the  sense  of  guilt  become  under  the  influence  of  Christian  thoughts,  that  at  length 
the  overburdened  heart  of  fervent  times  could  endure  the  weight  no  longer ;  the 
Confessional  arose,  and  it  became  the  chief  object  of  the  widest  sacerdotal  order 
which  tihe  world  has  ever  seen,  to  soothe  the  sobs,  and  listen  to  the  whispered 
record  of  human  penitence.    Everywhere  the  Christian  mind  proclaims  its  need  ot 
mercy,  and  bends  beneath  the  oppression  of  its  guilt ;  and  since  Jesus  began  to 
"  reveal  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts,"  Christendom,  with  clasped  hands,  has  fallen 
at  His  feet  and  cried,  "  We  are  sinful  men,  O  Lord."    Li  nurturing  this  sentiment, 
in  producing  this  solemn  estimate  of  moral  evil  and  quick  perception  of  its 
existence,  the  religion  of  Christ  does  but  perpetuate  the  influence  of  His  personal 
ministry.    (J.  Martineau, LL.D.)        Illumination: — A  flash  of  supernatural  illumi. 
nation  had  revealed  to  him  hoih  his  own  sinful  anworthiness  and  who  He  waa 
who  was  with  him  in  the  boat.    It  was  the  cry  of  seU-loathing  which  had  already 


mtr.  v.]  8T.  LUES.  493 

realized  something  nobler.  It  was  the  first  impnlee  of  fear  and  amazement,  before 
they  had  had  time  to  grow  into  adoration  and  love.  St.  Peter  did  not  mean  the 
"  Depart  from  me  " ;  be  only  meant — and  this  was  known  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts — 
••  I  am  utterly  unworthy  to  be  near  Thee,  yet  let  me  stay."  How  unlike  was  this  cry 
of  his  passionate  and  trembling  humiUty  to  the  bestial  ravings  of  the  unclean  spirits, 
who  bade  the  Lord  to  let  them  alone ;  or  to  the  hardened  degradation  of  the  filthy 
Oadarenes,  who  preferred  to  the  presence  of  their  Saviour  the  tending  of  their 
iwina  I  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Self-loathing  in  view  of  infinite  purity  : — We  read  in 
profane  history  of  an  old  woman  who  fell  mad  on  seeing  her  deformity  in  a  looking- 
glass.  There  is  enough  in  the  view  which  the  mirror  of  the  Word  gives  us  of  our 
individual  character,  if  not  to  drive  us  to  derangement  and  despair,  to  prostrate 
ns  in  the  dust  of  self-abasement  and  self-abhorrence  ;  and  still  more  affecting  and 
overpowering  does  this  view  of  ourselves  become  in  the  presence  of  the  Infinite  Purity. 
The  impresaion  made  by  Christ's  holinett.    L  In  the  first  place,  a  view  of  thb 

OHABAOTEB  OF  JeSUS  CHBIST  AWAKBKS  THB  FEELIItO  OF  SINFULNESS.      It   is   absolutely 

perfect.  The  character  of  Jesus  is  fathomless;  and  what  has  been  remarked  of 
Christianity  by  one  of  the  early  Boman  bishops,  may  with  equal  truth  be  said  of  the 
character  of  its  Author :  "  It  is  hke  the  firmament ;  the  more  diligently  you  search 
it,  the  more  stars  will  you  discover.  It  is  like  the  ocean ;  the  longer  you  regard  it, 
the  more  immeasurable  will  it  appear  to  you."  When  the  characteristic  qualities  of 
Ghrist  are  distinctly  beheld  in  their  holy  and  spotless  beauty  by  a  sinful  man,  the 
contrast  is  felt  immediately.  The  instant  that  his  eye  rests  upon  the  sinlessness 
of  Jesus,  it  turns  involuntarily  to  the  sinfulness  of  himself.  He  realizes  that  he  is 
a  different  man  from  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus ; "  and  that  except  so  far  as  he  is 
changed  by  Divine  grace,  there  can  be  no  sympathy  and  union  with  Him.  This 
is  a  proper  and  blessed  mood  for  an  imperfectly  sanctified  Christian.  It  corre- 
sponds with  the  facts  of  the  case.  How  can  pride,  the  essence  of  sin,  dwell  in  such 
a  spirit  ?  It  is  excluded.  II.  Intimately  coNNEcxEn,  in  the  second  place,  with  a 
VBW  OF  Christ's  oharacteb,  is  that  of  Christ's  daily  life.  When  this  with  its  train 
of  holy  aotions  passes  before  the  mind  of  the  believer,  it  produces  a  deep  sense  of 
indwelling  sin.  This  sense  of  sin  as  related  to  justice  should  hold  a  prominent 
place  in  the  Christian  experience ;  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  first  vividly  elicited 
by  the  operation  of  the  law,  and  then  is  completely  pacified  by  a  view  of  Christ  aa 
suffering  "  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  will  be  the  depth  of  our  love  towards  Him,  and 
the  simplicity  and  entireness  of  our  trust  in  Him.  Those  who,  like  Paul  and 
Luther,  have  had  the  clearest  perception  of  the  iniquity  of  sin,  and  of  their  own 
criminality  before  God,  have  had  the  most  luminous  and  constraining  view  of 
Ghrist  as  the  "  Lamb  of  God."  III.  Having  thus  directed  attention  to  the  fact 
that  there  is  such  a  distinct  feeling  as  guilt,  we  remark,  in  the  third  place, 

THAT  the  contemplation  OF  THE  8UFFEBING8  AND  DEATH  OF  ChRIST  BOTH  ELIOITS  AND 

PACIFIES  IT,  IN  THE  BELIEVER.  Whocvcr  beholds  human  transgression  in  the  light 
of  the  Cross,  has  no  doubts  as  to  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Being  nailed 
to  it ;  and  he  has  no  doubts  as  to  his  own  nature  and  character.  The  distinct 
and  intelligent  feeling  of  culpability  forbids  that  he  should  omit  to  look  at  sin 
in  its  penal  relations,  and  enables  him  to  understand  these  relations.  The 
vicarious  atonement  of  Christ  is  well  comprehended  because  it  is  precisely 
what  the  guilt-smitten  conscience  craves  in  its  restlessness  and  anguish.  The 
believer  now  has  wants  which  are  met  in  this  sacrifice.  His  moral  feelings  are  all 
awake,  and  the  fundamental  feeling  of  guilt  pervades  and  tinges  them  all ;  until, 
in  genuine  contrition,  he  holds  up  the  Lamb  of  God  in  his  prayer  for  mercy,  and 
cries  out  to  the  Just  One :  "  This  oblation  which  Thou  Thyself  hast  provided  ia 
my  propitiation ;  this  atones  for  my  sin."  Then  the  expiating  blood  is  applied  by 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  conscience  is  filled  with  the  peace  of  God  that  passeth 
all  understanding.  "Then,"  to  use  the  language  of  Leighton,  "the  conscience 
makes  answer  to  God :  *  Lord,  I  have  found  that  there  is  no  standing  in  the 
judgment  before  Thee,  for  the  soul  in  itself  is  overwhelmed  with  a  world  of  guilti* 
nesB ;  but  I  find  a  blood  sprinkled  upon  it  that  hath,  I  am  sure,  virtue  enough  to 
purge  it  all  away,  and  to  present  it  pure  unto  Thee.  And  I  know  that  wheresoever 
Thoa  findest  that  blood  sprinkled.  Thine  anger  is  quenched  and  appeased  imme* 
diately  upon  the  sight  of  it.  Thine  hand  cannot  smite  when  that  blood  is  before 
thine  eye.' "  We  have  thns  considered  the  effect,  in  awakening  a  sense  of  Biii« 
produced  by  a  clear  view  of  the  character,  life,  and  death  of  Christ.  Bat  how 
dim  and  indistinct  is  our  vision  of  all  this!  It  should  be  one  of  oor  most 
difltinct  and  earnest  aims,  to  set  a  emoified  Bedeemer  visibly  before  our  ejetk 


494"  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

{W.  G,  T.  Shedd,  D.D.)  Peter's  confession.  I.  Remark  his  confession — "  I  am 
a  sinful  man."  II.  His  petition — "  Depart  from  me,  0  Lord  I  "  The  following 
things  seem  to  be  impUed.  1.  Great  fear  and  ditress.  Few,  unless  they 
have  been  in  something  of  the  same  situation,  can  guess  at  the  various  agita- 
tions of  Peter's  mind.  What  a  sense  he  now  had  of  his  own  vileness,  and 
what  views  of  the  excellency  of  Christ  1  Eebecca  alighted  from  her  camel  when 
she  saw  Isaac,  and  prostrated  herself  before  him :  and  whatever  opinion  we  may 
have  entertained  of  ourselves  before,  sure  I  am,  that  we  shall  be  sensible  of  our 
own  nothingness  when  we  view  ourselves  in  the  Ught  of  the  Divine  perfections. 
2.  It  implies  modesty  and  diffidence,  which  kept  him  at  a  distance  from  Him  who 
not  only  admits,  but  invites  to  the  greatest  nearness.  Peter  felt  on  this  occasion 
somewhat  like  the  centurion,  when  he  said,  •'  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou  shouldst 
come  under  my  roof."  3.  This  request  bespeaks  rashness  and  inconsideration, 
much  remaining  darkness  and  ignorance.  That  might  be  applied  to  Peter  here, 
which  is  said  of  him  in  another  place :  '•  He  wist  not  what  to  say,  for  he  was  sore 
afraid."  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Fifth  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — Let  us  consider, 
with  reference  to  this  subject — I.  The  truth  of  Peter's  confession.  II.  The 
unreasonableness  of  his  petition.  That  Peter  was  a  sinful  man,  who  can  possibly 
doubt?  He  was  the  child  of  Adam,  inheriting  his  corrupt  nature;  and  it  must 
therefore  needs  be  that  he  was  a  sinner  before  Qod.  With  some,  the  alarms  of 
oonscience  are  soon  appeased ;  such  heavings  of  the  sool  within  are  lulled  speedily 
to  rest.  Some  endeavour  to  quiet  them  by  sedatives,  or  soothing  applications, 
altogether  inadmissible.  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Such  are  the  gracious  purposes  of  God  towards  ob. 
To  depart  from  Him,  because  we  are  sinners,  would  be  to  reverse  the  order  of 
Heaven's  law  and  appointment.  What  is  it,  however,  which  will  cause  God  to 
depart  from  us,  or  ourselves  to  desire  that  He  should  do  so  t  Every  kind  and 
form  of  wilful  and  habitual  sin ;  all  unfaithfulness  to  Qod.    (H.  J.  Uattingt,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Fear  not;  firom  henceforth  thou  Shalt  catch  men. — Fishing  for  men:— 
To  be  good  fishermen  we  must  be — I.  Ardently  enamoubeo  or  the  visbino.  IL 
Intimately  acquainted  with  the  fishes.  In  following  the  analogy,  we  may 
observe  that,  because  of  his  acquaintance  with  the  fishes,  the  fisherman  knows— 
1.  Where  to  fish.  A  novice  would  throw  in  his  line  anywhere;  but  not  so  the 
fisherman.  Fishes  of  various  sorts  must  be  sought  in  various  localities,  and  in 
some  places  you  may  seek  in  vain  for  any.  Many  a  man  has  "  toiled  all  the  night 
and  has  taken  nothing,"  simply  because  he  has  been  trying  in  the  wrong  place; 
while  others  round  about  him  have  "  made  a  good  tide."  For  one  sort  he  may  go 
to  the  quiet  lake  and  the  gentle  stream ;  for  another  to  the  open  sea  or  the  deep 
channel ;  while  for  others  he  has  to  go  out  into  the  great  wide  ocean.  And  in  our 
spiritual  fishing  we  must  learn  where  to  catch  men.  We  may  find  opportunities  in 
the  quiet  lakes  of  our  own  domestic  circles,  or  in  the  pleasant  streams  of  our  social 
friendships.  Because  of  his  acquaintance  with  the  fishes,  the  fisherman  also 
tnows — 2.  How  to  fish.  Like  men,  fishes  differ  very  much  in  their  dispositions 
and  habits,  so  that  what  would  be  suitable  for  catching  one  class  would  not  be 
successful  with  another.  For  instance :  While  some  must  be  drawn,  others  must 
be  driven.  I  have  seen  fishermen,  after  casting  their  net,  row^  round  about  it, 
making  as  much  noise  as  possible  with  their  oars,  in  order  to  frighten  the  fishes 
into  it ;  while,  in  other  instances,  a  bright  light  has  been  burned  in  the  boat  to 
allure  them,  if  possible,  into  the  snare.  It  is  exactly  so  with  men.  Some  are 
caught  in  shoals,  while  others  must  be  caught  singly.  There  are  some  that  never 
can  be  taken  in  a  net,  and  there  are  others  that  can  never  be  taken  with  a  line. 
You  must  go  about  it  very  cautiously.  The  fish  is  a  shy  creature,  and  many  a 
would-be  sportsman  has  driven  away  all  chance  of  success  by  his  incautioas 
procedure.  Almost  anybody  can  cast  a  net,  but  it  requires  an  expert  to  use  the 
Une.  People  can  successfully  address  large  assemblies,  who  are  ill  at  ease  when  in 
personal  intercourse  with  the  ungodly.  This  is  a  work  that  demands  all  our  skill 
and  care.  You  may  see  a  wonderful  example  of  this  in  our  Saviour's  oonversatioa 
with  the  woman  at  the  well.  I  have  been  in  the  same  boat  with  several  persons, 
each  provided  with  similar  lines,  hooks,  and  bait;  and  yet  some  have  been  as 
wonderfully  successful  as  others  have  been  strangely  unfortonate.  The  secret,  to 
those  who  understood  fishing,  was  obvious.  The  good  fisherman,  knowing  exactly 
how  to  manage  and  tempt  his  prey,  oould,  with  inferior  apparatus,  secure  suocees ; 
while  the  novice,  with  the  best  patent  gear,  might  sit,  and  wait,  and  wa^ch  in  vai». 


mil.  ▼.]  8T.  LUKE.  495 

The  application  is  easy.  Seek  to  allure  men  I  Make  your  Christianity  an  atti-active 
thing  1  Surround  all  you  do  with  the  genuine  sunshine  of  the  Bible  I  Beveal 
Christ,  and  He  "  will  draw  all  men  unto  Him."  Again,  his  acquaintance  with  tho 
fishes  will  teach  the  fisherman — 3.  When  to  fish.  "  A  word  in  season,  how  good  it 
is  1 "  Some  fishes  are  to  be  caught  when  the  tide  is  high  ;  others,  when  it  is  low ; 
and  others,  when  it  is  "  slack."  Some  can  be  obtained  only  in  cloudy  weather,  and 
others  may  be  caught  when  the  sky  is  clear  and  bright.  Tor  some  the  daylight  ia 
needful,  and  for  others  there  is  no  time  like  the  night.  And  the  fit  season  for 
approaching  men  may  be  equally  various.  As  in  fishing,  so,  as  a  rule,  with  men, 
the  best  time  to  seek  them  is  during  ' '  the  slack "  of  the  tide.  It  is  not  well  to 
make  the  attempt  during  either  the  full  swing  of  the  flood,  or  of  the  strong  rash  of 
the  ebb.  Indeed,  no  ordinary  lead  would  carry  your  bait  to  where  they  are.  You 
most  seek  men  when  they  are  quiet.  It  is  worthy  of  observation  that  most  fishes 
are  caught  best  in  cloudy  weather.  When  the  sky  is  murky  and  lowering,  then  the 
fisherman  pats  out  to  sea.  This  certainly  suggests  to  us  the  appropriateness  of 
Christian  words  in  seasons  of  sorrow.  III.  Morally  qualified  to  be  fishebjjew. 
Piety,  patience,  perseverance,  and  every  Christian  grace  will  be  needful  in  this  work. 
Its  difficulties  are  neither  few  nor  small.  {W.  H.  Burton.)  Catching  men  alive  : — 
Thou  shalt  catch  men.  The  word  "  catch  "  is  different  from  any  word  that  haa 
been  ased  concerning  the  fish,  and  expresses  the  catching  alive  of  the  prey  to  be 
caught ;  so  that  the  phraseology  of  our  Lord  seems  to  carry  with  it  the  thought  that 
fishers  of  men  are  to  toil  for  living  creatares,  and  that  unless  they  be  caught  ahve 
they  might  as  well  not  be  caught  at  all.  How  well  would  it  be  for  all  those  who  are 
called  to  be  fishers  of  men,  to  remember  that  their  work  is  not  to  fill  their  boat 
with  fishes  which  may  serve  as  food  for  themselves,  but  to  catch  living  men  and 
make  them  servants  of  the  Most  High  God.  {Bishop  Goodwin.)  Fishers  of  men  : — 
The  design  of  this  miracle  was  twofold.  It  was  intended — 1.  To  produce  an 
immediate  effect  upon  the  minds  of  Peter  and  the  rest,  to  deepen  their  faith  in  the 
Master  who  had  called  them,  and  to  set  forth  His  power,  His  watchfulness,  His 
love.  But  still  more — 2.  To  take  effect  in  the  future;  it  was  emphatically  a 
prophetic  miracle — to  be  looked  back  to  and  to  yield  inexhaustible  comfort  again 
and  again  amid  the  heavy  cares  and  discouraging  tasks  of  the  years  to  come,  when 
the  gospel-net  had  been  finally  put  into  their  hands,  and  they  had  become  "fishers 
of  men."  St.  Peter  was  to  translate  into  spiritual  language  all  that  belonged  to  his 
old  fisherman's  life.  He  was  to  understand  that  it  had  been  in  a  homely,  but  still 
most  real,  way  a  preparation  for  the  new  unearthly  service  to  which  Christ  was 
calling  him.  So  you  may  remember  the  simple  shepherd-life  of  David  is  set  forth 
in  the  seventy-eighth  Psalm  as  a  preparatory  discipline  for  kingly  rule.  And  so, 
according  to  the  fancy  of  an  early  writer,  the  trade  of  tentmaker  followed  by  Saul 
of  Tarsus  prefigured  the  work  which  lay  in  store  for  Paul  the  apostle,  as  the  maker 
of  tabernacles  for  the  people  of  God,  the  founder  of  Churches  all  over  the  known 
world.  {Canon  Duckworth.)  The  promise  that  Peter  should  become  a  fisher  of 
men  was  made  still  more  impressive  by  a  great  symbolical  miracle.  1.  The  number 
of  fish  caught  at  Jesus'  word  represented  the  men  he  should  some  day  take.  2.  As 
he  fished  all  night  and  caught  nothing,  so  had  he  afterwards  to  labour  long  in  Israel 
without  winning  a  single  human  soul.  3.  So,  too,  at  Jesus'  word,  he  put  further 
out  into  the  deep  of  the  great  Gentile  world,  and  drew  there  a  great  draught.  4. 
Last  of  all,  there  were  two  boats  to  fill — the  Gentile-Christian  and  the  Jewish- 
Christian  Churches.  Then  the  net  began  to  tear,  and  the  opposition  of  these  two 
sections  threatened  the  Church  with  a  grievous  schism.  But  the  draught  was 
brought  safely  to  land,  to  the  confounding  of  the  circumcised  Jew,  through  whose 
instrumentality  this  Divine  action  had  been  brought  about.  {B.  Weiss.)  Men- 
catchers : — The  man  who  saves  souls  is  like  a  fisher  upon  the  sea.  1.  A  fisher  is 
dependent  and  trustful.  2.  He  is  diligent  and  persevering.  8.  He  is  intelhgent 
and  watchful.  4.  He  is  laborious  and  self-denying.  5.  He  is  daring — not  afraid  to 
venture  npon  a  dangerous  sea.  6.  He  is  successful.  He  is  no  fisher  who  nevei 
Batches  anything.  Jc.  H.  Spurgeon.)  There  is  as  much  analogy  aa  contrast 
between  the  first  and  second  vocations  of  the  sons  of  Jonas  and  Zebedee.  1.  Like 
the  fisherman,  the  minister  of  the  gospel  must  be  furnished  with  a  good  net,  i.e., 
he  must  be  conversant  with  the  Scriptures,  and  mighty  in  them.  2.  Like  the 
fisherman,  he  must  be  acquainted  with  the  sea,  i.e.,  the  world,  and  not  fear  to 
confront  its  perils  in  pursuance  of  hie  calling.  3.  Like  the  fisherman,  he  must  now 
mend,  now  cast  his  nets.  4.  Like  the  fisherman,  he  must  labour  perseveringly,  and 
wait  patiently.    5u  Like  the  fisherman,  he  must  enter  into  the  spirit  of  his  yocatio» 


49t "  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHi*.  T, 

i.e.,  he  mast  be  animated  with  the  enthtieiasm  of  the  holj  minlstfy.  6.  Like  the 
fisherman,  he  must  dare  to  expose  his  life  (Acts  xx.  24).  7.  Like  the  fisherman,  he 
must  draw  in  his  net  after  having  cast  it.  (C.  Babut,  B.D.)  Sympathy  a  bait  : — 
It  is  a  fact  of  which  we  can  scarcely  make  too  much,  that  nothing  baits  the  gospel- 
fisherman's  hook  like  sympathy.  {Dr.  J.  Clifford.)  Purposeless  sermons : — Are  an 
insult  to  God  and  man.  A  sermon  that  aims  at  anything  short  of  catching  men  is 
a  mistake.  Let  us  beware  of  converting  means  into  ends.  {Ibid.)  Catching 
bait : — The  fisherman,  however,  thinks  far  less  of  his  gathering  bait  than  he  does 
of  his  catching  bait,  in  which  he  hides  his  book.  Very  numerous  are  his  inventions 
for  winning  his  prey,  and  it  is  by  practice  that  he  learns  how  to  adapt  his  bait  to 
his  fish.  Scores  of  things  serve  as  bait,  and  when  he  is  not  actually  at  work  th« 
wise  fisherman  takes  care  to  seize  anything  which  comes  in  his  way  which  may  be 
useful  when  the  time  comes  to  cast  his  lines.  We  usually  carried  mussels,  whelks, 
and  some  of  the  coarser  sorts  of  fish,  which  could  be  used  when  they  were  wanted. 
When  the  anchor  was  down  the  hooks  were  baited  and  let  down  for  the  benefit  of 
the  inhabitants  of  the  deep,  and  Rreat  would  have  been  the  disappointment  if  they 
had  merely  swarmed  around  the  delicious  morsel,  but  had  refused  to  partake 
thereof.  A  good  fisherman  actually  catches  fish.  He  is  not  always  alike  success- 
fol,  but,  as  a  rule,  he  has  something  to  show  for  his  trouble.  I  do  not  call  that 
man  a  fisherman  whose  basket  seldom  holds  a  fish ;  he  is  sure  to  tell  you  of  the 
many  bites  he  had,  and  of  that  very  big  fish  which  he  almost  captured ;  but  that  la 
neither  here  nor  there.  There  are  some  whose  knowledge  of  terms  and  phrases, 
and  whose  extensive  preparations  lead  you  to  fear  that  they  will  exterminate  the 
fishy  race,  but  as  their  basket  returns  empty,  they  can  hardly  be  so  proficient  as 
they  seem.  The  parable  hardly  needs  expounding :  great  talkers  and  theorizers  are 
common  enough,  and  there  are  not  a  few  whose  cultured  boastfulness  is  only 
exceeded  by  their  Ufe-long  failure.  We  cannot  take  these  for  our  example,  nor  fall 
at  their  feet  with  reverence  for  their  pretensions.  We  must  have  sinners  saved. 
Nothing  else  will  content  us  :  the  fisherman  must  take  fish  or  lose  his  toil,  and  we 
must  bring  souls  to  Jesus,  or  we  shall  break  our  hearts  with  disappointment.  {C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  Slicking  off  tht  bait: — Walking  to  the  head  of  the  boat  one 
evening,  I  saw  a  line  over  the  side,  and  must  needs  hold  it.  You  osn  feel  by  your 
finger  whether  you  have  a  bite  or  no,  but  I  was  in  considerable  doubt  whether 
anything  was  at  the  other  end  or  not.  I  thought  they  were  biting,  but  I  was  not 
certain,  so  I  pulled  up  the  long  line,  and  found  that  the  baits  were  all  gone ;  the  fish 
had  sucked  them  all  off,  and  that  was  what  they  were  doing  when  I  was  in  doubt. 
If  you  have  nothing  but  a  sort  of  gathering  bait,  and  the  fish  merely  come  and  suok, 
but  do  not  take  the  hook,  you  will  catch  no  fish  ;  you  need  killing  bait.  This  often 
happens  in  the  Sunday-school.  A  pleasing  speaker  tells  a  story,  and  the  children  are 
all  listening ;  he  has  gathered  them ;  now  comes  the  spiritual  lesson,  but  hardly  any 
of  them  t«ke  notice  of  it,  they  have  sucked  the  bait  from  the  hook,  and  are  up  and 
away.  A  minister  in  preaching  delivers  a  telling  illustration,  all  the  ears  in  the 
place  are  open,  but  when  he  comes  to  the  application  of  it  the  people  have  become 
listless ;  they  like  the  bait  very  well,  but  not  the  hook ;  they  like  the  adornment  of 
the  tale,  but  not  the  point  of  the  moral.  This  is  poor  work.  The  plan  is,  if  you 
possibly  can  manage  it,  so  to  get  the  bait  on  the  hook  that  they  cannot  suck  it  oS, 
but  must  take  the  hook  and  aH.  Do  take  care,  dear  friends,  when  you  teach 
children  or  grown-up  people,  that  you  do  not  arrange  the  anecdotes  in  such  a  way 
that  they  can  sort  them  out,  as  boys  pick  the  plums  from  their  cakes,  or  else  you 
will  amuse  but  not  benefit.  {Ibid.)  Over-cautious  fishermen : — A  very  lealoui 
revivalist  of  our  acquaintance  was  wont  to  say  that  over-cautious  preachers  were 
like  fishermen  who  refuse  to  cast  forth  the  net  for  fear  they  might  catch  a  devil- 
fish. {From  Hervey^s  "  Manual  of  Revivals.")  Sinners  must  be  taken  out  of  their 
native  element : — We  must  never  be  satisfied  till  we  lift  sinners  out  of  their  native 
element.  That  destroys  fish,  but  it  saves  souls.  We  long  to  be  the  means  of  lifting 
sinners  out  of  the  water  of  sin  to  lay  them  in  the  boat  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.  To  this 
end  we  must  enclose  them  as  in  a  net ;  we  must  shut  them  up  under  the  law,  and 
surround  them  with  the  gospel,  so  that  there  is  no  getting  out,  but  they  must  bs 
captives  unto  Christ.  We  must  net  them  with  entreaties,  encircle  them  with 
invitations,  and  entangle  them  with  prayers.  We  cannot  let  them  get  away  to 
perish  in  their  sin,  we  must  land  them  at  the  Saviour's  feet.  This  is  our  design, 
bat  we  need  help  from  above  to  accomplish  it:  we  reqaire  our  Lord's  direction 
to  know  where  to  east  the  net,  and  the  Spirit's  helping  of  oar  infirmity  that  w« 
may  know  bow  to  do  it.     May  the  Lord  teaoh  as  to  profit,  and  may  wa  mtvam 


«BAP.  T.]  BT.  LUKE.  497 

from  onr  fishing,  bringing  oar  fish  with  na.  Ameou  (C.  H.  STpvrgeon.) 
The  draught  of  fishea: — This  miracle  illuBtrates — I.  Thb  low  level  of  a  lot 
WITHOUT  Chbist  pob  ITS  UABTSB.  Fishing  had  become  to  these  men  the  chief  end 
and  whole  aim  of  living.  Up  to  this  time  their  life  was  exceediogly  narrow.  It 
had  no  horizon  wider  than  the  sea  which  held  their  food  and  supplied  their  trade. 
Thus  they  would  have  lived  and  died,  but  for  the  call  and  commission  of  Christ. 
The  secular  ideal  of  life  always  binds  men  to  earth.  Only  Christ  can  raise  it.  II.  Thb 
TBUK  BELATioN  BETWEEN  BUSINESS  AND  BELioioN.  Our  Lord  lived  a  Carpenter 
before  He  died  a  Saviour.  Through  all  His  early  manhood  He  consecrated  manual 
toil  by  His  own  example,  and  so  He  wedded  the  daily  and  spiritual  life  for  ever  in 
one.  Here  He  sanctions  Simon's  business,  even  while  crowning  it  with  a  higher 
calling.  Our  Lord  is  master  both  of  business  and  religion  ;  no  drudgery  is  too  low 
or  mean  to  become,  when  done  for  Christ's  sake,  the  very  service  of  God.  How 
this  transfigures  the  net  of  the  fisher,  the  miner's  pick,  the  grocer's  scales,  the  clerk's 
tape  :  in  each  of  them  can  be  discerned  a  humble  tool  for  the  accomplishment  of 
the  Divine  will.  The  servant's  broom,  thus  held,  becomes  a  sceptre  in  the  hand  that 
holds  it.  in.  The  seculab  life,  submitted  to  Chbist,  becomes  a  school  fob 
THE  spiBiTUAL  LIFE.  It  was  in  doiug  His  daily  work  for  Christ's  sake  that  Peter 
took  his  first  and  most  needed  lesson  in  apostleship — the  lesson  of  humility.  And 
thus  it  is,  through  the  arts  and  implements  which  are  the  most  familiar,  that  the 
Lord  is  always  seeking  to  lift  men  up  from  secular  to  spiritual  lives.  As  the  Eastern 
astrologers  were  pointed  to  the  Bedeemer's  cradle  by  a  star ;  as  the  woman  of 
Samaria,  in  the  very  act  of  drawing  water  out  of  Jacob's  well,  was  led  to  dip  and 
drink  of  the  sweeter  waters  of  life ;  as  Peter,  the  fisherman,  by  a  surprising  draught 
of  fishes  was  made  lowly  enough  to  catch  men — so  through  the  humblest  art  or 
calling  of  the  daily  life,  the  Lord  is  reaching  down  hands  to  train  and  mould  us  for 
a  purer  spiritual  life  and  service.  The  counting-room  is  no  longer  narrow,  when 
thus  its  higher  use  as  schoolroom  of  the  soul  is  recognized.  Dollars  and  cents  no 
longer  degrade  men  when  they  learn  to  read  on  their  face,  not  the  name  of  Cssar 
only,  but  the  holier  seal  and  superscription  of  God.  The  irritating  cares  of  home 
cease  to  fret  the  housekeeper's  spirit  when  she  begins  to  treat  them  as  part  of  that 
ministry  by  which  the  Lord  seeks  to  make  her  a  more  profitable  servant.    IV.  Thk 

HOBLE   SEBVICES   OF   A  LIFE   CONSECBATED   IN   ALL  ITS  ACTIVITIES   TO    THB  LOBD.      Kot 

all  at  once  ;  we  cannot  enter  school  and  graduate  the  same  day.  It  needs  many 
lessons ;  line  upon  line  of  experience ;  but  success  does  come  at  last.  V.  Pbactical 
liESSONS.  1.  The  service  of  the  Lord  is  always  the  truest  service  we  can  render  to 
ourselves.  We  have  all  something  to  give  up  to  become  followers  of  Jesus.  Yet 
give  it  up  1  Tours  will  be  a  strange  experience  if  the  things  you  give  up  for  Christ's 
sake  do  not  soon  look  small  beside  the  things  you  have  gained.  They  will  be,  in 
comparison,  as  the  Sea  of  Galilee  to  the  world,  as  the  worth  of  a  fish  to  the  value 
of  an  immortal  man.  2.  No  business  on  earth  is  worth  following  for  its  own  sake. 
It  may  be  an  honest  and  innocent  business ;  but  if  it  be  not  also  a  Christian  calling, 
and  that  by  our  own  most  deliberate  choice,  it  will  certainly  dwarf  the  higher  nature 
of  him  who  follows  it.  It  may  keep  os  alive.  It  may  bring  us  gains.  Bat  what 
are  life  and  wealth  worth,  in  any  sober  man's  estimate,  when  thus  secured  f  The 
"successes"  of  millionaires  have  been  commonly  the  worst  mistakes  of  life. 
There  is  a  higher  law  reigning  over  all  trades,  professions,  occupation  (1  Cor.  x.  31). 
8.  The  climax  of  all  callings  is  to  be  a  fisher  of  men.  {J.  B.  Clark.)  The  noblest 
ealling: — An  eminent  New  England  divine,  in  his  last  sickness,  was  asked  by  a 
friend,  '•  "What  seems  to  you  now  the  greatest  thing  ?  "  "  Not  theology,"  said  this 
prince  of  theologians ;  "  not  controversy,"  again  replied  this  chief  of  debaters ; 
"  but,"  gathering  up  his  last  breath  to  speak  the  words,  while  his  spirit  hovered  at 
the  gate  of  heaven,  "  the  greatest  thing  in  the  world  is  to  save  a  souL"  He  spoke  of 
what  he  knew,  for  he  had  felt  the  joy  of  delivering  many;  and  could  the  witoess  of 
all  saints,  from  Peter  down  to  the  last  ascendeid,  be  taken,  would  it  not  be  the 
same,  "  the  greatest  thing  on  earth  is  to  save  a  soul  "  ?  {Ibid.)  The  "net  "of 
a  genuine  Christian  life  : — You  and  I  may  never  be  heroes  of  a  Pentecost ;  we  are 
not  masters  of  the  great  seine,  which  Peter  and  John  of  old,  and  some  modem 
disciples,  shoot  out  and  catch  men  by  the  thousands  ;  but  have  we  not  some  humble 
hand-net  with  which  we  can  take  a  few  ?  Along  our  coast  line,  for  some  years,  men 
have  been  setting  np  what  they  call  "weirs,"  consisting  of  a  series  of  enclosed  porids, 
connected  with  each  other  by  openings,  and  terminating,  at  last,  in  a  nefied  fence 
ronning  far  out  into  the  bay.  Against  this  netted  fence  the  fish,  in  tLeir  progress,, 
strike,  and,  following  it  down,  they  are  safely  enclosed,  at  last,  in  the  smallest  pond« 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  TLLVSTBATOH.  (oha».  t. 


where  they  are  easily  «8ptared  when  the  tide  is  out.  Like  this  netted  arm,  rnnning 
far  out  into  the  busy  world,  is  a  genuine  Christian  life.  It  has  none  of  the  special 
gifts  of  a  Finney  or  a  Moody,  but  in  the  coming  and  going  tidea  more  than  one 
soul  is  arrested  by  this  standing  net  of  a  godly  life.  Unconscionsly  gaided  by  the  holy 
barrier  in  their  way,  they  are  drawn  into  stiller  waters,  and  when  the  tide  goes  out 
at  last,  many,  I  believe,  will  be  found  taken  for  Christ,  and  taken  by  fishers  of  men 
whose  chief  skill  has  been  to  stand,  to  stand  firm  and  without  rent,  in  the  midst  of 
a  restless  sea.  {Ihid.)  Catch  men  by  love: — Would  you  be  a  fisher  of  men  ?  And 
do  yoo  ask.  How  may  I  succeed  ?  Love  is  the  best  pilot,  the  only  wise  interpreter. 
Love  men  as  Christ  loved  them,  and  you  vdll  not  mourn  your  small  skill  or  limited 
chance.  Love  will  soon  show  you  your  own  best  way.  To  catch  men  without  love  is 
as  hopeless  as  to  catch  fish  without  a  net.  Love  is  the  net.  There  never  was  a 
wicked  sinner  unsoftened  by  a  pure  and  steadfast  love.  There  never  was  a  wayward 
scholar  who  did  not  reward  the  faithful,  patient  love  of  his  teacher.  Let  our  love 
lie  only  such  that  we  can  pray  as  Christ  prayed  for  men,  can  weep  as  Christ  wept 
over  them,  can  bleed  as  Christ  bled  for  them,  can  stretch  our  arms  of  help  as  wide 
as  He  stretched  His  on  the  cross  of  sacrifice !  Then  we  shaU  be  able  to  catch 
men,  for  so  He  drew  us,  and  so  He  is  drawing  the  world  to  Himself.  "  Fear  not," 
He  seems  to  say  to  all  who  love,  yet  shrink  from  this  holy  calling,  "  fear  not ;  love 
men,  and  you  shall  catch  them."  (Ibid.)  Ministerial  lessons : — Christ's  method 
of  training  His  ministers  for  their  high  oflSce  was  very  remarkable.  It  was  by  a 
miracle,  especially  designed  to  represent,  in  a  figure,  their  future  office,  so  that  the 
homely  trade  in  which  they  were  engaged  was  for  ever  hallowed  to  be  the  emblem  of 
the  gathering  into  the  Church  of  such  as  should  be  saved.  1.  The  unwearied 
patience  and  consummate  skill,  without  which  the  fisherman  cannot  be  successful 
in  alluring  his  prey,  are,  no  doubt,  fit  illustrations  of  that  constancy  of  purpose 
and  that  heavenly  wisdom  which  are  such  important  elements  in  the  character  of  the 
Christian  teacher.  2.  And,  perhaps,  the  fact  that  the  four  disciples  had  toiled  all 
uight  and  taken  nothing,  and  yet  were  ready,  at  their  Master's  bidding,  again  to  let 
down  the  net  for  a  draught,  is  recorded  as  an  instance  of  that  unwavering  faith  in  the 
Divine  promise,  and  that  patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  which  had  prepared 
these  simple-minded  peasants  of  Galilee  for  that  office  in  which  the  Christian 
minister  has  only  to  obey,  while  he  leaves  results  in  a  higher  hand,  and,  even  when 
he  fears  he  has  bestowed  labour  in  vain,  still  to  labour  on,  in  reliance  upon  the 
assurance  that  God's  word  shall  not  return  to  Him  void.  3.  But  perhaps  the  chief 
ministerial  lesson  which  our  Lord  intended  to  convey  to  the  minds  of  His  apostles 
was  this — that  as  even  the  fisherman,  in  spite  of  all  his  skill,  must  still  depend  on  the 
power  of  Him  whose  is  the  sea,  for  He  made  it,  so  aU  the  success  of  the  gospel 
preacher  is  of  the  Lord  alone.     (/.  S.  Hoare,  B.D.)        Fishers  of  men: — I.  Nonb 

SHOULD    ENTER   THE    MINISTRY   BUT    THOSE    WHO    ABE     CALLED   OF    ChBIST.      There  are 

other  voices  to  which  young  men  are  apt  to  listen.  1.  There  is  the  voice  of  the  love  of 
a  life  of  literary  ease.  The  young  man  has  a  passion  for  books ;  his  daily  toil  seema 
to  him  mean  and  degrading ;  and  he  fancies  that  if  he  were  in  the  ministry  he 
would  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  study,  and  that  study  would  be  a  lifelong  and  ever- 
increasing  delight.  At  the  best  he  becomes  a  respectable  bookworm,  who  hatea 
preaching,  which  so  greatly  interferes  with  his  studies ;  but  he  must  preach  or  starve, 
and  so  he  preaches  sermons  about  the  gospel — very  learned  sermons — which  do 
his  hearers  about  as  much  real  good  as  would  an  admirable  lecture  on  the  chemistry 
of  food  delivered  to  a  number  of  farm  labourers  who  at  the  close  of  a  day's  toil  had 
hurried  into  a  kitchen  hungry  for  food.  2.  There  is  a  voice  of  the  ambition  to  be 
respectable,  genteel!  3.  There  is  the  voice  of  the  love  of  publicity.  Sometimes  a 
little  success  in  delivering  half  a  dozen  addresses  to  a  Sunday  School,  or  in  making 
as  many  speeches  in  a  debating  society,  turns  a  young  man's  brain,  and  he  is  sure 
that  his  proper  place  is  in  the  ministry.  4.  There  is  still  another  voice  to  which 
many  young  men  are  apt  to  hsten,  imagining  that  it  is  indeed  the  voice  of  Christ 
calling  them  to  devote  themselves  to  the  ministry — the  voice  of  a  sincere  desire  to 
do  good.  This  desire  is  quick  and  powerful  in  the  heart  of  every  young  man  who 
has  really  given  himself  to  Christ.  But  it  is  a  pitiable  mistake  to  imagine  that  the 
call  to  do  good  and  the  call  to  become  a  preacher  of  the  gospel  is  one  and  the  same 
thing.  To  none  of  the  voices  that  I  have  named  should  a  young  man  listen  when 
he  is  debating  the  qusstion  whether  he  should  devote  himself  to  the  ministry  of  the 
Word.  Before  he  takes  that  solemn,  and  in  many  cases  irrevocable  step,  he  should 
be  very  sure  that  it  is  the  voice  of  Christ  that  he  has  heard  saying  to  him, 
**Sollo\t  Me,  and  I  will  make  you  a  fisher  of  men."    II.  Box— this  is  the  second 


V.J  ST.  LUKE,  499 

fact  that  ghould  be  pondered — ^Wbtbn  a  man  has  heabd  that  call  hb  should  obet 
IT  AT  ANir  COST.  It  may  be  that  he  cannot  do  so  without  making  sacrifices  ;  like 
Simon  and  Andrew,  James  and  John,  he  may  have  to  leave  behind  him  nets,  boats, 
valuable  fishing-tackle,  and  dear  friends  ;  he  may  have  to  give  up  great  present 
advantages,  still  greater  prospective  advantages ;  but  hke  those  of  whom  this 
narrative  speaks  to  us,  he  should  cheerfully  forsake  all,  and  fallow  Christ.  Amos, 
the  herdsman,  was  as  true  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  as  Isaiah,  although  he  was  reared 
in  a  palace.  The  other  young  man  is  in  the  counting-house  ;  he  is  the  eldest  son 
of  the  successful  head  of  the  firm  ;  he  knows  that  in  due  time  he  will  be  a  partner  in 
the  firm  ;  he,  too,  is  called,  clearly  called — he  has  no  doubt  that  it  is  Christ's  voice 
he  hears — yet  he  hesitates,  for  the  nets  and  boats  that  will  have  to  be  left  are 
too  many  and  too  valuable ;  he  reminds  himself  of  the  fact  of  which  of  I  have 
reminded  you,  that  it  is  not  in  the  ministry  only  that  a  man  can  do  good,  and  so, 
with  this  excuse,  which  he  knows  is  for  him  a  lie,  he  silences  the  Voice  that  calls  so 
clearly.  And  hence  comes  that  fact,  which  all  the  Churches  deplore,  that  so  few 
young  men  come  forth  from  the  middle  and  upper  ranks  of  society  to  serve  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  preachers  of  His  Word.  This  was  Garibaldi's  most  effective 
appeal  to  his  fellow-countrymen : — "  Soldiers,  your  efforts  against  overwhelming 
odds  have  been  unavailing.  I  have  nothing  to  offer  you  but  hunger,  thirst,  hard- 
ship, death  :  let  all  who  love  their  country  follow  me  "  (July  22,  1849).  Such  an 
appeal  does  Christ  address  to-day  to  the  sons  of  our  Christian  merchants  and 
landowners.     (Christian  Age.) 

Yer.  11.  And  when  they  had  bronght  their  ships  to  land,  they  forsook  all,  and 
followed  TTim. — Imitation  of  the  apostles : — I.  With  kegaed  to  thosk  points  in 

WHICH  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  THE  APOSTLES  AT  THEIB  CALL  IS  NOT  TO  BE  UNIVERSALLY  IMI- 
TATED, I  would  remark  at  once  a  wide  difference  betwixt  their  case  and  that  of  the 
generahty  of  Christians,  which  is,  that  they  were  entering  the  ministerial 
office.  Those  whom  they  might  convert,  either  from  the  errors  of  Judaism  or 
the  bliudness  of  idolatry,  might  possibly  become  equally  acceptable  Christians  in 
the  sight  of  their  Divine  leader  ;  but  there  would  still  remain  a  line  of  separation 
betwixt  the  two  classes,  and  to  each  class  peculiar  duties  were  annexed.  And  besides 
this  distinction  which  we  have  just  noticed,  there  is  another  consideration  which 
invests  the  situation  of  the  apostles  in  a  still  more  peculiar  light.  They  were 
going  to  Hve  day  and  night,  and  in  constant  companionship  with  one  who,  having 
"  all  power  given  Him  both  in  heaven  and  earth,"  could,  at  any  moment,  supply 
their  wants,  whatever  those  wants  might  be  :  and  in  attending  upon  whom,  there- 
fore, they  would  be  miraculously  defended  from  all  those  evils  which  would  infalhbly 
overtake  any  one  who  now  attempted  literally  to  do  as  they  were  ordered.  And  in 
speculating  upon  our  Saviour's  purpose  in  this  particular  miracle,  though  the  idea 
may  not  hitherto  have  occurred  to  you,  it  certainly  does  seem  probable  that  He 
meant  it  to  have  this  convincing  effect;  for  that  men,  earning  their  precarious 
livelihood  as  mere  fishermen  on  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  probably  dependent  for  their 
next  day's  meal  on  the  fortune  which  attended  their  over-night's  fishing,  would 
naturally  feel  their  trust  much  strengthened  in  our  Saviour's  character  after  such 
an  exhibition  of  His  miraculous  power  to  help  them,  there  cannot  be  a  doubt. 
Christ  foresaw,  indeed,  though  as  yet  hidden  from  the  apostles'  eyes,  that  dreadful 
cloud  of  persecution  which  was  gathering  on  every  side  of  them,  which  in  a  very 
short  while  burst  in  its  first  fury  upon  Calvary,  and  soon  after  took  off  each  one  of 
our  Lord's  immediate  followers  by  the  refined  agonies  of  some  cruel  death.  And 
having  this  foreknowledge  of  what  would  and  must  come,  Christ  took  only  for  the 
attendants  of  His  mission  such  as  would  be  undisturbed  from  their  purpose  of  final 
perseverance  and  endurance  :  such  in  fact  only  as,  having  previously  resigned  all 
affections  for  this  world,  would  be  able  and  willing  to  quit  life  at  any  moment 
through  the  martyr's  blood-stained  gate.  But,  my  brethren,  there  are  some  points 
in  which  the  example  of  the  apostles  must  be  imitated,  if  we  would  be  Christians. 
In  the  first  place,  we  must  imitate  the  apostles  in  their  readiness  to  resign  all  earthly 
things  when  put  in  competition  with  those  of  heaven.  Secondly,  we  must  imitate 
them  in  their  liveliness  of  conscience,  to  distinguish  the  value  betwixt  the  body  and 
the  soul.  Thirdly,  we  must  imitate  their  perseverance  and  final  triumph,  through 
faith,  over  the  temptations  of  hfe  and  the  terrors  of  death.  {A.  Gatty,  M.A.) 
Forsaking  all : — This  was  indispensable  to  our  becoming  disciples.  It  is  indispens- 
able to  our  continuing  disciples.  1.  We  are  to  feel  habitually  that  we  have  nothing 
si  our  own.    All  idea  of  proprietary  rights  we  are  to  relinquish.    2.  And  when  th« 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ». 

selfish  counter  pleas  that  oppose  the  claims  of  the  rightful  Master  solicit  my  con- 
sent, I  must  hear  only  the  one  Divine  call  that  bids  me  forsake  aU  I  have  in 
devotion  to  this  new  Master.  3.  And  this  renunciation  of  all  must  be  made  in  the 
conviction  that  there  is  no  use  we  can  possibly  make  of  ourselves  and  of  what  we 
have  that  can  be  so  sweet,  so  wise,  and  so  fruitful  of  good  and  of  blessing,  as  to 
lay  the  whole  down  at  Jesus'  feet.  (A.  L.  Stone,  D.D.)  Love  to  Christ  supreme : — 
A  Earen  woman  offered  herself  for  baptism.  After  the  usual  examination,  I 
inquired  whether  she  could  give  up  her  ornaments  for  Christ.  It  was  an  unex- 
pected blow.  I  explained  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.  I  appealed  to  her  own  con- 
soioQBness  of  vanity.  I  read  to  her  the  apostle's  prohibition  (1  Tim.  ii.  9).  She 
looked  again  and  again  at  her  handsome  necklace,  and  then,  with  an  sir  of  modest 
decision,  she  took  it  off,  saying,  "I  love  Christ  more  than  this."  (Dr.  Judson.) 
Leaving  all  to  follow  Christ: — The  secretary  of  the  Brighton  Town  Mission  narrates 
the  following  :  "  Miss  B.  was  in  the  theatrical  profession,  earning  as  much  at  times 
as  £21  a  week.  Through  the  agencies  at  work  in  connection  with  our  hall,  she 
was  led  to  choose  the  one  thing  needful.  But  now  came  the  struggle  between  duty 
to  Christ  and  duty  to  her  parents.  As  she  expressed  it,  *  She  could  not  have  Christ 
and  go  on  with  her  work  ;  therefore,  as  she  felt  she  would  rather  die  than  dishonour 
Him,'  although  only  seventeen,  she  made  the  happy  choice.  Every  means  was 
taken  to  win  her  back ;  her  Bible  was  burned,  her  clothes  taken  from  her,  she  was 
locked  up  in  her  room,  she  was  sent  from  home,  but  flattery  and  persecution  were 
alike  in  vain,  she  realized  in  its  fulness  the  promise,  '  My  grace  is  sufficient  for 
thee.'  She  still  holds  on  her  way  rejoicing."  Rejecting  a  kingdom  for  Christ : — 
This  noble  act  has  been  left  for  a  converted  heathen  in  India  to  do  for  Christ.  The 
account  has  lately  been  sent  to  this  country  by  Mr.  C.  A.  EUiott,  C.B.,  the  Com- 
missioner of  Assam,  who  says  he  supposes  the  man  in  question  is  the  only  man  now 
alive  who  has  rejected  a  kingdom  for  Christ.  He  was  the  heir  of  the  Eajah  of 
Cherra,  U.  Bor.  Sing,  of  Khasia,  India,  and  had  been  converted  to  Christianity  by 
the  missionaries.  U.  Bor.  Sing  was  warned  that  in  joining  the  Christians  he  would 
probably  forfeit  his  right  to  be  King  of  Cherra  after  the  death  of  Earn  Sing,  who 
then  ruled.  Eighteen  months  afterwards  Eam  Sing  died  ;  the  chiefs  of  the  tribes 
met  together,  and  unanimously  decided  that  Bor.  Sing  was  to  succeed  him  as  Siim 
(king),  but  that  his  Christian  profession  stood  in  the  way.  Messenger  after 
messenger  was  sent  to  U.  Bor,  Sing  urging  him  to  go  to  the  missionaries  and  recant. 
He  was  invited  to  the  native  council,  and  there  asked  to  put  aside  his  religious  pro- 
fession, and  that  then  they  would  aU  acknowledge  him  as  their  king.  Bis  answer 
was,  "  Put  aside  my  Christian  profession  1  I  can  put  aside  my  head-dress  or  my 
cloak,  but  as  for  the  covenant  I  have  made  with  my  God,  I  cannot  for  any  considera- 
tion put  that  aside."    Another  was  therefore  appointed  king  in  his  stead. 

Vers.  12,  15.  Behold  B  man  full  of  leprosy. — The  leper  cleansed : — I.  Lepbost 

APFOBDS  A   STBIEINO   BEPBKSENTATION   OF   THE    CHABACXEB    AND    CONSEQUENOE   OF   SIN. 

1.  This  spiritual  leprosy  has  rendered  all  our  race  unclean  in  the  sight  of  God 
and  in  the  judgment  of  His  holy  law.  (1)  It  shuts  us  out  from  His  presence,  (2) 
and  from  a  place  among  His  people.  2.  No  skill  or  power  of  man  can  cure  this 
disease.  3.  This  malady,  if  not  healed,  will  issue  in  death.  And  remember,  death 
is  not  cessation  of  being,  but  a  state  of  awful  terror,  pain,  and  wretchedness.  This 
is  the  issue  to  which  sin  is  bringing  its  victims.  4.  Yet,  thank  God,  our  case  is  not 
altogether  hopeless ;  there  is  a  cure.  U.  Obsebve  the  steps  taken  by  this  lepeb 
TO  obtain  a  cube.  Thus  we  may  learn  what  the  disposition  is,  in  which  we  should 
endeavour  to  approach  the  Saviour,  who  alone  can  heal  our  spiritual  leprosy.  1. 
The  first  thing  I  would  notice  in  this  leper's  conduct  is  the  eagerness  and  haste 
with  which  he  ran  to  Jesus  immediately  he  met  Him.  2.  His  reverential  self- 
abasement.  His  eagerness  in  seeking  rehef  did  not  cause  him  to  forget  what  was 
due  to  the  character  of  Him  from  whom  that  relief  was  sought.  3.  The  confidence 
he  entertained  of  Christ's  power.  Have  not  we  far  stronger  grounds  for  this  than 
he  had?    {J.  Harding,  M.A.)        Two  pulpits : — I.  Observe  how  manv  anontmous 

BELIEVBBB  THEBE  ABE   IN  THE   BiBLB   BKCOBD   WHO   GIVE  HELP  ALL  ALONO   THE   AOSS. 

Here  are  mentioned  "  multitudes,"  and  among  them  two  persons  in  particular — a 
leper  and  a  paralytic.  And  that  is  all  we  know  about  any  individual  to  whom  that 
eventful  day  was  the  beginning  of  renewed  life.  No  name,  no  history,  no  after- 
career  ;  but  we  suppose  that  these  cripples  are  in  heaven  now,  and  we  know  that 
their  etory  has  helped  thousands  to  be  patient  and  cheerful  on  the  way  thither.  It 
ia  ot  little  consequence  who  we  are ;  it  matters  more  what  we  are.    ZX.  £v£N  ot 


«Bi».  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  BOl 

SXTBEllB   HOPKLESSNESS   OF  DISEASE    ONE    lUT    EXHIBIT   A.  SUPREME  AKD   II.IiU8TBI0Vt 

FAITH.  The  cases  of  these  two  men  were  as  bad  as  they  could  well  be ;  yet  did 
oar  Lord  find  in  them  faith  enough  to  be  healed.  In  the  rooms  of  the  American 
Tract  Society,  in  New  York,  are  still  standing  two  objects  which  I  studied  for  som» 
meditative  years,  once  a  month,  at  a  committee  meeting.  One  is  a  slight  framework 
of  tough  wood,  a  few  feet  high,  so  bound  together  with  hasps  and  hinges  as  to  be 
taken  down  and  folded  in  the  hand.  This  was  Whitefield's  travelling-pulpit — the  one 
he  used  when,  denied  access  to  the  churches,  he  harangued  the  thousands  in  the 
open  air,  on  th&  moors  of  England.  You  will  think  of  this  modern  apostle,  lifted 
op  upon  the  small  platform,  with  the  throngs  of  eager  people  around  him,  or 
hurrying  from  one  field  to  another,  bearing  his  Bible  in  his  arms;  ever  on  the 
move,  toiling  with  Herculean  energy,  and  a  force  like  that  of  a  giant.  There,  in 
that  rude  pulpit,  is  the  symbol  of  all  which  is  active  and  fiery  in  dauntless  Christian 
zeal.  But  now,  look  again:  in  the  centre  of  this  framework,  resting  upon  the 
slender  platform,  where  the  living  preacher  used  to  stand,  you  will  see  a  chair — a 
plain,  straight-backed,  armed,  cottage-chair — rough,  simple,  meagrely  cushioned, 
unvarnished,  and  stiff.  It  was  the  seat  in  which  Elizabeth  Wallbridge,  "  the  dairy- 
man's daughter,"  sat  and  coughed  and  whispered,  and  from  which  she  went  only  at 
her  last  hour  to  the  couch  on  which  she  died.  Here  again  is  a  pulpit ;  and  it  is 
the  symbol  of  a  life  quiet  and  unromantio  and  hard  in  all  Christian  endurance. 
Every  word  that  invalid  woman  uttered — every  patient  night  she  suffered — was  a 
gospel  sermon.  In  a  hundred  languages,  the  life  of  that  servant  of  God  has 
preached  to  millions  of  souls  the  riches  of  Christ's  glory  and  grace.  And  of  these 
two  pulpits,  which  is  the  most  honourable  is  known  only  to  God,  who  undoubtedly 
accepted  and  consecrated  them  both.  The  one  is  suggestive  of  the  ministry  of 
speech,  the  other  of  the  ministry  of  submission.  III.  Am  expi.anation  of  thx 
HTSTEBY  AND  THE  puBPOBE  OF  suFFEBiNO.  Pain  Is  a  sort  of  ordiuation  to  the 
Christian  ministry.  Pure  submission  is  as  good  as  going  on  a  foreign  mission. 
Souls  may  be  won  to  the  Cross  by  a  life  on  a  sick-bed  just  as  well  as  by  a  Ufe  in  a 
cathedral  desk.  lY.  Hence,  we  may  easily  learn  what  should  be  the  chief 
OCCUPATION  of  an  invamd.  No  ouo  Can  preach  from  any  pulpit  without  the  proper 
measure  of  study.  He  must  thoughtfully  ascertain  what  will  make  his  efforts  most 
pertinent.  1.  He  will  study  doctrine.  2.  He  will  study  experience,  too.  A  month 
ago  I  saw  a  brave  soldier  of  the  Cross  who  had  been  passing  through  a  fiery  history 
of  years  with  broken  health,  which  had  taken  him  from  the  pulpit  of  his  usefulness 
and  bidden  him  look  into  the  grave  season  after  season.  He  was  now  only  able  to 
stand,  and  sought  a  new  field.  Only  yesterday  he  visited  me  again ;  in  his  feeble- 
ness he  lay  on  my  couch  while  he  talked.  He  had  just  come  from  putting  the  wife 
of  his  manhood,  his  patient  helper  and  the  stay  of  his  home,  in  the  bedlam  of  a 
madhouse.  Poor  in  spirit  and  poor  in  purse,  broken-hearted  and  alone,  he  feared 
he  should  break  again.  Yet  there  he  lay,  and  spoke  hopefully  and  gently.  Oh« 
that  valiant  brother,  quivering  in  every  muscle,  but  bold  and  firm  in  his  trustful 
courage,  preached  to  me  in  my  study  as  I  know  I  never  preached  in  my  church  1 
y.  Some  people  recover  from  long  illness ;  Christ  heals  them,  as  He  did  these  men 
in  the  story.  So  there  is  one  more  lesson  for  convalescents:  what  abb  thet 
oomo  TO  DO  WITH  THEiB  LIVES  HEBEAFTEB  7  "  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  die,"  said 
Schiller,  "  but  it  is  a  more  solemn  thing  to  live."  We  know  the  story  of  the  Scotch 
mother,  whose  child  an  eagle  stole  away ;  half  maddened  she  saw  the  bird  reach 
its  eyrie  far  up  the  cliff.  No  one  could  scale  the  rock.  In  distraction  she  prayed 
all  the  day.  An  old  sailor  climbed  after  it,  and  crept  down  dizzily  from  the  height. 
There,  on  her  outstretched  arms,  as  she  pled  with  closed  eyes,  he  laid  her  babe. 
She  rose  in  majesty  of  self-denial  and  took  it  (as  she  had  been  taught  in  that  land) 
to  her  minister.  She  would  not  kiss  it  till  it  had  been  solemnly  dedicated  onto 
God  I  What  shaU  a  man  do  with  a  life  given  back  to  him  ?  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 
What  ha$  Ood  done  to  save  me  i — The  divinely-offered  key  to  a  right  appreciation 
of  Christ's  spiritual  work,  even  to  that  which  theologians  call  the  Atonement, 
should  be  sought  by  observing  how  our  Lord  cleansed  the  lepers,  made  the  blind  to 
Bee,  and  the  lame  to  walk.  Let  ns  endeavour  to  realize  how  He,  whose  name  is  the 
only  name  given  under  heaven  among  men  whereby  we  may  be  saved,  healed  men's 
diseases,  in  order  that  we  may  understand,  so  far  as  it  has  been  revealed,  how  He 
■aves  ns  from  our  sins.  I.  Consideb,  first,  why  Jesus  healed.  Not  to  show 
that  He  could,  but  because  He  pitied  the  sufferer.  When  asked  to  work  miraelei 
to  prove  His  abihty  to  do  so,  He  habitually  declined.  Every  act  of  healing  wrought 
by  Christ  was  an  act  of  pore  compassion.    He  never  healed  to  attract  attentioo  t* 


«09  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  ▼. 

flimself.  He  often  commanded  those  He  healed  to  say  nothing  of  their  care.  II. 
Consider,  next,  how  Jesus  healed.  1.  The  fact  that  He  had  compassion  upon 
them  was  itself  the  first  step  in  the  cure  of  many  who  came  to  Him.  There  ara 
diseases  in  which  recovery  must  begin  by  regaining  lost  self-respect.  In  Christ  the 
most  dissolute  and  disgraced  found  not  only  pity,  but  delicate  considerateness. 
Think,  e.g.,  of  His  treatment  of  this  leper.  We  can  scarcely  conceive  what  the 
effect  must  have  been  upon  a  man  who  had  for  years  been  closeted  with  his  loath- 
some self,  or  with  still  more  loathsome  fellow-sufferers — a  man  who  might  not  eat 
with  human  beings  unless  the  same  deadly  taint  was  upon  them,  nor  appear  in  the 
street  except  jangling  a  bell  to  give  warning  of  the  peril  his  presence  brought ;  who, 
if  he  patted  upon  the  head  a  carrion  dog,  it  must  be  instantly  killed,  lest  it  shoulii 
brush  against  others  and  defile  them,  because  he  had  touched  it ;  who,  if  he  saw  hia 
mother,  his  child,  his  wife  approach,  must  fly  or  shout,  "  Unclean,  unclean !  Keep 
afar  1 "  We  can  scarcely  conceive  what  the  effect  must  have  been  upon  such  a  man, 
when  he  saw  Jesus  draw  nigh.  The  multitude  attending  the  Saviour  falls  back  as 
men  shrink  from  the  plague ;  for  crowds  are  always  cowards.  But  the  Master 
approaches,  and,  paying  no  heed  to  the  jangling  bell,  the  warning  cry,  lays  His 
hand  upon  him.  For  tne  first  time  for  years  the  leper  feels  the  touch  of  a  hand 
that  is  not  hardened  by  the  awful  malady.  That  touch  must  have  made  the  leper  a 
new  man  in  heart  before  the  quickened  pulse  could  shoot  new  life  into  the  decaying 
limbs.  2.  In  healing,  Christ  made  effort.  One  must  be  blind  to  read  the  New 
Testament,  and  fancy  Christ's  cures  cost  Him  nothing  because  He  was  Divine. 
It  was  because  He  was  Divine  that  they  cost  Him  so  much.  If  you  would  seek 
beings  incapable  of  suffering,  you  must  not  go  up  toward  the  angels  and  the  great 
white  throne,  for  there  you  will  find  "  the  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,"  but  down 
among  the  oysters.  Do  you  ask,  How  did  Christ  bear  men's  diseases?  Thus  :  He 
sighed,  He  prayed,  He  lifted  them  in  His  arms,  He  put  His  hands  upon  them.  He 
drew  them  to  His  bosom.  He  groaned.  He  felt  Hia  strength  go  from  Him,  to  heal 
their  bodies.  If  He  had  done  less.  He  would  not  have  made  manifest  the  long- 
suffering  God ;  and  His  saving  men's  bodies,  His  bearing  their  infirmities  and 
healing  their  diseases,  would  have  been  no  illustration  of  the  agony  with  which  He 
wrestled  in  Gethsemane  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  3.  In  many  instances 
Jesus  employed  known  remedies  in  physical  healing.  He  manipulated  the  palsied 
tongue  and  the  stopped  ears — "  put  His  fingers  in  the  ears,"  "  touched  the  tongue." 
He  covered  the  blind  eyes  with  moist  clay,  a  well-known  Egyptian  remedy  for 
ophthalmia.  He  inquired  minutely  the  symptoms  of  the  demoniac  boy.  He  bent 
over  those  He  healed.  He  touched  them,  as  careful  physicians  do.  Thus  He 
encouraged,  not  the  breach,  but  the  observance  of  God's  order.  He  put  honour,  by 
His  example,  upon  the  use  of  scientific  remedies.  At  times  He  healed  by  a  word, 
without  approaching  the  sick  one.  But  He  seems  to  have  dispensed  with  remedies 
only  when  to  employ  them  was  impossible,  or  when  they  would  have  been  obviously 
nseless,  or  when  there  was  a  special  reason  for  neglecting  them.  His  example  said 
to  those  apostles  to  whom  miraculous  powers  were  given,  "  Use  the  best  means ; 
pray  God  to  bless  their  use  ;  and  when  you  can  do  nothing  more,  pray."  And  that 
IB  what  every  wise  and  instructed  Christian  tries  to  do.  4.  In  all  Christ's  healings 
there  was  conspicuously  revealed  the  authority  of  absolute  power.  When  He  spoke, 
devils  obeyed,  the  dead  heard,  the  despairing  hoped,  the  lost  knew  that  they  were 
found.  (William  B.  Wright.)  The  touch  of  Chritt ;  or,  the  power  of  sympathy  : — 
A  lady  visiting  an  asylum  for  friendless  orphan  children  lately  watched  the  little 
ones  go  through  their  daily  drill  superintended  by  the  matron,  a  firm,  honest 
woman,  to  whom  her  duty  had  evidently  become  a  mechanical  task.  One  little 
toddler  hurt  her  foot,  and  the  visitor,  who  had  children  of  her  own,  took  her  on  her 
knee,  petted  her,  made  her  laugh,  and  kissed  her  before  she  put  her  down.  The 
other  children  stared  in  wonder.  **  What  is  the  matter  7  Does  nobody  ever  klsft 
you  ?  "  asked  the  astonished  visitor.  "  No  ;  that  isn't  in  the  rules,  ma'am,"  was 
the  answer.  A  gentleman  in  the  same  city,  who  one  morning  stopped  to  buy 
a  newspaper  from  a  wizened,  shrieking  newsboy  at  the  station,  found  the  boy 
following  him  every  day  thereafter,  with  a  wistful  face,  brushing  the  spots  from 
his  clothes,  calling  a  car  for  him,  <&c.  "  Do  you  know  me  ?  "  he  asked  at  last.  The 
wretched  little  Arab  laughed.  "  No ;  but  you  called  me  '  my  child '  one  day.  I'd 
like  to  do  something  for  yon,  sir.  I  thought  before  that  I  was  nobody's  child." 
Christian  men  and  women  are  too  apt  to  feel  when  they  subscribe  to  organized 
charities  that  they  have  dome  their  duty  to  the  great  army  of  homeless,  friendless 
waifs  around  them.    A  toujh,  a  kiss,  a  kind  word,  may  do  much  towards  saving 


nur.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  603 

the  neglected  little  one  who  feels  be  is  "  nobody's  child,"  teaching  it,  as  no  money 
can  do,  that  we  are  all  children  of  one  Father.  When  Christ  would  heal  or  help 
the  poor  outcast.  He  did  not  send  him  money,  but  He  came  close  and  touched  him. 
d  leper's  logic : — This  man  apparently  had  no  doubt  of  our  Lord's  ability  to  heal 
him.  It  was  about  Christ's  willingness  that  he  was  in  doubt.  As  a  rule,  men  do 
not  naturally  associate  love  and  power ;  they  believe  in  the  existence  of  power  far 
more  readily  than  in  that  of  love.  Power  seems  to  create  distrust  in  love.  1, 
Perhaps  because  the  world  is  so  used  to  seeing  power  used  arbitrarily  and  selfishly. 
2.  Because  of  the  consciousness  of  sin.  It  was  when  Peter  saw  the  Divine  power 
of  Christ  displayed  in  the  draaght  of  fishes  that  he  said,  "Depart  from  me,"  &o. 
And  in  the  light  of  this  fact,  the  incident  of  our  text  has  a  peculiar  force ;  for — I, 
Thb  disease  fbom  which  this  man  was  bufb-erino  was  repbesentativb  of  sin. 
It  was  a  decomposition  of  the  vital  juices,  putrefaction  in  a  living  body ;  hence  an 
image  of  death.  The  leper  was  treated  throughout  as  a  sinner.  "  He  was  a  dread- 
ful parable  of  death."    The  case  of  this  leper,  therefore — II.  Gave  oob  Lord  an 

OPPORTCNITY,  not  ONIjT  TO  DO  A  WORK  OF  MERCY  AND  LOVB  DPON  A  DISEASED  MAN, 
BUT  ALSO   TO   GIVE    A    STMBOLIO    TESTIMONY    OF   Hl3    WILLINGNESS    TO    DEAL  LOVINGLY 

AND  FORoiviNGLY  WITH  A  SINFUL  MAN.  Let  US  SCO  how  Christ's  wlllinguess  come9 
out  in  this  incident.  1.  It  is  not  repelled  by  an  imperfect  faith.  2.  It  was  shown 
in  Christ's  express  declaration.  How  striking  is  the  way  in  which  He  meets  that 
timid  ••  If  Thou  wilt  "  with  "  I  will."  {M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)  "  If  Thou  wilt  "  :— 
When  the  leper  said,  "  If  Thou  wilt,"  he  narrowed  his  appeal,  and  directed  it  to 
the  will  of  Jesus.  His  faith  in  Christ's  power  was  very  much  stronger  that  his 
faith  in  Christ's  goodness.  It  contained  much  that  was  true,  but  did  not  contain 
much  more  that  was  equally  true.  Christ  answered,  not  according  to  the  imperfec- 
tion of  the  appeal,  but  according  to  its  possibility  of  being  perfected.  "  If  Thoa 
wilt "  is  fitting  language  for  us,  not  because  we  doubt  His  goodness,  but  because  we 
believe  in  His  wisdom.  If  we  learn  that  it  is  God's  will  that  we  should  suffer  and 
have  disappointment,  we  hope  amidst  our  pain,  and  know  that  our  disappointment 
is  after  all  the  appointment  of  the  wiser  still,  and  that,  whatever  may  be  in  the 
meantime  withheld,  the  answer  will  be  given  at  last,  "  Be  thou  clean."  (J.  Ogmort 
Davies).  Leprosy  : — I.  Physical  aspect.  1.  White  pustules — eat  away  flesh — 
attacking  one  member  after  another — at  last  the  bones.  2.  Attended  with  sleep- 
lessness, nightmare,  and  hopelessness  of  cure.  3.  A  living  death.  II.  Social 
aspect.  1.  Contagion.  2.  Lived  in  a  several  house,  or  in  bands  at  a  distance  from 
ordinary  dwelling.  3.  Went  with  head  uncovered,  crying,  "  Boom  for  the  leper." 
III.  Religious  aspect.  1.  Excommunication — no  communion  with  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel.  2.  In  every  way  a  type  of  the  impenitent  sinner.  For — 3.  Sin  is 
a  living  death ;  contagious,  and  separates  from  God.  (F.  Godet,  D.D.)  Socially 
restored,  as  well  as  morally  : — And  He  charged  him  to  tell  no  man.  Assume  that 
the  true  state  of  the  case  was  that  Jesus  wrought  a  cure,  and  left  it  to  the  priest  to 
declare  the  patient  cured,  and  all  becomes  clear,  natural,  and  Christlike.  Two 
things  had  to  be  done  to  make  the  benefit  complete — the  disease  had  to  be  healed, 
whereby  the  sufferer  would  be  delivered  from  the  physical  evil ;  and  it  had  to  be 
authoritatively  declared  healed,  whereby  the  sufferer  would  be  delivered  from  the 
social  disabilities  imposed  by  the  law  upon  lepers.  Jesus  conferred  one-half  of 
the  blessing,  and  He  sent  the  leper  to  the  priest  to  receive  from  him  the  other  half. 
He  did  this,  not  in  ostentation,  or  by  way  of  precaution,  but  chiefly,  if  not  exclu- 
sively, out  of  regard  to  the  man's  good,  that  he  might  be  restored,  not  only  to  health, 
but  to  society.  Hence,  also,  the  injunction  of  silence.  The  prevention  of  unhealthy 
excitement  among  the  people  was  only  a  secondary  aim.  The  primary  end  con- 
cerned the  man  healed.  Jesus  wished  to  prevent  him  from  contenting  himself 
with  half  the  benefit,  rejoicing  in  restored  health,  and  telling  everybody  he  met 
about  it,  and  neglecting  the  steps  necessary  to  get  himself  universally  recognized 
as  healed.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Show  thyself  to  the  priest,  dtc. : — A  certificate 
of  the  recovery  of  a  leper  could  only  be  given  at  Jerusalem,  by  a  priest,  after  a 
lengthened  examination,  and  tedious  rites.  It  will  illustrate  the  bondage  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  as  then  in  force,  to  describe  them.  With  his  heart  full  of  the  first 
joy  of  a  cure  so  amazing,  the  leper  had  to  set  off  to  the  Temple  for  the  requisite 
papers  to  authorize  his  return,  once  more,  to  the  roll  of  Israel.  A  tent  had  to  b* 
pitched  outside  the  city,  and  in  this  the  priest  examined  the  leper,  cutting  off  aB 
bis  hair  with  the  utmost  care  ;  for,  if  only  two  hairs  were  left,  the  ceremony  waa 
invalid.  Two  sparrows  had  to  be  brought  at  this  first  stage  of  the  cleansing — the 
one,  to  be  killed  over  a  small  earthen  pan  of  water,  iuto  which  its  blood  muat  drop^; 


"SM  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [cha».  t. 

the  other,  after  being  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  its  mate — a  cedar  twig,  to  which 
scarlet  wool  and  a  piece  of  hyssop  (Psa.  li.  1)  were  bound,  being  used  to  do  so — 
-was  let  free  in  such  a  direction  that  it  should  fly  to  the  open  country.  After  th» 
Gcrutiny  by  the  priest,  the  leper  put  on  clean  clothes,  and  carried  away  those  he 
iiad  worn  to  a  running  stream  to  wash  them  thoroughly,  and  to  cleanse  himself 
by  a  bath.  He  coulc  now  enter  the  city,  but  for  seven  days  more  could  not  enter 
his  own  house.  On  the  eighth  day  he  once  more  submitted  to  the  scissors  of  the 
priest,  who  cut  off  whatever  hair  might  have  grown  in  the  interval.  Then  followed 
a  second  bath ;  and  now  he  had  only  carefully  to  avoid  any  defilement,  so  as  to  be 
fit  to  attend  in  the  Temple  next  morning,  and  complete  his  cleansing.  The  first 
step  in  this  final  purification  was  to  offer  three  lambs,  two  males  and  a  female, 
none  of  which  must  be  under  a  year  old.  Standing  at  the  ouier  edge  of  the  court 
of  the  men,  which  he  was  not  yet  worthy  to  enter,  the  leper  awaited  the  longed-for 
rites.  These  began  by  the  priest  taking  one  of  the  male  lambs  destined  to  be  slain 
as  an  atonement  for  the  leper,  and  handing  it  to  each  point  of  the  compass  in  turn, 
and  by  his  swinging  a  vessel  of  oil  on  all  sides  in  the  same  way,  as  if  to  present 
both  to  the  universaDy-present  God.  He  then  led  the  lamb  to  the  leper,  who  laid 
his  hands  on  its  head,  and  gave  it  over  as  a  sacrifice  for  his  guilt,  which  he  now 
<»nfessed.  It  was  forthwith  killed  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar,  two  priests 
catching  its  blood,  the  one  in  a  vessel,  the  other  in  his  hand.  The  first  now 
sprinkled  the  altar  with  the  blood,  while  the  other  went  to  the  leper  and  anointed 
his  ears,  his  right  thumb,  and  his  right  toe  with  it.  The  one  priest  then  poured 
some  oil  of  the  leper's  offering  into  the  left  hand  of  the  other,  who,  in  his  turn, 
dipped  his  finger  seven  times  into  the  oil  thus  held,  and  sprinkled  it  as  often 
towards  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Each  part  of  the  leper  which  before  had  been  touched 
with  the  blood  was  then  further  anointed  with  the  oil,  what  remained  being  stroked 
on  his  head.  The  leper  could  now  enter  the  men's  court,  and  did  so,  passing 
through  it  to  that  of  the  priests'.  The  female  lamb  was  next  killed,  as  a  sin- 
offering,  after  he  had  put  his  hands  on  its  head,  part  of  its  blood  being  smeared  on 
the  horns  of  the  altar,  while  the  rest  was  poured  out  at  the  altar-base.  The  other 
male  lamb  was  then  slain  for  a  burnt- sacrifice ;  the  leper  once  more  laying  his 
hands  on  its  head,  and  the  priests  sprinkUng  its  blood  on  the  altar.  The  fat,  and 
All  that  was  fit  for  an  offering,  was  now  laid  on  the  altar,  and  burned  as  a  "  sweet- 
emelling  savour"  to  God.  A  meal-offering  of  fine  wheat  meal  and  oil  ended  the 
whole ;  a  portion  being  laid  on  the  altar,  while  the  rest,  with  the  two  lambs,  of 
which  only  a  small  part  had  been  burned,  formed  the  dues  of  the  priest.  It  was 
not  tiU  all  this  had  been  done  that  the  full  ceremony  of  cleansing,  or  showing  him- 
self  to  the  priests,  had  been  carried  out,  and  that  the  cheering  words,  "  Thou  art 
pure,"  restored  the  sufferer  once  more  to  the  rights  of  citizenship  and  of  intercourse 
with  men.  No  wonder  that  even  a  man  like  St.  Peter,  so  tenderly  minded  to  his 
ancestral  religion,  should  speak  (Acts  xv.  10)  of  its  requuements  as  a  yoke  which 
*'  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  are  able  to  bear."  (^Dr.  Geikie.)  The  moral  of  verse 
14  : — Unless  we  show  ourselves  to  whomsoever  is  our  priest  after  our  healings  and 
eleansings,  and  after  the  gift  which  is  commanded  us,  we  are  less  pure  for  having 
been  so  cleansed,  and  more  diseased  for  having  been  so  healed.  There  can  be  no 
greater  evil  than  to  be  prosperous  without  being  prayerful,  and  strong  without  being 
Godlike.  Tou  should  never  finish  your  successful  commercial  enterprise  with  the 
balancing  of  your  account  at  the  bank.  The  only  duty  of  your  restored  vigour  is 
act  merely  to  pay  your  doctor's  bill.  Your  heahng  and  your  prospering  are  from 
Israel's  God ;  you  had  better  tell  Him  of  them,  and  tell  Him  without  much  ado 
with  man  by  the  way.  Tell  no  man  until  you  know  how  to  speak  devoutly,  and 
see  no  man  until  you  have  seen  God.  You  must  obey  with  the  new  strength  before 
joa  are  free  in  the  use  of  it.    (/.  Ogmore  Davie$.) 

Ver.  15.  A  fame  abroad  of  ff<wi. — True  popularity : — ^That  distinguished  and  excel- 
lent judge,  Lord  Mansfield,  once  observed  :  ♦*  True  popularity  is  not  that  popularity 
vhich  is  followed  after,  but  the  popularity  which  follows  after."  A  fruitless  expedient 
to  prevent  overcrowding  : — Dr.  Chalmers,  when  large  audiences  attended  his  services, 
sometimes  announced  in  the  morning  that  he  would  repeat  the  same  sermon  in  tha 
{afternoon.  On  one  occasion  when  he  had  made  that  announcement  Dr.  Wardlaw 
'Qsras  present,  and  gives  as  an  account  of  the  scene.  It  was  on  one  Sabbath  evening. 
The  seats  were  occupied  an  hour  before  the  time,  and  the  doors  were  closed  and 
bolted.  An  immense  crowd  was  without,  and  as  soon  as  Chalmers  opened  the  vestry 
floor,  in  spite  of  the  keepers,  the  front  door  was  forced  open  and  the  crowd  rushed 


.  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  605 


in,  completely  filling  all  the  vacant  space.  Chalmers  was  grieved,  and  administered 
a  sharp  rebuke  to  the  audience.  Walking  home  with  him,  Chalmers  said  to  Ward- 
law,  •'  I  preached  the  same  sermon  in  the  morning,  and,  for  the  very  purpose  of 
preventing  the  aimoyance  of  such  a  densely-crowded  place,  I  intimated  that  I  should 
preach  it  again  in  the  evening.  Have  you  ever  tried  that  plan  ?  "  "  Wardlaw  says  : 
"  I  did  not  smile.  I  laughed  outright.  '  No,  no,'  I  replied.  ^  •  My  good  friend, 
there  are  but  very  few  of  us  that  are  under  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  the 
we  of  means  for  getting  thin  audiences.' "    {Bishop  Simpson,) 

Vers.  16, 17.  And  He  withdrew  Himself  Into  the  wilderness  and  prayed.— Jie«« 

praying : What  were  the  special  reasons  which  led  our  Lord  at  this  time  to  go 

away  for  prayer.  I.  The  need  of  inwabd  refreshment  of  which  He  must  havb 
BEEN  CONSCIOUS.  1.  Christ  was  full  of  the  truest,  tenderest  sympathy.  2.  His 
sympathy  was  invariably  practical.  3.  It  was  intensely  personal ;  general  enough 
to  embrace  the  multitude  ;  particular  enough  to  fix  itself  on  the  individual.  We 
can  imagine,  therefore,  how  exhausted  He  must  have  been.     II.  The  feeling  or 

BADNESS  WHICH  CAME  TO  HiM  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  SPIEITUAIi  APATHY  OF  THE  MULTI- 
TUDES WHO  WEBB  so  EAGERLY  SEEKING  HiM.  If  we  are  deeply  concerned  for  th» 
spiritual  welfare  of  men  we  shall  feel  something  of  the  same  sadness.    III.  His  con- 

BCIOUSNESS  OF  THE  DANGER  TO  HiS  SPIRITUAL  MISSION  WHICH  WOULD  ARISE  FROM  A  PBE- 

MATUBE  poPULAEiTY.  Prayer  is  the  only  true  preservative  against  the  perils  of  success^ 
Because  of  our  success  we  are  in  danger — 1.  Of  rushing  on  too  fast.  2.  Of  becom- 
ing self-dependent.  3.  Of  growing  unsympathetic.  (B.  Wilkinson,  F.G.S.)  The 
Redeemer  an  example  of  solitary  prayer: — I.  Upon  what  principles  are  wb  to 

ACCOUNT  FOB  OUR  LoRD'S  FREQUENT  RETIREMENT  FOR  SOLITUDE  AND  DEVOTION  ?   A  man» 

though  in  blessed  and  ineffable  union  with  God.  Made  in  all  points  like  unto  His 
brethren,  with  the  exception  of  His  sinless  purity.  1.  The  Eedeemer  would  be  im- 
pelled to  cultivate  solitude  and  devotion  by  the  fervour  of  His  piety.  2.  Solitary 
communion  with  God  was  necessary  to  preserve  His  holy  mind  from  the  contami- 
nations of  the  world,  incidental  to  the  possession  of  a  material  body,  and  his  parti- 
cipation of  human  nature.  3.  In  solitude  and  prayer,  the  Eedeemer  was  invigorated 
to  pursue  and  to  accomplish  His  great  work.  4.  Our  Lord,  by  this  habit  of  retired 
devotion,  afforded  an  example  and  an  illustration  of  His  own  doctrine,  and  con- 
demned the  hypocritical  and  ostentatious  worship  of  the  Jewish  elders.     II.  What 

ADVANTAGES  MAY  WE  EXPECT  TO  DERIVE    FROM    IMITATING  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  THE  SaVIOUB 

Ol  THIS  PARTICULAR  INSTANCE.  To  suppose  the  disciplc  in  less  need  of  perpetual  sup- 
plies of  grace  than  his  Lord  were  folly  and  presumption.  1.  Solitude  is  favourable 
to  that  calm,  reflecting,  and  pensive  state  of  the  mind  which  is  suitable  to  the  higher 
duties  of  religion.  2.  In  devout  seclusion,  the  realities  of  religion  are  brought  more 
closely  home  to  our  consciences  and  our  hearts,  and  we  feel  more  deeply  our  indivi- 
dual concern  in  their  truth  and  consequences.  3.  A  life  of  faith  in  opposition  to  a 
life  regulated  by  the  exclusive  interests  of  the  present  world,  can  only  be  sustained 
by  habits  of  private  devotion.  4.  It  secures  an  effectual  refuge  amidst  the  sorrows  and 
calamities  of  life.  {W.  Hull.)  Christ  and  prayer: — 1.  In  what  His  prayers  for 
the  most  part  consisted  we  know  not,  but  we  know  that  one  element,  which  must 
ever  form  an  important  part  in  our  petitions,  could  have  no  place  in  His.  He 
would  not  say,  ♦'  Forgive  Me  My  trespasses."  2.  But  though  Christ  prayed  without, 
seekiag  mercy,  of  which  He  had  no  need,  He  still  truly  and  earnestly  prayed.  Hia 
devotions  were  not  simply  thanksgivings,  utterances  of  praise  and  gladness,  or 
ecstatic  contemplations.  3.  In  the  prayers  of  Christ,  if  in  nothing  else,  we  see 
abundant  reason  for  our  prayers.  {E.  Mellor,  D.D.)  The  exhaustion  of  pity  :—' 
The  spirit  is  never  so  exhausted  as  when  it  is  exhausted  by  being  pitiful.  For 
weariness  of  bone  and  muscle  nature  is  very  generous  ;  rest  for  that  may  be  found 
anywhere ;  the  tree  wiU  do  for  shelter,  and  the  stone  for  a  pillow.  Weariness  of 
brain  is  harder  to  lay  aside,  and  weariness  of  heart  harder  still.  Brain  and  liml> 
fail  when  the  heart's  power  is  gone.  Jesus  needed  the  day  for  work  and  the  night 
for  rest.  The  spirit  must  rest  and  be  refreshed  by  spirit ;  we  are  revived  again,  and 
often  brought  to  a  lively  hope  through  the  ministry  of  life's  friendships,  and  have 
been  created  anew  by  the  consciousness  of  being  understood.  Christ  had  been  nn- 
derstood  neither  when  He  spake  nor  acted,  but  had  been  wholly  when  He  prayed.. 
We,  too,  have  need  of  a  place  apart  where  we  may  be  refreshed  from  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  {J.  Ogmore  Davies.)  Solitude  necessary : — ^Life  must  have  its  hour* 
of  holy  solitude  if  it  would  be  rich  and  strong.  It  is  true  that  we  can  pray  in  the 
•i^;  it  is  also  true  that  the  wilderness  has  charms  of  its  own  for  meditative 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [CHA».  T. 

purposes.  Silence  helps  speech.  Loneliness  prepares  for  society.  Natnre  baa 
special  messages  to  exhausted  workers.  After  the  wilderness  came  the  city,  with 
all  its  activities  and  temptations.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Prayer  the  breath  of  the 
spiritual  man : — A  celebrated  performer  upon  the  piano  was  continually  familiar 
with  his  instrument,  for  he  used  to  say,  "  If  I  quit  the  piano  one  day  I  notice  it ;  if 
I  quit  it  two  days  my  friends  notice  it ;  if  I  quit  it  three  days  the  public  notice  it." 
No  doubt  he  correctly  described  his  experience  ;  only  by  perpetual  practice  could  he 
preserve  the  ease  and  delicacy  of  his  touch.  Be  sure  that  it  is  so  with  prayer.  If 
this  holy  art  be  neglected,  even  for  a  little  time,  the  personal  loss  will  be  great ;  if 
the  negligence  be  continued,  our  nearest  spiritual  friends  will  notice  a  deterioration 
in  tone  and  life ;  and  if  the  evil  should  be  long  indulged,  our  character  and  influence 
will  suffer  with  a  wider  circle.  To  be  a  master  of  the  mystery  of  prayer  one  must 
pray,  pray  continually,  pray  hourly,  pray  at  all  times,  pray  without  ceasing.  A 
Christian  should  no  more  leave  off  praying  than  the  musician  should  leave  off  play- 
ing ;  in  fact,  it  is  the  breath  of  every  spiritual  man,  and  woe  be  to  him  should  he 
restrain  it  I  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  great  man  at  prayer : — I  had  once  been  spend- 
ing three  weeks  in  the  White  House  with  Mr.  Lincoln  as  his  guest.  One  night — it 
was  just  after  the  battle  of  Bull  Bun — I  was  restless  and  could  not  sleep.  I  was 
repeating  the  part  which  I  was  to  take  in  a  public  performance.  The  hour  was  past 
midnight.  Indeed,  it  was  coming  near  to  the  dawn,  when  I  heard  low  tones  pro 
ceeding  from  a  private  room  near  where  the  President  slept.  The  door  was  partly 
open.  I  instinctively  walked  in,  and  there  I  saw  a  sight  which  I  shall  never  forget. 
It  was  the  President  kneeling  beside  an  open  Bible.  The  light  was  turned  low  in 
the  room.  His  back  was  toward  me.  For  a  moment  I  was  silent,  as  I  stood  looking 
in  amazement  and  wonder.  Then  he  cried  out  in  tones  so  pleading  and  sorrowful, 
"  0  thou  God  that  heard  Solomon  in  the  night  when  he  prayed  for  wisdom,  hear  me: 
I  cannot  lead  this  people,  I  cannot  guide  the  affairs  of  this  nation  without  Thy  help. 
I  am  poor  and  weak  and  sinful.  0  God,  who  didst  hear  Solomon  when  he  cried  lor 
wisdom,  hear  me,  and  save  this  nation  1 "  (James  E.  Murdock.)  Public  prayer 
not  always  the  measure  of  private  prayer : — My  brethren,  do  we  pray  ?  There  is 
many  a  minister — pardon  me  for  saying  so — who  spends  more  time  in  public  prayer 
than  in  private  prayer,  and  not  a  few  spend  more  time  in  preaching  than  in  praying. 
Is  this  as  it  ought  to  be  ?  A  faithful  pastor  went  once  to  see  a  young  man  who  was 
a  member  of  his  Church,  and  he  said  to  him,  "  I  have  come  to  ask  you  if  you  are  on 
good  terms  with  your  Father?"  meaning  his  heavenly  Father.  The  young  man 
eeemed  very  much  taken  aback,  and  said  to  him,  "  Who  told  you  about  me  and  my 
father?  We  have  not  been  on  speaking  terms  for  years."  "  Oh,"  said  the  minister, 
"  I  mean  your  heavenly  Father ;  but  this  is  very  sad."  "  Oh,  it  is  sad,  and  it 
grieves  me  in  my  heart,"  said  the  young  man.  "Oh,"  said  the  minister,  "  I  have 
often  spent  an  evening  in  your  house,  and  I  never  noticed  there  was  any  estrange- 
ment between  you  and  your  father."  "Ah,  no,"  says  the  young  man,  "we 
have  an  arrangement,  when  we  come  together  in  company  to  act  as  if  nothing 
had  happened;  but  when  we  are  alone  there  is  no  intercourse  between  as." 
{G.  Lockliart.)  And  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal  them. — 
The  gospeVs  healing  power : — I.  The  power  of  Cheist  in  the  gospel  is  mainly 
A  POWEB  to  heal.  1.  It  is  a  Divine  power  which  comes  from  our  Lord  Jesus, 
because  He  is  most  surely  God.  It  is  the  sole  prerogative  of  God  to  heal 
spiritual  disease.  2.  Although  our  Lord  Jesus  healed  as  Divine,  remember 
that  He  also  possessed  power  to  heal  because  of  His  being  human.  He  used 
no  other  remedy  in  healing  our  sin-sickness  bat  that  of  taking  our  sicknesses 
end  infirmities  upon  Himself.  This  is  the  one  great  care-all.  3.  The  power  which 
dwelt  in  Christ  to  heal,  coming  from  Him  as  Divine  and  human,  was  applicable, 
most  eminently,  to  the  removal  of  the  guilt  of  sin.  Beading  this  chapter  through, 
one  pauses  with  joy  over  that  twenty -fourth  verse,  "  The  Son  of  Man  hath  power 
upon  earth  to  forgive  sin."  Here,  then,  is  one  of  the  great  Physician's  mightiest 
arts :  He  has  power  to  forgive  sin.  4.  This  is  not  the  only  form  of  the  healing 
power  which  dwells  without  measure  in  our  glorious  Lord.  He  heals  the  sorrow  of 
sin.  It  is  written,  "  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart  and  bindeth  ap  their  wounds." 
When  sin  is  really  manifest  to  the  conscience  itisamost  painful  thing,  and  for  the  con- 
science  to  be  effectually  pacified  is  an  unspeakable  blessing.  Sharper  than  a  dagger 
in  the  heart,  or  an  arrow  piercing  through  the  loins,  is  conviction  of  sin.  When 
Jesus  is  received  by  faith.  He  lifts  all  our  sorrow  from  us  in  a  moment.  5.  Christ 
also  heals  the  power  of  sin.  6 .  And  He  is  able  to  heal  us  of  our  relapses.  II.  A 
eecond  remark  arises  from  the  text :  There  are  special  periods  when  the  powes 


tnup  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  <07 

TO  BSAZ,  IS  HOST  MAKiFESTLY  DisPLATED.  The  Tcrse  before  as  says  that  on  a  certain 
day  the  power  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal,  by  whioh  I  understand,  not  that 
Olmst  is  not  always  God,  not  that  He  was  ever  unable  to  heal,  but  this — that  there 
were  certain  periods  when  He  pleased  to  put  forth  His  Divine  energy  in  the  way  of 
healing  to  an  unusual  degree.  The  sea  is  never  empty ;  it  is  indeed  always  as  full 
At  one  time  as  at  another,  but  yet  it  is  not  always  at  flood.  The  sun  is  never  dim, 
he  shines  with  equal  force  at  all  hours,  and  yet  it  is  not  always  day  with  us,  nor  do 
ve  always  bask  in  the  warmth  of  summer.  Christ  is  fulness  itself,  but  that  fulness 
does  not  always  overflow ;  He  is  able  to  heal,  but  He  is  not  always  engaged  in  heal, 
ing.  1.  On  this  occasion  there  was  a  great  desire  among  the  multitude  to  hear  the 
Word.  2.  The  healing  power  was  conspicuously  present  when  Christ  was  teaching. 
8.  A  further  sign  of  present  power  is  found  most  clearly  in  the  sick  folk  who  were 
healed  by  Jesus.  4.  The  particular  time  mentioned  in  the  text  was  prefaced  by  a 
special  season  of  prayer  on  the  part  of  the  principal  actor  in  it.     III.  When  thb 

POWEB   OF   THE    LOBD   IS    PRESENT   TO    HEAL,    IT  MAY   NOT    BE    SEEN  IN  ALL,  BUT    MAT   BB 

fiBOWN  IN  SPECIAL  CASES  AND  NOT  IN  OTHEBS.  We  do  Hot  And  that  this  power  was 
wanting  among  the  publicans ;  we  have  an  instance  here  of  one  of  them  who  made 
B  great  feast  in  his  house  for  Christ,  Where,  then,  was  the  power  lacking?  Where 
was  it  unsought  and  unfelt  ?  1.  It  was,  in  the  first  place,  among  the  knowing  people, 
the  doctors  of  the  law.  These  teachers  knew  too  much  to  submit  to  be  taught 
by  the  Great  Rabbi.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  knowing  too  much  to  know  anything, 
and  being  too  wise  to  be  anything  but  a  fool.  Beware  of  saying,  "  Oh  yes,  yes,  yes, 
yes,  that  is  very  applicable  to  So-and-so,  and  very  well  put."  Do  not  criticise,  but 
feel.  2.  Those,  moreover,  who  had  a  good  opinion  of  themselves  were  left  unblest. 
The  Pharisees  I  no  better  people  anywhere,  from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  than  the  Phari- 
sees, if  you  would  take  them  upon  their  own  reckoning.  3.  The  people  who  stood 
by,  as  one  observes,  they  did  not  come  to  be  preached  at,  they  came  for  Christ  to 
preach  before  them.  They  did  not  come  for  Christ  to  operate  upon  them  ;  they  were 
not  patients,  they  were  visitors  in  the  hospitals.  4.  Those  who  felt  not  the  healing 
power  sneered  and  cavilled.  When  a  man  gets  no  good  out  of  the  ministry,  he  is 
pretty  sure  to  think  there  is  no  good  in  the  ministry ;  and  when  he  himself,  for 
want  of  stooping  down,  finds  no  water  in  the  river,  he  concludes  it  is  dry,  whereas 
it  is  his  own  stubborn  knee  that  will  not  bend,  and  his  own  wilful  mouth  that  will 
not  open  to  receive  the  gospel.  IV.  In  the  last  place,  I  want  Christian  people  here 
to  observe  that  when  the  poweb  of  Christ  was  present,  it  called  forth  the 

BNEBOT  OF  THOSE  WHO  WEBE  HiS  FRIENDS  TO  WORK  WHILE  THAT  POWER  WAS   MANIFEST. 

(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  healing  the  sick : — 1.  The  infinitude  of  Christ's  power. 
2.  The  tenderness  of  Christ's  power.  3.  The  beneficence  of  Christ's  power.  4.  The 
Bvailableness  of  Christ's  power.  The  conditions  on  which  is  secured  the  outflow  of 
Christ's  beneficent  power.  1.  Helplessness.  Leper  and  paralytic  men  were  anable 
to  relieve  themselves.    2.  Humility.    3.  Faith.    (P.  P.  Davies.) 

Vers.  18-26.  A  man  which  was  taken  with  a  palsy. — Carried  by  four: — I.  Thzbb 

ARE   CASES  which  WILL  NEKD   THE   AID   OF   A   LITTLE   BAND   OF  WORKERS  BEFORE  THET 

WILL  BB  FULLY  SAVED.  Yondcr  Is  a  householder  as  yet  unsaved :  his  wife  has 
prayed  for  him  long ;  her  prayers  are  yet  unanswered.  Good  wife,  God  has  blessed 
thee  with  a  son,  who  with  thee  rejoices  in  the  fear  of  God.  Hast  thou  not  two 
Christian  daughters  also  ?  0  ye  four,  take  each  a  corner  of  this  sick  man's  conch, 
and  bring  your  husband,  bring  your  father,  to  the  Saviour.  A  husband  and  a  wife 
ere  here,  both  happily  brought  to  Christ ;  you  are  praying  for  your  children  ;  never 
cease  from  that  supplication :  pray  on.  Perhaps  one  of  your  beloved  family  is 
unusually  stubborn.  Extra  help  is  needed.  Well,  to  you  the  Sabbath -school  teacher 
will  make  a  third  ;  he  will  take  one  comer  of  the  bed ;  and  happy  shall  I  be  if  I 
may  join  the  blessed  quaternion,  and  make  the  fourth.  Perhaps,  when  home 
discipline,  the  school's  teaching,  and  the  minister's  preaching  shall  go  together,  the 
Lord  will  look  down  in  love  and  save  your  child.  II.  We  now  pass  on  to  the 
second  observation,  that  some  cases  thus  taken  up  will  need  much  thought 
BEFORB  the  design  IS  ACCOMPLISHED.  They  must  get  the  sick  man  in  somehow. 
To  let  him  down  through  the  roof  was  a  device  most  strange  and  striking,  bat  it 
only  gives  point  to  the  remark  which  we  have  now  to  make  here.  If  by  any  means 
we  may  save  some,  is  our  policy.  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  we  have  is  nothing 
comparable  to  a  man's  soul.  When  four  true  hearts  are  set  apon  the  spiritaal 
good  of  a  sinner,  their  holy  hunger  will  break  through  stone  walls  or  house  roofs. 
III.  Now  we  must  pass  on  to  an  important  truth.    We  may  safely  gather  from  the 


sot  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  Icha».  ▼. 

narrative  that  the  boot  of  spiritual  paralysis  generally  lies  in  dnpardoneit 
SIN.  Jesus  intended  to  heal  the  paralysed  man,  but  He  did  so  by  first  of  all  saying, 
"  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  The  bottom  of  this  paralysis  is  sin  upon  the 
conscience,  working  death  in  them.  They  are  sensible  of  their  guilt,  but  powerless 
to  believe  that  th«  •rimson  fountain  can  remove  it ;  they  are  alive  only  to  sorrow, 
despondency,  and  agony.  Sin  paralyses  them  with  despair.  I  grant  you  that  into 
this  despair  there  enters  largely  the  element  of  unbelief,  which  is  sinful ;  but  I 
hope  there  is  also  in  it  a  measure  of  sincere  repentance,  which  bears  in  it  the  hope 
of  something  better.  Our  poor,  awakened  paralytics  sometimes  hope  that  they 
may  be  forgiven,  but  they  cannot  believe  it ;  they  cannot  rejoice;  they  cannot  cast 
themselves  on  Jesus ;  they  are  utterly  without  strength.  Now,  the  bottom  of  it,  I 
say  again,  lies  in  unpardoned  sin,  and  I  earnestly  entreat  you  who  love  the  Saviour 
to  be  earnest  in  seeking  the  pardon  of  these  paralysed  persons.  IV.  Let  us  pro- 
ceed to  notice  that  Jesus  can  remove  both  the  sin  and  the  paralysis  in  a  singlb 
mohent.  It  was  the  business  of  the  four  bearers  to  bring  the  man  to  Christ ;  but 
there  their  power  ended.  It  is  our  part  to  bring  the  guilty  sinner  to  the  Saviour ; 
there  our  power  ends.  Thank  God,  when  we  end,  Christ  begins,  and  works  right 
gloriously.  V.  Wherever  our  Lord  works  the  double  miracle,  it  will  bb 
APPABBNT.  The  man's  healing  was  proved  by  his  obedience.  Openly  to  all  on- 
lookers an  active  obedience  became  indisputable  proof  of  the  poor  creature's 
restoration.  Notice,  our  Lord  bade  him  rise — he  rose  ;  he  had  no  power  to  do  so 
except  that  power  which  comes  with  Divine  commands.  He  did  his  Lord's  bidding, 
and  he  did  it  accurately,  in  detail,  at  once,  and  most  cheerfully.  Oh  I  how 
cheerfully ;  none  can  tell  but  those  in  like  case  restored.  So,  the  true  sign  of 
pardoned  sin,  and  of  paralysis  removed  from  the  heart,  is  obedience.  YI.  Au, 
this  tends  to  glorify  God.  Those  four  men  had  been  the  indirect  means  of 
bringing  much  honour  to  God  and  much  glory  to  Jesus,  and  they,  I  doubt  not, 
glorified  God  in  their  very  hearts  on  the  housetop.  Happy  men  to  have  been  of 
80  much  service  to  their  bedridden  friend  1  When  a  man  is  saved  his  whole  man- 
hood glorifies  God  ;  he  becomes  instinct  with  a  new-born  life  which  glows  in  every 
part  of  him,  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  But  who  next  glorified  God  ?  The  text  doe» 
not  say  so,  but  we  feel  sure  that  his  family  did,  for  he  went  to  his  own  house. 
Well,  but  it  did  not  end  there.  A  wife  and  family  utter  but  a  part  of  the  glad 
chorus  of  praise,  though  a  very  melodious  part.  There  are  other  adoring  hearts 
who  unite  in  glorifyiug  the  healing  Lord.  The  disciples,  who  were  around  the 
Saviour,  they  glorified  God  too.  And  there  was  glory  brought  to  God,  even  by  the 
common  people  who  stood  around.  We  must,  one  and  all,  do  the  same.  ((7.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Jesus'  method  of  doing  good : — The  first  thing  which  He  did  was  not 
the  thing  which ,  He  was  expected  by  men  to  do.  His  first  word  seemed  remote 
from  the  thing  needing  then  and  there  to  be  done.  The  friends  of  that  palsied 
man  expected  the  famed  Miracle-Worker  to  heal  him;  and  instead,  Jesus  said 
only,  "  Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  That  was  not  the  first  nor  the  last  time 
that  ecclesiastical  logic  has  drawn  a  correct  circle  of  reasoning  by  which  the  living 
truth  has  been  shut  out.  Jesus  stood  for  the  moment  looking  upon  the  disappointed 
faces  of  His  friends,  and  meeting  the  cruel  eyes  of  His  enemies.  He  knew  that 
His  word  of  Divine  forgiveness,  which  seemed  remote  from  the  very  present  need 
of  that  palsied  man,  and  which  to  the  Pharisees  was  idle  as  a  breath  of  »ir,  was 
nevertheless  the  force  of  forces  for  the  healing  of  the  world.  He  knew  how  to 
begin  His  work  among  men,  before  any  form  of  suffering,  with  a  word  which  should 
bring  down  to  the  soul  of  man's  need  the  power  of  the  heait  of  God.  The  multi- 
tude looked  on  and  saw  the  momentary  failure,  as  it  seemed,  of  the  Christ  of  God. 
"  But  Jesus,  perceiving  their  reasonings,"  &o.  "  Whether  is  easier? "  &c.  Which  is 
the  greater  force,  the  love  of  God  forgiving  sin,  or  the  miracle  of  healing  ?  Jesus 
began  with  the  greatest  work.  The  miracle,  as  it  seemed  to  the  people,  was  not 
the  greater  work  which  Jesus  knew  He  was  sent  io  accompUsh.  The  physical 
miracle  followed  easily  upon  the  diviner  power  of  God's  love  which  Jesus  was 
conscious  of  possessing  and  exercising  over  the  might  of  evil,  when  He  said,  "  Man, 
thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  The  people,  when  they  saw  the  lesser  work  done,  not 
comprehending  the  power  of  God  then  and  there  present  upon  the  earth,  and  work- 
ing first  the  greater  work  of  the  forgiveness  al  sin,  were  amazed  and  filled  with 
fear,  and  said,  "  We  have  seen  strange  things  to-day."  And  this  opinion  of  the 
people  must  be  our  opinion  of  these  miracles  if  we  do  not  know  Jesus^  any  better 
than  those  doctors  of  the  law  at  Capernaum  had  learned  Christ.  But  as  in  that  case 
goon  appeared,  Jesus  Christ  was  right  in  the  way  He  chose  to  begin  His  work,  and  the 


OHJ*.  ♦.]  ST.  LUKE.  801 

people  were  all  wrong.  He  did  the  harder  thing  first,  and  the  easier  thing  next.  And 
the  method  of  the  Church,  following  Christ's,  is  profoundly  right.  It  is  practically 
true.  The  gospel  of  Divine  forgiveness  we  must  put  first ;  our  benevolences  second. 
Sin  is  first  to  be  mastered ;  then  suffering  is  more  easily  healed.  {Newman  Smyth,  D.D, ) 
The  gospel  of  forgiveness : — In  this  miracle  many  truths  are  presented  to  us  ;  e.g., 
1.  A  strong  faith  will  overcome  difficulties.  2.  The  readiness  of  Christ  to  welcome 
the  needy,  and  to  reward  faith.  3.  The  enmity  aud  opposition  of  the  human 
heart.  4.  The  superiority  of  spiritual  to  temporal  blessings.  5.  Testimony  given 
to  the  Divinity  of  Christ  by  His  (1)  forgiving  sin;  (2)  searching  the  heart;  (3) 
healing  the  body.  But  the  central  truth  of  the  passage  appears  to  be,  the  gospel  of 
forgiveness  preached  to  the  poor.  I.  The  need  it  mekts.  The  figure  presented 
to  us  :  a  paralysed  man — helpless,  incurable — a  mere  wreck.  Three  things  com- 
bined in  him.  1.  Disease.  2.  Poverty.  3.  Poverty  of  spirit.  He  had  a  sense  at 
gin — connected  his  misery  with  his  sin — was  softened,  penitent.  II.  The  hope  it 
AWAKENS.  Indefinite — but  the  hope  of  good.  Had  heard  of  Jesus.  Drawn  by  rhe 
Father.  The  attraction  exercised  by  Christ.  All  obstacles  overcome.  Jesus  must 
be  reached.  III.  The  blessing  it  bestows.  1.  Forgiveness.  A  word  lightly  used ; 
little  valued  by  many.  But  ask  the  friend,  the  child,  the  sinner  who  feels  himself 
a  wrongdoer,  and  longs  for  reconciliation.  2.  Manner  of  bestowment.  (1)  Imme- 
diate. (2)  Free.  (3)  Complete.  (4)  Authoritative.  (5)  Effectual.  IV.  The  oppo- 
8ITI0N  IT  excites.  The  spirit  of  opposition  to  grace  always  the  same ;  the  form 
differs.  Here  it  was  provoked  by  Christ's  assumption ;  commonly  by  man's  pre- 
sumption. V.  The  vindication  it  receives.  Christ  proves  His  power  to  forgive, 
confutes  His  adversaries,  saves  the  man.  The  gospel  may  appeal  to  results. 
Conclusion  :  Application  to  (1)  The  careless.  (2)  The  anxious,  (t)  The  healed. 
(EmiliiLS  Bayley,  B.D.)  Itejlections  on  the  healing  of  the  paralytic: — 1.  Thia 
passage  suggests  some  serious  consideration  relating  to  the  great  numbers  who 
sometimes  assemble  when  the  gospel  is  to  be  preached.  Some  hear  with  profit ; 
but  how  many  seem  to  hear  in  vain.  2.  Be  exliorted  to  imitate  the  benevolence  of 
the  four  men  who  brought  the  paralytic  to  Christ.  All  who  are  themselves  in 
health,  strength,  and  comfort,  ought  to  be  ready  to  perform  the  various  oflices  of 
humanity  to  those  who  are  in  sickness,  or  any  trouble.  3.  There  are  some  things 
here  for  the  consideration  of  the  sick.  The  best  use  of  sickness  is  for  reUgioua 
improvement.  4.  It  is  delightful  to  think  that  the  Son  of  Man  has  still  power  to 
forgive  sin.  [James  Foote,  M.A.)  God  interprets  prayers : — In  our  prayers,  Christ 
often  hearkens  more  to  our  wants  than  our  desires.  He  goes  to  the  very  root  of 
the  evil,  which  is  sin ;  and  we  ought  to  imitate  Him  in  our  afdictions.  They  who, 
out  of  a  spirit  of  charity,  pray  for  others,  receive  frequently  more  than  they  ask. 
God  interprets  their  prayers  ;  because  He  understands  better  what  charity  asks  in 
them,  than  they  do  themselves.  (Quesnel.)  Faith's  reward : — The  hand  of  faith 
never  knocked  in  vain  at  the  door  of  heaven.  Mercy  is  as  surely  ours  as  if  we  had 
it,  if  we  have  but  faith  and  patience  to  wait  for  it.  (W.  Burkitt.)  The  healing 
of  the  paralytic : — Here  is  an  instance  of  the  secondary  services  which  men  may 
render  to  each  other.  The  men  who  carried  the  sufferer  could  not  cure  him.  Still 
they  could  help  him  by  kind  and  sympathetic  attention.  We  should  not  shrink 
from  the  lower  duties  simply  because  we  cannot  discharge  those  which  are  higher. 
The  method  of  approaching  Christ  adopted  by  them,  and  Christ's  approval  of  it, 
show  that  the  one  thing  to  be  particular  about  is  to  get  to  Christ,  rather  than  to  be 
fastidious  as  to  the  mere  manner  by  which  the  object  is  accomplished.  The  great 
thing  that  Jesus  Christ  valued  in  men  was  faith.  His  answer  to  the  faith  of  man 
was  always  in  proportion  to  the  fulness  and  courage  of  that  faith.  In  this  oasa 
He  gave  the  very  highest  answer  at  once,  with  an  apparent  abruptness  that  startled 
the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees  as  if  He  had  committed  high  blasphemy.  Look  at 
the  harmony  between  the  action  of  the  men  and  the  speech  of  Jesus.  He  did  not 
receive  them  coldly,  and  test  their  sincerity  by  much  questioning  and  seeming 
reluctance.  On  the  contrary,  no  sooner  did  He  see  a  special  exhibition  of  faith  in 
His  power,  than  He  instantly  spoke  the  highest  word  which  God  Himself  can 
address  to  the  heart  of  man.  Singularly  enough,  in  this  instance  Jesus  Christ 
passed  from  the  high  spiritual  act  of  forgiveness  to  the  high  spiritual  act  ok 
penetrating  the  hidden  thoughts  of  those  who  were  secretly  accusing  Him  of 
blasphemy.  The  twenty-second  verse  shows  the  absolute  fearlessness  of  Jesus,  in 
that  He  did  not  wait  for  an  audible  expression  of  unbelief  or  aversion.  He  who 
eould  thus  read  the  heart  showed  another  phase  of  that  great  power  by  which  He 
■eleased  man  Irom  the  captivity  of  his  guilt.    The  power  is  one;  only  in  its 


filO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chi».  w. 

application  is  it  varied.  In  His  further  remarks  npon  this  case  Jesns  Christ  shows 
that  He  can  begin  His  work  either  from  the  highest  spiritual  or  the  highest 
physical  point.  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  sensitive  were  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
in  the  matter  of  the  forgiveness  of  sins  by  any  but  God  Himself,  and  yet  how  dull  they 
were  to  draw  the  right  inference  from  the  fact  that  Jesus  perceived  their  thoughts. 
The  man  who  can  read  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  has  a  presumptive  claim  to  be 
considered  able  to  do  more  than  lies  within  the  sphere  of  ordinary  men.  We  find, 
however,  that  they  passed  from  this  instance  of  spiritual  insight  without  a  remark. 
This  is  a  danger  to  which  we  are  all  exposed — the  danger,  namely,  of  seeing 
blasphemy  where  we  ought  to  see  Divinity,  and  of  neglecting  to  construct  the  right 
argument  upon  such  evidences  of  Christ's  power  as  are  patent  to  our  own  observa- 
tion.  The  effect  produced  upon  the  minds  of  the  spectators  (ver.  26)  was  apparently 
satisfactory,  yet  not  really  and  permanently  so,  or  there  could  have  been  no 
recurrence  of  hostihty.  We  see  from  this  how  possible  it  is  to  be  amazed,  even 
to  glorify  God  and  to  be  filled  with  fear,  and  yet  to  fall  back  from  this  high  feeling 
into  positive  distrust  and  enmity.  Feeling  must  be  consolidated  by  understanding, 
or  it  will  prove  itself  a  poor  defence  in  the  day  of  repeated  trial,  Christianity  is  an 
argument  as  well  as  an  emotion  ;  and  to  separate  them  is  to  divide  our  strength 
and  to  miss  the  great  purpose  of  Christian  instruction.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
story  : — 1.  Is  an  admirable  commentary  on  the  psalmist's  words,  *'  Thy  gentleness 
hath  made  me  great."  As  we  follow  the  steps  of  the  narrative,  we  feel  how,  by 
His  gentleness,  by  the  wise  gradations  of  His  approach  to  the  paralytic's  true  need, 
Christ  is  gradually  raising  him  into  his  best  moods. ,  2.  Eeminds  us  that  in  His 
grace  Christ  rewards  the  very  moods  of  faith  and  hope  which  He  Himself  has 
produced.  He  says,  "  Be  of  good  courage  "  ;  and,  at  the  word,  courage  springs  up 
in  our  fearful  hearts.  He  says,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  " ;  and  we  are  able  to 
believe  that  He,  wiio  can  forgive  sins,  can  do  for  us  whatever  we  may  need.  And 
then,  having  inspired  faith  and  courage.  He  rewards  them  as  though  they  were 
our  virtues  rather  than  His  gifts  :  He  bids  us  "  arise  and  walk,"  to  prove  our  victory 
over  sin,  to  show  that  we  have  found  new  life  in  Him.  So  that  the  reward  He 
bestows  is — new  and  happier  service.  3.  Teaches  that  Christ  often  crosses  our 
wish  to  supply  our  want.  No  doubt  the  supreme  desire  of  the  Galilean  paralytic 
was  deliveiance  from  the  palsy.  But  that  is  not  the  first  thing  Christ  grants  him. 
There  must  be  faith  before  there  can  be  healing ;  the  man's  sins  must  be  forgiven 
before  he  can  be  made  whole  from  his  disease.  But  then,  when  our  sins  are  really 
forgiven  us,  forgiveness  implies  a  free  restoration  to  health.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 
The  vicarious  nature  of  faith : — We  have  here  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  value  of 
intercessory  prayer,  or,  if  I  may  so  express  myself,  of  vicarious  faith.  God,  we 
learn  therefore,  hears  prayers  of  believing  men  offered  up  not  for  themselves  but 
for  others.  1.  This  doctrine  is  Scriptural.  Abraham,  Moses,  &c.  2.  This  doctrine 
is  reasonable.  It  can  give  a  good  account  of  itself  before  the  bar  of  philosophy. 
It  is  a  wise,  God-worthy  policy  to  encourage  men  to  pray,  live,  and  even  die  for 
one  another,  in  the  assurance  that  they  pray  not,  live  not,  die  not  in  vain.  3.  The 
duty  arising  out  of  the  foregoing  doctrine  is  plain.  It  is  without  ceasing  to  desire 
and  to  pray  for  the  well-being,  spiritual  and  temporal,  of  all  men,  specially 
of  those  whose  case  Providence  brings  closest  home  to  us.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 
Spiritual  uses  of  affliction : — I.  A  case  of  dire  disease.  II.  Practical  stmpatht 
EVOKED.      III.  Unexpected  hindrances.     IV.  The  ingenuity  of  faith.      V.  A 

GRACIOUS  ORDER  OF  BLESSING.  VI.  PLAUSIBLE  OBJECTIONS  CONFUTED.  VII.  HUUAM 
EEST0RATI0N3     BY    JeSUS     MADE    COMPLETE.         VIII.     HuMAN     BUFFERING    KESULTINO 

IN  BRINGING  GLORY  TO  GoD.  (D.  Davics,  M.A.)  Who  can  forgive  tins  f — I. 
Whether  God  can  forgive  sins  or  not,  it  is  certain  that  no  other  being  can.  We 
have  no  right  to  forgive  one  another.  We  cannot  forgive  one  another.  Forgive- 
ness, real  and  complete,  can  neither  go  nor  come,  can  neither  be  given  nor  accepted, 
between  man  and  man.  As  I  have  said  before,  God  would  have  to  die  first. 
Eternity  would  havj  to  end  first.  This  is  what  conscience  says  to-day,  will  say 
to-morrow,  and  will  say  for  ever.  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  be  insisting  upon  any- 
thing  BO  elementary  and  axiomatic.  But  I  dare  not  be  ashamed  of  it.  There  ia 
something  in  the  air  which  predisposes  us  to  think  lightly  of  sin.  And  I  must 
warn  you  against  it ;  and  warn  myself  against  it.  Questions  of  conscience  are  only 
in  part  subjective  and  social.  They  are  between  us  and  the  Unseen ;  between  as 
and  the  Eternal ;  between  us  and  the  All- Just ;  between  us  and  the  All-Terrible. 
I  do  not  see  nor  touch  Him  yet.  But  when  this  tired  breast  stops  heaving,  and 
this  tired  poise  stops  beating,  quick  as  thof^ght,  quicker  than  hghtning,  I  shall  b« 


eStf.  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  «H 

with  Him,  face  to  face.  Only  one  question  shall  I  then  care  to  have  answered : 
Can  He  forgive?  I  do  not,  dare  not,  can  not  forgive  myself;  can  He  forgive  me? 
II.  Let  us  ask,  and  answer  this  question  now  :  Can  God  forgive  ?  In  the  dainty, 
superficial  thinking  of  our  time,  which  comes  of  so  much  self-indulgence,  softening 
the  mental  and  moral  fibre,  Divine  forgiveness  is  easy.  It  is  assumed  that  suffering 
must  cease  some  time.  A  bold  assumption,  in  the  face  of  a  creation  which  has 
always  sighed  aud  groaned.  If  God  is  not  impeached  or  disturbed  by  suffering 
to-day,  why  need  He  be  to-morrow,  or  next  day,  or  the  next  ?  Much  is  said  also 
of  our  insignificance,  and  that,  too,  by  men  who,  in  other  relations,  make  great 
account  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature.  God,  it  is  said,  can  suffer  no  loss  at  our 
hands.  We  cannot  rob  Him  of  any  treasure.  Somebody  once  asked  Daniel 
Webster  what  was  the  most  important  thought  that  ever  occupied  his  mind.  The 
propriety  of  the  question  hardly  equalled  the  solidity  of  the  answer.  "  The  most 
important  thought  that  ever  occupied  my  mind,"  said  he,  "  was  that  of  my  indi- 
vidual responsibility  to  God."  Psychology  admits  no  possibility  of  forgiveness. 
On  purely  rational  grounds,  it  is  inconceivable.  Plato  could  see  nothing  ahead 
but  either  penalty,  or  penance.  Some  speakers  and  writers  of  our  time,  affecting 
philosophy,  are  eloquent  about  work  and  wages,  being  and  condition,  character  and 
destiny.  Very  well,  gentlemen :  but  do  you  know  what  you  are  sa^^ing  ?  You  bate 
our  iron-clad  orthodoxy.  But  our  creed,  as  you  must  yourselves  admit,  has  some 
mercy  in  it ;  while  your  creed  has  no  mercy  in  it  at  all.  To  be  consistent,  you 
should  get  rid  of  your  idea  of  a  personal  God,  as  perhaps  you  have  already.  As 
you  put  things,  this  universe  might  just  as  well  be  governed  by  some  impersonal 
Force.  The  laws  are  all  alike,  whether  physical  or  moral.  Atonement  suggests 
and  warrants  the  declaration  that  "  God  is  Love."  Somehow,  on  the  basis 
of  this  atonement,  and  in  pursuance  of  its  purpose,  God  forgives.  What  is 
forgiveness?  Not  mere  remission  of  penalty.  Moral  penalty  never  can  be 
remitted  without  moral  change.  To  forgive  an  offence  that  I  know  will  be 
repeated  is  to  be  accessory  to  that  offence,  before  and  after.  Divine  forgiveness 
can  go  no  farther  thau  human  forgiveness,  and  achieve  no  more.  It  must  observe 
the  same  ethical  laws.  It  must  have  the  same  high  ethical  tone.  "  Go,  and  sin 
no  more,"  is  always  the  condition  of  forgiveness.  (R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.) 
Zeal  will  always  Jind  a  way  to  accomplish  its  purpose  : — It  seems  to  have  been  a 
common  practice  with  their  (the  Waldensian)  teachers,  the  more  readily  to  gain 
access  for  their  doctrines  among  persons  in  the  higher  ranks  of  life,  to  carry  with 
them  a  box  of  trinkets,  or  articles  of  dress,  something  like  the  hawkers  or  pedlars 
of  our  day ;  and  Eeinerius  thus  describes  the  manner  in  which  they  were  wont  to 
introduce  themselves :  "  Sir,  will  you  be  pleased  to  buy  any  rings  or  seals  or 
trinkets  ?  Madam,  will  you  look  at  any  handkerchiefs  or  pieces  of  needlework  for 
veils;  I  can  afford  them  cheap."  If,  after  a  purchase,  the  company  ask,  "Have 
you  anything  more?  "  the  salesman  would  reply,  "  Oh,  yes  ;  I  have  commodities 
far  more  valuable  than  these,  and  I  will  make  you  a  present  of  them,  if  you  will 
protect  me  from  the  ecclesiastics."  Security  being  promised,  he  went  on:  "The 
inestimable  jewel  I  spoke  of  is  the  Word  of  God,  by  which  He  communicates  His 
mind  to  men,  aud  which  inflames  their  heart  with  love  to  Him,"  {Milner.)  A 
vwther's  bilief  that  God  would  justify  her  faith  for  her  son's  conversion: — A  touching 
story  of  a  mother's  faith  is  that  of  a  dying  Scotch  mother,  who  in  praying  for  and 
speaking  of  a  wandering  son,  whom  she  had  not  heard  from  for  years,  said :  "  O 
God,  Thou  kuowest  I  consecrated  Jamie  to  Thee  when  he  was  an  infant  in  my  arms. 
Thou  knowest  I  have  prayed  for  him  with  the  prayer  of  faith — a  mother's  faith, 
every  day  ever  since  he  was  born.  He  is  Thy  child  ;  Thou  must  go  after  him  and 
find  him,  and  bring  him  into  the  kingdom,  for  Thou  hast  promised,  and  Thou  art 
faithful  to  fulfil  Tny  promises.  Thou  canst  not  lose  my  Jamie  from  the  fold.  I 
know  that  Thou  wilt  save  Jamie  for  me,  and  I  shall  meet  him  in  the  land  where 
none  ever  wander  away  from  the  green  pastures  and  the  still  waters."  Faith 
honoured: — "  There  is  no  use  in  keeping  the  church  open  any  longer ;  you  may  as 
well  give  me  the  key,"  said  a  missionary  in  Madras,  as  in  the  course  of  a  journey 
he  passed  through  a  village  where  once  so  many  of  the  natives  had  professed  Chris- 
tianity that  a  little  church  had  been  built  for  them.  But  the  converts  had  fallen 
away,  returned  to  their  idols,  and  there  only  remained  faithful  the  one  poor  woman 
to  whom  now  the  missionary  was  speaking.  "  There  is  Christian  worship  in  the 
village  three  miles  off,"  he  added,  noticing  her  sorrowful  look  ;  "  any  one  wha 
wishes  can  go  there."  •'  Oh,  sir,"  she  pleaded,  most  earnestly,  "  do  not  take  away 
the  key  1    I  at  least  will  still  go  daily  to  the  church  aud  sweep  it  clean  and  wiU 


51»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  V. 

keep  tlie  lamp  in  order,  and  go  on  praying  that  God's  light  may  one  day  visit  U9 
again."  So  the  missionary  left  her  the  key,  and  presently  the  time  came  when  he 
preached  in  that  very  church  crowded  with  repentant  sinners ;  the  harvest  of  the 
God-given  faith  of  that  one  poor  Indian  woman.  Rejoicing  through  forgiveness: — 
"  We  now  visit  an  old  man  of  seventy-five,  who  had  been  a  coachman  and  cabdriver 
in  Palis.  We  have  known  him  for  tea  years.  His  home  is  humble,  but  it  was  very 
interesting  to  look  in  from  time  to  time  on  old  Grimmet  and  his  wife,  both  of  them 
diligently  cutting  into  strips  a  sort  of  coarse  lace  to  try  and  earn  something  for 
their  own  support.  He  was  a  great  sufferer  through  gout  for  the  last  two  years, 
and  when  the  thought  came  forcibly  home  to  him  that  he  could  not  live  much 
longer,  the  sins  of  his  past  life  weighed  heavily  upon  his  mind.  •  You  have  no 
idea,'  he  would  say,  '  of  the  sins  I  have  committed  during  my  long  life,  and  if  I 
only  knew  they  were  forgiven  I  should  not  be  afraid  to  die.'  The  feeling  quite 
overpowered  bim.  We  visited  him,  and  read  God's  Word  with  him,  and  after 
some  months  the  hght  shone  in  upon  him,  and  all  was  changed.  But  let  him  tell  his 
own  simple  story:  'I  know  now  my  sins  are  all  forgiven,  for  the  sake  of  my 
Saviour,  who  died  for  me.  Yes,  though  I  am  such  a  great  sinner,  God  has  for- 
given  me  all.  I  used  to  be  so  frightened  when  I  awoke  at  night,  and  seemed  to  see 
dreadful  spirits  round  me ;  but  now,  when  I  am  awake,  I  pray  to  God,  and  I  seem 
to  know  He  is  in  the  room  with  me.  One  night  I  am  sure  I  saw  Jesus  standing 
before  me  when  I  was  praying.'  His  faith  was  bright  to  the  last,  and  he  passed 
quietly  away  to  '  the  home  above. '  "     (Miss  Leigh'' s  work  in  Paris.)         "  Sixty -Jive 

years'  sins  all  forgiven"  : — This  was  the  language  of  Mrs.  B ,  who  has  been 

visited  by  the  missionary  for  many  years.  She  always  received  my  visits,  and  wa» 
willing  to  bear  the  Scriptures  read,  but  was  totally  blind  to  their  spiritual  applica- 
tion, and  always  said  she  was  too  bad  to  be  forgiven  ;  but  this  was  as  a  cloak  to  cover 
her,  iiidnlgence  in  sin.  About  nine  months  ago  she  manifested  a  deep  concern 
about  her  spiritual  condition.  She  said,  "  It's  no  use  talking  to  me,  the  day  of 
grace  is  gone,  I  am  afraid  there  is  no  hope  for  me."  I  repeatedly  visited  her,  read 
and  prayed  with  her.  She  attended  all  the  meetings,  and  would  cry  out,  "  Lord, 
pave  me,  if  thou  canst  look  upon  •  poor  sinner  like  me  !  "  At  night  she  was  terri- 
fied with  dreams.  "  My  old  man,"  she  said,  "  declared  I  was  gone  mad.  I  said, 
'It's  my  sins,  my  sins  ! '  I  didn't  know  what  to  do  nor  where  to  go.  It  was  at 
the  Mission-room  last  June  that  I  heard  distinctly  a  voice  that  said,  '  Thy  sins 
which  were  many  are  all  forgiven  thee.'  I  felt  such  a  change ;  I'm  an  old  woman, 
but  I  could  dance  for  joy ;  it  is  wonderful  the  Lord  Jesus  forgave  me.  Sixty-five 
years'  sins  all  forgiven  1"  Omuisciince  of  Christ: — isature,  in  all  her  realms, 

lies  open  to  His  eye.  No  pearl  of  the  deep,  no  metallic  splendour  of  the  mine,  but 
shines  to  Him.  No  flower  of  a  day,  no  tree  of  a  century,  no  forest  of  a  millennium, 
but  has  in  petal,  foliage,  and  gathering  girth  a  history  He  intimately  knows.  No 
fish,  glancing  through  the  s-^as,  no  beast,  wild  or  subdued,  no  bird,  savage  or  harm- 
less, but  has  a  biography  whose  every  inciclent  is  clear  in  the  flame  of  His  all- 
searching  eyes,  and,  pointing  to  man.  He  says :  "  The  very  hairs  of  your  head  are 
all  numbered. "  And  is  He  so  minutely  acquainted  with  man's  decorating  and 
living  crown  ?  He  has  as  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  thoughts  of  man's  mind 
and  the  feelings  and  aspirations  of  his  soul.  Every  creature,  small  and  great, 
every  event  of  every  life,  every  sin,  sorrow,  fear,  and  hope,  lives  simultaneously, 
completely,  unerringly,  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  (G.  T.  Coster.)  Christ 
can  see  through  men : — He  needed  not  that  one  should  tell  Him  what  was  in  men ; 
He  knew  it.  He,  looking  upon  men,  looked  upon  them  as  if  they  were  glass,  and 
as  if  their  soul's  machinery  was  perfectly  visible  within  them.  As  we,  looking  upon 
a  clock,  see  its  whole  mechanism,  so  Christ,  looking  upon  men,  seemed  to  see  the 
interior  men  more  than  the  exterior.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  simplicity  of  Chrisft 
method  of  healing :— I  looked  the  other  day  into  old  Culpepper's  Herbal.  It  con- 
tains a  marvellous  collection  of  wonderful  remedies.  Had  this  old  herbalist's 
prescriptions  been  universally  followed,  there  would  not  long  have  been  any  left  to 
prescribe  for ;  the  astrological  herbalist  would  soon  have  extirpated  both  sickness 
and  mankind.  Many  of  his  receipts  contain  from  twelve  to  twenty  different  drugs, 
each  one  needing  to  be  prepared  in  a  peculiar  manner ;  I  think  I  once  counted 
forty  different  ingredients  in  one  single  draught.  Very  different  are  thesereceipts, 
with  their  elaboration  of  preparation,  from  the  Biblical  prescriptions  which  effec- 
tually healed  the  sick — such  as  these  :  "Take  a  lump  of  figs  and  lay  it  for  a  plastei 
upon  the  boil":  or  that  other  one :  "Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times  ";  oi 
that  other  :  "  Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk."     One  cannot  but  admire  the  simplicitj 


SHIP.  ▼.]  8T.  LUKE.  61S 

«f  troth,  while  falsehood  conceals  her  deformities  with  a  thoasand  triokeries. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Thepurpose  of  ChrisVt  miracles  of  healing : — It  is  not  so  easy 
a  matter  as  it  might  seem,  to  explain  the  multitude  of  the  miracles  that  are  nar- 
rated or  referred  to  in  these  Gospels  which  give  us  all  that  we  know  of  the  life  of 
Jesus  the  Messiah.  The  accounts  of  them  make  up  a  large  part  of  the  four 
Gospels.  Why  is  it  that  the  three  brief  years  of  Christ's  miracles  should  have 
been  so  largely  consumed  in  these  hundreds,  thousands  of  acts  of  healing  men's 
bodily  ailments  and  infirmities,  and  even  inconveniences  ?  What  was  the  purpose, 
and  what  was  the  result,  of  all  these  mighty  works  ?  1.  If  the  one  object  of 
Christ's  ministry  was  directly  to  reduce  the  sum  of  human  misery,  then  they  were 
ft  failure ;  for  their  result  was  inappreciably  small  and  insignificant.  What  a  mere 
drop  of  solace  in  an  ocean  of  agony !  What  an  atom  of  comfort  beside  the  huge, 
mountainous  mass  of  human  woe  1  2.  Such  an  object  as  that  of  arbitrarily  inter- 
rupting the  general  course  of  human  suffering  by  miraculous  interference,  not  only 
was  not  accomplished  by  the  power  of  Christ,  but  it  ought  not  to  have  been  accom- 
plished— it  would  not  have  been  a  blessing.  The  notion  that  there  was  too  much 
pain  and  suffering  in  the  world — more  than  was  right,  more  than  was  best,  more 
than  was  needed  by  mankind  for  their  own  good — the  notion  that  God  our  Father 
had  dealt  hardly  by  His  children,  and  that  the  Son  of  God,  with  a  superior  love, 
came  down  to  mitigate  the  hardship  which  the  Father's  too  great  severity  had 
imposed — is  quite  too  much  like  some  other  of  the  obsolete  notions  of  a  mediseval 
theology,  and  quite  too  much  unlike  the  Word  of  God.  For  it  is  not  true.  God 
tolerates  no  pain  in  the  world  that  can  be  spared.  It  was  not  in  revenge  or  cruelty, 
but  in  that  justice  which  is  another  name  for  love,  that  He  pronounced  on  ths 
apostate  race  the  curse  of  toil  and  suffering  and  death.  His  curse  was  the  best 
blessing  that  mankind,  sinful,  apostate,  were  capable  of  receiving.  S.  The  real 
answer  is  declared  in  the  text.  When  God  interferes  to  break  the  dreadful  chain 
of  moral  causes  that  binds  penalty  to  ain.  He  gives  sign  and  token  of  the  same,  by 
breaking  also  the  chain  of  physical  cause  and  effect  that  holds  the  creation  groan- 
ing under  bondage  to  bodily  pain  and  weakness.  When  He  sends  His  only- 
begotten  into  the  world,  He  adopts  this  way  to  signalize  Him  to  the  wretched,  the 
poor,  the  hungry,  the  sick,  the  palsied,  the  sinful  and  unhappy  of  every  land  and 
language  and  century,  as  God's  authorized  Commissioner.  4.  Christ's  works, 
moreover,  set  before  us  the  way  of  salvation — the  way  in  which  He  gives  it,  the 
way  in  which  we  are  to  receive  it.  The  miracles  are  parables — not  the  less  para- 
bles for  being  also  facts.  And  this  miracle,  in  particular,  shows  the  order  in  which 
the  devil's  works  are  destroyed  by  the  Holy  One  of  God — not  first  pain  and  sorrow, 
and  then  sin ;  but  first  sin,  and  then  the  pain,  sorrow,  death  that  sin  has  wrought. 
(Leonard  W.  Bacon.)  The  healing  of  the  palsied : — I.  This  miracle  is  a  pabablb. 
1.  Of  Divine  power  and  love.  2.  Of  human  faith.  II.  Consideb  the  paralttio's 
PBATEB.  It  was  a  wonderful  prayer — so  brief,  so  comprehensive,  so  affecting,  so 
complete  ;  stating  the  whole  case,  setting  it  forth  in  every  particular,  detailing 
every  symptom  of  the  malady,  urging  every  argument  of  sympathy,  calling  for 
exactly  the  comfort  and  help  that  were  required  ; — such  was  the  prayer  offered  by 
the  sick  of  the  palsy,  as  his  couch  with  its  half-dead  burden  dropped  on  the  ground 
at  the  feet  of  the  Christ.  What  then  did  he  say  ?  Not  one  word  I  The  silence 
which  this  strange  intruder  brought  with  him  into  the  school  of  Christ  was  broken 
only  by  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man  Himself — "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins 
■re  forgiven  thee."  He  had  told  his  story  welL  There  was  a  dead  and  leaden  limb 
hanging  to  a  half-lifeless  trunk.  There  was  a  hand  shaking  with  the  helpless 
tremor  of  the  nerves  that  could  do  little  more  than  tremble.  There  were  the  lips 
drooling  and  mowing,  and  the  tongue  lolling  with  a  look  like  idiocy  within  the  gate 
Df  speech,  and  the  eyes,  last  refuge  of  the  blockaded  intellect,  looking  with  longings 
that  cannot  be  uttered  toward  Him  who  is  the  Life.  And  now  do  yoa  ask.  What 
did  he  say  ?  Bather,  What  did  he  leave  unsaid  t  It  was  an  unspoken  prayer,  but 
not  a  prayer  nnuttered  or  unexpressed.  I  find,  in  the  very  nature  of  this  sick  man's 
malady,  some  instructive  indications  as  to  what  is  the  prayer  of  faith,  and  what  is 
faith  that  gives  prevailing  power  to  prayer.  It  is  not  without  significance  that  so  large 
aproportion  of  our  Lord'smiracles  of  healingwere  wrought  on  the  biindand  the  palsied 
— ^the  sufferers  from  those  two  forms  of  human  infirmity  which  most  discipline  one 
to  a  sense  of  his  own  helplessness  and  need,  and  most  educate  him  in  the  habit  of 
eonfiding  in  the  strength  and  wisdom  and  faithfulness  of  another.  And  as  I  medi< 
tate  of  blindness  and  palsy,  I  better  understand  the  darkness  and  impotency  of  sin, 
•od  what  is  that  faitb  by  which  we  should  commit  oorselves  to  the  infinite  wiidoii|» 

8d 


B14  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHl».  f 

love,  and  power  of  God.  III.  Consideb  th«  aksweb  which  thb  palbied  xak 
BECEiVED  TO  HIS  pBATEB.  If  it  Seemed  at  first,  to  any,  that  he  had  ottered  no 
prayer  at  all,  such  will  surely  think  at  first  that  he  received  no  answer  at  all.  Very 
commonly  this  is  true,  in  the  Gospels,  of  the  Lord's  response  to  those  who  come  to 
Him.  "  Jesus  answered  and  said,"  we  read ;  but  the  answer  has  no  obvious  rele- 
vency  to  what  was  asked  (John  iii.  1-3).  He  answers,  not  the  words,  but  what  lay 
in  the  heart,  behind  the  words.     In  such  wise  He  answers  the  prayer  of  the  palsied 

a  prayer  that  says,  plainer  than  any  words  can  say  it,  "  LorcQ  that  I  might  be 

healed."  It  seems  no  answer  at  all — "  Son,  be  of  good  cheer  ;  thy  sins  are  for- 
given thee."  There  seems  to  be  some  untold  story  here.  There  is  more  than 
palsy — there  is  sin ;  if  not  an  anxious  face,  at  least  a  troubled  conscience.  And 
there  is  a  keen  diagnosis  on  the  part  of  the  Great  Healer,  going  deeper  than  the 
surface  symptoms,  reaching  to  the  inmost  roots  of  the  trouble.  And  His  answer  is 
given  accordingly.  Observe  in  it — 1.  That  the  paralytic  received  the  substance, 
though  not  the  form,  of  what  he  had  asked,  to  his  entire  satisfaction.  For  a 
similar  case,  see  2  Cor.  xii.  7-10.  Did  the  features  of  the  paralytic,  think  you, 
betray  to  the  gazing  and  murmuring  scribes  some  sign  of  disappointment  or  dis- 
content, when  those  majestic  words  were  spoken  down  to  him — "  Thy  sins  be 
forgiven  thee  "  ?  Is  it  ever  those  who  cry  mightily  to  God,  who  are  found  com- 
plaining that  He  is  slack  concerning  His  promises  ?  And  if  not,  then  who  are  you 
that  are  finding  fault — making  bold  to  come  between  the  saint  and  hia  Saviour, 
to  complain  that  the  covenant  is  not  fully  performed  ?  If  Christ  is  satisfied,  and 
the  suppliant  soul  is  satisfied,  who  are  we  that  we  should  interfere  to  measnre  the 
prayer  against  the  answer,  and  remonstrate  with  the  Lord  that  His  ways  are  un- 
equal.  Nay,  I  take  you  all  to  witness — 2.  That  this  petitioner  received  more  than 
the  equivalent  of  what  he  had  asked,  by  as  much  as  it  is  a  greater  thing  to  suffer  and 
be  happv  and  joyful  in  the  midst  of  suffering,  than  it  is  not  to  suffer  at  all.  Many 
a  sick  man  has  implored  the  Lord  for  health  and  strength,  and  won  a  blessing 
greater  than  he  asked,  in  learning  "how  sublime  a  thing  it  is  to  suffer  and 
be  strong."  Many  a  bankrupt  man,  that  had  struggled,  with  anxious  calculations 
and  many  an  earnest  petition,  for  deliverance  from  accumulating  troubles,  and 
seemed  to  find  no  answer  from  God,  has  been  rewarded  at  last  with  the  heavenly 
gift  of  grace  to  step  majestically  down  from  wealth  to  poverty,  and  has  found  a  joy 
in  low  estate  beyond  what  wealth  could  ever  give.  3.  But  now  observe,  finally, 
that  when  he  had  received  the  equivalent  of  his  prayer,  to  his  full  content ;  and 
when  he  had  received  "  exceeding  abundantly  above  what  he  had  asked  "  ;  at  last, 
this  palsiti  man  was  given  the  identical  thing  which  he  had  asked.  Not  for  hi* 
sake — no,  he  did  not  ask  it  now.  He  was  of  good  cheer — his  sins  were  forgiven 
him.  So  far  as  appears,  he  was  full  of  exceeding  peace  and  content,  craving 
nothing  more,  but  wholly  satisfied,  the  rest  of  his  appointed  time,  to  lie  a  helpless 
infant  in  the  everlasting  arms.  No,  it  was  not  iox  his  sake,  but  "that  j/e  may 
know  that  the  Son  of  Man  hath  power,"  &c.  For  now  the  palsy  had  accom- 
plished its  work  and  could  be  spared.  It  had  brought  the  sufferer,  and  laid  him 
low  and  helpless  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  to  receive  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins,  and 
what  more  could  it  do  for  him  ?  The  time  was  come,  at  last,  when  it  might  be 
dismissed,  but  not  till  now.  And  Christ  is  not  so  unkind  as  to  give  healing  so 
long  as  suffering  is  still  needed.  He  is  not  less  merciful  than  the  Father,  as  He  is 
not  more  merciful.  Would  you  dare  to  ask  that  your  grief,  your  pain,  your  burden 
should  be  taken  away  before  its  work  was  done  ?  Could  you  bring  your  mind  to 
wish  that  all  these  past  hours,  and  days,  and  weeks,  and  weary  months  of  suffering 
should  have  been  in  vain ;  and  that  God  should  call  back  these  stern  but  kindly 
servants  of  His,  while  yet  their  mission  was  incomplete,  and  bid  them  Let  him 
alone!  sorrow  is  wasted  on  himl  he  is  joined  to  his  idols ;  let  him  alone?  But 
now,  the  sick  of  the  palsy  is  forgiven  and  at  peace.  The  sickness  has  well  fulfilled 
its  painful  but  beneficent  ministry,  and  He  who  is  Lord  over  all  the  powers  of  life 
and  death,  that  saith  to  this  one,  Gome,  and  he  oometh,  and  to  another,  Go,  and  he 
goeth,  may  call  away  this  sad-faced  angel,  and  send  him  back  to  where,  before  the 
throne,  they  "  stand  and  wait "  for  some  new  bidding  upon  messages  of  love.  (Ibid. ) 
Strange  things  : — I.  Mask  the  stkakqe  things  op  that  pabticdlab  dat.  1.  Power 
present  to  heal  the  doctors  (ver.  17).  2.  Faith  reaching  down  to  the  Lord  from 
above  (ver.  19).  8.  Jesas  pardoning  sin  with  a  word  (ver.  20).  4.  Jesns  practising 
tiiought-reading  (ver.  32).  5.  Jesus  making  a  man  carry  the  bed  which  had  carried 
him  7ver.  25).  II.  Mabk  the  stbanoe  things  of  Chbist's  day.  1.  The  Maker  of 
men  bom  among  men.    2.  The  Lord  of  all  servins  iSL    S.  The  Jort  One  eaorifiood 


CHAP,  r.]  8T.  LUKE.  615 

for  sin.  4.  The  Crucified  rising  from  the  dead.  5.  Death  slain  by  the  dying  of 
tlie  Lord.  III.  Mabk  the  strange  things  seen  by  beuevebs  in  their  day  witiiin 
THEMSELVES  AND  OTHEBS.  1.  A  sell-oondemned  sinner  justified  by  faith.  2.  A 
natural  heart  renewed  by  grace.  3.  A  soul  preserved  in  spiritual  life  amid  killing 
evils,  like  the  bosh  that  burned  with  fire  and  was  not  consumed.  4.  Evil  made  to 
work  for  good  by  providential  wisdom.  5.  Strength  made  perfect  in  weakness. 
6.  The  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  a  believer.  7.  Heaven  enjoyed  on  earth.  ((7.  H, 
Spurgeon.)  Revivals  of  religion : — I.  This  iNrLUENCE  succeeded  to  pratbb.  It 
is  said  our  Redeemer  had  withdrawn  into  the  wilderness  to  pray ;  He  had  just  come 
from  the  wilderness,  where  He  had  been  engaged  in  earnest  prayer  with  the  Father, 
no  doubt  for  the  salvation  of  a  lost  world ;  for  this  was  the  errand  upon  which  He 
came  to  our  earth,  this  was  the  work  which  He  took  upon  Him,  and  with  reference 
to  this  work  were  all  His  engagements.  We  are  sure  His  prayers,  when  presented 
to  His  Father,  had  a  special  and  direct  reference  invariably  to  the  salvation  of  a 
lost  world.  After  thus  praying  He  came  forth,  and  it  was  then  this  extraordinary 
influence  was  present.  In  all  ages,  God  hath  made  the  execution  of  His  gracious 
purposes  to  depend  upon  the  exercise  of  the  forth-putting  of  earnest  prayer. 
Throughout  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  we  find  all  those  who  were  raised  up 
by  Him  to  bring  about  the  spiritual  or  temporal  deliverance  of  His  people,  were  in- 
structed to  do  so  in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  When  the  holy  prophet  Daniel  was  made 
aware  that  the  set  time  to  favour  Zion  was  come,  even  after  knowing  this  he  did 
not  restrain  prayer,  but  gave  himself  to  this  duty  as  one  which  must  be  performed 
in  order  to  the  accomplishment  of  God's  gracious  purposes.  II.  This  geacioos 
influence  was  in  connection  with  the  teachino  of  Jesus.  Jesus  had  not  only 
been  praying,  and  was  now  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  but  He  was  teaching,  and  the 
Lord  hath  made  the  salvation  of  the  world  to  depend  upon  rhe  faithful  teaching  of 
the  doctrines  of  Christ :  "  Go  ye,"  said  our  Eedeemer,  "  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."     HI.  We  observe  the  conversion  of  this 

MAN    was    BRO0OHT   ABOUT    BY   EXTRAORDINARY    MEANS.       NoW  the   preSCUt   Etate   of   the 

Christian  Church,  and  this  professedly  Christian  land,  calls  to  extraordinary  efforts. 
We  have  been  trying  for  a  length  of  time  to  get  people  by  the  door,  and  if  the  house 
has  not  always  been  crowded,  as  it  has  not  in  some  instances  (the  more  the  pity), 
yet,  in  innumerable  instances  it  has  been  crowded  with  devils,  who  kept  out  poor 
sinners,  who  prevented  them  from  comiug  in :  and  there  we  have  been  too  ready  to 
leave  them,  because  we  were  afraid  of  stepping  out  of  the  ordinary  course — that  we 
should  do  anything  out  of  the  usual  way,  lest  the  whole  town  sLould  be  in  a  stir, 
and  that  any  of  the  people  of  God  should  think  we  were  disposed  to  signalize  our- 
selves. Now  we  wish  you  to  be  impressed  with  this ;  and  beware,  because  you  have 
happened  to  see  a  conveision  effected  by  extraordinary  means,  of  supposing  that 
this  is  the  only  way,  and  that  this  way  always  succeeds,  and  no  other  will.  It  is 
an  extraordinary  way  suited  to  extraordinary  circumstances ;  and,  I  believe,  extra- 
ordinary circumstances  are  more  general  than  people  are  disposed  to  admit.  But 
what  will  take  place  then  f  Why,  if  you  act  thus,  there  will  be  a  great  deal  of 
excitement,  and  people  will  talk  against  it ;  they  will  say,  oh,  take  care  of  excite- 
ment (for  the  excitement  has  been  very  great  amongst  us  in  several  instances) — 
take  care  you  do  not  excite  the  people.  We  ask  them  to  specify  any  good  reason 
why  we  should  not  try  to  excite  the  people,  and  then  we  will  desist.  Are  they  too 
susceptible  ?  Is  not  the  world  affected  with  excitement  in  other  quarters  ?  There 
is  plenty  of  excitement  in  the  theatre,  plenty  of  excitement  in  the  ball-room,  and 
no  one  attempts  to  fasten  upon  them  the  charge  of  enthusiasm.  These  men  are 
most  rational,  the  very  lights  of  the  world,  fitted  to  expound  everything  that 
appears  a  mystery  1  It  is  only  in  the  house  of  God,  where  the  most  stirring  subjects 
are  brought  before  us,  that  it  is  thought  better  to  be  as  still  as  possible ;  that  is,  it 
is  thought  a  perfect  breach  of  decorum  for  there  to  be  the  slightest  indication  of 
sympathy  in  the  statements  made.  We  are  in  perfect  bondage ;  we  dare  not  utter 
our  feelings  lest  some  that  stand  by  should  say  that  we  are  enthusiasts.  But  then,  if 
the  Lord  thus  appear,  if  the  Lord  make  bare  His  arm,  they  will  say,  oh,  it  is  all  sym- 
pathy— it  spreads  from  one  to  another.  We  admit  that,  to  a  considerable  extent, 
sympathy  is  the  means  that  God  employs.  But,  further,  if  you  thus  get  the 
influence  of  God  down  upon  the  people,  the  power  of  Christ  communicated  to  their 
hearts,  and  have  the  matter  settled  by  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  they  will  object 
to  the  suddenness  of  the  conversion.  God's  way  of  salvation  is  very  simple,  and 
the  person  who  has  been  brought  to  exercise  a  believing  act  will  learn  more  in  a 
few  boors  than  he  ooold  by  years  of  study  previous  to  its  exercise.    {J.  M*Lean.j 


818  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

Forgiveness  and  healing: — I.  Thb  sick  man  and  his  fbixnds.  1.  The  sick  man. 
2.  The  sick  man's  friends.  Several  interesting  particulars  are  suggested  by  their 
action  in  this  matter.  (1)  They  had  faith  in  Jesus.  It  is  only  men  of  faith  who 
can  truly  do  good  to  others.  If  we  do  not  believe  in  our  hearts  and  souls  that  Jesui 
Christ  can  forgive  and  heal  sinners,  we  shall  certainly  never  bring  any  such  to  himu 
(2)  Theirs  was  a  practical  faith.  Faith  is  not  merely  a  sentiment  which  believes 
something  to  be,  but  a  vitalized  affection  which  starts  all  our  faculties  into  action 
and  sets  us  to  work  to  accomplish  something.  (3)  Their  faith  was  resourceful. 
There  were  difficulties  in  their  path.  (G.  F.  Pentecost.)  Strange  things: — 
The  world  is  a-weary,  and  longs  for  something  noveL  The  greatest  stranger 
in  the  world  is  Jesus ;  and  alas  1  He  is  the  least  seen,  and  the  least  spoken 
of  by  the  most  of  men.  If  men  would  come  and  watch  Him,  they  would 
see  strange  things.  His  person,  His  life,  His  death,  are  full  of  strange  things. 
What  He  is  doing  now  has  as  much  as  ever  the  element  of  strangeness  and 
wonder  about  it.  Life  never  grows  stale  to  a  companion  of  Jesus.  Do  you 
find  it  becoming  so,  and  are  you  a  believer  ?  Seek  the  conversion  of  your  family, 
and  your  neighbourhood.  Seek  to  know  more  of  Jesus  at  work  among  men. 
This  wiU  cause  you  to  see  stranger  and  stranger  things,  till  you  see  the  strangest  of 
all  with  Christ  in  glory.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Two  kinds  of  wonder: — Wonder  at 
the  work  of  God  is  natural,  justifiable,  commendable.  He  is  a  God  of  wonders. 
It  is  right  to  say  of  the  Lord's  doing,  ••  It  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  We  are  to 
talk  of  all  His  wondrous  works  ;  but  this  must  be  in  the  spirit  of  devout  admira* 
tion,  not  in  the  spirit  of  suspicion  and  doubt.  A  holy,  grateful  wonder  should  be 
indulged  to  the  full ;  but  a  cold,  sceptical  wonder  should  be  resisted  as  a  suggestion 
from  Satan.  Faith  accounts  all  things  possible  with  God ;  it  is  unbelief  tnat  in. 
credulously  marvels  at  the  work  of  His  hand.  {Ibid.)  God's  wonders  : — Guthrie, 
of  Fenwick,  a  Scotch  minister,  once  visited  a  dying  woman,  whom  he  found  very 
anziouB  about  her  state,  but  very  ignorant.  His  explanation  of  the  gospel  was  joy< 
fully  received,  and  she  died  soon  afterwards.  On  his  return  home,  Guthrie  said, 
"  I  have  seen  a  strange  thing  to-day — a  woman  whom  I  found  in  a  state  of  nature, 
I  saw  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  left  in  a  state  of  glory." 

Vers.  27,  28.  And  saw  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom. — 

A  publican: — Publican  was  the  name  given  to  an  employe  of  low  degree,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  get  in  the  tribute  money.  He  was  the  agent  of  the  farmers-general, 
great  personages  who  lived  by  their  depredations,  after  the  publicans  themselves 
had  kept  back  an  exorbitant  percentage  on  the  money  levied.  The  Talmuds  often 
betray  the  scorn  felt  for  the  publicans.  Their  testimony  was  not  accepted  in  a 
court  of  justice.  Probable  that  the  publicans  were  allowed  no  more  rights  than 
the  heathen,  and  that  the  Court  of  the  Gentiles  alone  was  open  to  them.  (£. 
Stapfer,  D.I>)  The  Jews,  who  bore  the  Roman  yoke  with  more  impatience  than 
any  other  nation,  excommunicated  every  Israelite  who  became  a  publican  ;  and  the 
disgrace  extended  to  his  whole  family.  Nobody  was  allowed  to  take  alms  from 
one,  or  to  ask  him  to  change  money  for  them.  They  were  even  classed  with  high* 
way  robbers  and  murderers,  or  with  harlots,  heathen,  and  sinners.  No  strict  J«w 
woold  eat,  or  aTen  hold  intercourse,  with  them.    (Dr.  Qeikie.) 

AT  THE  RECEIPT  OF  CUSTOM. 

From  fishers'  net,  from  fig-trees'  shada, 

God  gathers  whom  He  will ; 
Touch'd  by  His  grace  all  men  are  mad* 

His  purpose  to  fulfil. 

But  not  alone  from  shady  nooki. 

Fresh  with  life's  noontide  dew 
From  humble  walks  or  quiet  booki^ 

Calls  He  His  chosen  few. 

Out  of  the  busiest  haunts  of  lif^ 

Its  most  engrossing  cares, 
Its  mighty  travail,  daily  strife, 

Belf-woven  golden  snares- 
He  for  His  vineyard  doth  provida,-^ 

His  gentle  voice  doth  move 
The  world's  keen  votaries  to  His  sids^ 

With  its  persuasive  love.  (Dr.  Jfowtlll 


'OTA*.  T.l  ST.  LUKE.  »1T 

ST.  MATTHEW  THE  APOSILE. 

At  onee  he  rose,  and  left  his  gold ; 

His  treasure  and  his  heart 
Transferred,  where  he  shall  safe  behold 

Earth  and  her  idok  part ; 
While  he  beside  his  endless  store 
Shall  sit,  and  floods  unceasing  pour 
Of  Christ's  true  riohes  o'er  all  time  and  spaee, 
First  angel  of  His  Church,  first  steward  of  His  graee.   {J.  KehU.) 

IThe  call  of  St.  Matthew : — Matthew  was  the  son  of  Alphsans,  or  CleopaB  who  had 
married  the  sister,  probably  the  elder  sister,  of  our  Lord's  mother.  Not  unlikely 
that  he  was  the  Cleopas  who  walked  to  Emmaus  (Luke  xxiv.  13-35).  A  holy  family 
—Israelites  indeed.  To  such  a  family,  what  calamity  could  be  more  terrible  than 
that  one  of  the  sons  should  become  a  publican,  a  renegade  to  the  Hebrew  faith,  a 
traitor  to  the  Hebrew  commonwealth  ?  Levi  had  taken  service  with  the  Romans. 
Day  by  day,  in  their  own  city  of  Capernaum,  he  was  to  be  seen  sitting  at  the 
receipt  of  custom.  Whenever  boats  came  into  the  Uttle  port,  it  was  his  duty  to 
take  dues  of  them.  Whenever  a  caravan  reached  the  city,  he  had  to  take  toll  of 
the  goods  with  which  the  weary  camels  were  laden.  And  these  tolls  and  dues  were 
paid,  not  into  the  Jewish  treasury,  but  into  the  purses  of  the  Roman  knights. 
For  the  true  publicani  were  Romans  of  wealth  and  credit  who  '•  farmed  "  the  taxes 
of  a  province.  In  the  collection  of  these  taxes  they  commonly  employed  natives 
of  the  province,  who  were,  as  a  rule,  infamous  for  their  extortions.  Only  the 
lowest  and  most  profligate  of  the  people  would  accept  so  degrading  an  office.  What 
led  Levi  thus  to  wound  and  put  to  shame  those  who  loved  him  so  well  ?  It  may  be 
that  the  very  austerity  of  their  piety  alienated  him  from  them.  It  may  be  that  he 
was  simply  thoughtless  and  pleasure-loving.  It  would  be  a  keen  joy  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  give  joy  to  such  good  people  as  His  uncle  and  aunt  and  cousins,  to  restore 
peace  and  union  to  the  family  in  which  He  had  lived  so  long.  This  was  His 
pleasant  errand  this  morning  as  He  left  the  house  in  which  His  mother  dwelt  with 
her  sister,  and  Cleopas,  and  their  children,  and  passed  through  the  city  to  the  shore 
of  the  lake.  As  He  passed  through  the  official  quarter.  He  saw  Matthew  sitting 
at  the  receipt  of  custom.  Possibly  He  had  not  seen  him  for  a  long  time.  In  all 
HkeUhood  Matthew  had  hitherto  slipped  out  of  His  way.  But  now  at  last  He  sees 
him  sitting  at  his  post.  What  a  Divine  constraining  power  there  must  have  been 
in  the  words  of  Him  who  spake  as  never  man  spake !  As  He  looks  at  Matthew, 
He  says  simply,  "  Follow  Me  "  ;  and  His  cousin,  so  hardened  and  degraded  by  his 
sins,  rises,  leaves  all — his  work  for  the  moment,  his  official  post  and  wage — and 
{olIowB  Him  as  though  drawn  by  an  irresistible  power.  Hitherto  he  had  beea 
called  Levi,  after  the  son  of  Jacob.  And  the  word  "  Levi  "  simply  meant  "  link." 
But  Jesus  had  found  and  saved  him  ;  and  He  brings  him  back  to  the  old  home  • 
new  man  with  a  new  name.  Henceforth  Levi,  now  a  true  and  strengthening  link, 
is  to  be  called  Matthew,  i.e.,  the  gift  of  God ;  the  very  moment  he  rises  to  the  level 
and  meaning  of  his  old  name,  a  new  name,  a  new  ideal  is  given  him,  A  true  gift 
of  God  was  this  recovered  son  to  the  wounded  and  sorrowful  hearts  of  his  father 
and  mother  and  brethren.  Matthew,  then,  was  the  scapegrace  of  a  holy  family. 
Father,  mother,  brothers,  sisters  were  ashamed  of  him.  Yet  nm  b*  WM  not 
bejond  the  reach  and  sway  of  Christ.    {S.  Cox,  D.D.) 

THE  CALL  OF  MATTHEW. 

••  Arise  and  follow  Me ! " 

Who  answers  to  the  call  7 
Kot  Ruler,  Scribe,  or  Pharisefli, 

Proud  and  regardless  alL 

••  Arise  and  follow  Me  1 " 

The  publican  hath  heard ; 
And  by  the  deep  Gennesaret  sett 

Obeys  the  Master's  word. 

Thenceforth  in  joy  and  fear. 

Where'er  the  Saviour  trod, 
Among  the  twelve  his  place  was 

The  Holy  One  of  God. 


B18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  »t 

His  is  no  honour  mean, 

For  Christ  to  write  and  die  ; 
Apostle,  Saint,  Evangelist, 

His  record  is  on  high.  {Dean  Alford.) 

Following  Chriit : — I.  The  kealitt  op  this  conversion  proved  by — 1.  The  change 
of  occupation  in  obedience  to  Christ.  2.  The  sacrifice  endured.  3.  His  identify- 
ing himself  with  Christ.  4.  His  concern  for  his  fellow-men.  II.  Let  us  try  our- 
selves BY  these  tests.  1.  What  is  Christ's  power  over  us?  2.  What  sacrifices 
are  we  making  for  Christ?  3.  How  do  we  identify  ourselves  with  Christ  ?  4.  What 
are  we  doing  to  bring  others  to  Christ?  (W.  W.  Patton,  D.D.)  God  calls  busy 
vien  to  do  His  grander  work: — God  calls  bnsy  men  to  do  His  grander  work. 
Moses,  the  shepherd  ;  Shamgar  and  Elisha  and  Gideon,  the  farmers ;  James  and 
John,  Andrew  and  Peter,  the  fishermen ;  Matthew,  the  tax-collector ;  Luke,  the 
physician,  Ac,  Ac.  This  same  Jehovah-angel  appears  also  to  Joshua.  The  cast 
of  the  Roman  Cincinnatus,  called  by  his  people  from  the  plough  to  be  dictator  of 
Home,  and  saving  it  from  the  enemy,  is  also  in  point.  Many  of  God's  most 
distinguished  workmen  have  been  called  from  scenes  of  the  humblest  labour.  It 
was  when  toiling  over  a  shoemaker's  bench  that  Carey's  soul  was  filled  with  a  zeal 
for  missionary  labour.  Yet  he  became  one  of  the  most  Buccessful  missionaries  of 
his  age.  By  his  labours  a  magnificent  college  was  erected  at  Serampore,  sixteen 
flourishing  stations  were  established,  the  Bible  translated  into  sixteen  languages, 
and  the  seed  sown  of  a  moral  revolution  in  India.  Morrison,  another  laborious 
missionary,  was  once  a  maker  of  shoe-lasts.  Henry  Martyn's  father  was  a  Cornwall 
miner.  John  WilUams,  of  Erromanga,  left  the  blacksmith's  shop  to  teach  theislanders 
of  the  Pacific  the  way  of  life.  Dr.  Livingstone  supported  himself  through  a  cours* 
of  study  by  working  in  a  cotton  mill.  (Teacher's  Storehouse.)  Following  Christ 
fully : — In  the  diary  of  the  lamented  Dr.  Livingstone  was  found  the  following 
passage,  written  thirteen  months  before  he  died : — '•  My  own  Jesus,  my  King  1  my 
life,  my  all  I  have  given  Thee ;  I  dedicate  my  whole  self  to  Thee.  Accept  me,  O^ 
gracious  Father,  and  grant  that  ere  this  year  has  gone  I  may  finish  my  task.  In 
Jesus'  name  I  ask  it.  Amen."  There  is  the  key  to  the  life  of  Dr.  Livingstone. 
The  call  of  Matthew  : — I.  Christ  calls.  1.  We  cannot  tell  what  preparation  may 
have  been  previously  made  for  this  abrupt  summons.  If  Matthew  was  son  of  the 
Alphaeus  elsewhere  named,  then  his  connection  with  our  Lord  would  account  for 
it.  2.  In  any  case  we  are  sure  that  our  Lord's  appeal  was  reasonable.  Besting 
on  grounds  intelligible  to  St.  Matthew.  3.  The  call  involved  sacrifice.  He  was 
following  a  lucrative  calling,  and  he  had  to  abandon  it.  4.  Our  Lord's  calling  it 
always  substantially  the  same.  (1)  It  bids,  us  leave  the  world.  (2)  It  bids  ii» 
follow  Him.  Whatsoever  is  inconsistent  with  a  close  earnest  following  of  Hiia 
must  be  abandoned.  II.  Matthew  obeys.  Mark  the  brevity,  yet  sufficient  fulness, 
of  the  account  given.  This  was  all  that  was  required  of  him,  and  he  did  it.  1. 
Great  difliculties  lay  in  his  way.  (1)  His  manner  of  life.  (2)  The  peculiar 
character  of  his  employment.  (3)  Perhaps  also  acquired  habits  in  connection 
with  his  employment.  2.  Yet  his  obedience  was  ready  and  prompt.  (1)  No  rash- 
ness. He  certainly  knew  what  our  Lord  asked,  and  what  he  was  bound  to  render. 
Christ  repressed  those  who  came  thoughtlessly.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  no 
vacillation  or  hesitation.  III.  The  ekalitt  of  his  adhesion  to  Christ.  This 
Vfas  shown — 1.  By  the  evident  sacrifice  he  made.  An  example  to  all  who  hear 
Christ's  voice,  and  follow  Him.  No  royal  road  to  perfection.  Jesus  by  suffering 
conquered,  and  all  who  follow  Him  must  enter  into  the  spirit  of  sacrifice.  2.  By 
his  seeking  for  Christ's  communion.  He  "  made  Him  a  great  feast."  {W.  R. 
Clark,  M.A.)  Matthew  before,  during,  and  after  his  conversion : — Matthew  is  of 
the  number  of  those  saints  who,  once  living  in  sin,  gained  heaven  by  perfect 
repentance.  As  a  true  penitent  he  deserves  our  veneration,  which  we  shall  beat 
exhibit  by  learning  from  his  life  what  we  should  do,  and  what  avoid,  in  order  to 
gain  heaven.  I.  The  occupation  of  Matthew  before  his  conversion.  1.  The 
occupation  of  a  money-changer,  which  is  perilous.  2.  The  trade  of  a  usurer, 
which  is  vicious.  8.  The  office  of  a  toll-collector,  which  was  odious.  II.  Th» 
BUPPER  PREPARED  BY  Matthew  FOR  THE  LoBD.  1.  The  reasouB  foT  which  he  pre- 
pared it.  (1)  To  show  his  true  joy,  and  to  give  an  evidence  of  his  willingness  to 
forsake  all  things  and  to  follow  Jesus.  (2)  He  would  do  the  little  He  could,  ift 
order  to  gain  the  love  of  Jesus.  (3)  To  give  other  publicans  an  opportunity  ot 
becoming  acquainted  with  Jesus.    2.  The  reasons  for  which  Jesus  accepted  th« 


ctur.  v.]  ST.  LUKE.  51« 

invitation  to  the  supper.  (1)  To  afford  pleasure  to  Matthew,  to  encourage  and 
reward  him.  (2)  To  exhort  also  other  publicans,  and  to  give  them  grace.  3.  The 
reasons  for  which  the  Pharisees  grumbled,  and  reprimanded  the  disciples.  (1)  To 
deceive  the  disciples,  by  making  them  distrust  their  Master,  and  to  turn  them  from 
Jesus.  (2)  Because  they  envied  Jesus.  III.  The  honours  of  St.  Matthew  afteb 
HIS  coNVEBSioN.  1.  He  became  an  apostle.  2.  An  evangelist.  3.  A  martyr. 
Lessons.  1.  Let  sinners  learn  from  St.  Matthew  conversion  without  delay.  2, 
Let  the  converted  learn  from  him  zeal.  3.  Let  the  zealous  learn  from  him 
perseverence.  (Laselve.)  Great  honour  was  put  upon  the  simple  work  of  the 
fisherman,  and  the  keen  pursuits  of  the  custom-house,  when  Christ  chose  of 
fisheimen  and  publicans  to  become  His  first  disciples  and  His  apostles.  His 
parables,  also,  cast  the  same  reflection  of  honour  on  all  honest  work.  Let  us  then 
ask  how  our  common  business  in  warehouses  and  shops  may  bring  glory  to  Christ. 
I.  In  business  hat  be  found  a  sebvice  fob  Ghbist.  May  be  found;  but,  alas  I 
sometimes  it  is  lost ;  often  it  is  not  even  sought.  II.  Wk  must  not  think 
»oo  MUCH  of  dailt  WORK,  and  set  too  great  a  price  on  it.  III.  We  bhalij  seek  to 
GIVE  OF  THE  FRUITS  OF  ouB  TBADiNQ  TO  Ghbist.  All  WO  Spend  may  be  spent  with 
express  thought  of  Him ;  but  to  make  full  proof  of  our  ministry,  we  shall  seek 
for  special  expenditure  in  works   of  Christian  philanthropy.     IV.  We  shall  bb 

willing  to  GIVE  UP,  NOT   ONLY   THE   FEUITS  OF  DAILT   WORK,  BUT   DAILY  WORK  ITSELF, 

>OB  Christ.  It  is  not  only  to  ministers  that  Christ  says  "Follow  Me."  Others 
also  are  called  to  self-sacrifice.  To  say  that  business  keeps  me  from  Sunday-school 
teaching,  or  that  business  keeps  me  from  visiting  the  sorrowful,  and  taking  help 
to  the  needy,  may  not  be  a  plea  that  ever  covers  neglect  in  the  sight  of  our  great 
Master,  Christ.  His  word  may  be,  •'  Then  have  less  business.  Follow  Me."  It  is 
possible  that  God  calls  one  and  another  to  make  some  sacrifice  of  apparent 
opportunities  of  making  money,  in  order  that  there  may  be  more  time  for  spiritual 
service.  Willingness  to  make  sacrifice  for  Christ  is  essential  to  true  discipleship. 
{T.  Oascoigne,  B.A.)  Matthew  obeys  Christ't  call : — Some  years  ago  I  remember 
having  my  notice  drawn  by  a  little  picture  that  hung  in  the  window  of  an  Oxford 
book-shop ;  it  was  a  simple  German  lithograph,  and  it  represented  the  call  of 
Matthew.  I  do  not  know  the  name  of  the  artist,  but  he  seemed  to  me  to  have 
caught  the  whole  spirit  of  the  scene.  In  the  centre  was  Matthew  himself,  eagerly 
leaving  his  booth,  with  treasures  of  untold  money  lying  untouched  on  the  counter 
for  his  helpers  to  reckon.  Before  the  booth  was  the  crowd  of  fishers  and  traders 
entering  the  seaside  city,  almost  aghast  at  the  sudden  leaving  of  the  business  by 
one  till  then  so  strict  in  all  his  dealings  with  them,  so  ever  ready  to  receive 
tribute.  And  just  behind  appeared  a  company  of  Christ's  disciples,  not  altogether 
nnwondering  at  so  ready  a  departure  from  all  that  wealth ;  half  sorry  for  sacrifice 
so  great ;  and  yet  half  feeling,  from  what  little  they  had  learnt  already  of  the 
Master,  that  He  was  worth  the  sacrifice.  And  in  front  was  the  Christ  Himself, 
patient,  tender,  calling,  waiting — the  Lord  of  all,  knowing  calmly  how  life  ia  the 
Father's  kingdom  was  worth  any  earthly  sacrifice,  that  the  Father  could  yet  give  to 
His  own  all  they  ever  might  have  need  of.  {Ibid.)  Self-surrender: — It  ia 
related  in  Boman  history  that  when  the  people  of  Collatia  stipulated  about  their 
surrender  to  the  authority  and  protection  of  Bome,  the  question  asked  was,  "  Do 
yon  deliver  up  yourselves,  the  CoUatine  people,  your  city,  your  fields,  your  water, 
your  bounds,  year  temples,  your  utensils,  all  things  that  are  yours,  both  human 
and  Divine,  into  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Bome  f  "  And  on  their  replying, 
"  We  deliver  up  all,"  they  were  received.  The  voluntary  surrender  which  you. 
Christian,  have  made  to  Christ  is  equally  comprehensive;  it  embraces  all  yon  are, 
and  have,  and  hope  for.  {H.  G.  Salter.)  Follow  exactly: — Two  persons  wnt 
walking  together  one  very  dark  night,  when  one  said  to  the  other,  who  knew  the 
road  well,  "  I  shall  follow  you,  so  as  to  be  right."  He  soon  fell  into  a  ditch, 
and  accused  the  other  with  his  fall.  The  other  replied,  "Then  yon  did 
not  follow  me  exactly,  for  I  have  kept  free."  A  side  step  had  caused 
the    fall.     There    is    like    danger  in    not   following   Christ  fully.  On   th« 

calling  of  St.  Matthew : — I.  We  abe  to  leave  all  our  evil  pbaoticbs  that 
WE  MAY  FOLLOW  Chbist.  We  must  relinquish  our  former  iniquities  altogether,  and 
without  reserve.  Suppose  that  St.  Matthew,  when  Christ  commanded  him  to 
become  His  follower,  had  answered,  that  he  would  attend  upon  Christ  occasionally, 
when  his  occupation  afforded  him  leisure :  and  that  for  the  future,  when  employed 
in  collecting  tribute,  he  would  commit  acts  of  extortion  only  seldom.  Would  Christ 
have  accepted  such  service  ?    You  must  surrender  yourselves  entirely  to  Oluist, 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  r. 

Ton  mast  follow  Him  wholly.  You  mnst  follow  Him  alone.  When  yoo  reserve 
«ome  favourite  sin  for  your  occasional  gratification;  is  that  to  leave  all  for  the  sake 
of  Christ?  No  man  can  serve  two  masters.  H.  We  must  benounce,  tob  thb 
SAKE  OP  CHBiST,  ALL  otJB  Eviii  INCLINATIONS.  This  Step  is  nccessary  to  make  repent- 
ance complete.  St.  Matthew  not  only  relinquished  his  occupation,  but  abandoned 
it  with  gladness.  You  do  not  see  him  taking  leave  of  his  home  with  reluctance 
and  sorrow.  In  conformity  to  this  example  every  Christian  is  not  merely  to  abstain, 
as  by  constraint,  from  sinful  actions  ;  but  to  glorify  his  God  by  cheerful  obedience, 
and  to  bring  his  will  under  thankful  subjection  to  his  Redeemer.  He  is  to  be  holy 
in  thought,  holy  in  heart,  holy  in  his  designs,  holy  in  his  wishes.  III.  We,  like 
St.  Matthew,  abe  to  benoonce  pbivate  intebest,  wheneveb  it  intebfbbes  with  oub 
OBEDIENCE  TO  Jesus  cheist.  Behold  a  decisive  proof  of  sincerity  I  He  does  not 
honour  his  Saviour  with  his  lips  only.  He  glorifies  the  Son  of  God  by  making 
large  sacrifices  for  His  sake;  by  immediately  making  every  sacrifice  which  is 
required.  He  counts  all  things  but  loss  that  he  may  v?in  the  approbation  of  his  Re- 
deemer. IV.  We  are  to  renounce  our  own  righteousness ;  to  cast  away  all  beliancb 
ON  mebit  of  oub  own  fob  acceptance  with  God.  Why  did  St.  Matthew  become  a 
disciple  of  Jesus  Christ?  Why  did  he  leave  all  to  be  with  that  man  of  sorrows? 
Secause  he  beheld  in  that  man  of  sorrows  one  who  bare  our  griefs  ;  one  who  bare 
the  sins  of  many,  and  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors.  He  recognized  the 
appointed  Saviour ;  the  Lamb  of  God  which  took  away  the  sins  of  the  world. 
v.  We  must,  in  the  last  place,  follow  oub  Redeemeb  unto  the  end.  Such  was  the 
stedfastness  of  St.  Matthew.  He  remained  constantly  with  Christ  until  the  evening 
before  the  crucifixion.  On  that  evening  he  showed,  in  common  with  the  other 
apostles,  what  man  is,  when  the  Divine  grace  withdraws  itself,  and  leaves  him  to 
his  native  weakness.  All  the  disciples  of  Christ  forsook  Him  and  fled.  Of  that 
guilty  flight  St.  Matthew  was  a  partaker.  After  the  Resurrection,  he  received,  in 
conjunction  with  the  other  apostles,  pardon  and  streugth  from  his  forgiviug  Lord. 
When  Jesus  had  ascended  into  heaven,  we  behold  St.  Matthew  continuing  closely 
in  prayer  and  supplication  with  the  women  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  the 
brethren ;  and  bearing  his  part  as  an  apostle  in  the  election  of  a  successor  to 
the  traitor  Judas.  Boldly  remaining  at  Jerusalem,  when  havoc  was  made  of  the 
Church  after  the  martyrdom  of  Stephen,  he  proved  that  he  was  not  of  those  who 
have  no  root,  and  in  time  of  persecution  fall  away.  And  the  early  history  of  the 
Christian  Church  informs  us  that,  in  the  face  of  danger  and  death,  he  persevered 
until  the  end  of  his  days  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  his  Lord.  From  every 
Christian  patient  continuance  in  well  doing  is  indispensably  required.  {Thomas 
Gishorne.)  The  duty  of  following  Christ,  as  illustrated  by  the  conduct  of  His 
disciples  : — But,  in  the  event  which  succeeds,  we  have  an  instance  of  still  greater 
power  than  that  which  is  involved  in  the  healing  of  any  temporal  disease.  We 
find  Him  controlling  not  merely  the  elements  of  nature,  as  he  had  often  done,  or 
the  circumstances  which  conduce  to  the  health  of  our  temporal  frames,  as  in  the 
instance  of  the  paralytic  man,  but  we  find  Him  swaying  the  very  elements  of  the 
mind  and  will,  and  proving  that  the  moral  and  the  intellectual  powers  of  man  are  no 
less  subject  to  His  sovereign  control.  "After  these  things,"  we  are  told,  "He 
went  forth,  and  saw  a  publican,  named  Levi,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom  :  and 
He  said  unto  him,  Follow  Me."  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  individual  named  Levi,  who 
is  spoken  of  by  St.  Luke,  is  said  to  have  been  a  publican— a  term  which  is  explained 
in  some  degree,  when  it  is  mentioned  that  he  was  found  "  sitting  at  the  receipt  of 
tjustom."  It  was  thus  that  the  name  of  publican  became  expressive,  in  their  mind, 
of  all  that  was  abandoned  and  profane.  There  was  nothing,  for  instance,  in  the 
character  or  condition  of  the  individual  before  us  to  warrant  his  selection  to  this 
high  and  distinguished  calling.  There  was  no  title  existing  in  himself  whereby  he 
could  claim  it  as  peculiarly  his  own.  He  was  a  member  of  an  obnoxious  profession, 
and  he  was,  so  far  as  we  know,  unadorned  with  any  lofty  or  brilliant  attainments. 
We  are  not  referring  in  the  meantime  to  the  condition  of  these  men  as  poor  and 
illiterate,  and  as  affording  from  their  original  circumstances,  as  contrasted  with  the 
noble  future  discharge  of  their  apostolic  duties,  a  powerful  argument  for  the  truth 
and  efficacy  of  our  holy  religion.  We  are  referring  to  it  simply  as  pointing  out  in 
the  term,  publican,  in  the  present  instance,  and  in  the  ideas  which  were  usually 
associated  with  that  term,  the  very  condition  in  which  by  nature  we  are  placed,  and 
from  which  Christ  is  so  willing  to  redeem  us.  Naturally,  we  say,  there  is  nothing 
in  any  one  of  us  to  entitle  us  to  selection  on  the  part  of  Christ.  On  the  contrary, 
ihere  is  everything  that  might  lead  Him  to  reject  us,  and  dispose  Him,  in  the  purity 


CKkv.  T.j  ST.  LUKE.  SSt 

of  His  clmraoter  and  the  beanty  of  His  own  perfections,  to  pass  ns  by  as  nn worthy 
of  His  notice.  In  all  our  character  and  condition,  naturally  considered,  and  as 
seen  in  the  light  of  His  untainted  holiness,  there  is  nothing  which  His  pure  and- 
omniseient  eye  can  possibly  desire.  We  are  not  engaged  in  His  service.- 
We  are  not  contemplating  His  works.  We  are  not  endeavouring  to  ascend 
through  the  survey  and  admiration  of  these  to  the  adoring  contemplation 
of  His  excellence,  or  aspiring  in  the  light  of  His  perfections  to  have  our 
natures  assimilated  to  His.  There  is  nothing  of  all  this,  when  He  comes  to< 
OS  on  His  errand  of  mercy,  and  calls  upon  us  to  follow  Him  as  His  disciples  and 
His  friends.  We  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  world  at  that  very  time,  intentv 
like  the  fishermen  of  Galilee,  or  the  despised  receiver  of  customs,  on  the  affairs  of 
a  life  which  is  only  preparatory  to  another,  but  for  which  other  we  are  not  mindful 
or  solicitous  to  prepare.  Yes,  my  friends,  we  are  either  busied  in  the  pursuit  of 
some  gainful  and  engrossing  occupation,  or  we  are  sitting  at  destructive  ease  in  the 
degradation  of  sin,  reviewing  our  extending  treasures,  and  yet  thirsting  to  increase 
them.  If  active,  we  are  not  active  in  God's  service— if  at  ease,  we  are  not  at  ease 
in  Zion,  or  because  we  have  sought  peace  and  found  it  of  the  Lord.  We  repeat, 
then,  that  we  are  selected  by  Christ  in  the  exercise  of  free  and  sovereign  compas- 
sion. We  are  called  to  be  disciples  of  His,  not  because  we  have  loved  Him,  but 
because  He  has  loved  us.  2.  The  inclination  or  willingness  to  follow  onward  to  know 
the  Lord,  is  not  occasioned  by  any  exercise  of  our  own  powers,  but  is  wrought  in 
tts  by  the  operation  of  Christ's  own  mighty  power.  But  in  Jesus  there  was  nothing 
Kutwardly  to  distinguish  Him.  He  was  surrounded  with  no  trappings  of  external 
dignity,  no  insignia  of  honour,  no  symbols  of  opulence  or  power.  He  was  meek 
and  lowly  in  His  deportment — the  reputed  son  of  a  carpenter ;  arrayed  like  the 
meanest  of  the  people,  and  bearing  in  His  aspect  the  suffering,  yet  subdued,  expres- 
sion of  the  man  of  sorrows.  And  yet  He  called  the  disciples,  and  they  impUcitly 
obeyed  Him.  No  sooner  did  He  issue  the  command  than  they  hastened  to  fulfil 
it.  He  said  to  them,  "Follow  Me,"  and  immediately  they  left  all  andfollowed  Him. 
Now,  we  argue  from  this,  that  a  great  and  decided  change  must  have  instantane- 
ously passed  upon  their  minds.  The  mere  command  of  Jesus,  considered  apart 
from  His  divinity — considered  apart  from  His  power  over  the  understanding  and 
the  heart,  could  never  have  produced  this  effect.  We  say,  then,  that  the  gra«e  of 
God  must  have  operated  directly  in  this  instance  to  the  enlightenment  of  their 
minds,  and  the  regulation  of  their  wills.  On  no  other  principle  can  we  account 
for  the  conduct  they  displayed.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  with  them,  and  at 
once  they  felt  it  to  be  their  duty  and  their  privilege  to  obey.  They  resembled  the 
men  who  acknowledged  Saul  to  be  their  king,  when  Samuel  announced  him  to  be 
the  chosen  of  God  to  the  throne  of  Israel,  and  when  the  children  of  Belial  were 
despising  and  setting  him  at  nought :  they  resembled  these  firm  and  devoted 
men,  of  whom  it  is  said,  in  the  expressive  language  of  Scripture,  •'  that  when  Saul 
went  up  to  Gibeah,  there  went  up  with  him  likewise  a  band  of  men,  whose  hearts 
God  had  touched."  In  the  case  of  the  disciples,  God  also  had  touched  and 
influenced  their  hearts.  3.  We  would  remark,  that  when  the  Spirit  of  God  does 
touch  our  hearts,  and  the  power  of  Christ  is  thus  made  manifest  in  our  lives,  we 
are  at  once  enlightened  as  to  two  things — the  right  of  Jesus  to  command,  and  His 
worthiness  as  a  King  and  Saviour  to  be  obeyed.  All  this  was  exemplified  in  the 
conduct  of  the  disciples.  True,  they  had  not  at  this  time  the  most  clear  views  of 
His  character,  or  the  most  spiritual  notions  of  the  kingdom  He  was  to  establish, 
but  still  they  saw,  or  ratber  felt  enough,  to  convince  them  tbat  Christ  was  worthy 
of  their  obedience  and  love;  and,  therefore,  without  a  moment's  hesitation  or 
reserve,  they  yielded  the  submission  which  He  required,  and  determined  to  "  follow 
Him  whithersoever  He  went."  We  admit,  then,  that  they  were  not  enlightened  all 
at  once,  and  that  they  were  still  imperfect  as  to  their  conceptions  of  Christ's 
heavenly  kingdom.  But  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  Spirit  of  Divine  grace  in 
general  acts  upon  the  human  understanding.  He  works  in  a  gradual  and  progres- 
sive manner,  disclosing  more  and  more  of  the  beauty  of  Christ,  and  of  the  loveli- 
ness of  sacred  truth,  and  shining  inwardly  upon  the  soul  with  somewhat  of  the' 
brightening  effulgence  of  that  light  of  heaven,  which  rises  at  first  with  the  faint 
dawnings  of  the  eastern  sky,  until  at  last  it  opens  and  expands  into  the  glorious 
lustre  of  the  perfect  day.  But  still  the  work  of  the  Spirit  leads  us  at  once  to 
exercise  confidence  in  Christ.  Now,  the  right  which  Christ  has  to  the  obedience 
of  OB  all,  is  simply  this:  He  has  created  us,  and  we  are  bound  to  serve  Him  ;  He 
bas  preserved  oa,  and  we  are  bound  to  honour  Him ;  He  has  redeemed  us,  and  wr 


522  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

are  bound  to  love  Him.  In  every  character  and  relation  He  is  entitled  to  car  love, 
and  homage,  and  gratitude,  and  esteem.  But  superadded  to  this,  there  is  now  the 
powerful,  the  constraining  tie  of  sovereign  and  redeeming  love.  In  following 
Christ,  my  friends,  we  must  follow  Him  to  duty.  When  the  Saviour  issued  His 
command  to  His  disciples,  there  was  before  Him  the  chequered  scene  of  Hia 
labours ;  and  they,  as  the  companions  of  His  wanderings,  had  to  go  forth  and 
mingle  in  the  work.  Again,  my  friends,  we  must  follow  the  Saviour  in  the  path 
of  suffering.  When  Christ  told  His  disciples  to  follow  Him,  He  had  yet  before 
Him  the  scenes  of  His  agony  and  death — the  privations  of  His  wanderings  to  feel, 
the  hall  of  Pilate  to  encounter,  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  to  bear,  the  torture  of 
the  cross,  in  unmitigated  anguish,  to  endure.  And  His  disciples,  whom  He  had 
called  to  follow  Him,  had  likewise  their  griefs  and  sufferings  to  undergo.  '*  In  the 
world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,"  was  the  warning  which  He  gave  them.  Not  that 
the  way  of  life  is  a  dark  and  painful  career,  unsoothed  by  a  single  comfort,  anal- 
leviated  by  a  single  joy.  The  truth  is,  that  the  follower  of  Christ  has  joys  which 
the  world  cannot  understand,  just  as  he  has  sorrows  which  it  cannot  share.  Ha 
has  a  peace  of  mind  which  passeth  knowledge,  which  rises  far  above  the  compre- 
hension of  the  mere  natural  man ;  bat  then  he  has  griefs  which  a  stranger 
cannot  interfere  with.  There  is  encouragement,  however,  the  amplest  and 
sorest  encouragement.  Hear  the  language  of  Christ  to  His  people :  "  I  will 
make  My  grace  to  be  sufficient  for  you  ;  I  will  perfect  My  strength  in  your 
weakness;  I  will  guide  yoa  by  My  coonsel,  and  receive  yon  to  My  glory."  {W» 
Meulure.) 

Vers.  29, 30.  And  Levi  made  Him  a  great  feast  In  Ids  own  honse.— !>««{*« /«(ul.v— 

Text  shows  our  Lord  a  guest  at  a  great  feast  at  which  a  company  of  publicans  and 
others  sat  down  with  Him.  Our  Lord's  example  applicable  to  as  all.  That  which 
Christ  did  always.  His  servants  cannot  be  justified  if  they  never  do — the  mixing 
with  others,  neither  for  business  nor  yet  for  pleasure,  but,  in  the  largest  sense  of 
the  word,  for  charity.  1.  It  will  then  be  seen  how  many  persons  there  are  who 
have  need  to  be  reminded  of  this  duty.  2.  One  way  of  mixing  with  our  brethren, 
in  a  manner  most  pleasing  to  Christ  and  useful  to  ourselves,  is  by  holding  frequent 
intercourse  with  tiie  poor.  (T.  Arnold,  D.D.)  Religious  joy  attociated  with 
common  occasion! : — Some  people  are  very  much  offended  by  the  close  connection  of 
common  joys  with  spiritual  and  religious  events.  "  Keep  religion  by  itself,"  they 
say,  "  and  let  it  be  unmixed  with  any  associations  which  may  in  the  least  tend  to 
degrade  it;  and  if  you  take  pleasure,  let  it  be  wholly  separated  from  religioua 
occasions."  But  the  conduct  of  Christ  is  a  perpetual  witness  to  the  fact  that  the 
most  holy  and  momentous  occurrence  in  our  religious  history  may  be  associated 
with  social  enjoyment.  The  feast  to  which  Christ  was  invited,  and  which  He 
attended,  was  a  feast  which  was  given  in  connection  with  the  choice  and  appoint- 
ment of  an  apostle.  The  event  is  deserving  of  our  attention  inasmuch  as  it  brings 
Christ  before  us  in  an  aspect  of  His  character  which  is  often  overlooked.  We  have 
looked  to  Him  so  much  as  the  Christ  who  has  gone  away  from  the  world  that  the 
simple  gospel  history  of  Christ  in  the  world  has  been  passed  over  by  us,  and  we 
have  almost  felt  that  we  were  doing  something  wrong  when  we  ascribed  to  Jesus 
Christ  words  and  acts  such  as  ordinary  men  would  say  and  do.  Tet  here  is  the 
history  to  speak  for  itself — the  record  of  One  who,  if  He  had  been  seen  in  our 
streets,  and  in  our  homes,  might  have  been  found  living  as  we  live,  entering  the 
dwellings  of  neighbours,  with  or  without  ceremony,  speaking  kindly  to  the  old,  the 
weak,  the  downcast,  and  being  at  home  in  the  houses  of  rich  and  poor,  Pharisee 
and  publican,  at  the  rich  feast  or  the  scant  meal,  and  shedding  around  Him  the 
fragrance  of  good  feeling,  and  a  genial  warmth  and  light.  And  withal,  here  is  the 
record  of  One,  who,  in  all  these  simple  and  kindly  courtesies,  never  forgot  that  it  was 
the  deepest  cravings  and  wants  in  human  nature  which  He  had  come  to  satisfy,  and 
that  His  great  mission  was  to  bring  men  to  God.  {A.  Watton,  D.D.)  The  con- 
version of  Levi : — I.  Jesus  beholdimo  sinnebs.  "Jesus  saw  a  publican."  Jesas, 
brethren,  sees  all  the  sons  of  men.  His  eyes  behold  all  classes.  Christ  saw 
Paul  while,  in  his  unconverted  state,  he  was  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel ;  and 
while  he  was  afterwards  occupied  in  persecuting  the  Christian  Church ;  and  He  took 
not  off  His  eyes  from  Paul  tiU,  in  deep  contrition  and  self-devotion,  he  cried  out — 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  Christ  saw  the  woman  of  Samaria  at 
Jacob's  well,  long  before  she  had  any  idea  that  Christ's  seeing  her  wonld  issue  in 
her  salvation.     Christ  saw  Zaccheas  in  the  fig-tree  before  his  conversion,  and 


«H1P.  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  623 

called  him  down  to  active  service  and  eternal  salvation.  Christ  saw  Lydia  of 
Thyatira,  the  seller  of  purple,  long  before  she  had  any  conception  that  her  heart 
would  be  opened  to  hear  the  word  spoken  by  St.  Paul.  But  do  not  mistake  my 
words.  To  prevent  your  conversion,  Satan  makes  some  of  you  imagine  that,  if 
you  become  religious,  the  Lord  Jesus  will  wish  you  to  neglect  your  proper  callings. 
Far  otherwise.  He  expects  His  people  to  be  "  diligent  in  business,  fervent  in 
spirit,  serving  the  Lord."  But,  when  Jesus  beholds  sinners  with  the  eye  of  His 
pity,  He  does  so  with  a  view  to  their  salvation.  This  we  shall  see,  while  we  state 
our  second  point.  II.  Jesus  calling  sinnebs.  Jesus  said  unto  Levi,  "  Follow 
Me."  There  are,  you  observe,  brethren,  two  kinds  of  call.  There  is  the  general 
call,  and  there  is  the  effectual  call.  III.  Jesus  honoured  bt  sinners.  It  is  the 
cry  of  every  true  believer  —  "  What  can  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  His 
mercies  ?  "  This  was  the  cry  of  Levi's  heart  as  soon  as  he  was  brought  to  a 
saving  knowledge  of  his  Redeemer.  He  was  willing  to  do  anything  which  would 
show  his  attachment  to  that  Saviour,  to  whose  love  and  mercy  he  was  so  much 
indebted.  He,  therefore,  made  for  Jesus  "  a  great  feast,"  "  in  his  own  house." 
He  then  thought  to  show  his  respect  for  Christ  by  providing  for  Him  a  great 
entertainment ;  and,  with  a  view  to  their  spiritual  benefit,  he  invited  to  it  many 
of  his  old  friends  from  among  the  publicans  and  his  other  companions.  Now  this, 
brethren,  is  one  great  proof  of  an  effectual  call.  David,  in  his  deep  thnnkfulnesa 
for  God's  sparing  mercy,  said  to  Araunah  the  Jebusite — "  I  will  not  offer  burnt 
offerings  unto  the  Lord  my  God  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing."  There  are 
innumerable  ways,  brethren,  in  which  we  also  can  show  our  gratitude  to  Christ. 
Temporally  and  spiritually  we  can  help  Christ's  brethren  ;  and  of  such  acta 
He  declares,  "Ye  have  done  it  unto  Me."  Those,  therefore,  of  you  who  never 
make  any  sacrifice,  either  of  your  substance  or  your  time,  for  Christ  and 
Christ's  work,  have  reason  at  once  to  conclude  that  you  have  heard  the  Saviour 
call,  but  that  thus  far  that  call  has  been  unheeded.  It  is  a  great  trial  to  a  really 
spiritual  man  to  mix  with  the  world  at  all,  whether  on  festive  or  on  other  occasions. 
And  as  soon  as  such  mixing  with  the  world  ceases  to  be  a  trial,  mischief  has  been 
done.  But  we  come  now  to  notice  a  remarkable  interruption  in  the  feast,  and 
this  interruption  gave  our  Lord  the  opportunity  of  stating — IV.  Thb  blessings  im- 
parted BY  THE  gospel.  There  never  was  any  good  done  in  this  fallen  world 
without  some  men  objecting.  When  Nehemiah  was  building  the  walls  of  Jerusalem, 
"  What  do  these  feeble  Jews  ?  "  was  the  taunt  of  Tobiah  and  Sanballat.  And,  what 
is  more  observable,  the  objection  generally  proceeds  from  those  who  ought  to  be  the 
last  to  make  it.  The  objection  often  comes  from  those  who  profess  to  be  the 
spiritual  guides  of  the  people.  Look  at  the  case  before  as.  Here  was  Levi  making 
a  feast  for  publicans  and  sinners,  with  Jesus  among  the  guests,  with  a  view  to  their 
spiritual  profit.  And  who  can  object  to  such  a  proceeding?  The  civil  and  the 
ecclesiastical  rulers  of  the  day — •'  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  " — they  object  They 
do  not  attack  the  Master ;  they  attack  the  disciples.  So  is  it  now.  Many  objectors 
attack  Christ's  servants,  hot  they  little  imagine  that,  in  so  doing,  they  are  attacking 
Christ,  If,  therefore,  you  are  attacked,  brethren,  for  your  piety,  remember  that  no 
one  was  more  attacked  than  was  Christ  ELimself.  You  may  safely  leave  your  causa 
with  Jesus,  as  your  faithful  Creator.  He  will  answer  every  objection,  and  you  shall 
hold  your  peace.  It  was  so  here.  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  murmured  against  the 
disciples,  and  said — "  Why  do  ye  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners?  "  To  this  question 
Jesus  gave  them  a  reply  they  Uttle  expected.  He  told  them  plainly,  that  was  the 
object  of  His  gospel.  It  was  not  meant  for  self-righteous  formalists.  ^  It  was  meant 
for  those  who  feel  their  guilt — for  those  who  are  sensible  of  their  spiritual  disease. 
I  now  add  two  other  practical  remarks.  We  see  hence — 1.  The  freeness  of  salvation. 
Medicine  is  for  the  sick.  Salvation  is  for  sinners.  In  all  diseases  there  are  outward 
symptoms.  That  precious  blood,  which  He  shed  for  our  sins  on  the  cross,  is  a 
never-failing  remedy.  It  makes  crimson  iniquities  as  white  as  snow.  It  cleanses 
sins  as  red  as  scarlet,  till  they  become  as  wool.  2.  The  peril  of  a  worldly  spirit 
(C.    Clayton,   M.A.)  Christ's  call:—!.    This  call  is  to  iNDiviDtJALS.      1.    To 

repentance,  ».«.,  to  begin  life  again.  2.  To  a  feast,  and  its  joys.  II.  This  caHi 
WILL  BE  SUCCESSFUL  IT  WE  DESIRE  IT.  1.  Having  Busccptiblc  hearts.  2.  If  poor 
in  spirit.  8.  If  we  hunger  after  righteousness,  i.e.,  desire  the  feast.  HI.  How  th» 
CALL  IS  HADE  or  NONE  EFFECT.  1.  The  worldly  heart — ^pre-ocoupied — makes  effnctQal 
calling  impossible  (Luke  xiv.  16,  20).  2.  The  "  wise  and  pnid<sni  "  do  not  like  it 
(Matt.  xi.  25).  3.  The  stupid  heart,  wayside  —  no  soil.  4.  By  Uyity.  **  Thej 
made  light  of  it."     (F.  B.  Proctor,  M.A.) 


S24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OTA?,  f. 

Ver.  30.  Bat  tlie  Bcribes  and  Pharisees  mormiir. — The  Friend  of  tinners : — W» 
cannot  \7onder  at  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  asking  this  question.  I  think  that  we 
shonld  most  of  ns  ask  it  now,  if  we  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  going  out  of  His  way  to 
eat  and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners.  Make  merry  with  them  He  could  not, 
but  He  certainly  so  behaved  to  them  that  they  were  glad  to  have  Him  among  them, 
though  He  was  so  unlike  them  in  thought,  and  word,  and  look,  and  action.  And 
why  7  Because,  though  He  was  so  unlike  them  in  many  things,  He  was  like  them 
at  least  in  one  thing.  If  He  could  do  nothing  else  in  common  with  them.  He 
could  at  least  eat  and  drink  as  they  did,  and  eat  and  drink  with  them  too. 
Yes.  He  was  the  Son  of  Man,  the  man  of  all  men,  and  what  He  wanted  to  make 
them  understand  was  that,  fallen  low  as  they  were,  they  were  men  and  women  still, 
who  were  made  at  first  in  God's  likeness,  and  who  could  be  redeemed  back  into  God's 
likeness  again.  The  only  way  to  do  that  was  to  begin  with  them  in  the  very 
simplest  way — to  meet  them  on  common  human  ground.  Self-respect  would  begin 
to  rise  in  those  poor  sinners'  hearts  when  our  Lord  came  to  them  and  ate  and  drank 
with  them.  (Charles  Eingsley.)  Practical  sympathy: — A  city  missionary  waa 
one  day  visiting  one  of  the  lowest  and  most  degraded  courts  in  London,  and  a 
woman  said  something  like  this  to  him : — '*  Tou  say  you  care  for  as,  and  are 
anzions  about  us ;  bat  it  is  a  very  easy  thing  for  you  to  come  from  your  clean, 
quiet  home  just  to  visit  us.  Would  you  come  and  bring  your  family,  and  live  in 
this  court,  expose  yourself  to  all  these  evils  day  by  day,  in  order  to  lift  us  up  ? " 
The  missionary  felt  he  had  hardly  enough  love  for  that :  but  Jesus  dwelt  with 
sinners,  ate  and  drank  with  them,  as  well  as  died  to  save  them.  (Biblical 
Treasury.)  Sympathetic  help  : — A  Boston  minister  a  short  time  ago  had  occa* 
sion  to  look  up  a  very  poor  family,  and  climbed  up  four  flights  of  stairs  in  » 
noisome  tenement  house  on  his  errand.  His  tap  at  the  door  was  answered  by  Dr. 
Phillips  Brooks,  with  a  baby  in  his  arms.  Inquiry  revealed  the  fact  that  the  woman 
had  been  very  ill,  and  sorely  needed  fresh  air,  but  had  no  one  with  whom  to  leave 
her  little  baby.  Phillips  Brooks  found  her  out,  gave  her  tickets  for  a  tram-car 
ride,  and  was  staying  tending  the  baby  while  she  enjoyed  it.  Only  from  a  large 
heart  flUed  with  the  spirit  of  Christ  could  such  an  act  of  real  kindness  have  sprung. 
{American  Paper.)  Frigid  selfishness : — A  great  poet  has  represented  the  soula 

of  thoroughly  selfish  men  as  encased  in  ice,  alternately  shivering  and  benumbed, 
with  only  enough  of  life  to  be  conscious  of  the  surrounding  all-pervading  death. 
This  supreme  selfishness,  or  rather  indifference — this  insensibility  to  what  is 
generous  and  lofty,  this  prudent  self-complacent,  self-indulgent  regard  for  one's 
own  interests,  is  what  our  modem  civilization,  with  its  wonderful  development 
of  material  wealth,  has  been  drifting  towards.  And  nothing  can  be  more  fatal 
to  the  highest  interests  and  happiness  of  man.  A  splendid  frost-work  of  society- 
sparkling  like  what  we  sometimes  see  around  us  after  snow  or  rain  on  a 
winter's  day — as  beautiful,  but  also  as  cold  and  as  fatal  to  all  spontaneous  out- 
gushing  of  warm  and  generous  life.  (J.  H.  Thompson.)  Christ  in  the  company 
of  social  outcasts ; — The  Jews  and  Egyptians,  and  indeed  other  peoples,  were  very 
scrupulous  with  whom  they  ate,  much  as  are  the  Hindoos  to  the  present  day.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  Joseph  (Gen.  zliii.  32)  ate  with  his  brethren  apart,  and  the 
Egyptians  by  themselves,  for  it  was  an  abomination  to  the  latter  to  eat  with 
Hebrews.  And  so  the  old  Tobias,  during  the  Assyrian  captivity,  exhorted  his  son 
not  to  eat  and  drink  with  sinners.  Christ,  by  sitting  down  to  table  with  these 
despised  and  excommunicate  publicans,  and  with  heathen,  broke  through  the 
caste  rules,  of  which  separation  at  table  was  the  most  conspicuous  symbol.  He 
showed  that  this  holding  aloof  from  others,  whether  it  were  national  or  individual, 
was  contrary  to  the  principles  of  the  gospel,  against  the  fundamental  laws  of  His 
Church.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.)  The  Saviour  and  the  publicans  .'^Thift 
question  was  asked  partly  in  ignorance  and  partly  in  ill-will.  Our  Lord  would  not 
leave  to  His  simple  and  timid  disciples  the  task  of  answering  the  critics.  First,  He 
rebukes  with  stem  irony  the  self-righteousness  of  the  questioners,  and  then  He 
explains.  I.  Ths  answer  set  fobth  the  olobt  or  oub  Divine  Saviottb.  "  The 
Friend  of  siimers  "  is  one  of  our  Lord's  most  glorious  titles.  God's  condescensions 
xeveal  His  glory  more  completely  than  His  magnificence.  1.  The  glory  of  His  work— 
••  To  call  sinners  to  repentance."  2.  The  glory  of  His  character — *'  Which  of  you 
eonvinceth  Me  of  sin  ?"  H.  A  comment  on  the  action  anh  history  or  the  ChubcS 
or  Chbist.  Like  her  Lord,  the  Church  of  Christ  has  entered  into  the  life  ot  linfol 
humanity  to  purify  and  elevate  it.  She  may  not  cease  to  eat  and  drink  with 
publicans  and  sinners,    in.  Suooestivb  as  to  zhb  sutt  amd  conddoi  or  pbitatv 


DBkr.  v.]  ST.  LUKE,  625 

CHBieruire.  In  consorting  with  those  who  openly  deny  the  truth  of  religion,  or 
who  live  in  flagrant  violation  of  its  precepts,  there  are  two  dangers  to  be  guarded 
against.  1.  We  must  keep  clear  of  Pharisaism,  that  rank  weed  which  so  soon 
springs  up  in  the  souls  of  believers.  2.  We  must  not  voluntarily  expose  our  soula 
to  risks  which  are  palpable  and  overwhelming,  when  no  good  can  be  done  for  th« 
Bouls  of  others.  Let  us  endeavour,  when  we  are  thrown  with  others,  be  they  who 
they  may,  to  think  of  our  Lord  at  Matthew's  feast,  and  pray  Him  for  His  gracious 
help  that  we  too,  sinners  though  we  be,  may  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  ia 
weary.     (Canon  Liddon. ) 

Ver.  31.  They  that  are  whole  need  not  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick. — Tie 
souVb  malady  and  cure : — The  occasion  of  the  words  is  set  down  in  the  context ; 
Levi  was  called  from  the  receipt  of  custooa  (he  was  a  custom-house  man),  but 
Christ  called  him,  and  there  went  out  power  with  the  word,  "  he  left  all,  rose  up, 
and  followed  Him.*'  "  Levi  made  Him  a  great  feast  in  his  own  house  "  ;  a  better 
guest  he  could  not  invite.  Levi  feasted  Christ  with  his  cheer,  and  Christ  feasted 
him  with  salvation.  L  The  dying  patients.  They  that  are  sick.  Whence  observe — 
Doct.  1.  That  sin  is  a  soul-disease — "  He  hath  borne  our  griefs  " ;  in  the  Hebrew  it 
is  our  sicknesses.  Man  at  first  was  created  in  a  healthful  temper,  he  bad  no  sickness 
of  soul,  he  ailed  nothing  ;  the  soul  had  its  perfect  beauty  and  glory.  The  eye  was 
clear,  the  heart  pure,  the  affections  tuned  with  the  finger  of  God  into  a  most  sweet 
harmony.  I.  In  what  sense  sin  is  resembled  to  sickness'.  1.  Sin  may  be  compared 
to  sickness  for  the  manner  of  catching.  (1)  Sickness  is  caught  often  through 
carelessness  :  some  get  cold  by  leaving  off  clothes.  (2)  Sickness  is  caught  some- 
times through  superfluity  and  intemperance.  Excess  produceth  sickness.  2.  Sin 
may  be  resembled  to  sickness  for  the  nature  of  it.  (1)  Sickness  is  of  a  spread- 
ing nature,  it  spreads  all  over  the  body,  it  works  into  every  part,  the  head, 
stomach,  it  disorders  the  whole  body  :  so  sin  doth  not  rest  in  one  part,  but  spreads 
into  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  and  members  of  the  body — "  The  whole  head  is 
sick,  the  whole  heart  is  faint."  The  memory  is  diseased ;  the  memory  at  first  was 
like  a  golden  cabinet  in  which  Divine  truths  were  looked  up  safe ;  but  now  it  is  like 
a  colander,  or  leaking  vessel,  which  lets  all  that  is  good  run  out.  The  memory  is 
like  a  searcer,  which  sifts  out  the  fiour,  but  keeps  the  bran.  So  the  memory  lets 
saving  truths  go,  and  holds  nothing  but  froth  and  vanity.  Many  a  man  can 
remember  a  story,  when  he  hath  forgot  his  creed.  Thus  the  memory  is  diseased; 
the  memory  is  like  a  bad  stomach  that  wants  the  retentive  faculty,  all  the  meat 
comes  up  again :  so  the  most  precious  truths  will  not  stay  in  the  memory,  but  are 
gone  again.  The  will  is  diseased  ;  the  will  is  the  soul's  commander-in-chief,  it  ia 
the  master-wheel ;  but  how  irregular  and  eccentric  is  it  I  The  affections  are  sick  : 
the  affection  of  desire ;  a  sick  man  desires  that  which  is  hurtful  for  him,  he  calls 
for  wine  in  a  fever ;  so  the  natural  man  being  sick,  he  desires  that  which  is 
prejudicial  for  him  ;  he  hath  no  desire  after  Christ,  he  doth  not  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness  ;  but  he  desires  poison,  he  desires  to  take  his  fill  of  sin,  he  loves 
death  :  the  affection  of  grief ;  a  man  grieves  for  the  want  of  an  estate,  but  not  for 
the  want  of  God's  favour ;  he  grieves  to  see  the  plague  or  cancer  in  his  body,  but 
not  for  the  plague  of  his  heart :  the  affection  of  joy ;  many  can  rejoice  in  a  wedge 
of  gold,  not  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  Thus  the  affections  are  sick  and  distempered. 
The  conscienee  is  diseased  ;  "their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled."  (2)  Sickness 
doth  debilitate  and  weaken  the  body  ;  a  sick  man  is  unfit  to  walk :  so  this  sickness 
of  sin  weakens  the  soul — "When  we  were  without  strength  Christ  died."  In 
innocency  Adam  was,  in  some  sense,  like  the  angels,  he  could  serve  God  with  a 
winged  swiftness,  and  filial  cheerfulness ;  but  sin  brought  sickneai  into  the  soul, 
and  this  sickness  hath  cut  the  lock  where  his  strength  lay  ;  he  is  now  disarmed  of 
all  ability  for  service ;  and  where  grace  is  wrought,  though  a  Christian  be  not  so 
heart-sick  as  before,  yet  he  is  very  faint.  (3)  Sickness  doth  eclipse  the  beauty  of 
the  body.  This  I  ground  on  that  Scripture,  "  When  Thou  with  rebukes  dost  correct 
man.  Thou  makest  his  beauty  to  consume  away  like  a  moth."  The  moth  consumes 
the  beauty  of  the  cloth ;  so  a  fit  of  sickness  consumes  the  beauty  of  the  body. 
Thus  sin  is  a  soul-sickness,  it  hath  echpsed  the  glory  and  splendour  rf  the  soul, 
it  hath  turned  ruddiness  into  paleness  ;  that  beauty  of  grace  which  once  sparkled 
as  gold,  now  it  iqay  be  said,  ♦'  How  is  this  gold  become  dim  I"  That  soul  which 
once  had  an  orient  brightness  in  it,  it  was  more  ruddy  than  rubies,  its  polishing 
was  of  sapphire,  the  understanding  bespangled  with  knowledge,  the  will  crowned 
with  libertj,  the  affections  like  to  many  seraphim,  burning  in  love  to  Ckid ;  now 


588  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ORAV.  V, 

the  glory  is  departed.  Sin  hath  turned  beauty  into  deformity  ;  as  some  faces  by 
sickness  are  so  disfigural,  and  look  so  ghastly,  they  can  hardly  be  known.  (4) 
Sickness  takes  away  the  taste ;  a  sick  man  doth  not  taste  that  sweetness  in  his 
meat ;  so  the  sinner,  by  reason  of  soul-sickness,  hath  lost  his  taste  to  spiritual 
things.  (5)  Sickness  takes  away  the  comfort  of  life ;  a  sick  person  hath  no  joy 
of  anything,  his  life  is  a  burden  to  him.  II.  What  the  diseases  of  the  soul  are. 
Only  I  shall  name  some  of  the  worst  of  these  diseases.  Pride  is  the  tympany  of 
the  soul,  lust  is  the  fever,  error  the  gangrene,  unbelief  the  plague  of  the  heart- 
hypocrisy  the  scurvy,  hardness  of  heart  the  stone,  anger  the  phrenzy,  malice  th^ 
wolf  in  the  breast,  covetousness  the  dropsy,  spiritual  sloth  the  green  sickness, 
apostasy  the  epilepsy  ;  here  are  eleven  soul-diseases,  and  when  they  come  to  the 
full  height  they  are  dangerous,  and  most  frequently  prove  mortal.  III.  The  third 
thing  to  be  demonstrated  is,  that  sin  is  the  worst  sickness.  To  have  a  body  full  of 
plague  sores  is  sad ;  but  to  have  the  soul,  which  is  the  more  noble  part,  spotted  with 
sin,  and  full  of  the  tokens,  is  far  worse  ;  as  appears.  1.  The  body  may  be 
diseased,  and  the  conscience  quiet :  "  the  inhabitant  of  the  land  shall  not  say  I  am 
sick. "  He  should  scarce  feel  his  sickness,  because  sin  was  pardoned ;  but  when 
the  soul  is  sick  of  any  reigning  lust,  the  conscience  is  troubled—-"  There  is  no  peaca 
to  the  wicked,  saith  my  God."  2.  A  man  may  have  bodily  diseases,  yet  God  may 
love  him.  "  Asa  was  diseased  in  his  feet."  He  had  the  gout,  yet  a  favourite  with 
God.  3.  Sickness,  at  worst,  doth  but  separate  from  the  society  of  friends  ;  but  this 
disease  of  sin,  if  not  cured,  separates  from  the  society  of  God  and  angels.  2,  If 
sin  be  a  soul-sickness,  then  how  foolish  are  they  that  hide  their  sins  ;  it  is  folly  to 
hide  a  disease !  3.  If  sin  be  a  soul-sickness,  then  what  need  is  there  of  the 
ministry  ?  If  sin  be  a  soul-sickness,  then  do  not  feed  this  disease ;  he  that  is  wise 
will  avoid  those  things  which  will  increase  his  disease ;  if  he  be  feverish,  he  will 
avoid  wine  which  would  inflame  the  disease ;  if  he  have  the  stone  he  will  avoid  salt 
meats  ;  he  will  forbear  a  dish  he  loves,  because  it  is  bad  for  his  disease  :  why  should 
not  men  be  as  wise  for  their  souls  ?  Thou  that  hast  a  drunken  lust,  do  not  feed  it 
with  wine  ;  thou  that  hast  a  malicious  Inst,  do  not  feed  it  with  revenge.  Doot.  2. 
That  Jesus  Christ  is  a  soul-physician.  Ministers  (as  was  said  before)  are  physicians 
whom  Christ  doth  in  His  name  delegate  and  send  abroad  into  the  world.  I.  That 
Christ  is  a  physician  ;  it  is  one  of  His  titles — "  I  am  the  Lord  that  healeth  thee." 

II.  Why  Christ  is  a  physician.  1.  In  regard  of  His  call ;  God  the  Father  called 
Him  to  practise  physic,  He  anointed  Him  to  the  work  of  healing — "  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  Me,  because  He  hath  anointed  Me  to  preach  the  gospel :  He  hath  sent 
Me  to  heal  the  broken-hearted."  2.  Jesus  Christ  undertook  this  healing  work, 
because  of  that  need  we  wpre  in  of  a  physician.  Christ  came  to  be  our  physician, 
not  because  we  deserved  Him,  but  because  we  needed  Him  ;  not  our  merit,  but  our 
misery,  drew  Christ  from  heaven.  3.  Christ  came  as  a  physician  out  of  the  sweet- 
ness of  His  nature  ;  He  is  like  the  good  Samaritan,  who  had  compassion  on  the 
wounded  man.  A  physician  may  come  to  the  patient  only  for  gain  ;  not  so  much 
to  help  the  patient  as  to  help  himself :  but  Christ  came  purely  out  of  sympathy. 

III.  The  third  particular  is,  that  Christ  is  the  only  physician — "  Neither  is  there 
salvation  in  any  other,"  &c.  IV.  How  Christ  heals  His  patients.  There  are 
four  things  in  Christ  that  are  healing.  1.  His  word  is  healing — "  He  sent  His  word, 
and  healed  them."  2.  Christ's  wounds  are  healing;  "with  His  stripes  we  are 
healed."  Christ  made  a  medicine  of  His  own  body  and  blood ;  the  physician  died 
to  cure  the  patient.  3.  Christ's  Spirit  is  healing ;  the  blood  of  Christ  heals  the 
guilt  of  sin  ;  the  Spirit  of  Christ  heals  the  pollution  of  sin.  But  if  Christ  be  a 
physician,  why  are  not  all  healed  ?  1.  Because  all  do  not  know  they  are  sick ;  they 
see  not  the  sores  and  ulcers  of  their  souls  ;  and  will  Christ  cure  them  who  see  no 
need  of  Him?  2.  All  are  not  healed,  because  tbey  love  their  sickness — "Thou 
lovest  evil  " ;  many  men  hug  their  disease.  3.  All  are  not  healed,  because  they  do 
not  look  oat  after  a  physician.  4.  All  are  not  healed,  because  they  do  not  take  the 
physic  which  Christ  prescribes  them ;  they  would  be  cured,  but  they  are  loath  to 
put  themselves  into  a  course  of  physic.  5.  All  are  not  healed,  because  they  have 
not  confidence  in  their  physician ;  it  is  observable  when  Christ  came  to  work  any 
cure,  He  first  put  this  question,  "  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?"  Millions 
die  of  their  disease,  because  they  do  not  believe  in  their  physician.  V.  The  fifth 
and  last  particular  is,  that  Christ  is  the  best  physician.  That  I  may  set  forth  th« 
praise  and  honour  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  shall  show  yoa  wherein  He  excels  othet 
physicians ;  no  physician  like  Christ.  1.  He  is  the  most  skilful  physician  ;  there 
U  no  disease  too  hard  for  Him—"  Who  healeth  all  thy  diseases."    3.  Christ  it  th« 


.  T.]  ST.  LUKE.  627 

best  physician,  because  He  cures  the  better  part,  the  soul ;  other  physicians  can 
core  the  liver  or  spleen,  Christ  cures  the  heart ;  they  can  cure  the  blood  when  it  i& 
tainted,  Christ  cures  the  conscience  when  it  is  defiled ;  "  How  much  more  shall  the 
blood  of  Christ  purge  your  conscience  from  dead  works  ?  "  3.  Christ  is  the  best 
physician,  for  He  causeth  us  to  feel  our  disease.  4.  Christ  shows  more  love  to  His 
patients  than  any  physician  besides.  6.  Christ  is  the  most  cheap  physician.  6. 
Christ  heals  with  more  ease  than  any  other:  other  physicians  appiy  pills,  potions, 
bleeding ;  Christ  cures  with  more  facility.  Christ  made  the  devil  go  out  with  a 
word.  7.  Christ  is  the  most  tender-hearted  physician.  He  hath  ended  His  passion, 
yet  not  His  compassion.  8.  Christ  never  fails  of  success.  9.  Christ  cures  not  only 
our  diseases,  but  our  deformities.  The  physician  can  make  the  sick  man  well ;  but 
if  he  be  deformed,  he  cannot  make  him  fair.  Christ  gives  not  only  health,  but 
beauty.  Sin  hath  made  us  ugly  and  misshapen.  10.  And  lastly,  Christ  is  the 
most  bountiful  physician.  Other  patients  do  enrich  their  physicians,  but  here  the 
physician  doth  enrich  the  patient.  Christ  prefers  all  His  patients ;  He  doth  not 
only  cure  them,  but  crown  them.  Christ  doth  not  only  raise  from  the  bed,  but  to 
the  throne  ;  He  gives  the  sick  man  not  only  health,  but  heaven.  But  mine  is  au 
old  inveterate  disease,  and  I  fear  it  is  incurable.  Though  thy  disease  be  chronical, 
Christ  can  heal  it.  But  after  I  have  been  healed,  my  disease  hath  broken  out 
again ;  I  have  relapsed  into  the  same  sin  ;  therefore,  I  fear  there  is  no  healing  for 
me.  It  is  rare  that  the  Lord  leaves  his  children  to  these  relapses.  If  Jesus  Christ 
be  a  spiritual  physician,  let  us  labour  to  hasten  the  cure  of  our  souls.  Consider 
(1)  What  a  little  time  we  have  to  stay  here,  and  let  that  hasten  the  cure.  (2)  Now 
is  properly  the  time  of  healing,  now  is  the  day  of  grace,  now  Christ  pours  out  His 
balsams,  now  He  sends  abroad  His  ministers  and  Sx^irit ;  "  now  is  the  accepted 
time."     (T.   Watson.)         The   sick   need  the  physician: — I.   Christ  is  most  con- 

OEBNED  WITH  THOSE  WHO  NEED  HiM  MOST.  II.  SiCKNESS  OF  SODL  IS  THE  NEED  WHICH 
CAILS  FOB  ChEIST  AS  THE  GoOD  PhTSICIAN.  III.  It  IS  NECESSABY  FOE  A  MAN  TO  CONFESS 
HIS   SICKNESS  OF    SOUL   BEFORE    HE  CAN  BE  HEALED  BY  ChRIST.       (W.  F.  AdeUCy,  M.A.) 

We  have  recently  been  told  that  there  are  no  less  than  1088  definite  forms  of 
disease  to  which  uur  mortal  bodies  are  liable.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  moral 
disease  of  humanity : — I.  Theee  is  a  moral  disease  in  the  heaet  and  chaeacteb  o» 
MAN.  1.  Depraved  mental  appetite.  2.  The  faculty  of  vision  is  impaired.  3. 
Moral  stupor  and  lethargic  disposition  of  mind.  4.  Feverish  excitement  of  dis- 
position. 5.  Moral  weakness  and  want  of  activity.  II.  The  peculiar  characteb- 
I8TICS  by  which  this  MORAL  DISEASE  IS  DISTINGUISHED.  1.  It  is  Universal  in  extent. 
2.  It  is  inherent  in  our  constitution.  3.  It  is  disastrous  in  its  results.  4.  It  ia 
incurable  by  anything  less  than  Divine  agency.  III.  The  remedy  proposed  fob 
HMALiNG  this  DISEASE :  the  healing  medicine  of  the  gospel.  1.  Universally  adapted. 
2.  Absolutely  free.  3.  Infallibly  efficacious.  {W.Urwick.)  The  art  of  healing : — 
That  the  sick  need  a  physician  is  an  assertion  which  appeals  to  the  dictates  of 
common  sense.  1.  The  ministrations  of  the  art  of  healing  are  a  beautiful  imita- 
tion of  those  of  Divine  providence.  Both  are  designed  to  restore  what  was  lost, 
and  to  repair  what  is  disordered.  2.  How  striking  is  the  contrast  between  the 
art  of  medicine  and  the  art  of  war.  3.  The  erection  of  hospitals  and  infirmaries 
for  the  poor  is  one  of  the  distinguishing  ornaments  and  fruits  of  Christianity, 
unknown  to  the  wisdom  and  humanity  of  pagan  times.  {R.  Hall,  A.M.) 
Chiistianity  a  remedy  for  all  diseases: — The  gospel  is  not  meant  for  the  salvation  of 
men  who  are  so  good  that  they  hardly  seem  to  need  it,  but  for  men  that  are  bad — 
for  the  very  worst  of  men.  Admit  all  that  can  be  said  of  the  badness  of  the 
Chinese ;  admit  the  blackest  portrait  that  can  be  correctly  painted  of  them  ;  admit 
that  they  are  as  bad  as  men  can  be  out  of  hell — if  I  understand  the  matter  rightly 
you  only  make  out  a  stronger  case  for  sending  them  the  gospel  of  Christ,  There  is 
a  story  told  of  a  vendor  of  quack  medicine,  who  sent  out  an  advertisement  to  one 
of  the  Australian  newspapers,  and  after  enumerating  all  the  diseases  of  which  he 
could  think,  he  added,  *'  If  there  be  any  disease  peculiar  to  the  colony,  put  that 
in,  for  my  medicine  will  cure  that  too."  A  statement  that  was  not  true  of  the  quack 
medicine  we  can  apply  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  If  there  be  any  wickedness  pecuUar 
to  the  Chinese ;  if  they  are  the  worst  specimens  of  humanity  ;  if  human  depravity 
has  assumed  a  type  there  which  it  does  not  present  in  any  other  part  of  the  world, 
put  all  these  in,  for  the  gospel  will  cure  them  too.  It  is  a  remedy  for  all  diseases, 
•v«n  the  worst.  (W.  Landels.)  Eagerness  to  find  the  Great  Physician : — Years 
ago,  the  bargemen  who  were  associated  with  the  coal  mines  on  the  Biver  Buhr,  ia 
Qermany,  were  regarded  as  uncivilized  and  wicked  beyond  reclamation ;  but  on  one 


B29  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  ▼ 

occasion  a  religious  awakening  broke  out  among  them  which  astonished  all  who 
beheld  its  varied  and  striking  phenomena.  There  was  one  man  more  particularly 
whose  name  of  Wolf  suggested  only  a  few  of  the  traits  of  his  character:  for  a 
savage  beast  of  the  forest  would  have  used  its  offspring  better  than  this  man  used 
his  household.  To  crown  all,  he  was  a  drunkard,  and  no  wolf  could  ever  bo 
charged  with  that  abomination.  Though  too  illiterate  to  read,  the  man  still  cam» 
under  the  influence  which  was  abroad,  and  conscience  smote  him  on  account  of 
past  iniquities,  until  life  was  almost  unendurable.  In  a  state  of  despondency  he 
went  to  a  relative  who  was  a  Christian  man,  who  after  listening  a  while,  remarked, 
*' I  know  a  Physician  who  can  cure  you."  "  Where  does  he  live?"  cried  Wolf,  in 
extreme  eagerness,  "  I  would  gladly  walk  ten  miles  this  night  to  find  him."  The 
only  reply  to  this  was  to  preach  Christ  as  the  Great  Physician,  who  saves  from  the 
effects  of  sin.  When  the  penitent  returned  home  he  prayed  long  and  earnestly, 
until  his  agony  of  mind  was  relieved,  and  he  found  peace.  His  appearance  among 
his  companions  in  labour  struck  them  all  with  surprise.  Instead  of  beating  his 
wife,  he  became  instrumental  in  her  conversion,  while  the  earnest  power  with  which 
he  preached  Christ  among  the  workers  on  coal  barges  was  viewed  with  astonish- 
ment. Dr.  Pinkerton,  who  sent  home  the  particulars,  remarked,  "  the  Holy 
Spirit  confirmed  his  testimony.  The  holy  fire  spread  from  boat  to  boat; 
drunkards,  thieves,  and  abandoned  characters  were  made  penitent."  Hundreds 
were  converted,  and  houses  which  had  been  given  up  to  riot  and  squalor 
became  clean  and  attractive — the  abodes  of  peace  and  love.  (Stoord  and  Trowel.) 
Conviction  of  sin  necessary  to  a  jtut  sense  of  God's  grace  in  salvation: — In  multitudes 
of  cases,  they  are  entirely  insensible  of  the  malady  that  is  preying  upon  them  and 
hastening  to  its  fatal  issue  in  the  death  of  the  soul.  And  so  long  as  they  entertain 
this  opinion  of  themselves,  or  remain  insensible  to  their  real  condition  as  perishing 
in  sin,  it  is  plain  that  they  cannot  feel  their  need  of  the  remedy  provided  for  them 
in  the  gospel,  and  will  not  apply  to  the  Divine  Physician  for  the  healing  of  their 
souls,  or  their  recovery  to  spiritual  health.  Let  us  illustrate  this  point  in  a  few 
particulars.  And — 1.  I  remark — those  who  feel  themselves  to  be  whole,  in  the 
sense  of  our  text,  can  have  no  sincerity  or  earnestness  in  using  the  means  of 
spiritual  recovery.  A  man  who  is  in  doubt  whether  he  is  sick  or  well,  will  of  coarse 
hesitate  whether  he  shall  ask  advice  of  a  physician,  and  after  having  asked  it,  he 
will  show  the  same  indecision  and  hesitancy  in  regard  to  taking  the  medicine 
prescribed  by  him.  2.  While  a  man  feels  himself  to  be  whole  he  can  of  course  have 
no  true  conviction  of  sin.  3.  While  a  man  imagines  himself  to  be  whole,  he  cannot 
feel  his  need  of  mercy,  and  of  course  cannot  ask  for  nor  receive  it  as  it  is  offered  him 
in  the  gospel.  4.  While  a  man  feels  himself  to  be  whole,  he  cannot  receive  Christ 
as  his  Saviour,  nor  acceptably  apply  to  Him  for  any  one  blessing  of  His  mediation. 
fi.  That  while  a  man  imagines  himself  to  be  whole  he  can  have  no  real,  abiding 
gratitude  for  redeeming  mercy,  even  should  he  flatter  himself  that  he  has  embraced 
Christ  as  his  Saviour.  In  conclusion,  I  am  led  to  remark — 1.  We  see  in  view  of 
our  subject  who  they  are  that  are  in  the  greatest  danger  of  being  lost.  2.  We  see 
the  necessity  of  preaching  the  law.  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  3.  We 
see  why  there  is  so  little  of  deep  and  fruitful  religion  in  many  who  profess  to  be 
Christians.  They  are  wanting  in  a  deep  and  abiding  sense  of  the  great  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  their  infinite  indebtedness  to  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  in  delivering  them 
from  the  wrath  to  come.  4.  We  see  why  it  is  so  difficult  to  persuade  impenitent 
men  to  accept  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  It  is  because  they  do  not  feel  their 
need  of  such  a  salvation.  {J.  Hawes,  D.D. )  The  Physician  of  souls  : — The  text 
hath  three  parts.  1.  The  patients.  2.  The  Physician.  8.  The  cure.  I.  The  patients 
ARE  PROPOUNDED  MBQATivELT — "uot  the  wholc."  AfiBrmatlvcly — "but  the  sick."  Is 
any  man  whole  7  1.  No  man  is  whole  by  nature  ;  in  Adam  all  are  deadly  sick.  2. 
Some  are  whole  in  conceit  only.  And  another  cause  of  conceited  soundness  is  the 
extenuation  of  sin.  Let  this  therefore  serve  to  convince  these  whole  men,  and  let 
them  see  their  estate,  so  as  they  may  seek  to  the  Physician,  and  not  die  senseless. 
The  marks  and  spots  of  a  deadly  disease  are  these :  1.  An  ill  stomach  argueth 
bodily  disease ;  so  spiritual,  if  the  Word  be  bitter,  if  thy  mind  rise  against  it,  and 
the  mouth  of  thy  soul  be  out  of  taste,  if  thy  memory  keep  not  the  doctrine  of  God, 
if  by  meditation  thou  digestest  it  not,  and  so  sendest  it  into  all  parts  of  thy  life, 
thou  art  sick  indeed,  though  thou  seemest  never  so  whole.  2.  When  the  body  con- 
Bumeth,  the  parts  are  weakened,  the  knees  bow  under  a  man,  and  with  much  ado 
he  draggeth  his  limbs  after  him,  there  is  certainly  a  bodily  disease,  though  there 
be  no  complaint.    So  in  the  soul ;  when  men  are  weak  to  deeds  of  piety,  have  no 


«Hip.  T.]  ax.  LUKE.  629 

strength  to  oonqner  temptation,  to  safler  crosses  and  trials ;  to  works  of  charity, 
mercy,  or  jnstice ;  bat  all  strength  of  grace  seems  to  be  exhausted,  here  is  a 
dangerous  disease.  3.  When  the  senses  fail,  the  eyes  grow  dim,  the  ears  dull,  it  is 
an  apparent  sign  of  a  bodily  or  spiritual  disease.  A  senseless  is  the  sickest  man, 
because  he  is  sick  though  he  be  not  sensible.  Even  so,  when  the  eye-strings  of  the 
soul  are  broken,  that  they  see  not  the  light  of  grace,  nor  of  God,  which  as  the  sun 
shines  round  about  them  ;  the  ears  hear  not  the  voice  of  God,  the  feeling  is  gone, 
they  have  no  sense  of  the  great  gashes  and  wounds  of  the  lusts  of  uncleanness, 
drunkenness,  covetousness,  swearing,  lying,  malice  against  God  and  His  servants ; 
nay,  no  complaint,  but  rather  rejoicing  in  these ;  the  soul  of  such  a  man  lies  very 
weak,  as  a  man  for  whom  the  bell  is  ready  to  toll.  4.  Difficulty  of  breathing,  or  to 
be  taken  speechless,  is  a  sign  of  a  disease  and  death  approaching.  So  in  the  soul, 
prayer  being  the  breath  of  the  soul,  when  a  man  can  hardly  fetch  his  breath,  cannot 
pray,  or  with  much  ado  can  beg  mercy,  strength,  and  supply  of  grace  ;  or  when  he 
is  speechless,  a  man  cannot  hear  him  whisper  a  good  and  savoury  word,  but  all  is 
«arthly,  fruitless,  or  hurtful ;  here  is  a  living  corpse,  a  painted  sepulchre,  not  a  man 
of  a  better  world.  Thus  negatively  of  the  patient,  or  party,  fit  for  cure.  AflBrma- 
tively  it  is  the  sick  man.  And  he  is  the  sick  man,  that  feels  and  groans  under  the 
pain  and  burden  of  his  sin.  The  point  this :  Sin  is  the  most  dangerous  sickness  in 
the  whole  world,  and  fitly  resembles  bodily  sickness.  For — 1.  Sickness  comes  by 
intemperance:  the  temperate  body  is  never  tick;  while  we  were  in  innocency 
we  were  in  sound  health,  but  through  distemperature  in  oar  nature  we  were 
poisoned  at  first,  and  ever  since  our  sins  and  lusts  conceiving,  bring  forth  sin  and 
death.  2.  Sickness  weakeneth  the  body,  and  impaireth  the  vigour  of  nature ;  so 
doth  sin  in  the  soul :  experience  showeth  that  after  some  sin  we  very  hardly  and 
weakly  attempt  any  good  thing  for  a  long  time.  Sin  hath  weakened  the  faculties, 
darkened  the  understanding,  corrupted  the  will,  disordered  the  affections  :  thence 
this  sickness.  3.  Sickness  brings  pain  and  torment  into  the  body ;  so  doth  sin  into 
the  soul.  4.  Sickness  continuing  and  lingering  on  the  body,  threateneth  death, 
and  without  timely  cure  bringeth  it;  sin  also,  not  removed  by  repentance,  menaceth 
and  bringeth  certain  death  to  body  and  soul.  5.  Sickness  is  generally  incident  to 
all  men.  So  the  souls  of  all  men  are  diseased  by  nature ;  even  the  souls  of  the 
elect,  till  they  be  healed  by  Christ.  II.  Wb  come  now  to  thb  Physician.  The 
Physician  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  as  in  the  next  word,  "  I  come  not  to  call  the 
righteous  but  sinners  to  repentance."  "I  am  the  Lord,  that  healeth  thee"  (Exod. 
y.  26).  God  challengeth  this  as  a  part  of  His  own  glory,  by  Christ  to  heal  us. 
"  He  maketh  soi"e,  and  bindeth  up ;  He  woundeth,  and  His  hands  make  whole " 
{Job  v.  18).  "  Who  healed  thee  of  thy  infirmities.?  *'  (Psa.  ciii.  3).  1.  As  a  skilful 
Physician  He  knoweth  every  man's  estate  perfectly :  "  He  knoweth  what  is  in  man  '* 
{John  ii.),  so  doth  no  other  physician.  He  saw  the  woman  at  the  well  to  be  an 
harlot.  And  (Matt.  xvi.  7/  H«  saw  the  reasoning  of  their  hearts,  when  they  thought  He 
•pake  because  they  had  no  bread.  2.  He  knows  the  cure  as  perfectly  as  He  doth  the 
diaeMe  No  ohysician  knows  til  the  virtues  of  all  the  simples  and  drugs  ha 
administereth ;  and  besides,  he  is  wholly  ignorant  of  many.  Bat  Christ  our 
Physician  knows  the  infallible  work  of  His  remedies.  8.  Aa  a  akilfol  Plijd'>iaa 
He  prescribeth  the  fittest  remedies.  For  in  His  word  He  appointeth  physie  for  every 
disease  of  the  soul;  for  pride,  envy,  covetousness,  trouble  of  conscience,  and  other. 

4.  As  a  physician  prepareth  his  patient  for  his  physic,  so  Christ  prepareththe  partj 
by  faith  to  apply  His  remedies ;  by  persuading  the  heart  to  believe,  and  to  apply  to 
the  sore  and  wounded  conscience  the  precious  balms  which  Himself  hath  prepared. 
Else,  as  physic,  not  in  the  receipt,  or  box,  or  cupboard,  or  pocket  csm  profit,  nnlesa 
it  be  applied  and  received,  though  it  be  never  so  sovereign ;  no  more  can  this. 

5.  Christ  goeth  beyond  all  physicians,  two  ways.  (1)  In  the  generality  of  His  cure. 
Some  diseases  are  desperate,  and  all  the  physio  in  the  world  cannot  cure  them. 
But  Christ  can  cure  ah. ;  no  disease  is  so  desperate  as  to  foil  Him.  (2)  In  the 
freedom  of  His  cure.  For  first.  He  offereth  His  help  and  physio  even  daily  in  the 
preaching  of  His  gospel.  Now  if  Christ  be  the  Physician,  Christ  must  be  magnified 
for  our  health.  The  Pope,  by  his  pardons,  masses,  pilgrimages,  and  the  like,  can- 
not cure  us.  It  is  too  great  a  price  to  pay.  Nay,  the  angels  can  confer  nothing  to 
this  cure.  Lastly,  if  Christ  be  the  Physician,  here  is  marvellous  comfort  for  afflicted 
Bouls  pained  and  pined  under  the  burden  of  sin.  1.  He  is  a  skilful  doctor,  ^  He 
knows  all  our  diseases  and  the  remedies ;  thoa  mayst  safely  commit  thyself  into 
His  hands,  as  His  mother  said  to  those  servants,  "  Whatsoever  He  commands,  that 
do  "  (John  ii.).    Simple  obedience  is  required,  without  reasoning  ot  inquiry.    4U 

u 


^30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  ». 

His  sayings  mnst  we  do.  2.  He  is  able  enongh  to  cure  as,  because  He  ii  Gk>4 
Omnipotent,  able  to  work  an  infinite  oare :  and  only  snch  a  physician  can  bestead 
us,  for  all  created  power  cannot  help  us.  3.  He  is  as  willing  to  help  as  able ;  being 
a  merciful  High  Priest,  compassed  with  infirmities,  to  have  compassion  on  then? 
that  are  out  of  the  way.  III.  Having  spoken  of  the  patients,  and  of  the  Physician, 
we  come  now  to  the  ooeb,  which  is  the  third  general ;  wherein  consider — 1.  The 
confection.  2.  The  application.  In  the  confection  are — 1.  The  Author.  2.  The 
matter.  3.  The  virtue.  The  Author  must  be  a  man,  and  above  a  man.  He  must 
be  a  man,  because  man  had  sinned,  and  man's  nature  must  satisfy ;  else  God's 
justice  and  menace  had  not  taken  place.  But  withal.  He  must  be  above  a  man; 
even  our  Emmanuel  (Isa.  vii.  14),  God  with  us.  All  this  must  our  Physician  do,  by 
His  lowest  abasement.  He  must  satisfy  God's  justice,  appease  His  anger,  triumph 
against  enemies  of  salvation,  subdue  sin,  foil  the  devil,  overcome  death,  discharge 
all  debts,  cancel  all  obligations  and  handwritings  against  us,  and  after  all  be 
exalted  to  glory.  Thirdly,  He  must  be  God  to  procure  us  those  infinite  good  things 
we  need,  viz.,  to  restore  us  God's  image  lost,  and  with  it  righteousness  and  l3a 
eternal.  To  defend  soul  and  body  against  the  world,  the  devil,  hell,  and  all 
enemies.  Next,  the  matter  of  the  cure,  and  that  is,  the  Physician's  own  blood, 
by  which  is  meant  His  whole  passion  :  "  By  His  stripes  we  are  healed  " 
(1  Peter  ii.  19),  His  sickness  brings  us  health.  Next  the  virtue  and  preciousnesa 
of  this  cure.  Oh,  it  was  a  powerful  and  precious  blood  1  and  that  in  five  respects. 
1.  In  respect  of  the  qualtity:  it  is  the  blood  incorruptible.  All  other  diseases 
are  cured  with  corruptible  things  (1  Pet.  i.  18).  2.  In  respect  of  the  person: 
it  was  the  blood  of  God  (Acts  xx.  23).  3.  In  respect  of  the  subject  of  it:  no 
other  cure  or  remedy  can  reach  the  soul.  All  other  drugs  conduce  for  healthful 
life,  and  work  upon  the  body ;  but  this  makes  for  an  holy  life,  and  works  upon  the 
soul,  the  sickness  whereof  the  most  precious  thing  in  the  world  cannot  cure,  4.  In 
respect  of  the  powerful  efifects  of  it,  above  all  other  cures  in  the  world :  for — (1) 
They  may  frame  the  body  to  some  soundness  of  temperature,  but  this  makes  sound 
souls,  according  to  the  conformity  of  God's  law.  (2)  They  may  preserve  natural 
life  for  a  whUe,  but  this  brings  a  supernatural  life  for  ever.  (3)  They  may  restore 
strength  and  nature  decayed,  but  this  changeth  and  bringeth  in  a  new  nature, 
according  to  the  second  Adam.  (4)  They  cannot  keep  away  death  approaching,  but 
this  makes  immortal.  (5)  They  cannot  raise  or  recover  a  dead  man,  but  this 
raiseth  both  dead  in  sin,  dead  in  soul,  and  dead  in  body.  g.  In  respect  of  time. 
All  other  physic  is  made  of  drugs  created  with  the  world,  but  this  was  "  prepared 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world  "  (1  Pet.  i.  18).  Again,  all  work  of  all  other 
physic  is  done  in  death,  but  the  perfection  and  most  powerful  work  of  this  is 
after  death.  By  all  this  take  we  notice  of  our  extreme  misery  by  sin;  seeing 
nothing  else  can  cure  us,  but  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God.  If  we  had  such  a 
disease  as  nothing  but  the  heart-blood  of  our  dearest  friends  alive  (suppose  our  wife, 
husband,  mother,  or  child)  could  cure  us,  what  a  hopeless  and  desperate  case  were 
it  ?  It  would  amaze  and  astonish  the  stoutest  heart.  But  much  more  may  it  smite 
our  hearts,  that  we  have  such  a  disease  as  nothing  else  but  the  heart-blood  of  the 
Son  of  God  can  cure.  But  those  never  saw  their  sin  in  this  glass  who  conceive  the 
cure  as  easy  as  the  turning  of  a  hand,  a  light  "  Lord  have  mercy,"  or  an  hour  of 
repentance  at  death.  2.  In  this  cure  we  may  observe  a  world  of  wonders — (1) 
Wonder  and  admire  this  Physician,  who  is  both  the  Physician  and  the  Physic. 
Was  ever  the  like  heard  of  in  aU  nature  ?  (2)  Admire  the  confection :  that  the 
Physician  must  temper  the  remedy  of  His  own  heart-blood.  He  must  by  passion 
be  pounded  in  the  mortar  of  God's  wrath  ;  He  must  be  beaten,  smitten,  spit  upon, 
wounded,  sweat  water  and  blood,  be  trodden  on  as  a  worm,  be  forsaken  of  His 
Father ;  the  Lamb  of  God  must  be  slain  ;  the  just  suffer  for  the  unjust.  Dost  thou 
not  here  stand  and  wonder  ?  (3)  Admire  the  power  of  weakness,  and  the  Omnipotent 
work  of  this  cure  by  contraries,  as  in  the  great  work  of  creation ;  there  the  Son  of 
God  made  all  things,  not  out  of  something,  but  out  of  nothing ;  so  in  this  great 
work  of  our  cure  by  redemption.  He  works  our  life,  not  by  His  life,  but  by  His  own 
death;  He  makes  us  infinitely  happy,  but  by  His  own  infinite  misery;  He  opens  the 
grave  for  us,  by  His  own  lying  in  the  grave ;  He  sends  us  to  heaven  by  His  own 
descending  from  heaven  ;  and  shuts  the  gates  of  hell  by  suffering  helhsh  torments. 
He  honours  us  by  His  own  shame  ;  He  breaks  away  our  temptations,  and  Satan's 
molestations,  by  being  Himself  tempted.  Here  is  a  skilful  Physician,  tempering 
poison  to  a  remedy,  bringing  light  ont  of  darkness,  hfe  out  of  death,  heaven  out  of 
helL    lo  the  whole  order  of  natore  one  contrary  resisteth  another,  but  it  is  beyond 


tBMt.  T.)  ST.  LUKE.  5S1 

nature  that  one  contrary  should  produce  another.  Wonder.  (4)  Admire  the  care 
of  the  Physician,  who  provided  us  %  remedy  before  our  disease,  before  the  world  was, 
or  we  in  it.  (5)  Admire  His  matchless  love,  who  to  save  our  souls,  made  His  soul 
an  offering  for  sin,  and  healeth  our  wounds  by  His  own  stripes.  A  physician 
showeth  great  love,  if  he  take  a  little  care  above  ordinary,  though  he  be  well 
rewarded,  and  made  a  great  gainer  by  it.  But  this  Physician  must  be  a  loser  by 
His  love ;  He  must  lose  His  glory.  His  life.  Wonder,  and  wonder  for  ever.  3.  How 
may  we  testify  our  love  to  Christ  7  (1)  In  profession  and  word  we  must  magnify 
His  great  work  of  redemption,  and  advance  it  in  the  perfection  and  virtue  of  it,  aa 
able  of  itself  to  purchase  the  whole  Church.  (2)  As  God's  love  was  actual,  so  we 
must  settle  ourselves  to  His  service.  (3)  According  to  His  example,  let  us  not  love 
our  lives  to  the  death  for  His  sake  (Rev.  xii.  11),  Now  we  are  to  consider  it  in  the 
application.  For,  what  would  it  avail,  to  have  the  most  skilful  and  careful 
physician,  and  the  most  rare,  proper,  and  powerful  medicine  under  the  sun 
prescribed  by  him,  if  either  it  be  not  for  me,  or  not  applied  to  the  disease  or  sore  ? 
And  80  our  heavenly  Physician  hath  taken  care,  not  only  for  direction  and  confec- 
tion, but  also  for  application.  Medicines  must  be  received  ;  for  we  must  not  look 
to  be  cured  by  miracle,  but  by  means.  Where  consider — 1.  The  persons  to  whom 
the  cure  is  applied.  2.  The  means  whereby.  3.  The  time  when.  For  the  persons, 
the  text  saith,  "all  that  be  sick";  that  is,  sensible  and  languishing  under  their 
sickness.  And  Psa.  cxlvii.  3,  "  He  heals  those  that  are  broken  in  heart,  and  binds 
up  their  sores."  For  the  means  whereby  the  cure  is  applied,  it  is  faith  ;  we  must 
bring  faith  to  be  healed.  But  when  is  this  medicine  applied  ?  For  time,  there  is 
no  application  but  iu  this  life  ;  no  curing  after  this  life.  Again,  seeing  there  is  a 
time  to  heal,  come  in  season  (Eccles.  iii.  3).  Again,  content  not  thyself  only  to 
hear  of  this  remedy,  but  seek  to  know  that  it  is  applied  to  thee  in  particular,  and 
to  feel  the  virtue  of  it  in  thyself.  How  may  I  know  it  ?  As  physio  taken  into  the 
body  works  often  so  painfully,  that  men  are  even  at  the  gate  of  death  in  their 
present  sense,  and  no  other  but  dead  men,  so  this  physio  worketh  kindly,  when  it 
worketh  pain  in  the  party,  through  the  sense  and  sight  of  sin,  apprehension  of 
God's  anger  and  utter  despair  in  themselves.  As  physio  kindly  working  de- 
livers the  party,  not  only  from  death,  but  such  humours  as  were  the  cause 
of  bis  sickness,  at  least  that  they  be  not  predominant  ;  even  so  must  this 
physic  rid  as  of  our  sin,  and  these  peccant  humours  which  were  the  matter  of 
our  sickness.  As  after  application  of  proper  physic  we  find  a  great  change 
in  our  bodies,  as  if  we  had  new  bodies  given  us ;  so  after  the  kindly  work  of 
this  physic  we  may  find  ourselves  cast  into  a  new  mould ;  this  blood  applied 
makes  us  new  creatures,  new  men,  having  new  minds,  new  wills,  new  words, 
new  affections,  new  actions,  new  conversations.  Our  strength  is  renewed  to 
Christian  actions  and  passion  ;  we  are  strong  for  our  journey,  for  our  combat,  and 
strong  to  carry  burdens,  with  a  strong  appetite,  and  digestion  of  the  word ;  every 
way  more  hearty  and  cheerful.  Thus  having  received  our  health,  by  means  of  this 
cure,  wisdom  commands  us  to  be  as  careful  to  preserve  our  health  as  to  attain  it. 
Every  wise  man  will  be  as  careful  to  keep  himself  well  as  to  get  himself  well.  And 
to  this  purpose,  we  must  remember  the  counsel  of  our  Physician  for  maintaining 
our  health  attained.  Among  many  direction  prescribed,  I  mention  four.  1.  Not  to 
be  tampering  with  our  own  medicines,  nor  the  medicines  of  Egypt,  merits, 
pilgrimages,  penance,  or  the  Uke ;  nor  any  quintessence  or  mineral  from  the  hand 
of  any  libertine  teacher ;  but  only  such  as  we  find  prescribed  in  the  Word  of  God, 
by  our  great  Doctor.  2.  To  keep  our  health,  we  must  keep  good  diet,  both  for  soul 
and  body.  The  best  diet  for  the  soul  is  to  keep  God's  hours  for  our  daily  repast  by 
the  Word,  in  reading  and  meditating  on  it ;  which  David  regarded  above  his  ordinary 
food.  A  liberal  diet  is  best  for  the  soul ;  but  the  best  diet  for  the  body  is  a  spare 
diet,  a  sober  and  moderate  use  of  meat,  drink,  and  pleasure,  for  beating  down  and 
mortifying  corrupt  affections  and  lusts.  3.  To  preserve  our  health,  we  must  strive 
to  live  in  a  good  and  wholesome  air.  If  thou  Uvest  in  a  corrupt  air,  change  it  for  a 
better.  The  worst  air  that  can  be  is  where  worst  men  and  worst  company  are.  The 
air  of  a  hot  plague  house  is  not  so  infectious  as  the  contagious  air  of  wicked  com- 
pany. 4.  To  preserve  health,  physicians  prescribe  the  use  of  good  exercises.  The 
best  exercises  to  use  for  the  health  of  the  soul  are  hearing  and  reading  of  God's 
Word ;  pray  also,  and  meditate  when  thou  art  alone ;  with  conference  of  good 
things  in  company.  These  are  notable  helps  to  bring  thee  through  weaknesses,  and 
keep  thy  soul  in  good  ph'ght,  health,  and  cheerfulness.  (T.  Taylor.  D.D.)  Christ 
the  Phytieian  of  men : — The  grand  design  of  Christ's  mission  into  the  world  wai 


582  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  loHJa.  ♦. 

that  He  might  be  the  Physician  of  goals — ^that  He  might  heal  those  who  were 
eabjeot  to  the  disease  of  sin,  and  restore  them  in  spiritual  health,  life,  and  happi- 
ness.  L  Oub  Lobo  was  Divinbly  authobized  akd  appointed  to  this  impobtant 
omcB.    II.  Chbist,  as  the  obeat  Phtsician  op  souls,  has  pbovided  a  bemedt  o» 

TEANSCENDENT   EFFICACY.       III.   OuB   HEAVENLY   PHYSICIAN  IS    POSSESSED  OF  XNTINITB 

SKILL.  His  understanding  is  infinite.  He  perfectly  knoweth  our  frame.  He  knows 
all  the  distempers  of  our  minds,  with  all  their  diversified  forms  and  symptoms. 
IV.  The  Physician  oe  souls  is  possessed  op  iniinite  poweb  and  compassion.  If 
with  one  hand  He  extends  to  us  a  bitter  potion,  with  the  other  He  upholds, 
strengthens,  comforts  us.  V.  He  is  qeneeous  and  disinteeested.  He  seeks  not 
ours,  but  us.  His  sole  object  is  to  do  us  good,  VI.  He  is  always  accessible.  No 
disadvantage  of  place  or  condition  can  exclude  from  His  aid.  Nor  is  there  a  single 
individual  who  may  not,  on  every  occasion,  obtain  from  Him  the  healing  that  he 
needs.    {Peter  Grant.) 

Yer.  32.  I  came  not  to  call  the  xlgbteons,  but  sinners  to  repentance. — The  sin 

healer : — This  conduct  of  Christ  was  not  official  or  symbolic.  It  was  His  feeling  as 
very  God  that  led  Him  to  this  course.  It  opened  to  the  world  the  very  Divine 
nature.  A  disposition  to  heal  men  of  sin  is  a  greater  manifestation  of  Divine 
rectitude  than  to  exterminate  sin  by  punishment.  It  is  this  thought  that  I  shall 
attempt  to  draw  out  briefly,  and  apply  to  our  own  case  and  experience.  I.  To  heaii 
SIN  evinces  hatked  op  evil  even  moeb  than  a  bummab?  punishment  of  it. 
Consider  the  patience,  the  self-sacrifiice,  which  is  required  to  win  men  from  evil 
habits,  and  from  wicked  dispositions.  Now  we  measure  our  moral  likes  or  dislikes 
by  what  they  lead  us  to  undergo.  How  much  we  love  we  can  tell  by  how  much  we 
will  bear  for  our  affections  ;  how  much  we  dislike,  by  what  effort  we  are  willing  to 
put  forth  to  resist  or  avoid  what  is  offensive  to  us.  Consider  a  teacher  who  shall 
avenge  himself  of  a  pupil's  disobedience  by  punishing,  or  by  summarily  excluding 
that  pupil.  How  cheap  is  such  riddance  of  mischief  from  his  school  1  How  is  all 
summed  up  in  one  outburst  of  feeling  I  It  is  very  painful  and  disagreeable,  but  it 
is  short.  But  suppose  that,  instead  of  resorting  to  expulsion,  with  its  disgrace,  the 
teacher  shall  enter  into  the  sympathy  of  the  pupil  by  gentleness,  by  winning  kindness, 
by  forbearance,  by  devoting  his  very  life  to  him,  and  shall  set  him  upon  reformation, 
and  wait  for  him  to  reform,  and  endure  while  he  is  reforming.  How  much  more 
does  he,  by  such  a  course  of  conduct  as  this,  evince  his  dislike  of  evil,  than  by 
merely  excluding  the  pupil  I  What  we  will  bear  for  the  sake  of  getting  rid  of  evil, 
measures  how  much  we  dislike  it.  II.  A  disposition  to  heal  sin  is  the  cleabest 
possible  expositoe  op  mobal  bectitude.  Men  do  not  always  see  it  to  be  so.  It 
is  a  part  of  our  lower  thinking  to  believe  that  a  thunderous  exhibition,  with  a 
display  of  wrath  and  punitive  judgment,  is  a  more  solemn  and  conclusive  manifest- 
ation of  the  Divine  abhorrence  of  sin.  But  an  abhorrence  of  sin  is  more  illustriously 
marked  by  gentleness  and  patience  in  healing  it,  than  by  any  display  of  justice  in 
punishing  it.  He  that  once  conceives  of  the  God  that  presides  over  the  universe, 
and  keeps  all  its  elements  intact  and  unharmed,  as  a  God  that  makes  Himself  the 
medicine  for  those  that  are  led  away  from  purity,  and  becomes  Himself  the  Saviour 
of  sinners — he  that  once  does  this  has  a  conception  of  rectitude  in  God,  and  of  the 
Divine  hatred  of  evil,  such  as  he  can  get  in  no  other  way.     III.  A  dispositioh  to 

HEAL  BIN   DOES   NOT    TAKE   AWAY  FEOM    SIN  ANY    OP  ITS    DANOEES.        It    remOVCS     HO 

barriers,  and  yields  no  encouragements.  There  are  ways  of  dealing  with  evil  that 
lead  to  the  presumption  that  it  is  safe  to  sin  because  there  is  a  chance  for  recovery, 
if  harm  begins  to  come  upon  the  sinner ;  but  the  way  in  which  Christ  dealt  with 
evil  led  to  no  such  presumption.  Where  men  fall  into  sickness  by  their  excesses, 
is  the  tenderness  on  the  part  of  the  nurse  an  argument  for  the  repetition  of  those 
excesses.  The  care  and  the  kindness  of  a  parent  in  restoring  a  son  from  downfall 
cire  never  a  reason  with  a  grateful  son  for  falling  again.  And  the  grace  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  that  bears  with  sin,  not  because  it  is  to  be  allowed,  but  because,  being 
hateful,  God  addresses  the  whole  energy  of  His  Being  and  administration  to  the 
rescue  of  men  from  it — this  does  not  take  away  anything  from  the  fear  of  sin,  nor 
fumith  motives  to  transgression.  IV.  On  the  part  of  those  who  arc  healed,  a  dis- 
position TO  HEAL  SIN  PEODUCBS  A  OENBBOUS  BBPENTANCB,  WHICH  OBOWS  OUT  OP  THB 

NOBLEB  SENTIMENTS  OP  THE  MIND,  and  which  is  therefore  a  true  repentance— one 
that  does  not  need  to  be  repented  of.  It  is  no  longer  fear  of  consequences,  nor 
even  self-e>ndemnation  or  conscience,  that  inspires  reformation ;  it  is  an  action  ot 
gratitude ;  a  work  of  love.    Y.  Such  a  disposition  pbesents  thb  Divine  ohabactbb 


■cawp.  v.]  ST.  LUKE.  58* 

IN  A  UOHT  WHICH  TENDS   TO   UNIVERSAL  ADMIRATION  AND   UNIVERSAL  CONFIDENCE.      It 

takes  nothing  away  from  the  essential  authority  and  monarchy  of  God ;  but  it  brings 
God  into  vital  sympathetic  relations  to  His  creatures — especially  where  the  remedy 
has  been  wrought  out  at  the  expense  of  His  own  life.  The  spectacle  of  a  God  that 
is  clothed  with  a  spirit  of  justice  made  firm  in  the  administration  of  a  righteoua 
government,  and  of  one  that,  loving  justice,  still  finds  rescue  and  release  for  the 
transgressor  through  the  iiiterposition  of  His  own  self — that  spectacle  is  one  that 
cannot  but  fill  the  heart  of  every  pure  and  noble  creature  with  admiration  and  con- 
fidence and  love.  God,  by  the  very  pains  with  which  He  sought  to  cleanse  the 
heart  and  the  conscience,  testified  to  how  dangerous  was  that  sin  that  had  disfigured 
the  conscience  and  soiled  the  heart.  With  this  brief  statement,  I  remark  —  1. 
There  is  great  encouragement  for  men  that  have  given  way  to  temptation  and 
transgression,  to  turn  back  from  evil,  to  repent,  and  to  enter  upon  a  course  of 
right-living.  One  of  the  most  wonderful  of  doctrines  was  the  declaration  of  Christ 
that  a  man  might  be  born  again  ;  not  merely  that  he  mu$t  be — which  it  true,  if  he 
would  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven — but  that  he  might  be ;  that  a  man  who  had  for 
years  and  years  gone  wrong,  might,  as  it  were,  go  back  and  call  all  the  past  nothing, 
and  start  over  again.  What  would  men  give  if  they  iould  do  this  in  their  secular 
affairs !  Only  God  is  on  the  side  of  the  man  that  wants  to  return  to  the  path  of  holi- 
ness. There  is  no  parallel  to  the  Divine  helpfulness  towards  the  erring  anywhere  out 
of  the  family.  When  men  in  secular  relations  and  social  connections  have  done 
wrong,  nothing  is  on  their  side— everything  is  against  them.  The  influences  of 
this  world  tend  to  hold  a  man  up  in  the  beginning.  2.  This  exhibition  of  God  in 
healing  sin  instead  of  punishing  it,  is  the  model  for  Christian  dispositions.  We 
must  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  or  we  are  none  of  His.  The  mother  that  watches 
over  her  child,  and  that,  seeing  its  faults,  not  so  much  punishes  it  as  trains  it  out 
of  those  faults,  devoting  her  life,  day  and  night,  to  its  welfare ;  the  mother  that 
wins  her  child  out  of  evil  into  good— that  mother  stands  as  the  child's  saviour, 
reproducing  the  example  and  conduct  of  Christ  towards  her  httle  one.  Are  there 
those  round  about  you  that  need  succour  and  help?  Have  you  done  some  things 
lor  them  ?  3.  What  will  be  the  glorious  disclosure  of  this  Divine  nature  in  heaven 
— the  lovableness  of  God,  the  attractive  beauty  that  there  is  in  Him,  so  dis- 
closed by  the  Saviour  I  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Self-righteousness  giving  way  to 
penitence  : — The  man  who  thinks  he  is  not  so  very  bad,  is  no  true  penitent.  "  I 
am  the  chief  of  sinners,"  said  holy  Paul,  and  that  is  sure  to  be  the  feeling  of  the 
man  who  is  truly  penitent.  A  good  Quaker  told  me  once  how  he  visited  a  sick 
neighbour,  and  began  to  talk  to  the  man  about  soul-matters.  Beligion  was  all  very 
good,  the  poor  sick  man  acknowledged,  but  he  could  not  see  what  need  he  had  to 
concern  himself  about  it,  for  he  had  never  done  anybody  any  harm  in  his  life. 
The  good  Quaker  tried  to  convince  him  that  he  had  hved  without  hope  and 
without  God  in  the  world,  and  that  he  was  not  fit  to  die  ;  that  he  had  neither 
prayed  nor  worshipped,  nor  read  his  Bible,  nor  trained  up  his  children  in  the 
fear  of  God,  and  he  ought  to  feel  himself  a  sinner  in  the  sight  of  his  Maker. 
The  good  Quaker  knelt  and  prayed  with  him,  and  visited  him  again  and  again, 
and  began  to  observe  that  the  man  gradually  forgot  to  boast  of  bis  innocence ; 
and,  at  last,  seemed  to  be  growing  very  tender,  for  he  observed  him  in  tears. 
At  last  he  could  conceal  his  state  no  longer,  but  burst  out  into  weeping-—"  I 
am  too  great  a  sinner,"  said  he ;  "  there  is  no  mercy  for  me  I  "  •'  Thank  God  I ' 
said  the  good  Quaker,  "  I  have  hope  of  thee  now.  Let  us  pray  once  more,  and 
see  if  there  be  no  mercy  for  thee."  The  Quaker  prayed,  and  the  poor  sinner 
prayed;  and  before  they  gave  over,  the  sinner's  soul  was  set  free,  and  he 
rejoiced  in  the  pardoning  love  of  God.  {Thomas  Cooper.)  ChrusVs  errand: — 
I.  What  is  the  purport  of  Christ's  comino  into  and  work  in  the  world  as 
ANNOUNCED  IN  THE  ScRiPTURES  GENERALLY  ?  Universal  and  all-inclusive.  The 
world.  Whosoever,  n.  Here,  however,  an  apparent  lhotatiob.  Some  whom  He  did 
notcometocall:  the  righteous.  Who  were  these  righteous?  Were  they  really  righteous? 
No,  but  only  self-righteous.  III.  Are  there,  then,  ant  whom  Christ  did  noi 
COMB  to  save  1  No.  But  so  long  as  a  man  is  self-righteous  he  is  not  saveable, 
he  cannot  hear  and  obey  the  caU  of  Christ.  Christ's  errand  is  to  the  needy  and 
the  sinful.  Let  the  self-righteous  become  conscious  of  his  unrighteousness  and 
sinfulness,  and  he  becomes  at  once  one  of  those  whom  Christ  came  to  call.  For — IV. 
In  COMINO  TO  CALL  SINNERS  Hb  TRULY  CAME  TO  CALL  ALL,  for  all  are  sinncrs.  And 
thna  is  the  apparent  limitation,  so  far  as  His  desire  and  purpose  are  oonoemed, 
•hown  not  really  to  exist     He  will  have  all  men  to  b«  saved  and  to  come  to  a 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  V. 

knowledge  of  the  truth.  (J.  R.  Bailey.)  Criminality  certainly  appeared  to 
Christ  more  odious  and  detestable  than  it  did  to  His  contemporaries.  How  strange, 
then,  to  find  Him  treating  it  more  leniently !  perfect  justice  here  appears  to  tak& 
the  very  course  which  would  be  taken  by  injustice.  It  is  true  that  the  extremes  do 
in  a  manner  meet.  Christ,  representing  the  highest  humanity,  treats  crime  in  a 
manner  which  superficially  resembles  the  treatment  of  it  by  those  in  whom 
humanity  is  at  the  lowest  stage.  But  the  other  toleration  was  barbarous.  Christ's 
toleration  is  the  newly-revealed  virtue  of  mercy.  {Ecee  Homo.)  There  are  two 
classes  of  men — the  righteous  who  believe  themselves  sinners ;  and  sinners  who 
believe  themselves  righteous.    {Patcal.) 

Vers.  33,  34.  And  they  said  onto  Him,  Why  do  the  dlsclplea  of  Jolm  fast  often,, 
and  make  prayers  7 — Christian  mutual  tolerance : — The  whole  passage  illustrates  the 
breadth  and  tolerance  of  our  Lord's  teaching.  He  is  claiming  for  His  disciples 
that  their  spiritual  life  be  left  to  unfold  itself  naturally,  that  they  be  not  fettered 
by  forms,  that  they  be  not  judged  by  religious  traditions  and  old  habits,  that  tbej 
be  free  to  show  themselves  glad  when  they  have  cause  of  gladness,  and  that  their 
expressions  of  sorrow  and  their  self-discipline  follow  their  feeling  of  sorrow  and 
their  need  of  discipline.  He  adds  also  a  plea  for  the  sincere  among  the  Pharisees 
and  John's  disciples ;  He  tells  His  own  followers  that  they  must  be  tolerant  of 
these.  No  man  accustomed  to  old  wine  will  readily  relish  new.  These  parables 
have  a  perpetual  application.  They  affirm  the  propriety  of  all  forms  of  religious 
life  that  are  the  true  outcome  of  spiritual  experience,  and  they  plead  for  considera- 
tion of  one  another  in  the  differences  which  perpetually  arise  between  Christians  of 
varying  experience  and  habitude.  I.  Christ's  vimoicition  or  fbeedoh  to  aix  Hi» 
DisciPiiEB.  II.  Christ's  plba  fob  consideration  of  one  anotheb.  {A.  Maekennal, 
D.D.)  Wisdom  justified  of  her  children: — The  outward  religious  life  of  Christ 
differed  from  that  of  John.  One  was  social,  the  other  ascetic.  To  the  astonish- 
ment created  by  this  difference  among  worldly  people  and  Pharisees,  Jesus  vouch- 
safed no  reply  but  "  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children,"  Once,  however.  He  did 
condescend  to  explain  the  difference  between  His  life  and  the  life  of  John.  And  tho 
reply  goes  deep  into  the  grounds  of  a  religious  life.  L  The  beasons  fob  thb 
ASTONISHMENT  WHICH  CAUSED  THE  QUESTION.  1.  The  Dlviuc  life  was  social,  whereas 
the  popular  conceptions  of  religious  life  are  drawn  naturally  from  those  evidences 
'which  are  most  visible,  fasting  and  prayers.  2.  There  is  a  tendency  in  disciples  to 
copy  and  idolize  the  peculiarities  of  a  master.  Matthew  tells  us  that  it  was  John's 
disciples  who  put  the  question  of  the  text,  3.  The  indifference  of  Christ  to  ascetio 
forms  astonished,  because  there  is  a  real  influence  in  asceticism.  The  principle  of 
Christianity  is  from  within  outwards.  The  ascetic  principle  reverses  this.    U.  Thi 

SEASONS  FOB  WHICH   JeSUS   DID  NOT   IMPOSE   THE  ASCETIO   LIFE   ON    HiS  DISCIPLES.       1. 

Because  it  is  unnaturaL  "  Can  the  children  of  the  bridechamber  mourn  7  "  &o. 
2.  Because  of  the  results.  The  result  of  the  forcing  system  is  twofold :  (1)  Tht 
destruction  of  religion.  The  weak  old  wine-skins,  the  weak  old  cloth,  are  rent. 
(2)  Hypocrisy.  The  piece  agreeth  not.  No  harmony  between  the  form  and  th« 
life,  (F.  W.Robertson,  M.A.)  Privileges  as  weU  as  duties  to  be  attended  to:— 
When  Dr.  John  Mason  Good,  the  distinguished  and  excellent  author  of  the  "  Book 
of  Nature,"  was  on  his  death-bed  he  said,  "  I  have  taken  what  unfortunately  the 
generality  of  Christians  too  much  take.  I  have  taken  the  middle  walk  of  Chris- 
tianity. I  have  endeavoured  to  live  up  to  its  duties  and  doctrines,  but  I  have  lived 
below  its  privileges."  Is  not  this,  alasl  but  too  true  of  the  great  body  of  those  of 
as  who  call  ourselves  Christians,  and  who  may  indeed  be  so  ?  Are  we  not  living 
below  the  spirituality,  and  of  course  without  the  enjoyment,  which  God  designs  for 
His  children,  and  so  without  the  example  and  usefulness  that  should  mark  the  life 
of  every  Christian  ?  Far  better,  with  Whitefield,  to  pray  that  he  might  be  "  an 
extraordinary  Christian,"  and  to  endeavour,  by  God's  grace,  so  to  liva  M  to  be  an 
example  to  all  of  a  true  and  living  Christianity. 

Yer.  35.  But  tbe  days  ttUI  come  yrhm.  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away  Crom 
them. — Duties  are  not  to  be  pressed  indiscriminately  on  all  persons  and  at  all  times : — 
Our  Lord  makes  fasting  a  duty,  but,  nevertheless.  He  excuses  the  children  of  the 
bridechamber  while  the  bridegroom  was  with  them,  and  then  gives,  as  one  reason 
for  excusing  them,  the  inexpediency  of  prescribing  austerities  to  those  yet  young  in 
His  religion :  it  would  only  be  likely  to  alienate  and  disgust  them,  driving  them 
back  to  what  they  had  abandened,  and  thus  making  the  rent  worse,  even  as  would 


mAt.  ▼.]  ST.  LUKE.  585 

the  new  cloth  fastened  on  the  old.  Attend  carefully  to  this.  There  is  all  the  differ' 
ence  between  keeping  a  duty  entirely  out  of  sight,  and  enjoining  it  only  at  a  certain 
stage  in  Christian  experience.  Undoubte  dly,  aa  a  Christian  grows  in  grace  he  growa 
fitted  for  sacrifices,  privations,  and  endurances,  which  would  have  quite  overcome  him 
if  demanded  at  an  earlier  poiuc  of  his  careafas  a  believer ;  and  ft  is  not  so  much 
Christian  prudence  as  Christian  truth  to  avoid  requiring  from  the  young  convert 
what  may  justly  be  required  from  the  practised  disciple.  If  our  duties  grow,  as 
they  certainly  do,  with  our  Christian  age,  it  is  not  merely  inexpedient,  it  is  actually 
erroneous,  to  ask  a  beginner  to  perform  a  task,  or  to  bear  a  burden,  for  which  he 
may  not  have  strength  till  grown  into  a  veteran.    (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  36-38.  No  man  putteth  a  place  of  a  new  garment  upon  an  old. — The  patched 
garment: — We  appreciate  easily  the  oftonsiveness  of  what  is  incongruous.  It  is 
fatal  alike  to  beauty,  to  symmetry,  and  to  effectiveness.  A  sparrow  is  not  as 
beautiful  as  a  bird  of  Paradise,'  yet  the  little  brown  bird  is  a  pleasant  sight.  Try 
to  fasten  upon  him  the  gorgeous  plumage  of  the  other  bird,  and  you  make  him 
ridiculous  at  once.  His  beauty  consists  in  being  simply  himself.  An  inferior 
thing  that  is  constant  to  its  own  ideal,  consistent,  true,  is  a  far  more  useful  and  a 
far  more  pleasurable  thing  than  when  you  try  to  make  it  look  like  something  else» 
or  do  the  work  of  something  else,  or  take  it  out  of  its  place  and  put  it  in  circum- 
stances to  which  it  has  no  adaptation.  Take  a  plain  stone  wall,  for  instance. 
There  is  nothing  very  artistic  about  it,  but  if  it  be  well  and  truly  built,  a  simple 
wall  and  nothing  else,  it  is  not  an  unpleasing  object.  But  now  go  to  the  ruins  of 
that  Gothic  church,  and  bring  away  the  sculptured  keystone  of  an  arch,  th» 
fragments  of  a  carved  screen,  a  column  with  an  elaborately  cut  capital,  and  sandr^ 
pinnacles  and  gargoyles,  and  work  these  into  the  masonry  of  your  wall,  and  set 
op  your  pinnacles  along  the  top,  and  let  your  gargoyles  protrude  their  hideous  heads 
at  intervals :  you  have  made  a  ridiculous  thing  out  of  your  stone  wall.  People  at 
once  see  that  something  is  there  which  belongs  to  quite  another  order  of  things. 
Everybody  acknowledges  the  difference  between  the  church  and  the  plain  wall,  and 
the  difference  offends  no  one  so  long  as  each  keeps  its  place  and  is  simply  itself. 
But  the  attempt  to  pateh  one  with  the  other  emphasizes  the  difference  offensively. 
The  rent  is  made  worse :  the  beauty  is  taken  from  the  church,  and  the  wall  is  made 
ugly.  {M.  R,  Vincent,  D.D.)  Theology  must  tally  with  experience : — I  remember  an 
old  farmer  who,  when  he  was  about  sixty  yearp  of  age,  professed  faith  in  Christ.  He 
was  full  of  zeal,  and,  for  a  time,  was  like  a  flaming  torch  in  the  neighbourhood.  I 
never  saw  a  man  who  seemed  to  feel  so  keenly  the  awful  risk  he  had  run  in  delaying 
his  salvation  so  long.  He  could  not  be  in  a  prayer-meeting  without  rising  to  warn 
his  fellow-men  against  his  mistake.  But  he  was  also  an  ignorant  man,  and  hia 
new  experience  only  deepened  his  sense  of  his  ignorance  of  the  things  of  God  ;  and 
he  nsed  to  shut  himself  in  his  room  with  volumes  on  systematic  theology,  and 
painfully  wade  through  their  contents,  and  then  c^me  down  to  the  prayer-meeting 
and  attempt  to  reproduce  what  he  had  read ;  and  you  can  easily  imagine  the  result. 
So  long  as  he  kept  to  his  own  experience,  so  long  as  he  waa  just  himself,  speaking 
of  what  he  knew  and  felt,  he  spoke  with  power.  The  moment  he  tried  to  patch 
the  theologian  upon  the  plain  farmer,  he  spoiled  It  all.  The  theology  was  ruined, 
and  so  was  the  personal  experience.  The  ignorance  which  no  one  would  have 
thought  of  in  the  plain  man  speaking  out  of  a  full  heart,  was  thrust  into  promi* 
nence  by  the  ridiculous  attempt  to  play  the  part  of  a  theological  teacher.  The  rent 
was  made  worse.  (Ibid.)  The  unity  of  the  gospel : — The  gospel  is  a  nnit,  one 
and  inseparable.  It  is  sufficient  unto  itself.  It  asks  no  aid  from  any  source  out- 
side of  itselt  It  needs  no  combination  to  develop  its  peculiar  virtues.  The  great 
truth  it  sets  before  men  is  Christ  all,  and  in  all.  And  it  does  its  work  for  and  in 
man  upon  the  condition  that  it  be  received  as  it  is ;  entire,  adding  nothing  and 
subtracting  nothing.  It  does  not  engage  that  there  shall  be  virtue  in  its  fragments 
apart  from  the  whole.  You  may  take  up  the  lock  of  that  rifle,  and  pull  and  snap^ 
it  as  much  as  you  please,  and  it  will  be  a  good  while  before  yon  shoot  anything. 
Yon  must  combine  it  with  the  barrel  and  the  stock.  Neither  lock,  stock,  nor 
barrel  is  good  for  anything,  except  as  they  together  make  up  a  rifle.  Similarly^ 
1  cannot  answer  for  the  effect  of  a  single  Christian  precept  or  doctrine  disjoined 
from  the  whole.  It  is  only  a  patch,  cot  out  from  a  good,  solid  garment,  and 
refusing  to  match  with  any  other  fabric.  (Ibid.)  No  patch-work  morality  .*— 
Yoo  say,  and  say  honestly  no  doubt,  that  you  want  to  be  right  and  to  do  right» 
bat  ypu  can  accept  the  gospel  only  in  j^rt.    Chriat's  moral  oode  ia  all  Teiy  well, 


Xd9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

bat  the  doctrine  of  the  new  birth  yon  cannot  accept.    So  yon  go  to  cntting  patchea 
again.    You  cut  the  moral  code  clean  from  the  new  birth.     You  will  keep  Chriet'i 
precepts  without  being  a  new  creature.     You  will  sew  the  new  code  upon  the  old 
nature.    Very  well.     Some  people  in  a  city  think  they  will  build  a  fountain.     They 
engage  an  engineer,  and  a  noted  sculptor.  A  beautiful  design  is  carried  out  in  stone 
or  bronze.     The  water  is  to  pour  from  vases  in  the  hands  of  sea-nymphs,  and  to 
spout  from  the  horns  of  tritons.     At  last  all  is  ready.    The  crowd  assemble  to 
"witness  the  opening  of  the  fountain.    The  signal  is  given,  there  is  a  little  spirt  from 
a  jet  here  and  there,  and  then  all  is  dry  as  before.     The  stupid  engineer  has  drawn 
'his  water  from  a  point  almost  as  low  as  the  base  of  the  fountain,  and  there  is  no 
head  to  send  the  water  through  the  pipes.    But  a  more  competent  workman  comes 
to  the  rescue.    He  lays  a  large  main.     He  leads  it  to  a  deep  lake  or  reservoir  far 
up  above  the  town  ;  and  now,  at  the  signal,  the  crystal  waters  shoot  high  into  the 
air,  and  drape  the  beautiful  forms  with  their  falling  spray.     Oh,  my  friend,  I 
greatly  fear  you  have  not  rightly  estimated  that  moral  system  of  Christ.     It  is 
grander  than  you  think ;  higher  than  you  are  aware  ;  and  to  make  your  life  flow 
through  it  to  refresh  the  world,  you  will  need  something  besides  the  pressure 
of  your    feeble  will.     Your  reservoir  is  too  low   down.     If  your  life  is  to  fill 
that  godlike  out-line  of  virtue,  its  impulse  must   be  Divine.    If  your  impulse 
is  earthly,  your  life  will  be  earthly.      That  moral  code  was  meant  for  a  new 
man,  and  nothing  but  a   birth  from  above,  nothing  but   an  impulse  generated 
and  maintained   by  God  Himself,  will  ever  enable  you  to   live   it.     The  new 
code  and  the  new  man  will  not  be  separated.      If  they  shall  not  go  together 
the  gospel  will  be  caricatured  by  yon,  and  the  new  precepts  will  break  loose  con- 
tinually from  the  old  will  and  the  old  passions  and  the  old  habits,  and  the  rent  will 
he  worse.     (Ibid.)         Worthlessness  of  a  patched  character : — Men  talk  of  turning 
over  a  new  leaf — of  beginning  over  again.     How  many  times  you  hear  it.     "  Yes,  I 
have  been  careless,  self-indulgent,  hasty  and  passionate  ;  I  am  going  to  try  to  do 
better."    Never  does  the  old  year  strike  its  last  hour,  that  hundreds  and  thousands 
of  people  are  not  lying  wakeful  and  thoughtful  upon  their  beds,  or  sitting  with 
sober  meditation  in  their  closets,  and  gathering  up  their  faculties  into  mighty 
resolutions  for  the  year  to  come.     "  I  will  swear  no  more.     I  wiU  drink  no  more. 
I  will  go  to  the  house  of  God.    I  will  begin  to  read  my  Bible."    The  resolutions  are 
good  and  honest,  no  doubt.    It  is  a  good  thing  that  one's  attention  has  been  called 
to  those  faults.     It  will  be  a  better  thing  if  he  can  carry  out  his  resolution  and 
master  them  ;  but,  alas,  neither  the  good  resolutions  nor  their  accomplishment  go 
far  enough.      It  is  patch-work  still ;   patching  pieces    of  the  gospel  on   the  old 
nature ;  a  temperance  piece,  and  a  Bible-reading  piece,  and  a  church-going  piece, 
upon  a  nature  which,  in  its  very  quaUty  and  essence,  is  estranged  from  God.     The 
man  gives  up  an  indulgence  here  and  there,  says  to  God  in  effect,  "  Your  moral  law 
may  come  and  occupy  this  ground  which  has  been  occupied  by  my  misdoing  "  ;  but 
Buch  an  entrance  of  God's  law  is  Uke  the  occupation  of  some  remote  outpost  of  a 
fortified  town  by  an  invader.     The  citadel  is  still  unreached.    The  situation  is 
commanded  by  the  garrison  of  the  town.     There  is  no  conquest  until  the  invader 
gets  in  there.     [Ibid.)         Christianity  will  not  amalgamate  with  Judaism: — If  any 
of  the  Pharisees,  moved  by  the  miracles  which  Christ  wrought,  had  felt  disposed  to 
receive  Him  as  a  teacher  from  God,  the  thing  which  they  would  most  naturally 
!have  attempted  would  have  been  the  making  a  compound  of  their  own  religion  and 
the  Christian,  so  that,  whilst  they  kept  what  they  liked  most  in  their  tenets  and 
observances,  they  might  have  the  advantage  of  the  new  revelation  ;  and  therefore, 
what  Christ  bad  to    denounce  in  the  case  of   these   Pharisees  was  the  lurking 
notion  that  Christianity  might  admit  some  admixtures  from  other  religions,  so  that 
men  might  bring  into  its  profession  their  own  favourite  theories,  and  find  them 
amalgamate  very  well  with  its  doctrines.      This  notion  Christ  denounces  most 
emphatically.     Christianity,   though  far   enough  from  being  a  new  revelation, 
required  that  the  scene  should  be  swept  clear  for  its  institutions,  peremptorily 
refusing  that  there  should  be  blended  with  the  revealed  mode  of  a  sinner's  accept- 
ance anything  of  ceremonial  ordinance,  demanding  to  be  received  without  admix* 
ture,  or  rejected  without  reserve.    And  it  is  against  this  that  men  in  every  age  have 
arebelled.     They  have  wanted  not  only  to  keep  some  part  of  their  own  favourite 
systems,  but  to  keep  it  for  the  very  end  which,  according  to  their  own  theory,  it 
had  heretofore  answered.    Thus  generally  with  good  works.     It  does  not  content 
them  that  Christianity  demands  good  works,  that  it  makes  salvation  impossible 
without  ihfim,  and  thus  transfers  to  its  system  the  favourite  part  of  their  own  t  they 


our.  v.]  ST.  LUKE.  637 

have  been  accustomed  to  account  their  works  meritorious,  and  they  would  fain  have 
Christianity  account  them  so  too  ;  and  this  Chriatianity  will  not  do.  If  it  require 
and  retain  fasting  and  almsgiving,  it  will  not  allow  them  any  justifying  merit ;  it 
may  be  said  to  alter  their  character  in  granting  them  admission.  Thus,  whilst 
it  has  much  in  common  with  other  systems,  it  is  wholly  against  the  being 
compounded  with  those  systems,  in  order  that  the  produce  may  give  a  mixed 
mode    of    obtaining    salvation.      (H.    Melvill,    B.D.)  Christianity    a    new 

dispensation: — Our  Lord  is  referring  to  the  proposal  to  enforce  the  ascetic 
leanings  of  the  forerunner,  and  the  pharisaic  regulations  which  had  become 
a  parasitic  growth  on  the  old  dispensation,  upon  the  glad  simplicity  of  the 
new  dispensation.  To  act  thus  was  much  the  same  thing  as  using  the  gospel  by 
way  of  a  mere  adjunct  to — a  mere  purple  patch  upon — the  old  garment  of  the  law. 
The  teaching  of  Christ  was  a  new  and  seamless  robe  which  would  only  be  spoilt  by 
being  rent.  It  was  impossible  to  tear  a  few  doctrines  and  precepts  from  Christianity, 
and  use  them  as  ornaments  and  improvements  of  Mosaism,  If  this  were  attempted 
(1)  the  gospel  would  be  maimed  by  the  rending  from  its  entirety  ;  (2)  the  contrast 
between  the  new  and  the  old  system  would  be  made  more  glaring ;  (3)  the  decay  of 
the  evanescent  institutions  would  only  be  violently  accelerated.  (Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  Suitable  external  forms  : — Jesus  here  applies  a  great  principle  to  all 
external  rites  and  ceremonies.  They  have  their  value.  As  the  wineskin  retains 
the  wine,  so  are  feelings  and  aspirations  aided,  and  even  preserved,  by  suitable 
external  forms.  Without  these,  emotion  would  lose  itself  for  want  of  restraint^ 
wasted  like  spilt  wine,  by  diffuseness.  And  if  the  forms  are  unsuitable  and  out- 
worn, the  same  calamity  happens,  the  strong  new  feelings  break  through  them, 
•«  and  the  wine  perisheth,  and  the  skins."  The  coming  of  a  new  revelation  meant 
the  repeal  of  old  observances,  and  Christ  refused  to  sew  His  new  faith  like  a  patch- 
work upon  ancient  institutions,  of  which  it  would  only  complete  the  ruin.  Thus 
He  anticipated  the  decision  of  His  apostles  releasing  the  Gentiles  from  the  law  of 
Moses.  (Dean  Chadwick.)  A  mixed  garment : — Just  as  it  was  forbidden  by  th» 
law  of  Moses  to  wear  a  mixed  garment  of  Unen  and  of  wool,  so  there  was  a  deeper 
and  a  more  essential  incongruity  involved  in  every  attempt  to  patch  the  old  and 
tattered  garments  of  the  law  with  the  new  and  seamless  robe  of  the  gospel.  Just 
as  the  insertion  of  a  piece  of  undressed  cloth,  which  shrinks  when  wetted,  and 
takes  along  with  it  a  part  of  the  old  and  worn  garment,  does  but  increase  the  rent 
which  it  is  designed  to  mend ;  just  as  the  unfermented  wine  put  into  old  skins, 
bursts  the  skins  and  perishes  with  them,  even  so  our  Lord  declares  that  all  at- 
tempts to  combine  the  bondage  of  the  law  with  the  liberty  of  the  gospel  involves  a 
fundamental  ignorance  of  the  nature  and  design  of  both.  The  two  similitudes  em- 
ployed by  our  Lord  seem  to  exhibit  this  truth  in  different  ways.  1.  The  similitude 
of  the  old  garment  patched  with  a  piece  of  new  cloth  seems  more  immediately 
applicable  to  external  rites  and  ceremonies,  such  as  the  observance  of  those 
prescribed  days  and  months  and  years  which  caused  St.  Paul  to  stand  in  doubt  of 
the  Galatian  Church.  2.  The  similitude  of  the  new  wine  seems  to  have  reference 
to  the  inner  life  and  spirit — the  very  life  and  soul  of  the  Christian  dispensation 
which  could  not  be  restrained  within  the  trammels  of  the  worldly  sanctuary  of 
Judaism.  The  Jiistory  of  the  Church,  in  all  after  ages,  teaches  how  greatly  this 
lesson  was  needed,  and  how  imperfectly  it  has  been  learned.  (G.J.  Elliot,  M.A.) 
New  cloth  on  an  old  garment : — This,  we  may  add,  is  what  the  Church  of  Christ  has 
too  often  done  in  her  work  as  the  converter  of  the  nations.  Sacramental  ordinances, 
or  monastic  vows,  or  Puritan  formulffi,  or  Quaker  conventionahties,  have  been 
engrafted  on  lives  that  were  radically  barbarous  or  heathen,  or  worldly,  and  the 
contrast  has  been  glaring,  and  the  rent  made  worse.  The  more  excellent  way 
which  our  Lord  pursued,  and  which  it  is  our  wisdom  to  pursue,  is  to  take  tiie 
old  garment  and  to  transform  it,  as  by  a  renewing  power  from  within,  thread  by 
thread,  till  old  things  are  passed  away  and  all  things  are  become  new.  (Dean 
Flumptre.)  The  broken  bottles: — The  doctrines  of  religion  demand  a  certain 
suitableness,  or  preparedness,  in  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  taught ;  and  if  there 
be  no  attempt  in  the  persons  to  fit  themselves  for  the  doctrines — to  adapt  the 
bottles  to  the  wine — there  is  nothing  to  be  looked  for  but  that  the  doctrines  wiU  be 
wasted,  and  the  persons,  like  the  bottles,  be  only  injured  by  what  they  have  received. 
It  may  be  the  pure,  the  generous  wine  which  is  poured  forth — the  preacher  may 
dispense  nothing  but  the  unadulterated  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  the 
great  mass  of  hearers  come  up  to  God's  house  without  the  smallest  preparation  of 
heart,  with  scarce  a  thought  given  beforehand  to  the  solemn  dutj  in  whiah  they  are 


8S8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBUf.  n. 


about  to  engage.  In  place  of  having  been  secretly  in  prayer  that  God  woold  give 
unto  them  the  hearing  ear  and  the  understanding  heart ;  in  place  of  having  been 
endeavouring  to  purge  out  the  old  leaven  of  worldliness  and  prejudice,  that  so  they 
might  bring  with  them  candid  and  unoccupied  minds ;  they  rush  to  the  sanctuary, 
as  they  would  to  some  scene  of  business  or  pleasure;  conversing,  perhaps,  up  to  the 
moment  of  entering  it  on  politics,  or  scandal,  or  commerce,  or  feahion ;  and  con- 
tinuing to  give  the  same  things  their  thoughts,  when  restrained  by  the  place 
from  giving  them  their  tongues.  And  what  is  to  be  looked  for  from  the  attempt  to 
pour  the  new  wine  into  these  unseasoned  bottles,  but  that  the  wine  will  be  lost  and 
the  bottles  themselves  broken  ?  Yes— you  are  not  to  overlook  this  peculiarity  in 
the  parable — the  bottles  are  broken  through  the  action  of  the  wine ;  not  through 
any  external  violence,  but  simply  through  the  workings  of  the  generous  liquid.  It 
is  thus  with  the  moral  facts  which  the  parable  illustrates.  The  preaching  of  the 
gospel  is  no  inefficient  thing,  producing  no  injury  where  it  produces  no  benefit.  It 
is  "the  savour  of  death  unto  death,"  where  it  fails  to  be  •'  the  savour  of  life  unto 
life."  This  may  be  little  thought  of  by  numbers  who,  perhaps,  attend  church 
regularly  on  Sundays,  and  spend  the  intermediate  days  as  those  who  are  ignorant 
of  judgment  to  come.  Yet  it  is  of  all  hardening  things  the  most  hardening,  to 
remain  unrenewed  under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Alas  1  for  an  audience 
accustomed  to  hear  the  gospel,  but  to  hear  it  only  with  the  understanding  whilst 
they  shut  up  the  heart  I  I  may  pour  in  the  wine— but,  at  every  fresh  pouring, 
there  is,  so  to  speak,  a  fresh  rent  in  the  bottles.  Every  Sunday  does  but  make  the 
matter  worse,  dismissing  the  hearers  to  their  engrossing  pursuits,  and  their 
ensnaring  amusements,  but  with  another  unimproved  opportunity  for  which  to 
account,  another  warning  neglected,  another  effort  on  God's  part  resisted,  and, 
therefore,  another  nerve  added  to  the  power  of  resistance,  (if.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
New  wine  in  old  bottles : — As  the  action  of  organized  churches  has  too  often 
reproduced  the  mistake  of  sewing  the  patch  of  new  cloth  on  the  old  garment,  so  in 
the  action  of  enthusiastic  or  mystic  sects,  in  the  history  of  Montanism,  Quakerism 
in  its  earlier  stages,  the  growth  of  the  so-called  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church, 
which  had  its  origin  in  the  history  of  Edward  Irving,  we  have  that  of  pouring  '•  new 
wine  into  old  bottles."  (Dean  Plumptre.)  Permanence  of  the  old : — When  Mr. 
Lincoln  was  a  young  man,  he  was  awakened  one  night  by  the  good  deacon  with 
whom  he  boarded,  and  told  that  the  stars  were  falling  and  the  world  coming  to  an 
end.  He  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  saw  the  air  full  of  meteors,  but,  looking 
beyond,  he  saw  the  grand  old  constellations  firm  in  their  places  where  he  had 
always  seen  them  from  childhood  ;  and  he  went  to  bed,  feeling  that  all  was  well  bo 
long  as  the  old  coastellationB  were  unmoved.    (D.  E.  Lancing,  DJ>.^ 


CHAPTER  VL 

Vebb.  1,  9.  And  It  eame  to  pass  on  the  second  Sabbath  after  the  first,  tliat  Ht 
went  through  the  corn-fields. — The  $econd-fir$t  Sabbath : — This  is  a  very  diffiault 
phrase,  and  all  explanations  of  it  must  be  conjectural,  as  there  is  apparently  no 
Sabbath  designated  by  this  name  in  any  Rabbinical  writing.  One  of  the  two  follow- 
ing explanations  seems  most  likely :  1.  Either  that  it  was  the  Sabbath  which  occurred 
during  the  Octave  of  Pentecost — the  greatest  Sabbath  of  the  year  being  the  Passover 
Sabbath  ("  that  Sabbath  day  was  an  high  day  " — John  xix.  31) ;  and  the  one  occur- 
ring at  the  next  greatest  feast,  that  of  Pentecost,  would  be  the  next  greatest,  or 
next-first,  or  "  second-first,"  the  Passover  Sabbath  being  the  first-first,  or  by  far 
the  greatest.  The  feast  of  Tabernacles  would  be  the  third.  2.  But  very  many 
take  it  to  be  a  Sabbath  at  the  Passover,  either  the  first  Sabbath  after  the  second 
day  of  that  festival,  from  which  the  Sabbaths  to  Pentecost  are  numbered,  or  the 
last  day  of  the  feast,  which  was  to  be  observed  aa  a  Sabbath.  Whichever  of  these 
IB  the  true  meaning,  it  appears  to  me  that  St.  Luke  does  not  designate  this  day  as  the 
second-first,  to  mark  the  date  when  the  transaction  occurred,  but  to  mark  the 
peculiar  holiness  of  the  day.  The  disciples  were,  in  their  estimation,  breaking  no 
ordinary  Sabbath,  but  one  of  the  most  sacred  of  all.  (M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.) 
Pleating  Sabbath  impressions : — That  Sunday  of  my  childhood ;  the  marvelloaa 


.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  889 

•tillnesB  of  that  day  over  all  Lichfield  town  hill ;  that  wondrous  ringing  of  the  bell; 
the  strange  interpretation  that  my  young  imagination  gave  to  the  crowing  of  the 
eock  and  to  the  singing  of  the  birds ;  that  wondering  look  which  I  used  to  have 
into  things;  that  strange  lifting  half-way  up  into  inspiration,  as  it  were;  that 
sense  of  the  joyful  influence  that  sometimes  brooded  down  like  a  stormy  day,  and 
sometimes  opened  up  like  a  gala-day  in  summer  on  me,  made  Sunday  a  more 
effectually  marked  day  than  any  other  of  all  my  youthful  life,  and  it  stands  out  as 
elear  as  crystal  until  this  hour.  It  might  have  been  made  happier  and  better  if 
there  had  been  a  little  more  adaptation  to  my  disposition  and  my  wants  ;  but,  with 
all  its  limitations,  I  would  rather  have  the  other  six  days  of  the  week  weeded  out  of 
my  memory  than  the  Sabbath  of  my  childhood.  And  this  is  right.  Every  child 
ought  to  be  so  brought  up  in  the  family,  that  when  he  thinks  of  home  the  first  spot 
on  which  his  thought  rests  shall  be  Sunday,  as  the  culminating  joy  of  the  house- 
hold. {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Exemplary  Sabbath-keeping : — The  Mayflower  a  name 
DOW  immortal,  had  crossed  the  ocean.  It  had  borne  its  hundred  passengers  over 
the  vast  deep,  and  after  a  perilous  voyage  had  reached  the  bleak  shores  of  New 
England,  in  the  beginning  of  winter.  The  spot  which  was  to  furnish  a  home  and 
•  burial-place  was  now  to  be  selected.  The  shallop  was  unshipped,  but  needed 
repairs,  and  sixteen  weary  days  elapsed  before  it  was  ready  for  service.  Amidst 
iee  and  snow  it  was  then  sent  out,  with  some  half  a  dozen  pilgrims,  to  find  a  suit- 
able place  where  to  land.  The  spray  of  the  sea,  says  the  historian,  froze  on  them, 
and  made  their  clothes  like  coats  of  iron.  Five  days  they  wandered  about,  search- 
ing in  vain  for  a  suitable  landing-place.  A  storm  came  on  ;  the  snow  and  the  rain 
fell ;  the  sea  swelled  ;  the  rudder  broke  ;  the  mast  and  the  sail  fell  overboard.  In 
this  storm  and  cold,  without  a  tent,  a  house,  or  the  shelter  of  a  rock,  the  Christian 
Sabbath  approached,  the  day  which  they  regarded  as  holy  unto  God ;  a  day  on 
which  they  were  not  to  "  do  any  work."  What  should  be  done?  As  the  evening 
before  the  Sabbath  drew  on  they  pushed  over  the  surf,  entered  a  fair  sound, 
sheltered  themselves  under  the  lee  of  a  rise  of  land,  kindled  a  fire,  and  on  that  little 
island  they  spent  the  day  in  the  solemn  worship  of  their  Maker.  On  the  next  day 
their  feet  touched  the  rock,  now  sacred  as  the  place  of  the  landing  of  the  pilgrims. 
Nothing  more  strikingly  marks  the  character  of  this  people  than  this  act,  and  I  do 
not  know  that  I  could  refer  to  a  better  illustration,  even  in  their  history,  showing 
that  theirs  was  the  religion  of  principle,  and  that  this  reUgion  made  them  what 
they  were.  {A.  Barne$,  D,D.)  The  corn-field  : — There  are  many  lessons  that  the 
eom-fields  teach.  The  world,  children,  is  one  great  cornfield,  and  you  are  growing 
in  it.  Now  a  question  arises,  are  you  growing  there  as  com,  or  as  the  poppy,  the 
cockle,  and  the  blue-bottle  ?  "Whoever  passes  by,  through  the  corn-fields,  sees  the 
purple  flower,  and  admires  it.  But  the  farmer  loves  it  not,  for  its  seeds  contain  a 
noxious  element,  which  greatly  injures  the  corn  around,  and  fills  his  flour  with 
black  specks.  When  ripe,  the  capsule  contains  black  glossy  aromatic  seeds,  and  in 
them  is  the  mischievous  saponine.  While  the  wheat  has  been  ripening  wholesome 
grain,  the  corn-cockle  has  been  maturing  poisonous  seeds.  Both  plants  drank  of 
tiie  same  dew,  basked  in  the  same  sunlight,  were  fanned  by  the  same  breezes ;  the 
wheat  made  little  show  of  flower,  but  has  produced  a  precious  grain ;  the  cockle 
blazed  with  beauty,  and  ripens  an  injurious  seed.  I  would  have  you,  children, 
make  up  your  minds  early  what  you  are  going  to  be  in  God's  field,  wheat  or 
poppies ;  whether  you  are  going  to  yield  grain  or  blossom ;  whether  you  will  be 
profitable  or  ornamental.  I  speak  first  to  you  girls.  You  will  be  called  to  live  in 
the  world,  and  to  be,  to  some  extent,  ornaments  in  it.  You  will  dress  more  gaily 
than  boys,  wear  smart  gowns,  and  ribbons,  and  feathers,  whereas  boys  will  clothe 
themselves  in  sober  colours.  There  is,  therefore,  much  more  danger  in  your 
growing  up  to  be  cockle,  and  poppy,  and  blue-flower.  I  think  that  all  the  most 
showy  flowers  are  without  edible  fruit.  Dress  modestly,  becomingly,  and  prettily, 
against  that  there  is  no  law  ;  but  as  you  value  all  that  is  holy,  all  that  is  eternal, 
do  not  let  dress  occupy  your  thoughts.  There  was  a  Duke  of  Tyrol,  who  went  by 
the  name  of  Frederick  with  the  Empty  Pockets.  He  had  a  little  money  in  the 
eoffer,  so  he  spent  it  all  in  gilding  the  roof  of  the  balcony  that  overhung  the 
pubUo  square  in  Innsbriick.  It  is  there  still,  with  some  of  the  gold  still  adhering  to 
the  tiles.  There  are  plenty  of  men  who  act  like  Frederick  with  the  Empty  Pockets ; 
•11  they  have  is  laid  on  as  exterior  gilding,  everything  goes  in  making  a  great 
display.     If  they  have  money,  it  is  exhibited  in  the  most  offensive  and  vulgar 

S refusion ;  if  they  have  a  little  learning,  it  is  lugged  in  by  the  ears  on  all  occasions  ; 
!  they  have  some  position  it  is  made  the  most  of.     Gathered  in  bundles  to  b« 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

luarned  1  Yes,  that  is  the  terrible  end  of  the  weed.  The  great  lesson  that  I  wish 
to  impress  on  you,  children,  to  day,  is,  to  Uve  for  the  future,  and  not  for  the 
present ;  to  be  concerned  what  fruit  you  shall  bring  forth,  not  what  show  you  shall 
make.  (S.  Baring-Gould, M.A.)  Christ  arguing  with  the  Pharisees: — We  should 
naturally  wish  to  know  how  a  Divine  Being  would  argue  with  men.  We  should 
expect  that  His  arguments  would  be  clear,  convincing,  and  unanswerable,  and, 
consequently,  of  that  kind  best  adapted  to  the  subject.  In  such  expectation  we 
Bhhll  not  be  disappointed.  1.  Against  the  opinions  of  the  Pharisees  respecting  the 
Sabbath,  our  Saviour's  first  argument  was  taken  from  the  example  of  David. 
David,  by  partaking  of  the  shew-bread,  had  broken  a  positive  law  ;  but  the  disciples 
of  Jesus  had  violated  no  law.  2.  The  second  argument  is  stiU  more  pointed.  Th« 
priests  in  the  temple  service  did  not  observe  rest  on  the  Sabbath  ;  for,  according  to 
the  strict  letter  of  the  law,  their  duties  could  not  be  performed  without  violating 
the  Sabbath ;  yet  no  blame  was  attached  to  them.  3.  The  third  argument 
advances  a  step  higher.  God  prefers  the  duties  of  humanity  to  positive  command- 
raents,  when  it  is  impossible  to  observe  both  these.  Therefore,  even  if  the  plucking 
and  eating  of  ears  of  com  on  the  Sabbath  had  been  prohibited,  the  mercy  of  God 
would  have  overlooked  it  in  a  case  of  necessity.  4.  The  fourth  argument  was,  that 
the  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  ;  therefore  it  was  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  Sabbath. 
Thus  we  see  that,  according  to  our  Saviour,  no  act  of  necessity  nor  of  mercy  is  a 
breach  of  the  Sabbath.     (J.  Thomson,  D.D.) 

Yer.  5.  That  the  Son  of  Uan  Is  Lord  also  of  the  Sahbatb. — A  npiritual  man  Lord 
of  the  Siibbath: — When  is  a  son  of  man  lord  of  the  Sabbath-day  f  To  whom  may 
the  Sabbath  safely  become  a  shadow  ?  I  reply,  he  that  has  the  mind  of  Christ 
may  exercise  discretionary  lordship  over  the  Sabbath-day.  He  who  is  in  possession 
of  the  substance  may  let  the  shadow  go .  A  man  in  health  has  done  with  the 
prescriptions  of  the  physician.  But  for  an  unspiritual  man  to  regulate  his  hours 
and  amount  of  rest  by  his  desires,  is  just  as  preposterous  as  for  an  unhealthy  man 
to  rule  his  appetites  by  his  sensations.  Win  the  mind  of  Christ — be  like  Him — and 
then  in  the  reality  of  rest  in  God,  the  Sabbath  form  of  rest  will  be  superseded. 
Eematn  apart  from  Christ,  and  then  you  are  under  the  law  again — the  fourth 
commandment  is  as  necessary  for  you  as  it  was  for  the  Israelite  ;  the  prescriptive 
regimen  which  may  discipline  your  soul  to  a  sounder  state.  It  is  at  his  peril  that 
the  worldly  man  departs  from  the  rule  of  the  day  of  rest.  Nothing  can  make  ua 
free  from  the  law  but  the  Spirit.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Jesus  and  the  two 
ideals : — I.  The  title  He  gives  Himself.  Son  of  Man.  We  find  Him  botn 
humbled  and  exalted  as  the  Son  of  Man.  As  the  Son  of  Man  He  hath  not  where 
to  lay  His  head;  and  as  the  Son  of  Man  He  claims  authority  to  forgive  sin,  and  it 
Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath-day.  He  applied  this  phrase  to  Himself  in  all  the 
different  aspects  of  His  great  life.  In  Him,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  humanity  is 
again  in  its  Sonship  of  God.  II.  The  claim  He  makes  oh  His  own  bihalf, 
as  Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath-day.  The  perfection  of  God  and  the  perfection  of 
man,  as  depicted  in  the  Bible,  are  two  distinct,  and,  out  of  their  own  spheres, 
incompatible  ideals.  These  two  ideals  seem  to  have  met  in  the  Christ.  He  is 
humble  and  self-assertive,  receptive  and  fuU.  Authority  and  obedience  meet  in 
Eim  and  blend.  (J.  Ogmore  Davies.)  The  Sabbath,  a  saving  economy  : — Sunday  ia 
God's  special  present  to  the  working  man ;  and  one  of  its  chief  objects  is  to  prolong 
his  life,  and  to  preserve  efficient  his  working  tone.  In  the  vital  system  it  acts  like 
a  compensation  pond ;  it  replenishes  the  spirits,  the  elasticity  and  vigour  which 
the  last  six  days  have  drained  away,  and  supplies  the  force  which  is  to  fill  the  six 
days  succeeding.  In  the  economy  of  life  it  answers  the  same  purpose  as,  in  the 
economy  of  income,  is  answered  by  a  savings-bank.  The  frugal  man  who  puts 
asides  a  pound  to-day,  and  another  pound  next  month,  and  who,  in  a  quiet  way,  is 
always  putting  by  his  stated  pound  from  time  to  time,  when  he  grows  old  and  frail 
gets  not  only  the  same  pounds  back  again,  but  a  good  many  pounds  besides.  And 
the  conscientious  man  who  husbands  one  day  of  existence  every  week — who, 
instead  of  allowing  the  Sunday  to  be  trampled  and  torn  in  the  hurry  and  scramble 
of  life,  treasures  it  devoutly  up — will  find  that  the  "  Lord  of  the  Sabbath  "  keeps  it 
for  him,  and  in  length  of  days  and  a  hale  old  age  gives  it  back  with  usury.  The 
savings-bank  of  human  existence  is  the  weekly  Sunday.    {North  British  Review.) 

Vers.  6-11.  And  there  was  a  man  whose  right  hand  was  withered. — The  ahilitp 
of  Christ  to  heal  tlie  withered  energies  of  the  human  soul : — The  miracle  is  a  pictar* 


OBAP.  yt]  ST.  LUKE.  641 

of  Boblime  moral  instruction.  I.  Thb  best  enekgies  of  the  soul  are  in  4  withered 
CONDITION.  1.  Man's  intellectual  nature  withered,  and  csnnot  attain  to  the  innei 
meaning  of  Divine  truth.  2.  Man's  moral  nature  withered,  and  cannot  attain  to 
the  rich  blessings  of  the  gospel.  3.  Man's  compassionate  sympathy  withered,  and 
not  deeply  sensitive  to  the  woe  occasioned  by  moral  evil.  4.  Hence,  seeing  that 
the  best  energies  of  man  are  withered,  he  cannot  render  to  God  the  service  due  to 
Him.  n.  The  withered  energies  op  the  human  soul  are  capable  of  effectivb 
KESTOBATiON  BY  Christ.  1.  We  see  from  this  narrative  that  Christ  beholds  the 
withered  energies  of  the  human  soul  with  tender  compassion.  2.  That  there  is  an 
intimate  connection  between  the  word  of  Christ  and  the  restoration  of  the  withered 
energies  of  the  soul.  3.  Thcat  the  restoration  of  the  withered  energies  of  the  soul 
is  immediate,  visible,  and  complete.  4.  That  the  restoring  of  the  withered  energies 
of  the  soul  can  only  be  accomplished  by  Christ.  III.  There  are  many  individuats 
WHO  have  but  little  sympathy  with  Christ  in  His  work  op  soul-restobation.  1. 
The  Pharisees  were  cunning  in  their  watching  of  Christ.  2.  They  were  refuted  in 
their  contempt  of  Christ.  3.  They  were  regarded  by  Christ  with  mingled  feelings 
of  pity  and  anger.  IV.  Why  did  these  Pharisees  oppose  the  beneficent  act  of 
Christ  ?  1.  Because  He  did  not  fall  in  with  their  views  as  to  the  manner  and  time 
of  the  cure.  2.  Because  they  were  too  proud  in  spirit  to  rejoice  at  the  cure  thus 
wrought.  3.  Because  they  saw  not  the  full  meaning  and  blessing  of  the  cure. 
(J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  The  construction  of  the  hand  :—Tyndal  writes  of  his  ascent 
of  the  Weisshorn  : — "  There  is  scarcely  a  position  possible  to  a  human  being  which 
at  one  time  or  another  during  the  day  I  was  not  forced  to  assume.  The  fingers, 
wrist,  and  forearm  were  my  main  reliance,  and  as  a  mechanical  instrument  the 
human  hand  appeared  to  me  this  day  a  miracle  of  constructive  art.  ...  I  opened 
my  note-book  to  make  a  few  observations,  but  soon  relinquished  the  attempt. 
There  was  something  incongruous,  if  not  profane,  in  allowing  the  scientific  faculty 
to  interfere  where  silent  worship  seemed  the  reasonable  service."  (Hours  of 
Exercise  in  the  Alps.)  Language  of  the  hand  : — With  the  hand  we  demand,  we 
promise,  we  call,  dismiss,  threaten,  entreat,  supplicate,  deny,  refuse,  interrogate,  ad- 
mire, reckon,  confess,  repent;  express  fear,  express  shame,  express  doubt ;  we  instruct, 
command,  unite,  encourage,  swear,  testify,  accuse,  condemn,  acquit,  insult,  despise, 
defy,  disdain,  flatter,  applaud,  bless,  abuse,  ridicule,  reconcile,  recommend,  exalt, 
regale,  gladden,  complain,  afflict,  discomfort,  discourage,  astonish ;  exclaim,  in- 
dicate silence  and  what  not !  with  a  variety  and  multiplication  that  keep  pace  with 
the  words  spoken  by  the  tongue.  Promptitude  of  faith : — If  the  man  in  our  text 
had  been  a  scholar,  his  thought  most  likely  would  have  risen  up  in  instant  protest 
against  Christ's  command.  Had  he  been  a  physicist,  had  he  in  particular  been  an 
anatomist,  he  could  hardly  have  been  healed.  He  would  have  thought  top  much. 
He  would  instantly  have  fallen  into  reasoning  upon  the  utter  anatomical  and 
physiological  impossibility  of  a  withered  hand  stretching  itself  out;  and  such 
thinking  would  have  been  ruinous.  It  is  here  that  religion  and  science  break 
fellowship.  Science  thinks  everything  out.  Thought  is  from  its  very  nature 
surgical ;  it  cuts  in  pieces.  It  is  analytic,  and  unjoints  and  unhinges.  Suppose 
that  you  are  in  the  presence  of  a  speaker  that  powerfully  affects  you.  You  realize 
his  hand  upon  you  and  his  mastery  over  you.  This  wakes  up  your  inquisitiveness, 
and  puts  you  upon  asking  the  secret  of  his  power,  its  elements.  Thought  begins  at 
once  to  show  how  surgical  it  is ;  and  before  the  speaker's  address  is  completed  you 
have  his  oratorical  talent  accurately  and  elegantly  dissected ;  such  a  percentage  due 
to  figure,  such  a  percentage  to  manner,  to  matter,  and  the  rest.  And  yet  the 
process  of  analyzing  his  power  has,  so  far  as  relates  to  you,  destroyed  his  power, 
and  you  go  home  with  the  pocketed  ingredients  of  his  power  when  you  might  have 
gone  home  with  an  inspiration.  You  thought  too  much  and  too  nicely.  And  it  is 
remarkable  how  Christ  in  His  intercourse  with  His  disciples  laboured  to  keep  their 
thoughts  quiet.  He  never  provoked  argument.  He  indulges  in  no  definition- 
making.  Hows  and  wherefores  He  regularly  discouraged.  Nicodemus  wanted  the 
matter  of  the  rebirth  stated  analytically.  Christ  declined.  One  of  the  disciples 
wanted  a  statement  of  the  methods  of  the  Spirit's  operation.  Christ  declined.  One 
trouble  with  our  thinking  powers  is  that  they  work  at  such  a  level  as  to  create  more 
problems  than  they  solve.  They  are  like  a  fly  caught  in  a  web,  whose^  very 
struggles  and  buzzing  only  draw  the  tangled  skein  about  it  the  more  imprisoningly. 
All  that  saved  the  man  in  our  story  was  that  he  did  not  stop  to  think.  He  pro- 
ceeded as  though  there  were  no  difficulties,  and  forthwith  for  him  there 
were  none.      The  anconverted  men  in  oar  eongregai'on   can   see   just  where 


849  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n, 

this  pressea.  All  Christ's  commands  to  70a  are  in  the  present  tense,  vhicb 
means  that  the  command  is  issued  without  any  allowance  of  time  for  compre- 
hending the  mysteries  of  salvation,  or  for  acquiring  power  to  become  a  saved 
man.  It  is  simply  levelled  to  the  range  of  the  instant ;  not  because  thought  is  not 
advantageous  in  some  circumstances,  but  because  it  is  not  in  point  here.  The 
paralytic,  with  never  so  much  thinking,  would  never  have  seen  his  way  clear  to  do 
as  he  was  told.  Giving  ourselves  to  Christ  is  not  a  matter  of  understanding  what 
we  are  doing,  but  a  matter  of  doing ;  something  as  when  you  tell  your  boy  to 
raise  his  hand ;  he  does  not  know  how  he  raises  his  hand,  and  you  know  no  more 
about  it  than  he  as  regards  the  physiological  intricacies  of  the  act.  And  if  he  were 
to  decline  raising  it  until  he  understood  the  matter,  you  would  tell  him  to  do  it  first 
and  understand  at  his  leisure ;  your  command  was  aimed  at  his  will,  and  his  resort 
to  the  intricacies  of  physiology  only  a  side  issue  raised  to  divert  your  attention  from 
his  insubordination.  God's  commands  stand  out  of  aU  relation  to  human  power 
to  grasp  the  problems,  moral  or  theological,  associated  with  obedience  to  those  com- 
mands. God's  commands  are  like  the  pole-star,  which  with  swift  intuition  finds  out 
the  magnetic-needle  as  easily  by  night-light  as  by  daylight,  and  beats  upon  it  with 
relentless  compulsion  equally  in  the  darkness  and  the  sunshine.  They  are  not  a  ques- 
tion of  can,  but  a  question  of  will ;  and  with  the  will  once  trembling  obediently  on 
the  verge  of  action,  all  needed  resource  of  power  is  at  its  instant  service.  This  is 
another  lesson  of  our  text.  In  the  case  of  the  paralytic,  God's  power  came  in  just 
after  the  man's  will  to  stretch  forth  his  hand,  and  just  before  the  stretching  act. 
As  he  had  the  will  to  do,  God  furnished  him  the  power  to  do  with,  and  that  made 
out  the  miracle.  It  was  pretty  much  the  same  thing  done  divinely  as  is  done 
humanly  when  a  child  goes  tottering  and  clambering  up  a  staircase  that  is  too  steep 
for  it,  and  the  parent  takes  hold  of  the  child's  hand  liftingly.  The  child  has  the 
will  to  go  up,  and  the  parent  puts  some  of  his  own  strength  at  the  service  of  that 
will ;  and  in  this  way  weakness  does  impossibilities  by  virtue  of  superior  strength 
temporarily  loaned.  This  is  the  incident  of  the  paralytic  turned  into  terms  and 
relations  of  familiar  experience.  It  is  of  the  utmost  necessity  that  we  should  feel 
that  this  case  of  the  paralytic  stands  in  Scripture  to  represent  the  continuous 
action  of  God,  the  continuous  miracle  of  God,  if  you  please,  in  so  lending  Himself 
to  us  as  to  match  our  power  to  the  measure  of  our  holy  intents,  and  so  making  us 
able  to  do  that  which  there  is  in  us  a  righteous  will  to  do ;  precisely  as  in  our  story 
Christ  evened  up  the  paralytic's  power  exactly  to  the  level  of  his  willingness.  This 
ought  not  to  disturb  us  as  implying  a  familiar  and  presumptuous  dependence  upon 
the  Divine  resources  and  bounty.  It  is  only  doing  in  the  spiritual  realm  what 
every  man  does  in  a  greater  or  less  measure  in  the  physical  one.  The  forces  that 
we  call  natural,  that  we  use  in  every  foot-tread,  in  the  transportation  of  every 
pound  of  merchandise  by  wind  or  by  steam,  in  the  carrying  of  every  shuttle  and 
revolution  of  every  spindle,  these  forces  are  as  truly  grounded  in  God  as  are  the 
influences  that  emanate  from  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  work  in  us  holier  purposes 
and  affections  of  heart.  It  is  from  Him  that  cometh  down  every  good  and  perfect 
gift.  We  are  His  beneficiaries  in  everything.  It  is  as  much  making  use  of  God  to 
unfurl  our  sail  in  the  draft  of  the  west  wind  as  it  is  to  spread  out  our  unfilled 
capacities  of  emotion  and  action  in  the  draft  of  a  spiritual  Pentecost.  It  is  a  part 
of  God  that  He  yields  Himself  in  all  this  rich  diversity  of  ways  to  piece  out  man's 
infirmity.  There  is  no  way  in  which  we  can  so  well  serve  Him  as  by  letting  Him 
serve  us  in  our  pursuit  of  holy  ends.  Keligious  ideas  get  their  only  value  from 
their  fitness  to  serve  as  conduits  for  the  conveyance  of  Divine  supply.  We  have 
all  our  city  under-laid  with  water-mains,  but  we  prize  them  only  because  there  is 
water  in  the  reservoir  that  works  down  through  those  mains  and  presses  up  into 
our  dwellings.  Ideas  do  not  strengthen  us  any  more  than  the  water-pipe  refreshes 
or  gas-pipe  illuminates.  And  faith  is  not  conceiving  of  God  as  an  idea,  but  it  is 
laying  hold  upon  Him  as  a  power  and  utilizing  Him  to  the  ends  of  holy  living  and 
Christian  achieving,  in  just  the  same  strenuous  and  practical  way  in  which  we  lay 
hold  on  wind-pressure  and  steam-power,  and  let  them  even  our  resources  up  to  the 
level  of  our  secular  ambition.  If  now  the  Church  would  link  all  its  energies,  all 
its  devout  desires  as  confidingly  to  the  spiritual  influences  of  God  as  the  world  links 
its  ambitions  to  His  cosmic  energies  of  earth,  sea,  and  air,  hardly  are  there  any 
results  possible  to  be  named  that  might  not  be  achieved  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  saving  of  men  before  the  dawn  of  the  approaching  new  century.  And  then  on« 
other  lesson  that  follows  on  directly  from  this  is  the  position  of  enlarged  ao< 
eoontability  and  responsibility  in  which  we  are  set.    It  is  a  common  thing  for  us  t« 


eiUP.  VI.]  8T.  LUKE,  64S 

say  that  we  ar«  responsible  for  our  use  of  the  talents  we  have ;  tha^i  present  power 
is  the  measure  of  accountability.  It  appears  from  what  we  have  seen  in  our  story 
and  from  the  general  drift  of  Scripture  in  fact,  that  our  responsibility  lies  all  the 
way  around  beyond  the  outer  edge  of  our  power  and  talent.  The  man  in  our  text 
was  responsible  not  only  for  his  use  of  what  was  in  him,  but  for  what,  as  a  result 
of  his  faith,  he  was  able  to  have  divinely  added  to  him.  All  the  way  through 
Scripture  God  was  continually  commanding  men  to  do  more  than  they  in  them- 
selves had  the  means  to  do,  exactly  as  in  our  verse.  One  object  of  the  miracle  wai 
to  show  that  by  faith  we  acquire  a  property  in  power  that  to  our  unfaith  lies  at  an 
utter  remove  from  us.  We  need  some  of  the  old-time  audacity — somo  P  inline  and 
Petrine  presumption,  which  was  audacious,  not  because  it  was  wncalculating,  but 
just  because  it  was  so  grandly  and  discerningly  calculating,  and  calculated  not 
only  on  its  own  intrinsic  force,  but  on  a  magnificent  increment  of  working  energy 
from  on  high.     (C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.)        The  withered  hand : — I.  Discuss  that 

BPIKITUAL  POWEBLESSNESS,  OF  WHICH  THE  WITHERED  HAND  IS  A  JUST  AND  APPKOPKIATB 
SYMBOL,  EXPLAINING  WHAT  IT  IS  AND  WHEREIN  IT  CONSISTS.  II.  I  SHALL  POINT  OUT 
BRIEFLY  WHAT  ChRIST  REQUIRES   TO  BE  DONE,  IN    ORDER   TO    ITS  REMOVAL.       1.    "  There 

was  a  man  "  in  the  synagogue  "  whose  right  hand  was  withered."  Here  then  are 
three  distinct  points  to  be  noticed  in  our  comment.  (1)  The  organ  was  a  hand. 
The  hand,  as  you  know,  is  the  organ  of  touch.  The  sense  of  touch,  then,  brings  us 
into  closer  connection  with  matter  than  any  other  sense.  If  I  only  saw  an  object, 
however  steadily  it  might  abide  before  my  eyes,  I  might  imagine  it  was  an  unreal 
vi'^^ion.  Again,  if  I  hear  a  sound,  I  experience  indeed  a  sensation  ;  but  it  is  not  a 
sensation  which  irresistibly  forces  upon  me  the  conclusion  that  matter  exists.  So 
it  is  with  taste,  considered  in  itself  and  abstractedly  from  touch,  with  which,  how- 
ever it  is  almost  always  combined.  A  flavour  is  a  sensation  which,  if  we  did  not 
touch  the  object  that  excited  it,  would  not  irresistibly  force  upon  us  the  conviction 
that  such  an  object  existed.  But  touch — the  actual  hamUing  of  any  object — does, 
as  I  think  you  will  grant,  force  upon  the  mind  such  a  conviction.  But  there  are 
also  realities  of  eternity,  permanent  and  abiding,  which  will  be  felt  and  acknow- 
ledged to  be  realities,  when  Time  and  the  mortal  body  have  passed  away.  These 
realities  are  the  truths  of  which  revelation  assures  us — the  truths,  for  example 
(I  select  a  few  as  specimens  out  of  a  great  mass)  that  an  all-seeing  Eye  is  about  our 
path  and  about  our  bed,  and  spieth  out  all  our  ways — that  God  is  a  God  who  hears 
and  answers  prayer — that  we  must  all  stand  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ, 
and  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body.  Can  you  be  said  to  grasp,  to  touch  them, 
to  live  under  the  influential  conviction  of  their  reality  ?  Weigh  now  in  your  mind 
what  must  infallibly  be  the  effect  upon  our  character  of  the  doctrine  of  future 
judgment  and  the  peril  of  unrenewed  men,  if  we  possessed  such  an  impression  of 
its  reality  as  might  fitly  be  compared  to  the  impressions  of  things  material  derived 
from  the  sense  of  touch.  His  hand  was  withered.  While  he  had  all  the  other 
senses  complete,  he  had  lost  the  power  of  feeling,  so  far  as  the  chief  organ  of 
feeling  was  concerned.  And  such  is  the  case  with  us  with  regard  to  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  and  the  realities  of  eternity.  We  can  (as  it  were)  see  them,  hear  them, 
contemplate,  gaze  upon,  attend,  give  heed  to  them,  but  we  cannot  (by  nature)  touch 
them.  I  feel  that  herein  I  am  powerless,  and  I  am  sure  that  you  must  feel  the 
same.  My  understanding  follows  along  with  their  evidence,  even  unto  the  clearest 
mental  conviction,  but  an  abiding  energizing  persuasion  of  their  deep  reality, 
this  I  have  not,  and,  what  is  more,  I  am  incompetent  of  myself  to  produce  it ;  my 
hand  is  withered.  And  until  the  Lord  speaks  the  word  of  power,  it  must  remain 
withered.  (2)  Our  second  remark  on  the  case  of  this  poor  man  was,  that  not  both 
his  hands  were  withered,  but  the  better  and  more  serviceable  of  the  two.  He 
could  handle  and  feel  to  a  certain  extent,  but  it  was  only  with  his  left  hand.  By 
what  has  already  been  said,  it  will  have  appeared  that  the  spiritual  faculty,  corre- 
sponding to  the  bodily  faculty  of  touch,  is  faith.  Faith  it  is  which  realizes  things 
eternal.  And  from  the  study  of  it  we  learn  that  this  principle  of  faith  does  operate 
and  energize,  to  a  certain  extent,  even  in  those  who  are  unrenewed  in  the  spirit  of 
their  minds.  And  such  most  assuredly  is  the  case.  So  far  as  his  mere  temporal 
interests  are  concerned,  unrenewed  man  is  no  stranger  to  the  occasional  workings — 
nay,  no  stranger  to  the  continuous  life,  of  faith.  Let  us  cast  our  eyes  around  us, 
and  this  will  become  sufificiently  and  incontrovertibly  evident.  Here  is  a  man  laying 
up  for  his  family,  or  for  himself  in  old  age,  subjecting  himself  to  much  self-denial, 
imposing  upon  himself  many  restrictions — with  the  view  of  meeting  and  providing 
Against  the  future  but  foreseen  emergency  of  his  own  death,  or  the  natural  decay 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  vi, 

of  his  faculties.  And  all  such  provision  testifies  to  the  exietenoe  of  faith,  testifies- 
to  the  existence  and  operations  of  a  faculty,  which  reaUzes  things  unseen,  and  what 
is  this  hut  faith  ?  Alas  1  that  when  faith  approaches  the  realities  of  eternity,  th» 
Bolid  truths  of  revelation,  and  endeavours  to  realize  them,  it  finds  its  powers 
shattered  as  to  their  highest  and  noblest  exercise  I  The  man's  right  hand  ia 
withered  ;  he  knows,  indeed,  still,  what  the  sensation  of  touch  is,  for  he  can  touch 
bubbles  and  toys  and  trifles,  but  anything  weighty,  anything  of  real  substance  and 
worth,  he  is  incompetent  to  handle.  He  exercises  just  enough  of  the  faculty  to  be 
aware  how  powerful  it  would  be,  if  brought  to  bear  on  Divine  verities,  and  to  desire 
that  it  might  be  so  brought  to  bear.  But  this  is  all.  He  can  do  no  more,  until 
God  visit  him  in  power.  When  our  range  of  eyesight  is  for  the  first  time  enlarged 
by  the  telescope,  it  is  no  wonder  if  we  run  away  hastily  with  the  impression  that  we 
have  gained  a  new  sense.  Such,  however,  is  not  the  case  ;  it  is  as  the  renewal  of 
a  withered  hand,  an  old  sense  made  competent  to  gather  things.  (3)  A  third  point 
to  be  noticed  in  this  man's  state  is  the  mode  in  which  the  organ  was  affected.  The 
man  originally  had  the  use  of  the  organ — it  was  the  design  of  nature  that  he  should 
use  it — but  disease  had  thwarted  this  design.  The  organ,  however,  remained  8till» 
though  it  hung  powerless  by  the  man's  side.  It  was  not  out  off — not  abolished. 
Brethren,  in  so  far  as  man  has  no  power  of  realizing  things  eternal,  and  the 
Divine  verities  of  which  Eevelation  assures  him,  he  is  an  imperfect,  a  fallen 
being.  This  lamentable  defect  is  a  deviation,  a  deflection  from  the  original  image 
in  which  he  was  created.  You  know  how  influentially  conversant  man's  body  is 
with  matter,  with  outward  nature.  I  cannot  stir,  I  cannot  lift  up  my  eyes,  I  cannot 
walk  abroad  without  a  continual  influx  of  impressions  from  matter.  Suppose,  now, 
that  my  spirit  were  equally  susceptible  of  impressions  from  the  realities  of  eternity, 
that  in  its  every  motion  it  was  swayed  and  influenced  by  these  realities,  that  it 
received  impulses  from  the  invisible  at  every  turn,  this  surely  would  be  little  less 
than  complete  renewal  of  my  nature.  It  would  be  the  recovery  of  me  from  my 
acquired  infirmity,  the  restoration  to  health  and  vigour  of  the  withered  limb.  And, 
oh  !  brethren,  in  every  soul  of  man  there  exists  a  capability  of  such  a  restoration. 
No  one  is  disqualified  for  recovery.  In  all  there  is  the  organ ;  if  life  can  but  be 
infused  into  it  from  above,  all  will  be  well.  II.  But  I  hasten  on  to  point  out  briefly 
WHAT  Christ  RBQoiREa  us  to  do,  in  ordeb  to  the  removal  of  this  infirmity.  We 
have  said  that  He  alone  is  competent  to  this  removal — that  man  is  utterly  helpless 
and  powerless  in  the  work  of  his  restoration.  Brethren,  God  demands  exertion  and 
energy  on  our  parts  before  He  will  consent  to  put  forth  that  healing  power,  which 
alone  can  recover  us  from  our  soul's  infirmity.  He  bids  us  act  as  recovered  men, 
ere  yet  we  be  recovered,  and  only  in  our  sincerely  striving  so  to  act,  will  He  visit 
and  bless  us.  And  if  there  be  one  holy  exercise  rather  than  another  to  which  I 
must  give  myself,  it  is  that  of  prayer.  The  Lord  only  can  restore  me.  Shall  I  not 
apply  to  Him  for  restoration  ?  (Dean  Goulbum. )  Christ  knew  their  thoughts  : — 
A  paper  was  recently  read  before  the  German  Asiatic  Society  of  Japan  on  the  magio 
mirror  of  Japan.  It  really  possesses  no  magical  quality,  but,  owing  to  the  pecu- 
liarity of  its  structure,  the  reflection  of  the  sun  from  the  mirror  on  the  wall  or 
ceiling  reveals  the  figures  or  letters  written  on  the  back  of  the  mirror.  Thus  the 
deepest  secrets,  the  hidden  thoughts,  the  hidden  purposes  of  the  heart  are  brought 
out  by  the  Ught  God  turns  upon  us,  and  will  turn  upon  us.  What  is  written  out  of 
sight  in  our  spirits  shall  be  written  by  a  sunbeam  on  the  wall.  Not  to  save  life 
is  to  destroy  : — See  yonder  poor  wretches  whose  ship  has  gone  down  at  sea,  they 
have  constructed  a  poor  tottering  raft,  and  have  been  swimming  on  it  for  days ; 
their  supply  of  bread  and  water  is  exhausted,  and  they  are  famishing,  they  have  bound 
a  handkerchief  to  a  pole  and  hoisted  it,  and  a  vessel  is  within  sight.  The  captain 
of  the  ship  takes  his  telescope,  looks  at  the  object,  and  knows  that  it  is  a  ship- 
wrecked  crew.  "  Oh  I  "  says  he  to  his  men,  "  we  are  in  a  hurry  with  our  cargo,  we 
cannot  stop  to  look  after  an  unknown  object ;  it  may  be  somebody  perishing,  and 
it  may  not  be,  but  however,  it  is  not  our  business,"  and  he  keeps  on  his  course. 
His  neglect  has  murdered  those  who  died  on  the  raft.  {G.H,  Spurgeon.)  Saving 
a  limb  : — To  save  a  limb  is  a  great  thing.  A  poor  young  man  was  in  a  hospital  who 
had  crashed  his  arm  at  his  work.  The  doctor  said  there  was  no  help  for  it ;  his  arm 
must  be  cut  off  or  he  must  die.  But  the  young  man  could  not  bear  the  thought  of 
losing  his  arm,  and  said  he  would  rather  die  first.  But  the  lady  at  the  head  of  the 
hospital  did  all  she  could  to  heal  the  young  man's  arm.  She  dressed  it  carefully, 
she  watched  night  and  day,  and  did  whatever  she  could  to  keep  up  the  young  man's 
strength.    And  at  last  the  arm  was  saved.    The  young  man  b^ame  quite  well,  and 


85HAP.  vi.]  ST.  LUKE.  645 

nsed  to  call  that  arm  her  arm,  because  she  had  been  the  means  of  saving  it.  It  is 
a  great  thing  to  save  a  limb,  but  to  save  a  soul  is  far  greater.  (O.  T.  Coster.) 
Christ  heals  without  eatising  suffering : — My  sister  got  her  arm  put  cut  of  joint. 
The  neighbours  of  the  country  place  came  in,  and  they  tried  to  put  that  arm  in  ita 
place,  and  they  laid  hold  and  pulled  mightily ;  they  pulled  until  she  was  in  anguish, 
but  the  bone  did  not  go  back  to  its  place.  After  a  while  the  surgeon  came,  and  with 
one  touch  everything  was  adjusted.  So  we  go  out  for  Christian  work,  and  for  the 
lack  of  a  sympathetic  nature,  or  the  lack  of  this  gentleness  of  Christ,  we  make  the 
wounds  of  the  world  worse,  when  some  kind  and  gentle  spirit  comes  along  after  us, 
and  by  one  touch  heals  the  torn  ligaments,  and  the  disturbing  bones  are  rejoined. 
{Dr.  Talmage.)  The  power  of  faith  in  the  Saviour's  word: — A  Sunday-school 
teacher,  when  teaching  his  class  on  one  occasion,  left  his  seat  and  went  round 
among  his  scholars  with  his  watch  in  his  hand.  Holding  it  out  to  the  first  child, 
he  said,  "  I  give  you  that  watch."  The  boy  stared  at  it  and  stood  still.  The 
teacher  then  went  to  the  next  and  repeated — "  I  give  you  that  watch."  The  boy 
blushed,  but  that  was  all.  One  by  one  the  teacher  repeated  the  words  and  the 
action  to  each.  Some  stared,  some  blushed,  some  smiled  incredulously,  but  none 
took  the  watch.  But  when  he  came  nearly  to  the  bottom  of  the  class  a  small  boy 
pat  out  his  hand  and  took  the  watch  which  the  teacher  handed  to  him.  As  the 
latter  returned  to  his  seat,  the  little  fellow  said  gently,  "  Then,  if  you  please,  sir, 
the  watch  is  mine?  "  "Yes,  it  is  yours."  The  elder  boys  were  fairly  roused  by 
this  time.  "  Do  you  mean  to  say,  sir,  that  he  may  keep  the  watch  ?  "  "  Certainly ; 
I  gave  it  to  any  boy  who  would  have  it."  "  Oh,  if  I  had  known  that,"  exclaimed 
one  of  them,  "  I  would  have  taken  it."  "  Did  I  not  tell  you  I  gave  it  to  you  ?  " 
"  Oh,  yes ;  but  I  did  not  believe  you  were  in  earnest."  •*  So  much  the  worse  for 
you  ;  he  believed  me,  and  he  has  the  watch."  Saving  faith  is  as  simple  as  this.  It 
just  takes  God  at  His  word  and  trusts  Him.     (Theodore  Monad.) 

Ver.  7.  And  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  watched  fflm. — The  wily  watchers  of  the 
^od : — I.  They  are  eveb  on  the  outlook  for  an  apparent  breach  of  some  con- 
VENTiONAi,  LAW.  1.  Thcsc  men  are  cunning.  2.  They  are  diligent.  3.  They  are 
malicious.  II.  Theib  obeat  desire  is  to  blandeb  those  whom  thet  watch. 
III.  They  are  not  to  be  allowed  to  interrupt  the  duty  of  the  good.  Lessons: 
I.  Never  be  set  by  Satan  to  watch  the  conduct  of  the  good  to  find  defects.  2. 
Seek  to  find  all  the  good  in  men  you  can.  3.  Think  of  the  heavenly  watchers  of 
the  good.  (J.  S.  Exell,  M.A.)  Unsabbatical : — The  Pharisees  are  looking  with 
keen  hungry  eyes  upon  One  whom  they  have  marked  as  their  victim.  To  cherish 
these  feelings,  to  be  plotting  murder,  was  not  in  their  judgment  at  all  unsabbatical. 
Their  reverence  for  the  law  of  God  led  them,  so  they  believed,  into  this  state  of 
mind.     [F.  D.  Maurice.) 

Ver.  12.  And  continned  all  night  In  prayer  to  Ood. — Special  protracted  prayer: — 
If  any  man  of  woman  bom  might  have  lived  without  prayer  it  was  surely  the  Lord 
Jesus.  In  some  parts  of  prayer  He  conid  take  no  share,  e.g.,  confession  of  sin. 
Then  again.  He  had  no  need  for  self-examination  each  night,  and  no  need  to  pray 
to  be  protected  from  sin  each  morning.  Yet  never  was  there  a  man  more  abundant 
in  prayer.  1.  Notice  the  place  which  Christ  selected  for  prayer.  The  solitude  of 
a  mountain.  Why?  (1)  To  prevent  interruption.  (2)  That  He  might  be  able  to 
pray  aloud.  (3)  To  avoid  ostentation.  2.  The  time  selected.  The  silent  hours  of 
night.  To  some  of  us,  the  night  might  be  most  inappropriate  and  unsuitable ;  if 
so,  we  must  by  no  means  select  it,  but  must  follow  our  Lord  in  the  spirit  rather 
than  in  the  letter.  3.  Again,  onr  Lord  sets  us  a  good  example  in  the  matter  of 
extraordinary  seasons  of  devotion  in  the  protracted  character  of  His  prayer.  Ha 
continued  all  night  in  prayer.  I  do  not  think  that  we  are  bound  to  pray  long  as  a 
general  rule.  Force  is  its  standard  rather  than  length.  When  the  whole  soul 
groans  itself  out  in  half  a  dozen  sentences  there  may  be  more  real  devotion  in  them 
than  in  hours  of  m^re  wire  drawing  and  word  spinning.  True  prayer  is  the  soul's 
mounting  up  to  God,  and  if  it  can  ride  upon  a  cherub  or  the  wings  of  the  wind 
so  much  the  better,  yet  in  extraordinary  seasons,  when  the  soul  is  thoroughly 
wrought  up  to  an  eminent  intensity  of  devotion,  it  is  well  to  continue  it  for  a  pro- 
tracted season.  We  know  not  that  our  Lord  was  vocally  praying  all  the  time,  He 
may  have  paused  to  contemplate  ;  He  may  have  surveyed  the  whole  compass  of  the 
field  over  which  His  prayer  should  extend,  meditating  upon  the  charaoter  of  Hia 
Ood  recapitulating  the  precious  promises,  remembering  the  Wants  of  His  people^ 

35 


046  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [ota».  »l. 

and  thus  arming  Himself  with  arguments  with  which  to  return  to  wrestle  and 
prevail.  How  very  few  of  us  have  ever  spent  a  whole  night  in  prayer,  and  yet  what 
boons  we  might  have  had  for  such  asking  1  4.  Jesus  has  further  instructed  us  iu 
the  art  of  special  devotion  by  the  manner  of  His  prayer.  Notice,  be  continued  all 
night  in  prayer  to  God— to  God.  How  much  of  our  prayer  is  not  prayer  to  God  at 
all !  That  gunner  will  do  no  service  to  the  army  who  takes  no  aim,  but  is  content 
80  long  as  he  does  but  fire  ;  that  vessel  makes  an  unremunerative  voyage  which  is 
not  steered  for  a  port,  but  is  satisfied  to  sail  hither  and  thither.  We  must  direct 
our  prayers  to  God,  and  maintain  soul-fellowship  with  Him,  or  our  devotion  will 
become  a  nullity,  a  name  for  a  thing  which  is  not.  6.  Once  more,  we  may  learn 
from  Jesus  our  Lord  the  occasion  for  special  devotion.  At  the  time  when  our 
Master  continued  all  night  in  prayer  He  had  been  upbraided  by  the  Pharisees.  He 
fulfilled  the  resolve  of  the  man  after  God's  own  heart.  "Let  the  proud  be 
ashamed  ;  for  they  dealt  perversely  with  me  without  a  cause :  but  I  will  meditate 
in  Thy  precepts."  So  David  did,  and  so  did  David's  Lord.  The  best  answer  to  the 
slanders  of  the  ungodly  is  to  be  more  constant  in  communion  with  God.  (C.  H. 
Spurgcon.)  Christ  an  example  to  us  in  the  choice  of  seasons  Jor  prayer : — I.  Qua 
Lord  was  wont  to  pbat  when  engaqed,  ob  about  to  engage  in  any  beugious 
CEDiNANCE  (Lukc  ill.  21).  The  ordinances  of  grace  must  be  sanctified  to  us  by 
prayer,  or  we  shall  derive  no  benefit  from  them.    II.  Oub  Lobd  pbayed  when  about 

TO  ENGAGE  IN  MORE  THAN  USUALLY  IMPORTANT  AND  8EBI0U8  BUSINESS.      As  here   bcforO 

the  ordination  of  the  apostles.  III.  Another  season  for  peayeb  is  a  season  ojt 
EXCEEDING  ENJOYMENT  OB  HONOUB  (Luke  ix.  28,  29).  Strange  as  it  may  sound,  yet 
it  is  true,  that  they  who  receive  most  of  the  Lord's  grace  and  goodness  stand  the  most 
in  need  of  the  Lord's  grace  and  goodness ;  they  need  grace  to  use  abundant  grace 
and  goodness  well.  Pride  of  heart  is  often  called  into  exercise  by  it ;  or,  if  not 
pride  of  heart,  an  undue  love  of  that  mercy — giving  up  the  soul  to  the  enjoyment 
of  it.  IV.  Another  season  for  special  pbayer  is  when  we  bee  oub  friends  in 
PECULIAB  DANOEB  OR  SORROW  (Luko  xxii.  32 ;  John  xvii.).  How  can  there  be 
Christian  love  if  the  sorrows  and  wants  of  those  we  love  do  not  excite  prayer  in  us  ? 
v.  One  season  more  I  mention  as  peculiarly  a  season  of  supplication — when  troublr 
IS  ON  US  OR  EXPECTED  TO  COME  (Lukc  xxii.  14).  Severe  affliction  is  the  season,  of  all 
others,  for  praver.  (Charles  Bradley,  M.A.)  Private  devotion: — Some,  from 
the  nature  of  their  employments,  or  from  mental  constitution,  or  habit,  do  not  find 
that  they  can  often  continue,  or  profitably  continue,  long  at  devotion  at  once  ;  such 
may  supply  this,  in  a  good  measure,  by  frequency.  Most  clearly,  however, 
Bufficient  time  ought  to  be  taken  to  get  the  mind  fully  engaged.  When  Christ, 
after  labouring  the  whole  day  that  was  past,  and  having  also  to  labour  as  soon  as 
day  dawned  again,  spent  the  whole  night  in  prayer,  it  is  a  shame  for  any  of  His 
professing  followers,  however  busy  a  life  they  may  lead,  not  to  make  a  point  of 
reserving  from  the  cares  of  the  day,  or  it  may  be,  from  the  slumbers  of  the  night, 
as  much  time  as  is  necessary  for  morning  and  evening  devotions.  Mark,  Christians, 
how  the  airy  trifler  gives  the  night-watch  to  devour  the  foolish  romance ;  and  how 
the  pale  student  toils  over  the  midnight  lamp  ;  and  how,  for  the  sake  of  this  world's 
gain,  some  rise  early  and  sit  up  late,  and  even  work  whole  nights ;  and  how  the 
votaries  of  dissipating  pleasure  often  spend  the  whole,  or  almost  the  whole,  night 
in  its  pursuits  ;  and  then,  though  you  will  by  no  means  think  yourselves  called  on 
literally  to  spend  whole  nights  in  prayer,  yet  you  will  be  ashamed  and  confounded 
when  you  think  that  a  moderate  tarrying  before  the  throne  of  grace  should  ever 
have  been  unnecessarily  neglected  by  you,  or  felt  as  a  burden ;  and  you  will  desire 
to  give  more  of  your  time  and  of  your  heart  to  seasons  of  communion  with  your 
God.  (James  Foote,  M.A.)  Jesus  praying  all  night : — On  more  than  one 
occasion  in  the  hfe  of  our  Lord,  it  is  recorded  that  He  continued  all  night  in 
prayer  to  God.  What  need  was  there  that  He  should  sacrifice  rest  and  sleep  in  thia 
way  ?  He  knew  that  His  Father  always  heard  His  prayer.  He  gave  us  as  the 
model  for  our  prayer  a  form  which  can  easily  be  repeated  in  half  a  minute.  Was 
His  Father  unwilling  to  hear  Him  ?  Or  was  it  because  He  could  not  bring  Hia 
mind  to  the  proper  prayer-point,  and  so  had  to  pray  for  hours,  in  order  to  learn  how 
to  pray  for  one  moment  with  real  faith  ?  It  could  not  be  for  either  of  these 
reasons.  We  may  suppose  then  that  our  Saviour  spent  that  long  time  in  prayer  as 
»  delightful  employment  to  Himself.  He  loved  to  commune  with  our  God  and  His 
God.  To  Him  it  was  better  than  meat  to  do  the  will  of  Him  th&t  sent  Him.  So, 
doubtless,  it  was  more  soothing  and  refreshing  than  sleep  for  Him  to  talk  to  Hia 
Father.    Jesoa  praying  and  the  Father  listening;   that  was  a  harmony  more 


JKA».  ▼!.]  8T.  LUKE.  847 

•ntrancing  than  the  songs  of  angels.  But  no ;  it  was  not  for  enjoyment  alone  that 
Jesns  prayed  all  night.  His  prayers  were  poured  into  the  deep  heart  of  God  as  easily 
fcs  the  water  pours  over  the  rock  into  the  chasm  below.  His  heart  unfolded  to  Hia 
Father  as  gently  as  a  flower  is  kissed  open  by  the  breeze  of  a  summer-dawn.  But 
Christ  had  a  definite  purpose  in  the  night-long  prayer.  (National  Baptist).  A 
night  of  prayer : — I.  Tkb  text  shodld  convince  us  of  the  efficacy  of  pbayer.  II. 
The  text  should  impress  us  with  the  necessity  fob  pbayer.  III.  The  text 
SHOULD  instruct  US  AS  TO  THE  MANNER  OF  PRAYER.  1.  Christians  should  have  their 
seasons  of  secret  prayer  and  of  retirement  from  the  world.  2.  Christians  should 
have  special  seasons  set  apart  for  prayer  in  view  of  special  work.  (D.  MacEwen, 
D.D.)  Prayer  a  preliminary  to  important  steps  in  life: — We  should  give  our- 
selves to  special  prayer  when  we  are  about  to  make  any  important  changes  in  life : 
1.  Leaving  home.  2.  Entering  on  a  business  or  profession.  (1)  That  the  tempta- 
tions which  cluster  about  our  secular  callings  may  not  defile  and  degrade  us.  (2) 
That  our  secular  blessings  may  be  made  in  the  highest  sense  a  blessing  to  us.  8. 
Marriage.      {B.  Wilkinson,  F.G.S.)         A  night  of  solitary  prayer  : — I.  The  night 

OF   NEEDFUL   REST  SHORTENED  FOR  PRAYER.       II.    ThE  SOLITUDE  SOUGHT  FOR  SPIRITUAL 

PREPARATION.  The  cHsis  at  which  our  Lord  bad  arrived  —  1.  Originated  the 
Christian  ministry.  2.  Began  the  Christian  Church.  3.  Involved  the  selection  of 
His  own  betrayer.  4.  Was  a  preparation  for  the  full  exposition  of  His  doctrines. 
Sermon  on  the  plain.  III.  The  conduct  of  our  gracious  Lord  counsels  us  to — 
1.  Lonely  prayer.  2.  Preparatory  prayer.  3.  Self-denying  prayer.  4.  Leisurely 
prayer— "All  the  night."  5.  Lingering  prayer— "He  continued."  6.  Blissful 
prayer — All  night  with  God.  (W.  H.  Jellie.)  Here  is  the  great  secret  of  much 
tnat  we  see  in  the  active  life  of  Jesus.  1.  Secret  prayer.  2.  Long  prayer.  Prayer 
calms  and  strengthens  the  poul.  After  prayer  a  man  descends  upon  hit  work 
tather  than  rises  strainingly  towards  it.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

JESUS   PKAYING. 

Be  sought  the  mountain  and  the  loneliest  height, 

For  He  would  meet  His  Father  all  alone, 

And  there,  with  many  a  tear  and  many  a  groan. 

He  strove  in  prayer  throughout  the  long,  long  night. 

Why  need  He  pray,  who  held  by  filial  right. 

O'er  all  the  world  alike  of  thought  and  sense, 

The  fulness  of  His  Sire's  omnipotence  ? 

Why  crave  in  prayer  what  was  His  own  by  might  ? 

Vain  is  the  question — Christ  was  man  in  need, 

And  being  man,  His  duty  was  to  pray. 

The  Son  of  God  confess'd  the  human  need. 

And  doubtless  ask'd  a  blessing  every  day, 

Nor  ceases  yet  for  sinful  man  to  plead. 

Nor  will,  till  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  awaj. 

(SartUy  Coleridge,) 

All  night  in  prayer : — There  are  three  classes  of  minds  which  are  in  danger  of  making 
too  long  prayers.  1.  Oneis  the  loose,  unconcentrative,  whocumberthoughts  with  many 
words,  and  make  vain,  i.e. ,  empty,  repetitions  of  the  same  idea.  2.  Another  consists 
of  those  who,  mistaking  the  nature  of  importunity,  think  that  the  more  they  say,  the 
more  they  shall  get — not  seeing  that  in  so  doing  they  are  virtually  making  their  prayers 
a  purchase-price,  which  they  present  in  payment  of  what  they  ask — and  forgetting,  or 
not  considering,  the  true  character  of  prayer — that  it  is  only  the  opening  channel 
ia  a  man's  mind,  through  which  God  may  pour  out  into  that  mind  His  pre- 
ordained and  ready  gifts.  3.  And  the  third  are  they  who,  with  a  superstitious 
feeling,  think  that  God  will  be  angry  if  their  prayers  do  not  go  to  a  certain  extent, 
and  so,  in  their  intercourse  with  God,  they  stretch  their  prayers  to  a  degree  either 
inconsistent  with  their  other  duties,  or  incompatible  with  their  own  health.  They 
do  not  know  that  oftentimes  the  very  best  prayer  we  ever  pray,  is  not  to  pray,  but 
to  cast  ourselves  simply  on  the  love  of  God.  The  general  rule  is,  pray  according  to 
the  condition  of  your  heart.  Do  not  let  the  prayer  strain  the  thoughts,  but  let  the 
thoughts  determine  and  regulate  the  prayer.  Pray  as  you  feel  drawn  in  prayer — or, 
in  other  words,  as  the  Spirit  of  God  in  you  leads  and  dictates.  Nevertheless,  tha 
holier  a  man  is,  and  the  nearer  heaven — th«  more,  and  the  more  continuously, 


M8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼» 

that  man  will  be  able  to  oommane  with  God.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  All  night 
in  prayer : — The  Bev.  John  Welch,  of  Ayr,  was  accustomed  to  retire  many  nighta 
to  his  church  and  spend  the  whole  night  in  prayer — praying  with  an  audible 
and  sometimes  with  a  loud  voice.  His  wife,  fearing  he  would  catch  cold,  went  one 
night  to  his  closet  where  he  had  been  long  at  prayer,  and  heard  him  say,  "  Lord, 
wilt  Thou  not  grant  me  Scotland  ?  "  and,  after  a  pause,  "  Enough,  Lord,  enough." 
Once  he  got  such  nearness  to  the  Lord  in  prayer  that  he  exclaimed,  "  Hold  Thy 
hand,  Lord ;  remember  Thy  servant  is  a  clay  vessel,  and  can  hold  no  more." 

Vers.  13-16.  And  when  It  was  day.  He  called  nnto  Him  His  disciples :  and  ot 
them  He  chose  twelve,  whom  also  He  named  apostles. — Tfie  call  of  the  twelve: — 
Up  till  this  time  it  can  hardly  be  said  that  the  kingdom  of  God  was  set  up.  At  the 
hour  of  His  widest  popularity,  yet  at  a  crisis  of  gathering  peril,  in  face  of  the 
people  and  the  adversary  together.  He  virtually  sets  np  His  kingdom.  It  was  s 
moment  of  decision.  It  was  a  policy  of  safety,  because  a  policy  of  boldness.  It 
was  an  act  of  calm,  foresighted  courage,  full  in  its  simplicity  of  the  moral  sublime. 
Let  us  gather  up  and  reahze  the  circumstances.  1.  Our  Lord's  night-long  prepar- 
ation for  this  step  is  worthy  of  devout  attention.  The  veil  of  loneliness  and  of 
night  is  on  that  prayer.  But  may  we  not  humbly  venture  so  far  at  least  into  that 
night's  solitary  and  sacred  communings  ?  Courage  to  go  forward ;  wisdom  to 
choose  those  whom  His  Father  had  chosen,  and  had  given  Him  for  that  end.  Can 
the  Son  of  God  be  true  brother  to  ns  all  if  at  such  an  hour  He  needs  not  to  ask 
these  things  for  Himself  ?  And  for  them,  that  they  might  rise  to  the  height  of 
their  high  calling.  And  for  us,  and  for  all  the  long  line  of  Christian  generations 
to  be  built  up  on  these  twelve  foundations  1  May  we  not  so  read  that  long-night  prayer 
of  consecration  and  of  intercession  by  our  Priest  and  King  ?  A  lone  dark  watch  on 
the  cool  hUl-top,  with  the  stars  of  God  looking  calmly  down  on  Him,  and  the  great 
lake  spread  silently  out  below,  as  far  from  earthly  care  and  sin,  as  near  the  heavens 
in  their  pureness,  as  may  be — behold  the  oratory  of  the  Son  of  Man.  2.  When 
morning  broke  over  the  dark  wall  of  the  opposite  shore,  it  showed  Him  pale  from 
sleeplessness,  but  serene  from  prayer.  Beneath  Him,  on  the  hill-side,  was  the 
gathering  of  His  disciples.  Man  by  man.  He  called  whom  He  would  by  name ; 
and  man  by  man,  the  elect  twelve  left  their  wondering  companions  to  take  their 
places  by  the  Master's  side,  to  be  for  ever  now  chief  councillors  in  His  kingdom, 
the  next  in  honour  and  the  next  in  danger.  Most  of  them  have  been  heard  of 
already  in  the  narrative  :  Simon  the  Bock  and  his  lesser  brother,  with  the  two  sons 
of  Thunder,  whom  He  had  called  together  from  their  fishing-nets  to  be  four 
partners  in  the  ministry ;  Philip  of  Bethsaida  and  his  friend  Nathanael,  as  together 
a  year  ago  they  found  the  Christ;  two  of  the  Lord's  own  brothers  and  the 
Capernaum  pnbhcan  just  called  two  days  before ;  and  one  Simon  the  Zealot  and 
Thomas ;  and,  last  and  strangest  of  all,  that  one,  unsuspected  as  yet  by  any  save 
Jesus,  who  was  "  a  devil."  *•  The  glorious  company  of  the  apostles,"  the  Church 
has  called  them  in  her  hymn ;  but  had  we  seen  them  that  dawn,  as  they  clustered 
round  their  King,  we  must  have  thought  them  a  strange,  unlikely,  inglorious  band. 
Twelve  Galilean  workmen,  with  average  ability  and  the  prejudices  of  their  class ; 
attracted  indeed  by  the  superiority  of  this  Man,  and  yielding  to  His  influence,  but 
neither  comprehending  who  He  was,  nor  what  He  was  to  do ;  ignorant,  rude, 
strong-passioned,  ill-assorted :  by  these  Twelve  to  lay  the  foundations  of  the 
Church  of  God  so  broad  and  deep  that  on  them  might  be  built  the  hopes  of  all 
mankind  and  the  destinies  of  the  saved,  regenerated  earth  !  Did  ever  means  seem 
in  more  foolish  disproportion  to  the  end  ?  Yet  He  did  it.  These  f oohsh  things 
(1  Cor.  i.  27)  God  chose  to  confound  the  wise.  The  might  of  Jesus'  Spirit  turned 
them  to  apostles ;  and  to  that  dozen  workmen  on  the  hill  all  Christendom  in  all 
time  has  looked  back  as  to  the  planters  and  fathers  of  its  faith.  It  is  always  the 
same.  For  the  hmnbling  of  human  pride,  and  the  practice  of  Christian  faith,  God 
works  salvation  for  men  by  means  which  men  despise.  Look  at  that  morning's 
scene  as  the  act  of  God  our  Saviour,  and  it  will  read  you  this  lesson,  that  by  using 
earthen  vessels,  soiled  even  and  chipped.  He  would  magnify  the  treasure  of  His 
strength,  which  groweth  mighty  to  save  through  very  weakness.  Look  at  it  as  a 
great  venture  of  the  Son  of  Man  launching  His  Father's  cause  upon  the  world,  and 
it  is  the  grandest  example  of  faith,  setting  itself  to  achieve  the  impossible  by  the 
help  of  the  Almighty.  (J.  0.  Dykei,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of  the  apostles  : — 
The  institution  of  the  apostleship  opens  a  new  and  solemn  era  in  the  ministry  of 
Jesos  Christ,  and  St.  Luke  tells  as  that  oar  Lord  prepared  for  it  in  sohtude^ 


^JHAF.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  M9 

jneditation,  and  prayer.  A  few  days  after  one  of  those  frequent  meetings  with  the 
Pharisees,  which  were  as  the  painful  stages  of  the  weary  pilgrimage  which  was  to 
«nd  in  the  cross,  Jesus  left  His  disciples ;  He  went  up  a  mountain,  and  there, 
beneath  the  starry  sky  of  the  East,  during  the  long  and  silent  hours  of  night,  He 
communed  with  God.  Then,  when  the  day  came,  He  selected  twelve  men  from 
among  those  who  followed  Him,  and  made  them  His  apostles.  He  chose  twelve,  to 
indicate  that  these  men  were  about  to  form  upon  earth  the  true  people  of  God,  the 
spiritual  Israel  of  which  the  first  was  but  a  type.  He  chose  them,  poor,  ignorant, 
weak,  in  order  to  show  that  the  power  by  which  they  were  to  conquer  the  world 
came  not  of  them,  but  descended  from  above.  We  shall  study  together  the  aims 
of  this  institution.  Why  did  Jesus  institute  apostles,  and  how  did  they  fulfil  the 
mission  with  which  they  had  been  entrusted  ?  I.  Who  says  apostle,  says  messengeb. 
The  twelve  were  to  be  the  first  missionaries  of  the  gospel.  Ignorant,  poor,  and 
without  the  least  personal  prestige,  they  dared  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  the  world 
with  no  other  arms  than  the  Word  of  which  they  were  the  bearers.  II.  Howbeit, 
this  rSle  of  messengers  of  God,  which  the  apostles  fulfilled  with  so  much  power 
and  fideUty,  does  not  constitute  the  whole  of  their  original  and  unique  ministry. 
If  we  study  the  question  closely,  we  shall  see  that  the  apostles  are  above  all,  and  in 
a  special  sense,  the  witnesses  of  Jesus  Christ :  the  personal,  ocular,  and  duly 
accredited  witnesses  of  the  person,  acts,  and  teaching  of  their  Master.    III.  The 

NECESSITY   OF   THE   APOSTOLICAL  TESTIMONY    18    NOW   OBVIOUS.        Let    US    gO    One    Step 

further,  and  consider  whether  this  testimony  is  really  worthy  of  belief.  1.  They 
were  sincere.  But — 2.  A  man  may  be  mistaken  though  sincere.  Were  they  ?  Well, 
in  the  name  of  my  reason,  I  rise  up  against  this  revolting  hypothesis,  a  thousand 
times  more  miraculous  than  the  miracles  it  will  not  own ;  it  is  in  the  name  of  my 
reason  that  I  assert  that  the  delusion  of  a  few  Galileans  cannot  have  produced 
moral  harmony,  that  folly  cannot  have  given  birth  to  the  loftiest  reason,  that 
hallucination  cannot  have  invented  Jesus  of  Nazareth  1  IV.  But  is  there  testimony 
BuflScient  for  the  Church  ?  Evidently,  no.  It  has  pleased  God  that  the  eternal 
Christ,  as  well  as  the  historical  Christ,  should  have  His  witness  from  the  very  first 
days  of  the  Church,  and  that  is  the  profound  signification  of  St.  Paul's  apostleship. 
V.  Will  our  Protestant  Churches  continue  to  be  apostolical  Churches  f  Let  this  be 
our  highest  ambition — to  be  in  our  turn  the  witnesses  of  Christ.  {E.  Bersier,  D.D.) 
The  King  choosing  Hit  ministers: — 1.  The  words  "when  it  was  day,"  recall  the 
preceding  verse.  When  the  work  most  expressed  His  authority.  He  was  still  re- 
nouncing all  independence.  Every  prayer  is  a  renunciation  of  independence. 
Every  prayer  says,  "We  can  do  nothing  without  Thee."  As  His  prayers  were  the 
essentially  true  prayers,  they  must  have  had  this  meaning  perfectly,  without  any 
reservation.  2.  That  night  in  which  He  was  not  alone,  because  the  Father  was 
with  Him,  prepared  Him  to  come  down  amidst  the  disciples  whom  He  had  gathered 
about  Him.  He  had  gathered  them  ;  they  knew  it.  Each  of  them  had  heard  a 
voice,  more  or  less  distinctly,  bidding  him  come.  Each  had  yielded  to  One  who, 
he  felt,  had  a  right  to  command  him.  And  now  He  takes  twelve  out  of  their 
number.  He  calls  them  apostles.  They  are  to  be  sent  forth.  3.  Clearly  they 
were  distinguished  from  the  other  members  of  the  little  flock.  What  had  caused 
the  difference  ?  Did  He  merely  like  them  better  that  the  rest  ?  Had  they  merited 
eome  greater  honour  at  His  hands  ?  Had  He  discovered  some  peculiar  capacity  in 
them  ?  All  such  questions  would  occur  to  these  poor  fishermen  ;  would  occur  to 
them  not  less  because  they  were  poor  fishermen.  4.  The  number  which  our  Lord 
fixed  apon  for  His  apostles  of  course  reminded  them  of  the  tribes  into  which  their 
nation  was  divided.  (F.  D.  Maurice.)  Disciples  and  apostles : — Disciple  means 
learner.  Apostle  means  missionary.  When,  then,  Jesus  turned  His  disciples  into 
apostles  you  see  what  an  event  it  was  1  1.  It  was  really  the  flowering  of  that  gospel 
which  He  had  been  pouring  into  them  through  all  their  discipleship.  The  plant 
fills  itself  with  the  richness  of  the  earth.  No  noise  is  made.  The  whole  transaction 
lies  between  the  plant  and  the  rich  earth  that  feeds  it  through  its  open  roots.  All 
is  silent,  private,  restricted.  But  some  day  the  world  looks,  and  lo  !  the  process 
has  burst  open.  Upon  the  long-fed  plant  is  burning  a  gorgeous  flower  for  the 
world  to  see.  The  long  supply  of  nourishment  has  opened  into  a  great  display  of 
glory.  The  earth  has  sent  its  richness  through  the  plant  to  enlighten  and  to  bless 
the  world.  The  disciple  has  turned  to  an  apostle.  2.  Notice,  when  Jesus  took  this 
great  step  forward  He  did  not  leave  behind  His  old  life  with  His  disciples.  He 
chose  out  of  the  number  of  His  disciples  twelve,  whom  also  He  named  apostles. 
They  were  to  be  disciples  still.    They  did  not  cease  to  be  learners  when  He  mad« 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yp, 

them  missionaries.  The  plant  does  not  cease  to  feed  itself  out  of  the  ground  wheo 
it  opens  its  glorious  flowers  for  the  world  to  see.  All  the  more  it  needs  supply,  now 
that  it  has  fulfilled  its  life.  And  so  this  great  epoch  in  the  Christian  Gnurch  waa 
an  addition  not  a  substitution.  3.  And  notice  yet  another  thing.  It  is  out  of  the 
very  heart  of  the  discipleship  that  the  apostleship  proceeds.  It  is  the  very  best, 
the  choicest,  as  we  say,  of  the  disciples,  that  are  chosen  to  be  apostles.  It  is  they 
vho  have  listened  to  Him  longest,  and  most  i u tell i gently,  and  most  lovingly. 
Always  it  is  the  best  of  the  inward  life  of  anything,  that  which  lies  the  closest  to 
its  heart,  and  is  the  fullest  of  its  spirit,  which  flowers  into  the  outward  impulse  which 
comes  to  complete  its  life.  {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The  twelve  apostles : — They 
were  not  great  men,  strong  men,  learned  men,  but  they  must  have  had  qualifications 
of  some  kind  for  the  position  to  which  they  were  called.  What  were  these  qualifi- 
cations? 1.  They  were  good  men.  2.  They  were  men  of  sensitive  mind,  ready 
for  Divine  call?,  open  to  Divine  impulses.  3,  They  were  men  of  simple,  child-like 
heart — men  who  had  great  capacity  for  faith.  (/.  Foster.)  The  witness  of  the 
apostles : — 1.  As  their  name  implies,  the  apostles  were  men  sent  to  do  a  given 
work.  They  did  what  they  did  because  they  were  sent.  2.  They  were  men  with  a 
definite  work  in  hand ;  they  had  to  witness  to  the  world  what  their  Master  had 
been,  and  had  done,  and  had  siiffered  while  they  were  with  Him.  3.  This  witness 
they  bore  in  three  ways  : — (1)  By  their  words — they  preached  Christ ;  (2)  By  theii 
■works — they  built  up  the  Church  of  Christ ;  (3)  By  their  sufferings — they  ^ed  for 
Christ.  And  if  fourthly,  it  be  asked  why  we  should  trust  the  witness  of  these 
apostles,  I  answer  that  their  witness,  as  recorded  by  themselves  or  their  reporters  in 
the  gospels,  shows  that  they  were  at  once  sincere  and  accurate.  {Canon  Liddon.) 
Simon,  whom  He  also  named  Peter,  and  Andrew  hla  brother,  James  and  John. 
Brotherhood  in  Christ : — Two  pairs  of  brothers.  Significant  and  suggestive  that 
twice  in  the  small  number  of  the  twelve  it  should  have  happened  that  the  natural 
tie  of  brotherhood  was  emphasized  by  a  common  call  to  the  new  life,  and  a  common 
work  in  the  same  service.  The  world  is  covered  with  a  network  of  brotherhoods. 
This  network  of  brotherhoods,  like  every  evident  fact  of  life,  sets  us  to  ask  three 
questions — 1.  What  is  its  immediate  cause  ?  The  cause  of  this  interwoven  net- 
work, this  reticulation  of  life  with  Ufe,  is  the  whole  system  of  nature  by  which  each 
human  being  takes  its  start  from  another  human  being,  and  is  kept,  for  a  time  at 
least,  in  associations  of  company  and  dependence  with  the  being  from  whom  it 
t-prang,  and  with  the  other  beings  who  have  the  same  source  with  it.  2.  What  is 
the  direct  result  of  such  relationships  ?  They  are  full  of  mutual  helpfulness  and 
pleasure.  3.  What  is  the  final  reason  of  this  relationship  7  Here  the  answer  is 
not  so  entirely  clear  and  certain.  But  as  we  watch  and  think  it  seems  to  me  that 
we  are  at  least  led  to  wonder  whether  one  final  cause  or  purpose  of  this  interlacing 
of  life  with  life,  by  natural  and  indissoluble  kinships,  may  not  be  just  this,  the 
providing,  as  it  were,  of  open  communications,  of  a  system  of  shafts  or  channels 
piercing  this  human  mass  in  every  direction,  crossing  and  recrossing  one  another, 
through  which  those  higher  influences,  which  ought  to  reach  every  corner  and  every 
individual  of  the  great  structural  humanity,  may  be  freely  carried  everywhere,  and 
no  most  remote  or  insifjnificant  atom  of  the  mass  be  totally  and  necessarily  un- 
touched. And  if  we  look  at  Christ's  larger  method,  at  the  way  in  which  His  work 
went  on  after  it  had  gone  beyond  that  earliest  stage  among  his  personal  kindred, 
the  same  thing  still  appears.  His  truth  ran  abroad  in  the  channels  which  were  made 
by  the  natural  relations  of  mankind.  {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  Reflections  upon 
pie  list  of  apostles  : — In  the  service  of  Christ  there  is  room  and  work  for  all  sorts 
end  conditions  of  men — for  men  of  genius,  for  men  of  thought,  for  men  of  action. 
1.  Are  we  impetuous,  adventurous,  original?  Christ  has  chosen  and  called  us.  If 
we  are  true  to  His  call,  we  shall  become  steadfast  as  a  rock,  and,  while  we  blunder 
on  our  way,  we  shall  announce  the  coming  and  presence  of  the  Lord,  2.  Are  we 
of  those  in  whom  the  pale  cast  of  thought  is  all  sicklied  o'er  with  doubt?  Christ 
has  chosen  nnd  called  us.  If  we  are  true  to  His  call,  we  shall  see  that  we  may 
believe,  until  we  can  believe  even  greater  things  than  we  can  see.  3.  Are  we 
practical  men,  conversant  with  affairs,  capable  of  handling  them  to  purpose? 
Christ  has  chosen  and  called  us,  that  we  may  be  with  Him,  and  preach  His  gospel, 
that  we  may  bear  witness  to  Him  by  a  life  which  reflects  His  own ;  and  if  we  are 
true  to  His  call,  we  shall  also  be  with  Him  where  He  now  is,  seeing  and  sharing 
His  everlasting  and  indisturbable  peace.  (T,  T,  Lynch.)  Our  Lord's  choice  of 
apostles: — I.  Why  did  our  Lobd  choose  apostlks?  1.  To  spread  the  Christian 
religion  after  His  ascension.     2.  To  record  and  transmit  to  fntore  ages  the  most 


0«A».  VI.]  ST.  L  VKE.  661 ' 

important  facta  concerning  Jesus — His  miracles,  doctrines,  precepts.  II.  Whi 
WERE  TWELVE  THOUGHT  NECE8SABT  ?  1.  As  the  apostles  Were  to  be  witnesses  to 
the  world  of  facts  of  the  highest  importance,  it  was  proper  that  they  should  not 
be  too  few.  The  consistent  evidence  of  twelve  men  must  be  unexceptionable. 
Their  thorough  agreement  as  to  the  same  facts,  doctrines,  and  precepts,  is  remark- 
able and  convincing,  especially  when  we  consider  that  after  Christ's  ascension  they 
were  so  widely  scattered  as  to  shut  off  all  possibility  of  collusion.  2.  They  were 
destined  to  propagate  the  gospel  among  many  nations.  They  were  not  too 
numerous,  in  proportion  to  the  duties  assigned  them.  3.  If  it  be  farther  demanded 
why  twelve  were  fixed  on,  rather  than  eleven,  or  thirteen,  we  can  give  no  other 
answer,  but  that  this  was  probably  done  to  gratify  the  Jews,  who  might  prefer 
twelve,  as  corresponding  to  the  number  of  their  tribes.  III.  Why  did  Jesus  give 
A  pbefbbence  to  thosb  individuals  whom  He  selected?  {J.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
The  apostolic  band  : — The  choice  of  apostles  is  one  of  the  most  brilliant  proofs  ol 
the  adorable  wisdom  of  the  Saviour.  1.  He  chooses  simple-minded,  yet  already' 
measurably-prepared  men.  To  some  has  the  Baptist's  instruction,  to  others  the 
toilsome  fisherman-life,  or  the  active  publican's  office,  been  a  more  suitable  school 
of  preparation  than  a  scientific  preparation  by  Hillel  or  Shammai.  2.  Few,  yet 
very  diverse,  men.  He  works  intensively  before  He  begins  to  labour  extensively  on 
the  kingdom  of  God  that  is  to  be  founded.  He  will  rather  perfect  some  than  only 
partially  train  many.  Accordingly  He  trains  them  with  and  also  by  means  of  one 
another,  and  shows  how  fully  His  gospel  accommodates  itself  to  every  point  of 
human  development,  and  how  it  is  perfectly  calculated  for  every  one's  individual 
necessities.  3.  Some  prominent  to  go  with  several  less  noticeable  men  whom  He 
gathers  together  into  a  little  company.  So  far  as  we  can  see,  the  beautiful  figura- 
tive language  used  in  1  Cor.  xii.  14-27,  is  also  completely  applicable  to  the  organism 
of  the  apostolic  circle.  Had  all  been  as  distinguished  as  a  Peter,  a  John,  and  as 
afterwards  a  Paul,  the  unity  would  have  suffered  by  the  diversity,  and  the  one  light 
would  have  been  broken  into  altogether  too  many  colours.  (J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee, 
D.D.)  The  catalogue  of  the  apostles: — 1.  A  source  of  knowledge.  This  cata- 
logue fills  (1)  a  brilliant  chapter  in  the  history  of  mankind ;  (2)  a  sublime  chapter 
in  the  history  of  Jesus ;  (3)  a  noteworthy  chapter  m  the  history  of  the  Divine 
government.  2.  A  support  of  faith.  It  witnesses  of  (1)  the  truth;  (2)  the 
sublimity ;  (3)  the  divinity ;  (4)  the  imperishableness — of  the  gospel.  3.  A  school 
of  life.  It  displays  the  image  of  the  (1)  condition,  (2)  intended  work,  and  (3) 
prerogatives — of  the  Christian  Church  even  in  our  days.  {Ibid.)  Why  was 
Judas  Iscariot  selected  as  an  apostle: — A  circumstance  calculated  to  excite  our 
wonder ;  that  He  who  was  perfect  Himself,  and  who  came  into  the  world  to  establish 
a  religion  of  purity  and  holiness,  should  choose  for  one  of  His  constant  attendants 
a  man  who  was  unprmcipled  and  incorrigible.  Mistake  on  Christ's  part  was 
impossible  (John  ii.  25).  1.  The  testimony  of  Judas  in  favour  of  the  purity  of 
Jesus,  renders  the  evidence  completa  Judas,  after  committing  his  crime,  was 
placed  in  that  situation  in  which  every  fault,  every  accusation,  every  blemish,  that 
he  could  bring  against  his  Master,  would  have  a  tendency  to  palliate,  if  not  to 
vindicate  himself.  2.  Judas  testifies  to  all  ages  that  the  leading  passions  may  be 
BO  bad,  and  the  habits  so  inveterate,  that  the  very  best  possible  opportunities  of 
improvement  cannot  be  of  any  advantage.  3.  The  selection  of  Judas  has  famished 
an  excellent  opportunity  of  teaching  Christians  another  important  truth :  That  U 
the  means  of  instruction  and  improvement  which  Jesus  Christ  employed  be 
neglected  or  perverted,  no  other  means  will  be  bestowed.  (J.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
The  traitor  among  the  twelve  : — It  is  natural  to  ask.  Why  was  there  a  traitor  among 
the  twelve  f  and  what  good  purpose  was  served  by  this  development  of  iniquity, 
which  He  who  rules  over  all  was  thus  pleased  to  permit.  Now,  here  was  fulfilled, 
in  the  most  striking  way,  the  declaration  that  the  wrath  of  men  shall  praise  God, 
and  the  remainder  of  wrath  He  shall  restrain.     I.  The  histobt  of  Judas  Iscabiot 

»UBNI8HE8   A    BTEIKINO   PBOOF   OF   THK    TBUTH    OF   ChBISTIANITT.       1.    It   is   B  prOOf   of 

this,  as  it  is  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy  (Psa.  Ixix.,  cix.;  Zech.  xi.  12,  Ac).  2.  It 
brings  forward  the  testimony  of  au  enemy,  and  a  perfectly  well-informed  enemy,  in 
support  of  Christianity.    II.  This  history  teaches  us  that  thb  occasional  oooub- 

BBNCE   OF  OBISVODS  OFFENCES  AMONO  PBOFESSOBS  OF  RELIGION,  SHOULD  NOT  FBBJUDIOB 

OB  AGAINST  RELIGION  ITSELF.  If  cveu  amoug  the  apostles  such  a  case  occorred,  it 
need  not  greatly  surprise  as  that  something  similar  should  take  place  in  the  Ghorob 
from  time  to  time.  III.  A  most  awful  warning  to  all  who  pbofesb  to  bb  the  i>is> 
oiPLEs  of  Chbist,  to  bewabe  lest  they  fall  in  a  siioLAB  WAT.    {flamea  Foote,M.A.\ 


IIS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chat.  n. 

Zealots : — Simon  called  Zelotes  has  apparently  two  Bnmames  in  Scriptnre,  bat  they 
mean  thv  game  thing.  He  is  called  Simon  the  Cananite  in  nebrew — not  becaus< 
he  was  an  inhabitant  of  Gana  or  a  Canaanite,  but  that  word,  when  interpreted, 
means  precisely  the  same  as  the  Greek  word  Zelotes.  He  was  called  Simon  tha 
Zealot.  I  suppose  that  he  had  this  name  before  his  conversion.  It  is  thought  by 
some  that  he  was  a  member  of  that  very  fierce  and  fanatical  political  sect  of  the 
Jews,  called  the  Zealots,  by  whose  means  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  was  rendered  so 
much  more  bloody  than  it  would  have  been ;  but  this  does  not  seem  very  probable, 
for  the  sect  of  the  Zealots  had  scarcely  arisen  in  the  time  of  the  Saviour,  and 
therefore  we  are  inclined  to  think  with  Hackett  in  his  exposition  of  the  Acts,  that 
be  was  so  called  because  of  his  zealous  attachment  to  his  religion  as  a  Jew,  for 
there  were  some  in  the  different  classes  of  Jewish  society  who  were  so  excessively 
full  of  zeal  as  to  gain  the  name  of  Zealot.  But  it  strikes  me  that  he  must  have 
been  a  zealot  after  conversion  too,  for  within  that  sacred  circle  which  surrounded 
our  Lord,  every  word  was  truth,  and  the  Master  would  not  have  allowed  any  of  His 
disciples  to  have  worn  a  surname  which  was  not  expressive  or  truthful.  May  we 
so  act  and  live  that  we  might  truthfully  wear  the  title  of  Christian  Zealots.  I.  Let 
us  pouRTEA"?  THE  UNCONVERTED  ZEixoT.  1.  Zeal  frequently  expends  itself  on  other 
things  than  religion.  Politics.  Science.  Business.  2.  The  unconverted  zealot, 
should  his  zeal  expend  itself  upon  religion,  is  generally  exceedingly  boastful. 
Jehu.  3.  The  unconverted  zealot  is  generally  an  ignorant  zealot  (Rom.  x,  2). 
Probably  there  is  more  zeal  to  be  found  among  the  professors  of  false  doctrine  than 
among  the  followers  of  the  truth.  4.  The  zeal  of  unconverted  men  is  generally 
partial.  It  may  be  a  zeal  for  something  good,  but  not  for  everything  that  is  good. 
Zealous  he  is  for  sect  and  party  when  the  whole  that  the  sect  may  hold  is  not  of 
more  value  than  the  gnat,  and  yet  great  fundamental  doctrinal  truths  are  forgotten, 
as  though  they  were  of  no  value  whatever.  Brethren,  may  we  be  earnest  men  of 
<Jod,  but  I  pray  that  we  may  be  zealous  for  all  truth.  5.  The  zealot,  again,  while 
unconverted,  is  generally  (if  it  be  in  his  power)  a  persecutor.  "  Concerning  zeal, 
persecuting  the  Church. "  6.  His  aims  are  often  sinister.  Let  us  beware  of  a  zeal 
for  lifting  up  ourselves.  Zeal  must  be  pure — fire  off  the  altar.  7.  The  unconverted 
zealot  is  generally  but  temporary  in  his  zeal.  "  When  he  was  sick,"  says  an  old 
legend,  "  the  devil  a  monk  would  be  "  ;  but  when  he  got  well — you  know  how  ho 
gave  up  his  fine  intentions.  II.  The  true  Christian  zealot.  1.  How  his  zeal 
manifests  itself.  (1)  In  his  private  dealings  with  God.  He  is  zealous  in  repent- 
ance— his  tears  come  welling  up  from  his  heai-t.  Sin  is  not  a  little  distasteful,  but 
is  exceedingly  disgusting  to  him.  His  faith,  too,  is  not  merely  a  trembling  recog- 
nition of  truth,  but  it  is  a  firm  grasp  of  everlasting  verities.  The  Christian  zealot, 
when  he  is  alone  with  God,  throws  his  whole  heai-t  into  His  service.  (2)  In  his 
prayers.  He  prays  hke  a  man  who  means  it,  and  will  take  no  denial.  (3)  In  his 
jealousy  for  God's  honour.  Elijah.  Phineas.  Up  with  truth,  and  down  with 
falsehood.  A  man  is  no  zealot  and  cannot  be  called  Zelotes,  unless  he  has  a  holy 
jealousy  for  the  honour  of  Christ,  and  His  crown,  and  His  truth.  (4)  In  the 
abundance  of  his  labours  and  gifts.  Zeal  labours  for  Christ.  For  a  picture  of  zeal 
take  St.  Paul.  How  he  compasses  sea  and  land  1  Storms  cannot  stay  him, 
mountains  cannot  impede  his  progress.  O  that  we  could  live  while  we  Uve ;  but 
our  existence — that  is  all  we  can  call  it — our  existence,  what  a  poor  thiug  it  is ! 
"We  run  like  shallow  streams :  we  have  not  force  enough  to  turn  the  mill  of 
industry,  and  have  not  depth  enough  to  bear  the  vessel  of  progress,  and  have  not 
flood  enough  to  cheer  the  meads  of  poverty.  We  are  dry  too  often  in  the  summer's 
drought,  and  we  are  frozen  in  the  winter's  cold.  (5)  By  the  anguish  which  his  soul 
feels  when  his  labours  for  Christ  are  not  successful.  Zeal  must  move  not  merely 
the  tongue,  or  the  foot,  or  the  hand,  but  also  the  heart.  (6)  In  a  vehement  love 
and  attachment  to  the  person  of  the  Saviour.  Nothing  can  make  a  man  zealous 
like  attachment  to  a  person.  When  Napoleon's  soldiers  won  so  many  victories,  and 
^especially  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  when  agaiust  such  deadly  odds  they 
earned  such  splendid  triumphs,  what  was  the  reason  ?  The  "  Little  corporal  "  was 
ihere,  and  whenever  it  came  to  a  desperate  rush  he  was  the  first  to  cross  the  bridge 
or  charge  the  enemy,  always  exposing  himself  to  danger;  and  their  attachment  to 
bis  person,  and  their  love  and  admiration  of  his  valour,  made  them  follow  at  his 
Sieels,  swift  to  victory.  Have  not  we  heard  of  those  who  threw  themselves  in  tha 
way  of  the  cannon  ball  to  save  his  life  ?  There  could  not  have  been  such  triumphs 
if  there  had  not  been  a  man  who  knew  how  to  govern  men  by  attaching  them  to 
Siimself .    And  oh,  the  peivon  of  the  Saviour  1   What  attachment  can  there  he  eqaal 


CHAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE,  553 

io  that  which  binds  a  Christian  to  his  Lord  ?  2.  This  brings  us  now,  in  the  next^ 
place,  to  think  awhile  of  how  this  zeal  is  maintained  and  kept  up.  To  keep  up  a. 
good  fire  of  zeal  we  must  have  much  fuel,  and  the  fire  will  partake  of  the  quality  of' 
the  fuel,  so  that  it  must  be  good  firing  to  make  holy  zeal.  (1)  If  I  understand 
aright,  zeal  is  the  fruit  of  the  Holy  Spint,  and  genuine  zeal  draws  its  life  and  vital 
force  from  the  continued  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  soul.  (2)  Next  to 
this,  zeal  feeds  upon  truths  like  these.  It  is  stirred  by  the  ruin  of  sinners.  The 
▼ery  sight  of  sinners  makes  a  right-hearted  man  zealous  for  their  conversion.  The 
wants  of  the  age  are  enough,  if  a  man  has  any  sense  of  what  eternal  realities  are, 
to  make  us  zealous  to  the  highest  pitch.  (3)  And  next.  Christian  zeal  feeds  itself 
upon  a  sense  of  gratitude.  Look  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were  digged,  and 
yon  will  see  abundant  reason  why  you  should  spend  and  be  spent  for  God.  (4) 
Zeal  for  God  feeds  itself  upon  the  thought  of  the  eternal  future.  It  feels  that  all 
it  can  do  is  little  compared  with  what  is  wanting,  and  that  iime  is  short  compared- 
with  the  work  to  be  done,  and  therefore  it  devotes  all  that  it  has  to  the  cause  of  its 
Lord.  (5)  Above  all,  zeal  for  God  feeds  itself  on  love  to  Christ.  Lady  Powerscourt 
says  somewhere,  "If  we  want  to  be  thoroughly  hot  with  zeal,  we  must  go  near  tO' 
the  furnace  of  the  Saviour's  love."  (6)  Above  all.  Christian  zeal  must  be  sus- 
tained by  a  vigorous  inner  life.  3.  I  have  to  close  by  commending  zeal.  In  com- 
mending  zeal,  let  me  say,  methinks  it  should  commend  itself  to  every  Christian  man 
without  a  word  of  mine,  but  if  you  must  have  it,  remember  that  God  Himself  ia 
zealous.  "  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  will  perform  this."  Christ  was  zealous. 
We  read  of  Him  that  the  zeal  of  God's  house  had  eaten  Him  up,  and  when  He  took 
the  scourge  of  small  cords  and  purged  the  Temple,  John  tells  us  that  it  was  written 
of  Him,  "  The  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  Me  up."  A  prophet  tells  us  that  He 
was  clothed  with  zeal  as  with  a  cloak.  He  had  not  zeal  over  a  part  of  Him,  but 
was  clothed  with  it  as  with  ^ome  great  cloak  covering  Him  from  head  to  foot. 
Christ  was  aU  zeal.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  17,  19.  And  the  whole  multitude  sought  to  tonch  Him :  for  there  went 
virtue  out  of  Him,  and  healed  them  all. — Christ  the  fountain  of  health: — The 
subject  will  be  found  to  involve  two  considerations ;  what  is  the  virtue  which 
proceeds  out  of  Christ  ?  by  what  means  is  it  appropriated  to  men  7  I.  We  begin 
by  observing,  that  in  addition  to  the  superiority  of  our  Lord's  miracles  in  point  of 
number  over  those  of  every  other,  there  is  also  a  great  distinction  in  the  manner  of 
their  achievement.  The  apostles,  for  example,  nowhere  pretend  to  have  accom- 
plished the  prodigies  which  they  performed  by  their  own  ability.  The  words  o£ 
healing  are,  "  In  the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  rise  up  and  walk."  The 
distinction  to  which  we  advert  is  very  obvious ;  the  miracles  of  the  apostles  were 
wrought  by  an  agency  not  their  own ;  their  touch,  their  voice,  their  shadow,  had 
no  inherent  power  to  do  cures ;  from  Christ's  own  person  went  out  immediately  the 
virtue  which  healed  them  all.  The  difference  is  remarkable.  It  is  as  though  the 
indwelling  Godhead  did  so  impregnate  the  human  flesh  with  life-giving  energy,  that 
no  sickness  or  weakness  could  remain  after  contact  with  that  immaculate  frame. 
There  resided  in  that  sinless  body  a  fulness  of  grace.  It  was,  as  it  were,  a  spring 
of  life  to  the  bodies  of  others:  the  virtue  dwelt  in  it.  and  was  drawn  forth  by  an 
act  of  faith  in  the  diseased.  Such  we  conceive  to  be  the  original  meaning  of  the 
text ;  and  thus  understood,  it  will  be  found  accurately  to  describe  also  the  influence 
of  Christ  upon  ourselves.  The  fact  is  not  only  that  God  chose  to  regard  the 
offspring  of  Adam  as  iniquitous,  but  that  they  really  were  so.  Thus,  we  repeat,  it 
is  not  sufficient  to  consider  that  Adam's  fault  placed  his  descendants  in  the  positioo, 
of  criminals ;  it  did  really  and  actually  render  them  corrupt.  And  what  has  Christ, 
done  for  the  vast  family  of  man  thus  contemplated  ?  We  reply,  in  the  words  of  the 
text,  virtue  goeth  out  of  His  body  to  heal  them  all.  The  Redeemer,  we  are  told, 
took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  of  men.  Christ  Jesus,  the  Second 
Adam,  is  set  forth  to  be  the  Restorer  of  human  nature.  He  removes  the  inherent 
disease.  He  destroys  the  natural  defilement.  From  Him  a  new  period  commences  ; 
to  all  His  disciples  He  is  the  new  Stock,  the  Root,  the  Stem.  II.  It  remains  that 
we  very  briefiy  allude  to  the  means  by  which  the  healing  virtue  which  resides  iif 
Christ,  is  appropriated  to  man.  Now  as  respects  the  communication  of  the 
healing  virtue  of  Christ's  Manhood  to  our  souls,  we  hesitate  not  to  place  it  in  the 
two  Sacraments  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  These  are  between  us  and  the 
Second  Adam,  what  fleshly  procreation  is  between  us  and  the  first  Adam.  Thercr 
Is  healing  virtue  in  the  Secoud  Adam ;  we  obtain  a  share  of  it  through  oar  anioik 


1554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  n. 

with  Him  by  His  appointed  ordinances.  By  the  Sacraments  we  are  spiritually 
oonnected  with  Christ,  as  closely  as  we  are  carnally  connected  with  Adam  and 
Eve.  •' We  are  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  and  of  His  bones."  In  Him 
was  life,  but  how  was  this  life  to  be  communicated  to  others  7  In  Him  was  purity, 
but  how  should  it  be  transmitted  ?  He  was  the  Being  set  forth  to  make  all  things 
new,  but  how  was  a  connection  to  be  wrought  out  between  Him  and  us  ?  Indeed 
not  by  any  carnal  alliance,  but  in  a  new  and  living  way.  Through  these  Sacra- 
ments, duly  administered  and  faithfully  taken,  virtue  goeth  out  of  Him  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations.  And  in  connection  with  the  present  subject  of  discourse,  it 
seems  appropriate  to  remind  you,  in  conclusion,  that  whilst  our  Lord's  Incarnation 
as  a  whole  is  full  of  healing  virtue  for  all  generations  of  believers,  so  are  the 
several  events  of  His  life,  taken  separately,  imbued  with  a  similar  efficiency.  We 
have  been  very  much  struck  with  that  most  solemn  part  of  the  Litany,  in  which 
we  call  upon  God  the  Son  to  deliver  us,  making  mention  of  the  various  pains  which 
He  endured.  "  By  Thy  holy  Nativity  and  Circumcision;  by  Thy  Baptism,  Fasting, 
and  Temptation";  and  then,  in  deeper  and  more  thrilling  strain,  "By  Thine 
Agony  and  Bloody  Sweat ;  by  Thy  Cross  and  Passion ;  by  Thy  precious  Death  and 
Burial,  Good  Lord,  deliver  us."  It  is  probable  that  by  many  the  passage  is  only 
regarded  as  an  adjuration  to  the  Second  Person  to  be  merciful  unto  us,  by  the 
strong  plea  of  what  He  has  done  and  suffered.  The  Church  reminds  her  Lord,  if 
we  may  so  speak,  of  His  own  sorrows,  and  by  the  thought  of  them  claims  His  grace. 
But  is  this  all  ?  We  think  not.  We  believe  there  is  implied  in  the  awful  supplica- 
tion the  truth,  that  every  one  of  the  Eedeemer's  acts,  one  by  one  recalled,  is  full  of 
its  own  peculiar  virtue.  Thus  in  praying  to  be  saved  by  His  Nativity,  we  pray  that 
we  may  be  bom  anew  unto  holiness.  The  Collects  for  the  days  on  which  these 
single  acts  of  Christ  are  commemorated,  teach  us  what  appropriate  power  belongs 
to  each  act.  Turn  to  the  Collect  of  the  Circumcision.  We  find  the  mention  of 
Christ's  Circumcision  connected  with  the  true  circumcision  of  our  spirits,  the 
mortification,  i.e. ,  of  our  hearts  and  all  our  members.  The  Fasting  and  Tempta- 
tion of  the  Saviour,  as  brought  before  us  on  the  First  Sunday  in  Lent,  are  to  enable 
us  to  subdue  our  flesh  to  the  Spirit.  His  Cross  and  Passion  are  to  convey  to  ua 
the  grace  of  patience  like  His  ovm.  His  Burial  is  to  qualify  us  to  be  buried  with 
Him,  that  through  the  grave  and  gate  of  death  we  may  pass  to  our  joyful  resurrec- 
tion. And  thus  are  we  to  regard  everything  that  He  did ;  every  act  of  His  is  as  it 
were  sacramental  in  its  nature,  associated  with  its  own  appropriate  grace.  Yoa 
will  at  once  see  what  a  stupendous  importance  is  thus  attached  to  the  least  action 
of  Christ.  Here,  then,  is  the  Fountain  of  our  life  ;  there  is  no  sin  so  great  that 
Christ  cannot  cleanse ;  no  weakness  so  inherent  which  He  will  not  strengthen. 
Neither  time  nor  distance  can  set  bounds  to  those  health-giving  streams  which  flow 
from  Him.  {Bishop  Woodford,)  Healing  for  the  soul : — I.  Then,  as  it  respects 
the  soul  of  man,  thebe   is  a  disease  which  is   common  to  us  all;  and  thb 

ANALOOT  BETWEEN  THE  SOUL  AND  BODY  MUST  HERE  BE  MANIFEST  TO  THE  MOST 

BUPERnciAL  OBSERVER.  In  the  great  majority  of  instances,  you  need  not  inform 
even  a  child  of  the  existence  in  any  individual  of  bodily  disease;  for,  however 
incompetent  he  may  be  to  investigate  the  cause,  he  is  perfectly  familiar  with  the 
effect.  Sometimes  the  morbid  affection  disfigures  the  countenance,  sometimes  it 
distorts  the  shape,  sometimes  it  impedes  the  motion  and  paralyzes  the  limbs ;  in 
one  it  affects  the  utterance,  in  another  it  obscures  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  in  a 
third  it  is  betrayed  at  intervals  by  convulsive  starts  and  spasms  of  sudden  agony, 
in  a  fourth  it  antedates  the  halting  step  and  wasted  form  of  age  ere  yet  the  noon 
of  life  is  past,  and  causes  its  victim  to  walk  abroad  amongst  the  living,  impressed  in 
their  sight  with  the  ghastly  lineaments  of  death.  And  are  not  the  effects,  ox 
symptoms,  of  the  spiritual  disease  precisely  similar  7  But  here,  again,  an  important 
feature  in  the  analogy  is  presented  to  us,  by  the  expedients  which  men  employ, 
whether  of  business,  or  pleasure,  or  intemperance,  or  excess,  in  order  to  stifle 
thought.  These  things  act  upon  the  soul  like  opiates  on  the  body ;  they  mitigate 
the  present  suffering,  but  they  aggravate  the  symptoms  of  the  disease  ;  they  obscure 
the  perception  of  danger,  but  they  enhance  and  accelerate  the  danger  itself.  Under 
this  head,  moreover,  we  may  learn  another  lesson,  namely,  that  a  knowledge  of  the 
disease  is  a  prerequisite  to  the  seeking  of  the  remedy.  They  who  brought  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  all  that  were  diseased,  laid  the  sick  before  Him  in  the  streets;  but 
neither  would  the  sick  have  consented  to  be  brought,  had  they  not  been  conscious 
of  the  malady  within,  nor  would  their  friends  and  kindred  ha^e  brought  them,  had 
thej  not  discerned  the  symptoms  of  it,  as  developed  and  eihibited  without.    XL 


(OHAP.  T1.1  ST.  LUKE.  655 

Such,  then,  being  the  disease,  what,  in  the  next  place,  is  the  bemedt  ?  Now, 
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  that  on  the  occasion  to  which  my  text  refers,  and 
on  other  similar  occasions,  many  sad  effects  of  human  infirmity  and  suffering,  not 
a  few  of  them  incurable,  and  acknowledged  to  be  so,  by  all  human  skill,  because 
inaccessible  to  all  known  remedies,  were  exhibited  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  We 
must  set  ourselves  in  right  earnest  to  apply  to  the  throbbing  festering  conscience 
the  balm  of  Christ's  atonement,  and  to  embody  in  the  life  the  features  of  Christ's 
example.  III.  Since,  then,  the  bemedy  fob  odb  spibitual  disease  is  just  as 
DNiTEESAL  AS  THE  EXTENT  OF  IT — for  "  all  that  believe  are  justified  freely"  by  God's 
grace — and  since  it  is  also  unfailing  in  its  efficacy,  for  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
cleanseth  from  all  sin  "  ;  the  narrative  of  the  context  is  to  teach  us,  next,  the 
process  of  its  application.  In  every  case  they  did  what  they  could ;  and  we 
should  at  least  learn,  from  their  example,  this  lesson,  that  what  we  can  do  we 
are  not  to  leave  undone.  IV.  It  only  remains,  then,  that  we  complete  our  view  of 
this  most  instructive  and  interesting  analogy,  by  looking  at  the  besult  of  the 
APPLICATION  OF  SUCH  A  BEMEDY — that  remedy  being  the  blood  of  Christ  applied  by 
the  prayer  of  faith,  or,  if  you  will,  the  prayer  against  unbelief.  What  this  will  be, 
we  may  gather  from  the  narration  of  either  evangelist,  which  speaks  of  recovery  at 
once  universal  and  complete.  "  As  many  as  touched  Him,"  said  St.  Matthew,  or 
rather,  as  the  margin  reads,  "  as  many  as  touched  it "  (that  is,  the  hem  of  the 
garment),  "  were  made  whole  " ;  and  as  yoa  have  heard  by  St.  Luke  in  the  text, 
though  there  was  a  multitude  around  Him,  "  there  went  virtue  out  of  Him,  and 
healed  them  all."  If  the  sick  had  not  come,  or  had  not  been  brought  to  Jesus, 
they  would  not  have  been  healed ;  many  blind  were  there  in  Israel,  many  lame, 
many  palsied,  many  lepers,  many  demoniacs,  many  lunatics,  who  did  not  come,  and 
therefore  were  not  healed.  But  the  amount  of  oar  individual  responsibility  depends 
upon  the  amount  of  our  individual  knowledge  and  of  our  individual  opportunity  ; 
and  if  we  know  that  all  were  healed  who  did  come,  or  who  were  even  brought,  in 
faith,  what  greater  encouragement  and  inducement  can  we  desire  for  ourselves  ? 
(T.  Dale,  M.A.)  Christ    healing    bodily  disease,  emblematic  of  the    Church'i 

/unction : — *'  The  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  Him;  for  there  went  virtue  out  of 
Him,  and  healed  them  all."  1.  Familiar  as  this  statement  must  be  to  us,  there  is 
something  in  it  truly  wonderful  and  most  worthy  of  admiration — I  mean,  that  there 
is  in  the  gospel  this  universal  power  to  adapt  itself  to  man.  It  constitutes  perhaps 
its  most  wonderful  and  distinctive  feature.  We  shall  search  in  vain  in  any  other 
system  for  its  resemblance.  In  many  systems,  more  or  less  of  human  invention — 
in  systems  of  philosophy,  so  called — we  may  find  attempts  to  remedy  some  of  the 
evils  under  which  man  labours ;  one  applies  itself  to  one  kind,  and  another  to 
Another  ;  but  often  the  remedy  for  one  is  fatal  to  the  other.  But  the  gospel  is  a 
universal  remedy.  In  a  word,  there  is  truly  no  form  of  evil  which  the  gospel  of 
Christ  does  not  meet  and  rectify  ;  no  want  which  it  does  not  supply ;  no  real  good 
which  it  does  not  impart.  2.  And  scarcely  less  remarkable  is  it  to  observe  how  it 
takes  hold  of  all  the  natural  forms  of  character,  and  turns  them  to  due  accoont ; 
how  it  enlists  on  the  side  of  what  is  good  even  the  natural  temperaments  of  men. 
The  burning  zeal  of  a  Peter,  the  restless  energy  of  a  Paul,  the  fervour  and 
impetuosity  of  a  John  and  James — it  takes  them  all,  sanctifies  them  all,  concen- 
trates them  all  on  one  holy  end.  These,  and  such  like  human  dispositions,  left  to 
their  natural  courses,  would  have  branched  off  into  various  forms  of  evil.  But  lo  1 
they  are  touched  by  God's  Spirit  from  above,  the  gospel  pours  down  upon  them  its 
sanctifying  influences,  turns  the  dross  into  gold,  and  makes  what  would  have  been 
natural  imperfections  (to  say  the  least)  to  become  noble  features  in  the  Christian 
«haracter.  Such,  my  brethren,  is  the  power  of  the  gospel ;  such  is  the  virtue  which 
goes  out  of  Christ  to  heal.  For  if  we  inquire  how  the  gospel  possesses  and  exerts 
this  influence,  the  reply  assuredly  is — By  making  Christ  known  to  us.  And  here, 
too,  the  incident  before  us  is  strikingly  emblematic.  The  thronging  multitude 
were  healed  by  touching  Christ ;  and  to  us  the  gospel  is  made  "  the  power  of  God 
nnto  salvation,"  simply  by  bringing  us,  so  to  speak,  into  spiritual  contact  with 
Christ.  The  power  of  His  blessed  sacraments  consists  in  this  :  holy  baptism 
uniting  m  to  Christ  and  giving  us  spiritual  life  in  Him — the  holy  Eucharist 
sustaining  that  life  through  the  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  And 
BO  the  Word  of  the  gospel  is  effectual  to  its  appointed  end  by  testifying  of  Christ. 
He  is  the  centre  and  the  source  of  all  its  blessings.  3.  But  now  let  us  carry  this 
emblematic  style  of  our  blessed  Lord's  teaching  one  step  further.  If  we  study  the 
character  of  His  ministry,  there  is  no  feature  in  it  which  we  shall  find  more  promi* 


556  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHAJ.  n 

nent  than  this  :  that  it  bore  on  its  very  front  the  aspect  of  mercy,  and  this  not  onl; 
in  respect  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul  from  sin  and  misery,  but  also  in  a  compas- 
sionate care  for  the  bodily  necessities  of  men.  And  now,  my  brethren,  let  at 
consider  the  application  of  this  matter  to  ourselves.  It  is  the  high  and  holy 
prerogative  of  the  Church  to  be  on  earth  the  representative  of  her  Divine  Master, 
Her  highest  and  most  glorious  function — nay,  vre  may  say  her  only  function — is  to 
carry  on  and  perfect  the  work  of  mercy  which  He  began ;  of  spreading  the  knowledge 
of  salvation  through  the  world,  and  of  blessing  all  who  come  within  the  influence 
of  the  Church's  sphere.  We  all  know,  from  the  history  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles, 
how  well  the  early  Church  sustained  this  blessed  office ;  not  only  by  working 
miracles  while  that  power  lasted,  but  also  by  her  self-denying  charity — by  a 
common  fund,  abundantly  supported  by  the  liberality  of  the  first  Christians,  for  the 
relief  of  every  want  and  of  every  woe,  to  which  our  fallen  human  nature  is  subject. 
Wherever  the  Church  was  planted,  there  a  fountain  of  mercy  and  goodness  was 
opened ;  there  a  tree  was  planted,  "  whose  leaves  were  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations."  It  brought,  indeed,  richer  mercies  than  the  natural  eye  could  see  or  the 
natural  ear  could  hear — salvation  for  the  immortal  soul,  deliverance  from  the 
bands  of  sin  and  death,  and  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  "  ;  but  in 
its  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  the  immortal  soul,  it  did  not  overlook  the  transient 
sufferings  of  the  perishing  body.  It  did  not  wait  until  the  blind  eyes  and 
the  dull  hearts  could  perceive  and  appreciate  those  higher  blessings  which  it 
had  to  bestow;  but  it  accompanied  the  Word  of  grace  with  acts  of  more 
ostensible  mercy.  (W.  Dodtworth,  M.A.)  Chrisft  healing  power: — Miracles, 
according  to  the  records  of  Christ's  life,  were  of  most  frequent  occurrence,  not 
occasional.  They  were  the  simple  details  of  His  life,  coming  as  naturally  from 
Him  as  acts  of  kindness  from  the  benevolent  heart  or  gifts  from  the  charitable.  It 
was  thus  He  expressed  His  sympathy  with  the  poor  and  suffering.  In  this  way 
Christ  showed  His  message  of  mercy  to  man,  and  revealed  the  nature  of  that 
redemption  of  the  race  which  He  began  by  living  and  dying  for  the  world.  In  no 
other  way  could  He  so  deeply  have  impressed  the  world  with  the  distinctive 
character  of  His  redeeming  power.  I.  Christ's  power  to  heal  tbb  soul  is  im 
HmsELr  ALONB.  It  is  not  easy  to  understand  this — that  Christ,  and  Christ  alone, 
is  the  source  of  all  healing.  We  can  understand  that  a  doctrine  received  by  the 
mind  shall  restore  the  mind  to  health ;  or  that  the  heart  may  find  rest  in  some 
object  on  which  it  shall  place  its  affections ;  but  that  it  is  only  from  Christ  thai 
this  healing  power  comes — why,  it  is  hard  to  conceive.  Men  cannot  apprehend  the 
truth  of  God,  even  as  Jesus  reveals  it,  without  Divine  aid.  The  reason  is  strong, 
the  will  vigorous,  the  understanding  clear ;  but  there  is  need  of  the  power  of  God's 
Spirit,,  and  that  can  only  come  through  our  personal  touching  of  Christ.  Power 
goes  forth  from  Him — as  the  soul  receives  the  Holy  Ghost.    II.  Christ's  power  to 

HEAL    is   not    exercised   INDISCRIMINATELY,    BUT    ONLY   UPON   THOSE   WHO   GO   TO   HiM. 

There  are  always  many  who  see  Him,  and  yet  do  not  know  Him,  and  are  not  healed 
by  Him  7  Why  ?  Because  they  do  not  seek  to  touch  Him.  You  must  go  to  Him, 
not  trust  a  mother's  prayers — you  must  go  yourself.  Observe  here,  too,  that  the 
touch  was  effectual ;  touch  His  body  and  bodily  disease  was  cured,  because  it  was 
the  touch  of  faith.  Not  the  accidental  touch,  but  the  touch  on  purpose;  not  the 
touch  which  may  be  put  forth  out  of  curiosity,  nor  to  escape  the  evil  consequences 
of  your  sin;  but  the  touch  of  the  soul  that  wants  to  be  healed.  III.  Christ's 
POWER  IS  EXERCISED  TO  HEAL  ALL  WHO  TOUCH  HiM.  Noue  Were  disappointed. 
None  were  too  ill,  too  diseased.  There  was  no  asking,  "How  came  you  in 
this  state?  Your  own  faults,"  &o.  {H.  W.  Butcher.)  The  philanthropy  of 
Christianity : — The  power  which  Jesus  Christ  exercised  over  physical  disease  was  a 
guarantee  that  as  long  as  He  lived  He  would  be  surrounded  by  great  multitudes  of 
people.  Those  who  would  never  go  to  Him  for  spiritual  gifts  would  be  sure  to  find 
Him  in  the  time  of  physical  pain  and  fear.  It  is  thus  that,  even  now,  God  binds 
the  human  race  to  Himself.  They  hunger  and  thirst ;  they  are  in  sorrow  and  great 
distress ;  times  of  impoverishment  and  desolation  overtake  them  ;  and  under  such 
circumstances  the  better  nature  rises  and  yearns  for  protection  and  comfort.  The 
Church  should  create  for  itself  a  large  sphere  of  practical  service,  because  there  are 
many  who  cannot  understand  the  metaphysics  of  Christianity  who  may  be  touched  by 
its  philanthropy.  Jesus  Christ's  plan  was  to  take  hold  of  human  nature  as  it  chos» 
to  present  itself  to  his  attention ;  hence  we  find  him  not  only  speaking  essential 
truths  to  Nicodemus,  but  attending  to  the  bodily  necessities  of  those  who  had  no  under- 
standing whatever  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  which  He  came  to  establish.  (Dr.  Parker.^ 


«HAr.  yi.]  ST.  LUKE.  657 

Ter.  20.  Blessed  be  ye  poor:  for  yours  Is  the  Uagdom  of  God. — Blessednets, 
rather  than  happiness,  the  want  of  Tnan : — It  is  not  merely  happiness,  whatever  our 
Bballow  moralists  may  say,  that  is  "  the  aim  and  end  of  our  being."  Happiness 
implies  merely  the  undisturbed  enjoyment  of  the  man.  It  may  belong  to  the  child, 
or  to  the  selfish  votary  of  the  world.  It  may  be  spoken  of  the  miser's  gold,  or  oi 
the  successful  prizes  of  ambition,  or  ofjthe  gilded  baubles  of  social  folly.  There  is 
no  moral  meaning  in  it.  But  it  is  blessedness  that  alone  can  satisfy  the  mind  and 
heart,  which  are  living  for  another  end  than  self ;  blessedness,  which  has  no  hap 
in  it,  no  chance,  no  merely  outward  success.  (E.  A.  Washburn,  D.D.)  The  spirit 
of  gospel  morality : — The  whole  spirit  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  in  these  beatitudes. 
It  is  at  once  a  religion  and  a  morality.  It  teacbes  us  the  essence  of  all  Christian 
truth,  which  is  in  that  real  love  of  God,  that  is  manifest  in  love  of  men,  and  holi- 
ness. Yet  it  is  a  Divine,  a  perfect  morality.  No  other  faith  ever  revealed  itself  in 
such  personal  teaching,  in  such  living  beauty,  not  of  word,  but  of  character.  The 
Divine  humanity  of  Christ  and  His  religion  stands  forth  here  in  this  code,  human 
yet  more  than  man.  If  I  were  to  put  into  language  the  morality  of  mankind,  I 
should  write  the  very  opposite  catalogue  of  beatitudes  :  Blessed  are  the  rich. 
Blessed  they  who  do  not  mourn.  Blessed  are  the  high-minded.  Blessed  they 
who  hunger  and  thirst  after  the  selfish  gain.  Blessed  they  who  need  no  mercy 
Blessed  the  cunning  and  cold  of  heart.  Blessed  they  who  win  the  battle  of  life. 
Blessed  they  who  are  prudent  enough  to  escape  persecution.  It  is  this  very  excel- 
lence which  always  makes  it  appear  to  the  mass  of  selfish  men  an  unreal  thing. 
Take  any  of  those  rules,  and  try  for  an  hour  to  follow  them  out  in  practice,  and  the 
end  would  be  that  the  Christian  would  be  the  laughing-stock  of  the  crowd.  And 
what  is  the  inference?  Why,  the  Author  and  Founder  of  this  kingdom  was  probably 
one  of  the  pure-hearted  ideal  enthusiasts  of  His  time  :  His  religion  succeeded 
doubtless  awhile,  while  it  was  the  faith  of  a  few  poor  devotees.  But  in  proportion 
as  it  entered  into  the  world,  it  lost  of  necessity  this  moral  severity  ;  and  the 
Christianity  of  the  Church  and  the  world  is  little  more  than  a  civilized  heathenism. 
We  may  admire  much  in  the  New  Testament  that  is  pure  and  beautiful.  But  we 
oannot  call  its  morality  a  basis  in  any  sense  of  human  conduct,  a  Divine  or  authori- 
tative standard  for  mankind.  Such  is  the  argument.  And  there  is  much  that  is 
plausible  in  it.  It  falls  in  with  doubts  that  sometimes  naturally  rise  in  us  as  we 
read  the  gospel.  It  needs  careful  thought.  For,  if  it  be  really  so,  it  is  plain  that 
the  gospel  is  no  longer  a  standard  of  action,  and  cannot  be  Divine.  Now,  I  would 
endeavour  so  to  meet  it  as  to  set  at  rest  such  doubts,  and  to  convince  you  that  your 
religion  is  no  gospel  of  dreamers,  but  a  real,  a  practical  morality  for  the  man  and 
the  State.  1.  I  shall  begin  by  granting  freely  everything  that  is  fairly  said  of  the 
Divine,  absolute,  ideal  purity  of  Christ's  morality.  Nay,  I  shall  claim  it  as  its 
noblest  character.  He  sets  before  us  the  highest  ideal  of  personal  conduct.  And  I 
maintain  that  there  is  no  domain,  where  the  mind  and  will  of  man  are  employed, 
which  does  not  recognize  and  demand  such  an  ideal.  It  is  so  in  science.  It  is 
only  as  the  man,  who  holds  up  before  him  always  the  noblest  standard  of  know- 
ledge, a  perfection  beyond  what  any  has  reached,  who  never  acknowledges  a  limit 
to  his  growth — it  is  he  who  reaches  a  stature  above  the  crowd.  It  is  so  in  art.  A 
Thorwaldsen  works  in  the  clay  model,  conscious  that  in  his  mind  there  is  an  ideal 
which  guides  his  fingers  as  he  slowly  sees  the  clay  take  shape.  It  is  so  in  social 
order.  And  is  it  not  true,  is  it  not  far  truer,  of  the  moral  law  of  life  ?  There  must 
be,  not  for  the  monk  in  his  cell,  not  for  the  dreamy  recluse,  but  for  the  man  in  his 
daily  sphere,  an  ideal  above  the  common  standard  of  the  world  in  which  he  lives. 
If  I  shoot  my  arrow  at  the  mark,  I  aim  above  it ;  and  why  ?  Because  the  necessary 
power  of  gravitation  will  carry  it  to  a  degree  below  the  straight  line ;  only  the 
higher  aim  can  guide  it  aright.  If  I  will  reach  the  bank,  I  steer  above  it,  because 
the  tide  draws  the  boat  downward,  and  my  course  is  made  of  the  two  forces.  But 
this  law  of  physics  is  as  much  verified  in  morals.  There  are  in  the  atmosphere  of 
the  world,  in  our  own  weakness,  and  the  weight  of  selfish  passion  around  us,  forces 
that  always  drag  down  the  will,  the  affections,  below  even  the  mark  of  attainable 
goodness.  If  there  be  no  nobler  aim  than  the  common  law  of  society,  the  outward 
fear  of  justice,  the  rule  of  a  selfish  prudence,  it  will  make  us  but  an  inferior 
character.  And  thus  the  religion  of  Christ  gives  us  the  ideal  and  perfect  standard. 
It  plants  it  in  the  motive.  It  claims  the  pure  desire  of  an  unselfish  heart.  It 
proves  that  its  truth  is  Divine,  because  it  does  not  compromise  with  our  false 
passions,  with  our  earthly  appetites,  with  our  worldly  dissimulations.  2.  This  ideal 
morality  is  not  unreal,  but  more  real,  from  this  very  character.    It  has  entered 


55B  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  n, 

into  every  hnman  calling.  It  has  inspired  every  class  of  mankind.  It  has  taught 
the  lowliest  labourer  honest  thrift.  It  has  taught,  too,  the  highest  humility,  It 
has  purified  the  vices  of  trade.  It  has  nourished  domestic  love.  It  has  no  less 
presided  over  the  councils  of  State  than  over  the  private  heart.  It  alone  has 
inspired  the  enthusiasm  of  humanity.  Even  in  its  extravagances,  the  gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ  has  been  the  source  of  all  that  is  heroic,  beautiful,  pure,  Divine,  in 
manluad.  Yet  it  is  no  less  real.  If  its  tides  thus  reach  by  such  high  water-marks 
the  superhuman  power  it  may  at  times  attain,  it  is  no  less  in  its  ordinary  flow  we 
are  to  reckon  the  breadth  of  its  channel.  3.  And  thus  I  reach  its  noblest  witness, 
in  the  life  of  society.  Am  I  told  by  the  sceptic  that  it  is  this  powerless  ideal,  this 
gospel  of  the  anchorite,  this  lofty  yet  fruitless  morality  of  a  faded  age  ?  Sear 
witness  for  me,  this  miracle,  grander  than  all  of  the  New  Testament,  of  Christen- 
dom itself.  {Ibid.)  The  upward  tendency  of  gospel  morality  : — We  are  often 
told  that  the  tendency  of  religious  teaching  is  to  make  men  indifferent  to 
social  improvement ;  to  urge  the  poor  to  submit  to  false  distinctions ;  to  flatter 
the  rich  into  the  idea  that  they  can  keep  their  wealth,  if  they  are  charitable  in 
alms.  This  is  not  the  gospel.  There  is  not  a  sentiment  more  contradictory  to  it. 
Not  a  cause  of  justice,  of  wise  reform,  not  a  true  channel  of  social  good  it  does  not 
enf Dree ;  not  a  false  barrier  of  caste  it  does  not  frown  upon.  It  tells  the  wealthy 
that  he  is  God's  steward ;  it  tells  the  poor  he  is  to  labour  in  every  honest  calling, 
yet  to  remember  that  his  aim  is  the  wealth  of  a  pure  conscience  and  a  holy  life.  It 
makes  all  men  one  in  the  spirit  of  unselfish  equality.  It  is  our  disposition,  not  our 
position,  which  makes  the  real  difference  between  man  and  man  in  the  standard  of 
the  gospel  morality.  It  is  the  Christian  principle  of  social  union.  Who  has  the 
Christian  intellect  ?  It  is  he  who  pursues  knowledge  in  the  desire,  not  of  personal 
reputation,  but  of  a  truth  that  shall  make  the  world  wiser  and  happier  for  his  toil ; 
and  in  that  poverty  of  spirit,  whether  it  be  a  Kepler  studying  the  stars,  or  a  Baphael 
painting  his  Madonna,  or  a  Hooker  expounding  the  laws  of  his  Church,  it  is  a  sacred 
calling.  Who  is  the  great  man  in  Christ's  definition?  He  who,  if  God  hath  made 
him  a  ruler  in  the  State,  rules  in  His  fear,  and  loves  justice  and  mercy  more  than 
his  ambition.  It  is  so  in  every  calling.  We  may  pursue  our  trade  or  profession 
for  the  noble  end  of  a  Christian  life,  or  for  money-getting  and  its  rivalries.  It  is 
here  we  want  our  religion.  (Ibid.)  Relation  of  this  discourse  to  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount : — Men  have  doubted  whether  the  discourse  in  Matt,  v.-vii.  is  to  be  regarded 
as  an  ampler  account  of  that  which  begins  with  this  verse.  Many  passages  occur  in 
both.  The  general  scope  and  purport  is  the  same.  Yet,  as  St.  Matthew  says 
expressly  that  Jesus  spake  sitting,  on  the  mountain,  and  St.  Luke  that  He  spake 
standing,  and  in  the  plain,  it  seems  not  very  unnatural  to  suppose  that  the  one  (that 
given  by  St.  Matthew)  was  a  discourse  delivered,  as  it  were,  to  the  inner  circle  of 
His  disciples,  apart  from  the  crowd  of  outside  hearers ;  the  other  (that  preserved 
by  St.  Luke),  a  briefer  and  more  popular  rehearsal  of  the  chief  topics  of  the  former, 
addressed,  immediately  afterwards,  on  descending  from  the  hill-top,  to  the  promis- 
cuous multitude.  And  the  formation  of  the  hill  which  tradition  has  marked  as  the 
Mount  of  the  Beatitudes  lends  itself  naturally  to  this  supposition.  For  modem 
travellers  have  marked,  upon  its  eastern  summit,  a  little  circular  plain  exactly 
suited  for  the  gathering  of  a  smaller  and  more  select  audience  ;  and  again,  on  the 
lower  ridge,  between  that  eastern  and  another  western  horn  of  the  same  mountain, 
a  larger  space,  flattened  also  to  a  plain,  corresponding,  it  would  seem,  with  singular 
exactness  to  the  scene  described  by  St.  Luke,  and  to  the  presence  of  that  larger 
concourse  to  which  the  second  and  briefer  discourse  is  thus  conceived  to  have  been 
addressed.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  A  description  of  a  poor-spirited  man : — But  norw, 
I  say,  suppose  God  hath  given  grace,  yet  still  there  is  a  great  deal  of  poverty.  1. 
As,  in  the  first  place.  That  grace  thou  hast,  it  hath  need  of  continual  supply.  Thera 
is  no  Christian  can  live  upon  the  grace  he  hath  without  new  supply.  God  will  not 
trust  thee  with  the  stock  of  grace;  it  is  not  in  thy  hand,  but  in  the  hand  of  Christ : 
and  this  is  the  condition  of  the  strongest  godly  man  in  the  world  ;  he  must  go  daily 
and  continually  to  Christ  to  fetch  new  supply,  or  he  cannot  subsist.  And  this  ia 
the  poor  condition  that  we  are  in—  this  spiritual  poverty  even  of  the  saints.  2.  The 
poverty  of  the  saints  consists  in  this :  the  graces  that  they  have  are  but  small.  Thy 
grace  is  like  a  little  spark  wrapped  up  in  a  heap  of  embers,  so  that  the  maid  is 
raking  a  good  while  before  she  can  see  it.  Surely  thou  art  but  poor,  then.  3.  Even 
those  that  are  godly,  they  are  very  poor,  for  they  are  always  needy.  We  use  to 
•ay  of  a  man  or  woman  that  is  always  in  want,  and  always  complaining.  Surely 
they  are  poor  people.  4.  Their  services  are  very  poor  servioea  that  they  do  perfona. 


aiAr.  VI.]  ST.  LUKE.  559 

6.  Again,  poor  are  the  very  saints,  the  godly,  for  little  temptations  doth  overcome 
them  ;  at  least,  unsettle  them  and  put  them  out  of  frame.  6.  Poor  they  are,  further, 
for  they  have  hut  little  ability  to  help  others.  (J.  Burroughs.)  Poverty  of  spirit 
helpful  to  prayer: — Men  that  are  men  of  estates,  and  rich  men,  when  they  come  to 
a  door  for  business,  if  so  be  that  they  cannot  have  presently  what  they  desire,  away 
they  will  go ;  they  will  not  stand  waiting.  Why  ?  Because  they  are  rich,  and  so 
proud  in  a  suitable  way  to  their  riches.  But  now,  one  that  is  poor,  and  come  for 
an  alms,  is  content  to  wait,  especially  if  he  knows  that  there  is  no  other  door  for 
him  to  go  to  at  that  time ;  if,  indeed,  he  thinks  he  may  have  it  at  some  other  door, 
he  will  not  wait,  but  if  he  comes  for  an  alms,  and  he  must  hive  it  here  or  nowhere, 
he  is  content  then  to  wait.  So  those  that  are  truly  poor  in  spirit,  they  are  content 
to  wait  at  God's  gates,  knowing  that  there  is  no  other  door  that  they  can  have  their 
alms  only  at  the  gates  of  God.  (Ibid.)  The  reason  why  God  regards  poverty  of 
spirit : — 1.  The  great  reason  why  the  Lord  hath  such  regard  unto  such,  it  is  because 
this  disposition  doth  best  serve  the  great  design  that  God  hath  of  glorifying  Him- 
self in  the  world,  namely,  the  lifting  up  of  His  free  grace.  God  would  have  His 
glory  from  the  children  of  men.  But  what  glory?  The  lifting  up  of  free  grace, 
that  is  the  glory  that  God  would  have  above  all  other.  God  would  have  the  glory 
of  His  power,  the  glory  of  His  wisdom,  the  glory  of  His  bounty,  of  His  patience ; 
aye,  but  that  is  not  the  glory  that  God  doth  look  at  most;  but  that  He  might 
magnify  His  free  grace  in  His  Son,  that  is  the  glory  that  God  doth  most  delight  in. 
Now,  of  all  dispositions  in  the  world,  this  disposition  of  poverty  of  spirit  is  that 
that  serves  God's  end  and  God's  design  best ;  and  therefore  no  marvel  though  God 
doth  so  much  accept  of  it.  2.  Suah  a  disposition  makes  the  soul  to  be  conformable 
even  unto  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  when  Christ  shall  see  a  spirit  that  hath  a  conformity 
to  His,  Christ  looks  upon  it  and  saith,  "  Here  is  one  that  is  conformable  to  My 
Spirit,  I  was  willing  to  be  poor ;  and  so  is  such  a  one.  I  was  willing  to  empty 
Myself,  and  to  be  anything  for  the  furtherance  of  the  glory  of  My  Father  ;  and  so 
do  I  see  here  such  a  poor  creature  that  is  willing  to  empty  itself  of  anything  that  it 
hath,  and  is  willing  to  give  up  itself  for  the  glory  of  My  Father  and  Me.  Oh, 
blessed  are  these  poor !  "  (Ibid.)  Promises  to  the  poor  in  npirit: — 1.  The  first 
is  this,  that  God  loves  to  honour  those  that  are  willing  to  debase  themselves.  2. 
That  blessedness  doth  not  consist  in  any  worldly  thing — "  Blessed  are  the  poor." 
There  in  nothing  in  this  world  can  make  them  blessed ;  it  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
that  must  make  them  blessed.  If  you  would  be  happy,  you  must  look  beyond  the 
world.  3.  In  that  it  is  said  in  the  present  tense,  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
From  whence  the  note  is  this,  that  the  saints  of  God  live  not  only  upon  comforts 
that  they  shall  have  hereafter,  upon  the  assurance  of  what  they  shall  have,  but  upon 
present  comforts.  They  have  enough  for  the  present  to  uphold  their  hearts,  in  all 
their  poor  and  mean  condition  in  which  they  are  in  respect  of  the  world.  4.  That 
heaven  is  now  to  the  saints.  There  is  comfort  indeed  !  There  is  certainly  no  man 
or  woman  upon  the  earth  shall  ever  go  to  heaven  but  such  as  hath  heaven  come 
down  to  them.  First:  To  open  to  you  what  is  the  meaning  of  this;  what  doth 
Christ  mean  by  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  And  then,  secondly,  to  apply  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  such  as  are  poor  in  spirit.  I.  The  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  is  the 
kingdom  of  God's  power  whereby  He  rules  over  the  world  ;  and  then  there  is  the 
kingdom  that  He  hath  given  to  His  Son  the  Mediator.  It  is  the  second  kingdom 
that  ia  here  meant.  When  God  had  made  this  world,  He  Himself  reigned  over  it, 
LQd  was  the  King  of  it.  But  the  world  that  He  made  was  spoiled  with  sin,  and  so 
God  could  not  have  that  glory  from  the  world  that  He  made  it  for.  Therefore,  the 
Lord  He  was  pleased  to  erect  a  new  world,  another  spiritual,  heavenly  world,  to 
glorify  Himself  in  in  another  manner,  more  spiritual  and  heavenly  than  in  the 
former  world ;  and  He  makes  His  Son  to  be  the  King  of  that  spiritual  world — that 
new  world  which  the  Scripture  speaks  of  when  it  saith,  "  All  old  things  are  done 
away,  and  all  things  are  become  new  " — which  new  world  is  begun  in  the  work  of 
grace  in  the  hearts  of  the  saints,  and  so  carried  on  till  it  comes  to  eternal  glory. 
Jesns  Christ,  He  is  the  King  of  that  world.  Why  is  it  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
1.  It  is  called  the  kingdom  of  heaven  because  Christ  is  from  heaven,  who  is  the 
King  thereof.  2.  In  distinction  and  opposition  from  or  unto  the  kingdoms  of  the 
world.  3,  Because  that  Christ  His  seat  is  now  at  the  present  in  heaven.  4.  Because 
that  the  way  of  His  government  it  is  spiritual  and  heavenly,  not  in  an  outward  way. 
6.  Because  it  will  certainly  bring  both  soul  and  body  to  heaven  at  last.  There  ia 
infinite  blessedness  in  this  kingdom  of  heaven.  1.  For  it  is  Christ  the  Mediator 
that  gives  the  laws.   But  in  this  kingdom  of  heaven,  that  is  a  blessedness  that  thoa 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha>.  i% 

hast  a  law  from  Him  that  loves  thee  more  than  His  life ;  He  was  willing  to  lay 
down  His  life  for  thee  that  gives  thee  thy  law.  2.  The  second  thing  in  the  blessed- 
ness of  this  kingdom  of  heaven  is  this,  that  Jesas  Christ  He  now  rales  in  the  heart» 
of  His  saints,  by  His  word  and  Spirit,  a  great  deal  more  fully  than  He  did  in  the 
times  of  the  law,  or  in  any  way  can  be  conceived.  3.  All  transactions  between  God 
and  them  are  in  this  kingdom,  and  not  to  go  out  of  this  kingdom.  So  now,  wert 
thou  in  the  kingdom  of  God's  power,  as  He  is  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  so 
rules  the  world,  certainly  any  offence  of  thine  would  be  eternal  death  to  thee ;  and 
it  is  so  with  all  those  men  and  women  that  are,  I  say,  only  under  the  kingdom  of 
God's  power — that  is,  they  are  God's  creatures,  and  God  is  their  Creator,  and  so 
they  have  to  deal  with  God  as  under  the  kingdom  of  His  power ;  if  they  offend  ai 
creatures,  God  in  that  kingdom  deals  in  a  way  of  exact  justice,  so  as  to  punish  with 
death  upon  every  offence.  But  now  a  believer  brought  into  another  kingdom,  the 
kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  there  he  comes  to  have  other  privileges  ;  so  that  when  a 
believer  offends  he  doth  not  go  to  answer  in  that  court  of  His — to  wit,  the  kingdom  of 
His  power — but  he  is  to  answer  before  the  court  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  Christ  is  to  be 
the  judge,  and  Christ  He  is  to  deal  with  them  in  that  administration  of  His  that  He 
hath  received  from  the  Father,  and  so  comes  a  believer  to  stand  with  comfort 
before  God,  notwithstanding  all  his  offences  and  weaknesses,  for  the  transaction  is 
between  God  and  Him  within  this  kingdom,  and  not  without  it.  4.  And  then, 
further,  from  hence  thou  hast  protection.  Though  thou  beest  poor  and  mean  in 
thyself,  thou  hast  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God  that  undertakes  to  protect  thee,  to 
deliver  thee  from  evil,  and  to  supply  thee  in  all  thy  wants ;  that  is  the  work  of  a 
king.  5.  In  this  kingdom  Christ  undertakes  to  subdue  all  the  enemies  that  are 
against  thy  spiritual  and  eternal  good.  6.  He,  as  a  king,  gives  ordinances  and  gifts 
and  administrations.  All  the  ordinances,  gifts,  and  administrations  of  the  Ghuroh, 
they  are  given  by  Jesus  Christ  as  the  King  of  it,  and  thou  that  art  poor  in  spiritt 
thou  has  right  to  them.  7.  All  the  world  is  brought  into  subjection  to  this  king> 
dom.  8.  For  this  will  bring  thee  at  length  to  reign  with  Christ.  (Ibid.)  Comfort 
to  the  poor  in  spirit : — 1.  Consider  He  that  is  the  King  of  this  kingdom  of  heaven, 
He  was  poor  Himself ;  your  King  was  poor.  2.  Consider  this,  Christ's  poverty  it  waa 
to  sanctify  your  poverty.  3.  This  kingdom  of  heaven,  it  is  so  ordered  out  for  the 
most  part,  that  the  poor  in  the  world  are  the  subjects  of  this  kingdom.  4.  The 
Lord  hath  so  ordered  things  that  the  great  transactions  of  this  kingdom  of  heaven — 
that  hath  been  opened  unto  you — hath  been  carried  on  by  those  that  are  mean  and 
poor,  not  by  the  great  ones  of  the  world.     5.  Hence  follows,  therefore,  in  the  fifth 

Elace,  that  poverty  it  is  no  hindrance  to  the  highest  degree  in  this  kingdom  of 
eaven.  Indeed,  poverty  it  is  a  hindrance  to  degrees  in  the  honours  of  a  worldly 
kingdom.  6.  Even  those  that  are  outwardly  poor,  if  godly,  they  have  right  to  all 
things  in  this  world  so  far  as  may  be  good  for  them.  It  is  said  of  Abraham  (Rom. 
iv.  13)  that  he  was  "  the  heir  of  the  world."  7.  In  this  kingdom  are  spiritual 
riches  that  may  countervail  to  the  full,  and  are  infinitely  good  beyond  all  outward 
riches.  8.  And  then  from  all  these  follows,  that  hence  the  great  temptations  that 
those  that  are  poor  people  are  troubled  withal  may  from  the  consideration  of  the 
blessing  of  the  kingdom  be  taken  away.  What  are  they?  1.  As,  first,  I  am  afraid 
that  God  goes  out  against  me,  and  doth  not  bless  me  in  anything  that  I  go  about ; 
and  so  they  are  afraid,  and  under  great  bondage.  2.  The  second  is,  I  am  in  a  poor 
condition,  and  therefore  despised.  8.  And  then  a  third  temptation  is,  they  are  use- 
less in  the  world.  Nay,  this  text  wiU  answer  this  temptation.  Thine  is  the 
kingdom.  (Ibid.).  Our  Lord^»  first  text  : — A  fitting  text  for  Christ's  first  sermon, 
for  He  came  to  this  earth  to  bless.  His  life  was  a  life  of  blessing ;  His  one  thought 
how  He  might  bless  others,  make  others  happy.  He  died  to  bless,  and  His  arms 
jutstretched  on  the  cross,  His  hands  wide  open,  told  how  He  yearned  to  bless  to 
the  last.  He  rose  to  bless,  and  with  words  of  blessing  He  greeted  those  who 
mourned  Him  as  dead.  And  when  He  ascended,  He  was  still  true  to  the  work  of 
His  life,  for  the  last  His  disciples  saw  of  Him  as  He  disappeared,  were  His  hands 
outstretched  in  blessing.  And  still  He  lives  to  bless  ;  on  high  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  souls ;  here  on  earth  He  draws  nigh  to  bless  in  every  Sacrament, 
in  every  act  of  worship,  in  each  meditation,  in  each  sermon,  in  each  hour  of  prayer, 
always  present  by  His  Spirit  to  bless.  I.  Happiness  was  the  end  fob  which  man 
WAS  CHEATED.  God's  intention  for  man  was  a  life  of  beatitude.  From  God  there 
eame  to  him  nothing  but  blessing.  That  the  curse  took  the  place  of  the  blessing, 
misezy  of  happiness,  was  not  God's  work,  but  man's,  in  abusing  the  power  of  free 
•wiJL     But  God  would  not  leave  man  in  his  self-wrought  misery.     And  so  Jesuf 


«BA».  n.]  ST  LUKE.  Ml 

<!ame  to  take  away  the  curse  of  sin,  and  to  bless  mankind.  11.  This  blesssdnbsb 
CAN  ONLT  BE  ocBS  ON  OEBTAiN  CONDITIONS.  1.  It  is  a  blessedness  to  be  found  in 
God  alone.  To  reach  it,  we  must  climb.  Above  the  city  of  Edinburgh  there  is  a 
great  rock,  overhanging  it  like  a  crouching  lion.  It  is  a  dim,  misty,  foggy  day,  such 
as  sometimes  envelopes  even  the  modem  Athens  of  the  North.  We  leave  the  busy 
Btruets,  go  out  of  the  town,  and  find  ourselves  on  the  path  which  leads  up  the  sida 
of  Arthur's  seat.  We  have  hardly  taken  a  few  steps  ere  we  feel  the  mist  is  thinner, 
and  we  breathe  more  easily.  Still  we  climb  on,  for  the  top  is  far  above  us ;  we  can 
see  it  through  the  fog  above  us  standing  out  sharp  and  clear  against  the  sky. 
Still  we  climb,  and  the  air  becomes  at  every  step  more  keen  and  bracing,  and  our 
lungs  drink  it  in  more  freely,  until  at  last  we  stand  on  the  summit  iu  the  brightness 
of  God's  sunshine,  while  at  our  feet  lies  the  city  buried  in  the  mist.  Cannot  you 
read  the  parable  ?  We  are  always  seeking  for  happiness  ;  we  cannot  help  it.  It  is 
a  craving  of  our  being  as  irresistible  as  that  of  hunger  or  thirst.  It  will  not  be 
crushed  out  or  destroyed.  And  there  are  times  when  we  think  we  have  attained  to 
it,  and  we  laugh  and  sing  as  we  stand  in  the  sunshine.  But  it  is  short-lived.  The 
mist  creeps  over  us  again,  we  shiver  as  we  feel  its  cold  dampness,  and  we  murmur 
and  complain  in  our  disappointment.  What  is  wrong  ?  Ah  1  we  have  forgotten  to 
climb.  We  have  thought  to  find  what  we  want  on  earth,  apart  from  God,  and  we 
have  failed,  as  thousands  of  souls  have  failed  before  us.  2.  Jesus  tells  as  this 
blessedness  may  be  ours  now.  He  speaks  of  the  beatitudes  in  the  present  tense. 
Some  people  will  tell  us  that  the  innocent  joys  of  earth,  the  pure  affections  of  home, 
the  pleasures  of  the  intellect,  the  beauties  of  nature  or  art,  are  only  as  the  fading 
tints  of  the  sunset,  or  the  falling  golden  autumn  leaves.  Ah  i  but  they  forget  that 
there  is  a  Power  which  will  fix  these  fleeting  colours,  permanize  these  passing  joys. 
Use  them  as  God  intends,  as  guide-posts  to  Himself.  3.  But  Jesus  tells  us  this 
blessedness  is  hereafter  too.  If  He  speaks  in  the  present  tense.  He  speaks  still 
more  in  the  future.  Yes,  it  must  be  so,  for  true  blessedness  is  in  God,  in  God 
known  and  realized ;  and  here  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  here  we  know  only 
in  part ;  it  is  yonder  that  in  a  fuller  knowledge  of  God  we  shall  find  a  fuller 
blessedness.  4.  Blessedness  can  never  be  selfish.  No  one  can  be  happy  save  as 
he  seeks  to  share  his  happiness  with  others.  6.  There  are  degrees  of  blessedness. 
It  is  a  mountain  which  we  have  to  climb,  (C.  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.)  True  happi- 
ness:— Beatitude  is  the  perfect  being  of  every  creature.  It  is  that  condition  in 
which  there  remains  nothing  to  be  desired,  nothing  to  be  obtained.  I.  Man  was 
iiAPB  EXPRESSLY  FOB  THIS  PEBFECT  BEATITUDE.  It  is  bccauso  he  was  Created  for 
it,  that  his  whole  life  is  spent  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  The  human  sonl  must  strain 
after  happiness,  it  cannot  help  doing  so,  for  happiness  is  its  necessary  object.  It 
seeki  it  with  the  energy  with  which  the  stone  detached  from  the  mountain  roll* 
to  its  foot,  drawn  by  gravitation.  Not  only  so,  but  the  sinner  himself,  in  all  his 
errors,  seeks  happiness.  He  is  mistaken  in  the  place  where  he  seeks,  but  it  is 
happiness  which  he  seeks ;  and  when  he  find  out  that  he  has  not  obtained  that 
which  he  desired,  he  falls  back  into  disgust,  and  gropes  for  it  elsewhere.  Tha 
traveller  in  the  desert  rushes  forward  when  he  sees  the  mirage,  thinking  it  water, 
and  plunges  among  sand-hills ;  he  is  mistaken  in  looking  for  water  there,  hot  it  is 
a  true  thirst  which  has  impelled  him  towards  the  spot.    II.  Evebythino  that  is 

GOOD   AND  BEAUTIFUL   IN   THIS   WOULD   IS    GOOD    AND    BEAUTIPUIi    BECAUSE   IT  DEBIVES 

ITS  GOOD  AND  BEAUTY  FBOM  GoD.  Bichcs,  pleasure,  gaiety,  &c.,  are  not  evil  in 
themselves,  but  only  when  sought  as  final  ends,  without  thought  of  God.  When 
they  are  sought  as  sources  of  happiness,  and  not  as  reflections  of  the  perfections 
which  are  in  God,  then  they  are  evil.  The  creatures  which  God  made  are  good, 
but  if  we  content  ourselves  with  loving  and  devoting  ourselves  to  the  creatures,  wa 
are  falling  away  from  the  Creator.  A  great  bishop  and  doctor  of  the  Church 
(Bellarmine)  wrote  a  very  lovely  book,  called  "The  Ascent  of  the  Mind  by  the 
Ladder  of  the  Creature  to  God."  The  creatures  of  God  are  guide-posts  to  God,  not 
goals  to  which  we  are  to  run,  and  at  which  we  are  to  lie  down  to  rest.  III.  Pebfeot 
HAPPINESS  OB  BEATITUDE  IS  ONLY  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  GoD.  All  Secondary  good 
things  are  imperfect  because  they  are  created,  and  for  the  same  reason  thej 
are  not  imperishable.  The  soul  must  have  that  which  is  perfect  and  enduring. 
What  is  perfect  and  enduring  is  in  God  alone.  (S.  Baring-Gould,  M.A.) 
Christ's  standard  and  the  world's : — How  thoroughly  Christ's  conception  of 
blessedness  contradicts  the  popular  estimate  of  happiness.  This  Fteacher  seems 
stadiously  to  reverse  the  world's  judgment.  He  frames  His  words  so  as  to  fly 
In  the  face  of  pubUc  opinion  and  the  consent  of  men.    This  startling  eontradictioa 

m 


661  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

between  Christ  and  the  world  rests  on  a  radical  difference  in  their  way  of  looking 
at  human  life.  They  do  not  mean  quite  the  same  thing  with  their  beatitudes.  It 
is  of  condition  the  world  is  thinking;  Christ  of  character.  When  society  clapa 
hands  to  the  cry,  "  Oh,  Felix  !  "  "  Oh,  lucky  fellow  !  "  "  Oh,  rare  success  !  "  it  ia 
the  fortunate  circumstances  of  a  man's  lot  of  which  society  is  thinking.  It 
is  the  blessedness  of  having  a  great  deal  of  money,  of  being  always  com- 
fortable, of  being  environed  with  what  may  minister  to  pleasure,  and  able 
always  to  command  what  one  desires — it  is  this  blessedness  of  condition 
which  society  crowns  with  its  beatitudes,  and  to  which  men  pay  the  tribute 
of  enjoying  it.  Alas  for  this  blessedness,  which  is  outside  the  man ;  the 
blessedness  of  circumstance,  and  accident,  and  transient  condition  ;  the  blessedness 
which  Time's  scythe  mows  down  like  grass  to  be  cast  into  the  oven  I  Not  coodi- 
tion  does  Jesus  bless,  but  character.  The  happy  man  is  the  good  maiL  Not  what 
a  man  has,  but  what  he  is,  is  the  ground  of  his  blessedness.  (J.  Oswald  Dykes, 
D.D.)  God's  grace  is  the  source  of  blessedness : — The  ground  of  blessedness  is  not 
made  by  oar  Lord  to  rest  in  the  possession  of  character  itself,  but  in  that  promised 
grace  of  God  of  which  character  is  the  condition.  Some  of  the  qnaUties  here 
(Matt.  V.)  called  blessed  might  seem  even  to  us  to  be  their  own  reward.  We  can 
understand  how  it  should  be  a  blessed  thing  to  be  merciful,  or  pure,  or  pacific, 
though  no  promise  were  attached  to  these  states  of  heart  at  all.  With  others  it  is 
not  so.  It  is  not  in  itself  a  good  thing  to  be  poor,  or  to  mourn,  or  to  hanger ;  but 
for  us  it  becomes  good,  because  otherwise  we  cannot  be  enriched,  or  comforted,  or 
filled.  Here  the  blessing  is  plainly  not  in  the  state  of  heart,  but  in  that  appro* 
priate  Divine  gift  which  meets  and  answers  such  a  state  of  heart.  In  every  case, 
therefore,  there  is  a  deeper  Divine  reason  for  the  blessedness,  which  Christ's  eye 
sees,  where  man's  sees  none.  The  sum  of  all  the  blessings  which  are  here  dropped 
along  the  course  of  a  Christian's  life,  or  rather,  that  comprehensive  blessing  which 
opens  out  as  a  man  needs  it  into  many  forms :  which  becomes  to  the  mourner  com- 
fort,  to  the  meek  inheritance,  food  to  the  hungry,  and  mercy  to  the  merciful ;  which 
gives  to  the  pure-hearted  the  vision  of  God,  and  adoption  to  the  peace-makers : 
this  inclusive  formula  of  beatitude  is  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  (Ibid.)  The 
distinctively  Christian  character  of  the  beatitudes : — The  beatitudes  may  be  traly 
regarded  as  an  exposition  of  morality  purely  Christian  ;  and  in  attempting  to  make 
some  examination  of  them,  we  are  to  consider  ourselves  as  being  under  the  fall 
light  of  Christian  truth  and  grace,  not  dealing  with  abstract  or  general  morality, 
but  with  that  which  belongs  to  God's  saints  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  is  only 
possible  to  them — and  to  them  possible  only  by  the  help  of  that  Holy  Spirit  o£ 
whose  blessed  infiaence  the  saints  are  permitted  to  drink  in  the  Church.  (Bishop 
Moberly.)  Passive  virtues  first : — Mark  how  Jesus  puts  passive  virtues  in  the 
foremost  place.  We  can  easily  understand  why  He  does  this.  1.  They  are  the 
foundations  on  which  alone  the  superstructure  of  the  active  virtues  can  be  built. 
2.  They  are  out  of  sight,  and  therefore  are  easily  overlooked,  their  importance 
forgotten.  3.  They  were  little  thought  of  in  the  days  when  Jesus  lived  on 
this  earth.  (C.  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.)  St.  Luke's  version  of  the  Beatitudes : — 
In  Lake's  version  of  the  Beatitudes  they  seem  to  refer  to  literal  poverty, 
hunger,  and  sorrow.  If  the  question  be  asked  which  of  the  two  forms  ia  the 
most  original,  oar  judgment  inclines  to  that  of  Luke.  Speaking  generally, 
the  more  pregnant,  kernel-like  form  of  any  saying  of  Jesus  ia  always  the  more 
hkely  to  have  been  that  actually  used  by  Him.  Then  the  very  breadth  of  the 
announcements  in  Luke  is  in  favour  of  their  being  the  authentic  utterances  of 
Jesus.  It  is  intrinsically  credible  that  He  had  something  in  His  doctrine  of  happi- 
ness for  the  many,  for  the  million  ;  some  such  words  as  Luke  puts  into  His  mouth. 
The  poor  in  spirit,  the  mourners  for  sin,  the  hungerers  for  righteousness,  are  a  very 
select  band ;  only  a  few  of  them  were  likely  to  be  found  in  any  crowd  that  heard 
Jesus  preach.  But  the  poor,  the  hungry,  the  sad,  are  always  a  large  company ; 
probably  they  embraced  nine-tenths  of  the  audience  to  which  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  was  spoken.  Had  He  nothing  to  say  to  them  ;  to  catch  their  ears,  and  to 
awaken  hopes  in  their  heavy  laden  hearts  1  Who  can  believe  it  that  remembers  that  in 
His  message  to  John  Jesus  Himself  described  His  gospel  as  one  specially  addressed 
to  the  poor  ?  We  may,  therefore,  confidently  assume  that  the  Preacher  on  the 
Mount  began  His  discourse  by  uttering  words  of  good  cheer  to  those  present,  to 
whom  the  epithets  poor,  hungry,  sad,  were  applicable,  saying,  in  effect,  to  such, 
"Blessed  are  ye  whom  the  world  counts  wretched."  It  was  a  strange,  startling 
ssyingj  which  might  need  much  exposition  to  evince  its  truth  and  reasonableness. 


emtr.  vi.]  ST.  LUKE.  MS 

but  it  wao  good  to  begin  with ;  good  to  fix  attention,  provoke  thought,  and  awaken 
hope.  Proceeding  now  to  consider  the  import  of  these  surprising  declarations,  we 
understand  —1.  That  our  Lord  did  not  mean  to  pronounce  the  poor,  hungry,  and 
weeping  "  blessed,"  simply  in  virtue  of  their  poverty,  hunger,  and  tears.  2.  The 
connection  between  these  classes  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  and  its  blessings  is 
not  quite  so  immediate.  Yet  Christ  was  not  mocking  His  hearers  with  idle  words. 
He  spoke  gravely,  sincerely,  having  weighty  truths  in  His  mind,  every  one  of  which 
much  concerned  the  children  of  want  and  sorrow  to  know.  One  of  these,  the  most 
immediately  obvious,  was  that  the  classes  addressed  were  in  His  heart,  that  He 
cared  for  them,  sympathized  with  them,  desired  their  well-being ;  in  a  word,  that 
He  was  the  poor  man's  Friend.  This  at  least  is  implied  in  the  opening  sentence  of 
the  sermon,  "Blessed  are  ye  poor."  The  mere  fact  that  this  was  the  opening  sen- 
tence was  most  significant.  3.  But  Jesus  meant  to  say  more  than  this  to  the  poor 
and  sorrowful ;  more  than,  "  I  feel  for  you  " ;  or, "  The  bliss  of  the  kingdom  is  possible 
for  you."  He  meant  to  say  this  further ;  "  Just  because  ye  are  poor,  and  hungry, 
and  sad,  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  nearer  to  you  than  to  others. "  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 
Christ's  paradoxical  teaching : — He  who  taught  in  parables  taught  also  in  paradoxes. 
His  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts.  It  is  as  though  He  had  said,  Happy  are  the 
unhappy,  honourable  the  dishonoured,  great  the  little,  and  rich  the  poor.  Well, 
we  must  follow  Him.  We  must  learn  His  language,  we  must  judge  His  judgment, 
if  we  would  ever  rejoice  in  His  salvation.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  title  to  the 
kingdom : — Surely  this  first  opening  of  His  mouth  in  systematic  teaching  was  at 
once  a  gospel.  The  more  we  are  poor,  the  more  we  are  rich  !  0  blessed  and  life- 
giving  announcement  to  the  sorrowful  and  self -despairing  1  Your  sense  of  poverty 
is  the  very  title-deed  of  your  kingdom.  (Ibid.)  The  possession  of  the  kingdom  : — 
The  kingdom  is  theirs.  Theirs  already,  by  a  right  all  their  own.  In  this  life  they 
possess  it.  For  they,  alone  of  all  men,  live  their  citizenship.  They  know  that 
without  their  King  they  are  beggars ;  without  their  franchise  they  are  outlaws ; 
without  their  home  above,  they  are  houseless  and  shelterless  and  comfortless  exiles. 
Whatever  others  can  do,  they  cannot  do  without  their  kingdom.  They  declare 
plainly,  at  each  step  of  life's  journey,  that  they  are  seeking  a  country.  And  there- 
fore God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God  ;  for  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a 
city.  And  as  they  get  nearer  to  its  golden  gates,  and  have  nothing  between  it  and 
them  but  that  narrow  stream  of  death  which  a  Saviour  once  crossed  for  them,  it 
may  well  be  that  the  ownership  of  which  the  text  speaks  becomes  at  last  scarcely 
more  a  faith  than  a  sight ;  they  can  catch  the  very  sounds  of  the  heavenly  song, 
and  discern  the  bright  forms  of  those  who  were  once  faithful  unto  death,  and  now 
foUow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth.  {Ibid.)  The  kingdom  for  the  poor : — 
The  kingdom  of  God  comes  down  to  meet  the  sinner  as  low  as  is  at  all  possible ; 
asks  the  very  least ;  takes  as  up  just  where  sin  and  the  law  left  us,  stripped  and 
wounded ;  and  at  the  outset,  when  a  man  is  at  his  poorest,  it  enriches  him  with  its 
royal  riches.  Are  you  only  "  poor  "  ?  There  is  no  question  yet  about  what  some 
human  teachers  are  ready  enough  to  put  foremost,  express  or  vehement  moarning 
for  sin.  The  seed  of  that,  indeed,  is  in  poverty  of  spirit.  But  anxious  sonls  often 
impede  their  own  coming  to  Christ,  by  exacting  of  themselves  a  certain  keenness 
of  feeling,  so  much  heaviness  of  heart,  or  so  many  tears.  Be  content.  Mooming 
will  come  soon  enough  in  the  order  of  Jesus.  It  is  not  our  poverty  by  itself,  but 
Qod's  grace  to  us  in  our  poverty,  which  makes  sorrow  flow.  Jesus  asks  not  for 
tears  before  He  will  bless ;  He  asks  only  poverty.  If  you  are  so  poor  in  grace  that 
you  cannot  mourn,  cannot  hope  or  hunger  as  you  would,  can  hardly  pray,  can  only 
stand  in  dumb,  desolate  spiritual  want  before  God,  then  yon  are  poor  enough.  Poor 
enough  to  bring  nothing  but  empty  hands  to  God,  and  an  empty  heart ;  poor  enough 
to  take  the  heavenly  kingdom  as  a  gift  from  the  most  rich  and  bountiful  Lord  of  it ; 
poor  enough  to  have  a  simple  accepting  faith  when  He  says,  "  It  is  yours  I  "  (J, 
O.  Dykes,  D.D.)  Poverty  runs  through  every  act  of  spiritual  eititeruship : — Poverty  of 
spirit  runs  through  every  act  of  citizenship ;  it  is  the  secret  of  its  beginning,  con- 
tinuance, and  final  fruition.  It  is  the  secret  of  entrance  into  the  kingdom,  for  it  is 
the  very  essence  of  baptism.  We  bring  the  infant  to  be  baptized  because  it  ii 
nothing,  has  nothing,  can  do  nothing,  and  therefore  we  ask  God,  of  His  great 
mercy,  to  make  the  child  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  the  secret 
of  perseverance,  for  poverty  of  spirit  is  the  only  fitness  for  the  right  nse  of  every 
means  of  grace.  In  confirmation,  he  who  comes  urges  this  as  his  plea,  "  I  am 
weak,  strengthen  me  by  Thy  Spirit,  O  my  Father."  In  holy  communion  the  com. 
municants  pray,  "  We  are  not  worthy  so  mnch  as  to  gather  np  the  crombs  nnder 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

Thy  iable."  In  prayer  onr  very  posture  reminds  us  that  we  are  rappliants  at  th« 
throne  of  grace.  In  every  effort  after  holiness  the  Master's  words  are  ever  sound- 
ing in  our  ears,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing. "  In  every  work  of  love  we  can 
only  hope  it  will  be  accepted  with  the  words,  •*  She  hath  done  what  she  could."  In 
every  almsgiving  we  must  say  with  David,  "  All  things  come  of  Thee,  and  of  Thine 
own  have  we  given  Thee."  And  in  final  blessedness  the  attitude  of  the  redeemed 
tells  us  that  poverty  of  spirit  belongs  to  the  subjects  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  for 
see,  they  fall  on  their  faces  and  cast  their  crowns  at  the  feet  of  Him  who  sitteth 
upon  the  throne ;  and  this  is  the  song  they  sing,  "  Thou  art  worthy,"  Ac.  (Eev. 
iv.  11).      (C.  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.)  How  poverty  of  $pirit  may  be  attained: — 

We  cannot  attain  humility  by  directly  striving  to  become  so ;  it  must  be  caught  by 
guile,  not  taken  by  storm.  It  can  be  ours  only  by  the  power  of  faith.  What  is 
faith  ?  It  is  the  eye  of  spiritual  sight  by  means  of  which  we  see  God.  This  is  what 
we  need,  is  it  not  ?  We  make  a  false  estimate  of  life ;  we  miscalculate  ourselves 
and  what  we  are ;  we  weigh  with  false  scales  what  we  have ;  we  measure  with  an 
imperfect  standard  what  we  do ;  we  go  on  our  way  deceived  as  to  the  true  value  of 
all  around  us  by  the  mists  of  the  valley  through  which  we  are  journeying ;  we 
neglect  to  climb,  to  try  to  get  into  the  clearer  atmosphere  where  God  is ;  nay, 
we  forget  God,  we  leave  Him  out  of  our  lives,  we  neglect  to  give  Him  His  rightful 
claim ;  even  in  our  acts  of  worship  He  is  sometimes  absent  from  our  thoughts. 
And  so  it  must  be  with  us  to  the  end  of  life,  unless  by  God's  help  we  attain  to  the 
spirit  of  recoUectedness  of  God's  presence,  in  the  power  of  which  David  sang,  "  I 
have  set  God  always  before  me;  for  He  is  on  my  right  hand,  therefore  I  shall  not 
fall."  .  .  .  Eemember,  this  faith  is  ours  already.  It  is  God's  gift  to  each  one  of 
us  in  our  baptism.  But  it  needs  to  be  exercised,  developed,  trained  by  use ;  left 
alone  it  will  grow  weak  until  it  dies.  (Ibid.)  Poverty  favourable  to  piety  in  early 
times : — The  word  "  poor  "  admits  of  different  degrees  of  extent.  Being  here 
opposed  to  the  word  •*  rich"  in  ver.  24,  it  probably  includes  vaguely  all  who  are  not 
usually  called  rich.  It  wiU  naturally  be  asked.  How  can  such  persons  be  declared 
blessed,  or  happy,  or  fortunate  ?  Can  any  happiness  arise  from  mere  indigence  ? 
No,  certainly,  if  we  mean  by  happiness  present  feelings  of  pleasure.  But  might 
there  not  be  circumstances  attending  indigence  which  might  lead  to  beneficial  con- 
sequences, or  future  happiness  ?  That  this  is  the  meaning  of  our  Saviour  is  evi- 
dent from  what  is  added :  '•  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  theirs."  What,  then,  are 
we  to  rmderstand  by  this  f  AH  that  we  can  conclude  is,  merely  that  there  were 
certain  circumstances  in  the  condition  of  the  poor  that  would  dispose  them  to 
receive  the  invitation  of  Christ  more  willingly  than  the  rich.  A  rich  man  would  not 
be  inclined  to  make  those  sacrifices,  and  to  expose  himself  to  those  sufferings  to 
which  all  Christians,  during  the  first  ages,  were  liable.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was 
comparatively  easy  for  a  poor  man  to  become  a  Christian  ;  for  he  could  lose  little 
in  this  world,  and  would  gain  much  in  the  world  to  come.  (J.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
Our  Lord's  love  of  poverty : — Let  us  see  how  Jesus  by  His  example  and  word  teaches 
the  love  of  poverty,  and  wherein  that  poverty  consists  which  He  loves  so  tenderly. 
L  His  EXAMPLE.  No  one  of  us  has  chosen  the  circumstances  of  his  birth.  One  is 
born  in  a  poor  hut,  another  in  a  magnificent  palace.  Our  Saviour,  being  God  as 
well  as  man,  could  have  surrounded  His  human  nature  with  a  splendour  surpassing 
human  powers  of  conception.  He  who  so  clothes  the  lilies  of  the  field  that  even 
Solomon,  in  all  his  glory,  was  not  arrayed  as  one  of  them,  could  have  clad  His 
human  body  in  a  beauty  far  transcending  that  of  all  the  lilies  and  flowers  upon 
earth.  He  who  created  the  precious  stones  and  the  glittering  gold  in  the  veins  of 
the  earth,  and  who  gives  the  sun  and  the  stars  their  splendour,  could  have  built  for 
Himself  a  palace,  compared  with  which  all  palaces  of  men  were  mere  hovels.  But 
more  than  the  beauty  of  flowers,  more  than  the  gorgeous  glitter  of  diamonds  and  gold, 
more  than  the  magnificence  of  palaces,  more  than  the  splendour  of  the  sun.  He 
loved  poverty.  He  would  be  born  as  the  bride  of  poverty,  and  the  brother  of  the 
poor  in  spirit.  In  poverty  came  the  Expected  of  nations  into  the  world  ;  in  poverty 
He  lived  all  His  lifetime  ;  in  poverty  He  died  on  the  cross.  His  whole  life  teaches 
us  His  love  of  poverty.  II.  His  woed.  As  Jesus  commenced  His  earthly  life  with 
poverty,  so  His  first  doctrine  preached  in  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount  was,  **  Blessed 
are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  thus  intimating  that, 
unless  we  be  poor  in  spirit,  we  are  not  even  able  to  understand  His  doctrine.  He 
also  pointed  out  to  His  disciples  in  the  strongest  terms  the  danger  of  worldly 
wealth.  III.  Thb  nattjbb  of  Christian  povebtv.  Now  the  question  arises. 
Wherein  doe*  the  poverty,  without  which  we  cannot  be  saved,  properly  consist  f 


out.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  SOS 

We  distinguish  four  classes  of  men.  1.  The  first  class  comprises  those  who  hav« 
both  riches  and  the  love  of  them.  These  men  are,  in  most  cases,  avaricious  also. 
Men  of  this  description  are  the  farthest  from  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  second  class 
comprises  those  who  are  enamoured  with  worldly  goods,  which,  nevertheless,  they 
do  not  possess ;  those  who  live  in  want,  but  vehemently,  and  with  disquietude,  long 
for  the  riches  of  which  they  are  destitute.  These  men  are  in  a  worse  condition 
than  those  who  belong  to  the  former  class,  for  they  have  only  the  torment  of  an  an- 
gratified  desire.  3.  The  third  class  comprises  those  who,  although  endowed  with 
worldly  wealth,  preserve,  nevertheless,  poverty  of  spirit ;  who  abound  in  temporal 
goods,  but  make  good  use  of  them,  and  are  free  from  a  lasting,  vehement,  and  dis- 
quieting attachment  to  their  possessions.  4.  The  fourth  class  comprises  those 
who  to  temporal  poverty  unite  poverty  in  spirit.  Oh !  that  the  poor  would  recog- 
nize  how  priceless  a  treasure  is  hidden  in  their  poverty,  if  they  be  content  with 
their  condition,  and  joyfully  embrace  poverty  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  The  world 
having  neither  joys  nor  consolations  for  those  who  are  poor,  doubly  unhappy  are 
they  who  forfeit  the  blessing  belonging  to  poverty,  by  discontent  and  injustice. 
Christ  repudiates  them  for  their  wickedness ;  the  world  for  their  poverty.  (Bishop 
Ketteler.)  Music  chiefly  tlie  inheritance  of  the  poor : — It  is  a  curious  fact  that 
nearly  all  the  great  music  of  the  world  has  been  produced  in  humble  life,  and  has 
been  developed  amid  the  environments  of  poverty  and  in  the  stern  struggle  for 
existence.  The  aristocracy  has  contributed  very  little  to  music,  and  that  little  can 
be  spared  without  detriment.  The  enduring  music  has  been  the  child  of  poverty, 
the  outcome  of  sorrow,  the  apotheosis  of  suSering.  Sebastian  Bach  was  the  son  of 
»  hireling  musician.  Beethoven's  father  was  a  dissipated  singer.  Cherubini  came 
from  the  lowest  and  poorest  ranks  of  life.  Gluck  was  a  forester's  son.  Lulli,  in 
his  childhood,  was  a  page,  and  slept  in  palace  kitchens.  Haydn's  father  was  a 
wheelwright,  and  his  mother,  previous  to  marriage,  was  a  cook  in  the  kitchen  of 
Count  Harrach.  Mozart's  father  was  a  musician  in  humble  circumstances,  and  his 
grandfather  a  bookbinder.  Handel  was  the  son  of  a  barber  and  surgeon.  Meluel 
was  the  son  of  a  cook.  Bossini's  father  was  a  miserable  strolling  horn-player.  Schu- 
bert  was  the  son  of  a  poor  schoolmaster.  Cimarosa's  father  was  a  mason,  and  his 
mother  a  washerwoman.  Schumann  was  a  bookseller's  son,  and  Verdi  the  son  of 
a  Lombardian  peasant.  Weber's  father  was  a  strolling  actor  and  musician.  Among 
all  the  prominent  composers,  but  three  were  bom  in  affluence — Auber,  Meyerbeer, 
and  Mendelssohn.  Joy  the  inheritance  of  the  poor : — The  sunniest  hearts  I  have 
ever  found  in  my  pastoral  rounds  have  often  been  lodged  in  houses  so  poverty- 
stricken  and  obscure  that  even  the  tax-collector  never  found  them.  They  were 
people  who  had  very  little  of  this  world,  but  a  great  desd  of  the  next.  They  took 
short  views  of  this  life ;  but  long  ones  of  the  life  to  come.  Living  pretty  mnch 
from  "  hand  to  mouth,"  they  learn  to  trust  God  a  great  deal  more  than  their  pros- 
perous brethren,  who  secretly  trust — their  own  bank-accounts  and  government 
bonds.  The  happiest  heart  I  encounter  in  Brooklyn  belongs  to  an  aged  cripple,  who 
lives  on  charity  in  a  fourth  storey.  She  is  old  and  poor,  and  without  relatives,  and 
lost  even  the  power  of  speech  twenty  years  ago  I  By  dint  of  hard  effort  she  can 
make  a  few  words  intelligible.  But  I  never  saw  that  withered  face  distorted  by  a 
frown ;  and  a  few  Sabbaths  since,  when  she  was  carried  in  to  the  conomunion-table, 
I  looked  down  from  the  pulpit  into  that  old  saint's  countenance,  and  it  "  shone  Uke 
the  face  of  an  angel. "  She  lives  every  day  on  the  sunny  side  of  Providence,  and 
feeds  hungrily  on  the  promises.  Jesus  knows  where  she  lives.  He  "  ofttimes 
resorts  thither."  She  is  one  of  His  hidden  ones.  That  old  disciple  will  not  have 
far  to  go  when  the  summons  comes  from  her  Father's  house.  She  lives  near  the 
gates  now,  and  catches  the  odours  and  the  music  of  that  "marriage  supper"  for 
which  she  has  her  wedding  garment  on.  Would  to  God  that  some  of  Uie  sonr- 
spirited,  morose,  and  melancholy  Christians  of  our  acquaintance  could  drop  in  to 
that  old  woman's  garret  occasionally,  and  borrow  a  vial  of  her  sunshine  1  (Dr. 
Cuyler.) 

Yer.  21.  Blessed  are  ye  that  htmger  now;  for  ye  shall  be  filled. — Hunger  €md 
thirst : — Consider  how  much  is  conveyed  in  this  figure.  1.  Hunger  and  thirst  are 
real  things.  We  need  no  argument  to  prove  this ;  we  have  all  felt  them  for  onr- 
selTes,  even  thoagh  it  may  have  been  in  a  very  slight  degree.  Ay,  how  real  they 
are  He  who  spake  of  them  well  knew,  for  had  He  not  but  now  ended  His  long  fast  of 
forty  days  in  the  wilderness  ?  2.  They  are  active  feelings  that  will  assert  themselves. 
The  poor  man  may  know  his  poverty,  and  yet  be  so  accustomed  to  it  as  to  have  no  wish 


866  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.tr 

to  escape  from  it.  The  sick  man  may  be  too  ill  to  want  to  get  better,  his  only  wish 
being  to  be  let  alone  and  die  in  peace.  But  hanger  and  thirst  tell  of  a  want 
within,  a  reaching  after  that  without  which  they  cannot  be  stilled.  3.  They  are 
intense,  overpowering,  and  gain  the  mastery  over  the  man,  making  him  act  contrary 
to  the  instincts  of  reason.  What  stories  we  have  heard  or  read  of  the  terrible 
extremities  to  which  hunger  or  thirst  have  reduced  men.  Maddened  by  the  desire 
of  drink,  they  have  drunk  salt  water,  plunged  into  the  sea  to  put  an  end  to  their 
Bufferings,  or  drawn  lots  which  should  die  to  save  the  rest  alive.  Driven  by 
gnawings  of  hunger,  men  have  faced  disgrace,  and  stooped  to  steal  rather  than 
suffer  any  longer.  4.  They  are  universal,  for  they  are  felt  by  rich  as  well  as  poor  ; 
they  are  inseparable  from  our  being,  constituted  as  we  are ;  they  are  God-implanted 
instincts.  5.  They  are  lifelong.  The  man  dying  of  thirst,  able  no  longer  to  speak, 
opens  his  poor  parched  mouth,  or  looks  his  longing  with  his  fevered  eyes.  The 
man  perishing  for  lack  of  food  holds  out  his  thin,  emaciated  hands,  and  without  a 
word  begs  for  bread.  But  we  need  not  to  be  told  that  Jesus  is  not  speaking  of 
bodily  hunger,  any  more  than  of  bodily  poverty  or  bodily  mourning.  Just  as  the 
poverty  He  tells  of  may  exist  in  the  midst  of  the  abundance  of  riches,  and 
just  as  the  mourning  which  He  recommends  may  be  found  where  eyes  have 
never  shed  a  tear,  so  hunger  and  thirst  may  be  where  there  is  plenty  of  food 
and  drink.  For  every  man  is  a  sort  of  living  sacrament.  He  has  an  outward 
and  visible  part — his  body ;  but  he  has,  too,  an  inward  and  spiritual  part.  And 
there  is  a  close  analogy  between  them.  They  have  each  similar  feelings,  desires, 
longings.  And  so  the  spirit  of  a  man  has  its  hunger  and  thirst.  And  this  spiritual 
hunger  and  thirst  are  real  things,  are  they  not  ?  They  are  active,  asserting  them- 
selves, refusing  to  be  ignored ;  they  are  intense,  soul-agonizing,  bringing,  when 
nnsatisfied,  anguish  and  torment;  they  are  universal,  found  in  men  of  every  age, 
and  circumstance ;  they  are  life-long,  with  the  man  still  as  the  breath  of  life  quits 
his  body.  (G.  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.)  Hunger  Jits  man  to  embrace  the  kingdom  : — 
The  metaphor  here  chosen  by  our  Saviour  is  the  best  and  fittest  that  can  be  con- 
ceived to  express  a  strong,  powerful,  active  principle;  for  hunger  is  one  of  the 
strongest  principles  we  know — it  is  an  importunate  desire,  never  satisfied  till  it  obtains 
the  means  of  gratification.  The  feeling  of  thirst  is,  perhaps,  still  stronger ;  for  it 
is  sufi&cient  to  absorb  every  other  feeling,  every  other  thought,  and  to  confine  the 
attention  to  the  most  immediate  means  of  removing  the  distressing  pain.  For  the 
same  reason,  that  those  who  were  not  rich  were  in  a  favourable  state  to  embrace 
Christianity,  the  hungry,  who  are  also  poor,  would  be  in  a  similar  situation  ;  for, 
by  embracing  Christianity,  all  their  nobler  desires  would  be  gratified.  (J.  Thomson, 
D.D.)  Times  of  righttousness  promised  to  the  Church: — First,  We  shall  open 
what  this  righteousn>=^ss  of  Jesus  Christ  is  which  the  saints  do  hunger  and  thirst 
after.  Secondly,  We  shall  show  what  their  hunger  and  thirst  is ;  the  working  of 
their  hearts  in  their  hungering  and  thirstmg  after  this  righteousness.  Thirdly, 
What  a  desirable  object  this  righteousness  is ;  what  there  is  in  this  righteousnes* 
that  makes  the  saints  so  desire  after  it.  Fourthly,  Those  that  do  thus  desire  after 
it  are  blessed-  They  are  blessed  for  the  present.  Fifthly,  That  they  certainly  shall 
be  filled  with  this  righteousness.  L  For  the  first,  What  this  righteousness  is  that 
now  we  are  speaking  of.  It  is  the  righteonsness  which  is  for  justification.  II.  Now 
the  second  thing  that  is  to  be  opened,  it  is  the  work  of  the  soul  in  the  hungering 
and  thirsting  after  this  righteousness.  1.  The  soul  doth  clearly  apprehend  and  is 
thoroughly  convinced  that  it  hath  need  of  a  righteousness  to  enable  it  to  stand 
before  the  holy  and  righteous  God.  That  is  the  first  thing  that  raises  this  hunger 
andithirst.  2.  The  soul  comes  to  be  convinced  of  the  insufficiency  and  imperfec- 
tion of  its  own  righteousness.  3.  The  soul  comes  to  see  that  there  is  another 
righteousness  beyond  its  own.  4.  The  soul  likewise  must  be  enlightened  in  the  way 
of  the  gospel's  making  over  this  righteousness  to  the  creature.  Then  mark  how 
the  soul  puts  forth  itself  in  the  hungering  and  thirsting  after  this  righteous- 
ness. 1.  In  the  first  place,  It  doth  feel  it,  it  gets  an  assurance  of  it,  it  feels  a 
mighty  pain  for  the  want  of  it ;  as  yon  know  in  hunger  and  thirst  there  is  a  very 
great  pain  in  the  body  till  nature  be  supplied.  2.  All  other  things  whatsoever  that 
yon  can  tender  unto  a  man  that  wants  bread  or  drink,  that  is  ready  to  perish  for 
want  of  those  things,  tender  what  you  will  they  are  all  nothing  to  him — he  regards 
them  as  nothing,  there  is  no  savour  in  anything ;  come  and  bring  him  bags  of  gold 
or  silver,  it  is  bread  that  he  must  have  ;  come  and  bring  him  brave  suits  of  satin 
and  velvet,  what  is  that  if  he  be  ready  to  perish  for  want  of  bread  r  3.  As  all 
things  are  nothing  to  him  till  this  eomes,  lo  in  hanger  and  thirst  there  is  a  mighty 


ttlA».  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  667 

•trong  desire,  sach  a  strong  desire  as  the  body  is  ready  to  faint  if  the  desire  be  not 
satisfied,  even  to  faint  and  die.  So  it  is  with  the  soul  here ;  if  I  have  not  thia 
righteonsness  I  die,  I  faint  and  die — yea,  I  die  eternally.  4.  There  are  strong, 
endeavours  after  it ;  that  must  needs  be  in  hunger  and  thirst.  We  use  to  say  that 
hunger  will  break  through  stone  walls  ;  there  is  no  work  accounted  difficult  to  a 
tnau  to  get  bread.  5.  One  that  hungers  and  thirsts,  his  desires  are  resolute  ;  there 
is  power,  and  endeavours,  and  they  are  resolute  ;  he  doth  not  stand  upon  conditions, 
to  indent  this  or  that  way,  but  let  the  endeavours  be  what  they  will  be,  and  indeed 
this  is  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart  where  a  hypocrite  fails.  6.  Which  is  very  observ- 
able :  The  soul  is  unsatisfied  in  this  hunger  and  thirst  till  this  righteousneis  doth 
com*.  A  child  that  doth  but  play  with  his  meat,  or  whose  belly  is  full,  may  be 
crying  after  something  that  he  sees,  but  you  may  put  off  a  child  with  a  rattle  when 
his  belly  is  full ;  but  if  he  be  thoroughly  a-hungry,  then  ofifer  him  what  rattles  you 
will,  yet  he  must  have  his  hanger  satisfied  if  he  be  hungry  indeed :  and  so  it  is  with 
the  soul.  {J.  Burroughs.)  Hunger  a  sign  of  health: — It  is  a  good  sign  of  a 
thriving  Christian ;  not  only  of  a  living  Christian,  but  of  a  thriving  Christian.  As 
you  find  it  by  experience  in  the  body,  when  a  man  or  woman  begins  to  have  a  good 
appetite  to  their  meat,  to  be  hungry,  we  say,  then  they  mend.  A  man  that  begin* 
to  have  a  8tomach,to  be  hungry,  and  to  taste  his  beer,  he  begins  now  to  thrive ;  so  it 
is  with  the  soul.  Thou  hast  not  that  growth  that  thy  soul  desires,  but  hast  thou  a 
stomach  to  thy  meat,  canst  thoa  taste  thy  drink,  canst  thou  taste  the  waters  of  life» 
canst  thou  say.  These  are  sweet,  oh  that  I  might  have  more,  I  am  athirst  and  desire 
after  more  ?  When  thou  comest  to  the  Word,  thou  gettest  some  milk  to  nourish  thee, 
and  thou  hungerest  after  more.  It  is  an  argument  that  thou  art  in  a  thriving  condition^ 
it  is  sign  of  health,  that  thy  soul  is  hale,  that  thou  hast  not  those  distempers  and  cor- 
ruptions that  other  men  have.  (Ibid.)  Desires  meet : — Your  desires  and  God's  meet. 
There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  God  doth  more  freely  bestow  than  righteousness. 
(Ibid.)  No  vacuities  in  nature : — If  God  will  fill  vacuities  in  nature,  and  will  hear 
the  ravens  when  they  cry  unto  Him,  will  He  not  fill  the  emptiness  of  thy  soul  ?  God 
hath  so  ordered  things  in  nature  that  there  shall  be  no  vacuity.  Philosophers  say 
"  that  the  world  will  sooner  fall  to  nothing  than  there  should  be  the  least  emptiness 
in  the  world,"  but  it  must  be  filled  with  something  or  other.  Now  hath  the  Lord 
so  appointed  that  there  must  not  be  the  least  vacuity  in  nature,  but  there  must  be 
something  to  fill  it,  surely  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  a  vacuity  in  an  immortal  soul ; 
but  He  hath  something  to  fill  that  soul  of  thme  that  is  empty  for  the  present,  and 
the  Scripture  tells  us  that;  the  Lord  fills  every  living  thing  with  His  blessinj;,  and 
shall  not  a  soul  that  hungers  after  righteousness,  and  the  image  of  God,  and  the 
grace  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  shall  it  not  be  satisfied  ?  (Ibid.)  There  are  many 
that  desire,  but  their  desires  are  cold  and  lazy  desires,  such  as  shall  never  do  them 
good;  and  therefore  false  desires  they  may  be  known  by  these  characters:  1.  Their 
desires  are  false  who  satisfy  themselves  with  ignorant  desires.  Hath  God  en- 
lightened your  hearts  to  see  the  excellency  of  grace,  that  is  more  precious  than  rubies, 
of  more  worth  than  the  gold  of  Ophir  ?  If  it  come  not  from  these  grounds  they 
are  but  false  desires.  Many  have  a  false  appetite.  2.  Such  desires  are  false  who 
satisfy  themselves  with  foolish  desires.  Will  we  not  account  that  man  a  foolish 
man  that  shall  desire  food — Oh  that  I  had  something  to  eat  I  oh  that  I  had  bread 
or  meat ! — but  will  not  seek  for  it,  will  not  take  pains  to  get  it  ?  3.  When  men's 
desires  are  absurd,  such  desires  are  false.  They  desire  grace,  and  yet  live  in  that 
which  is  quite  contrary  to  grace.  4.  Such  as  satisfy  themselves  in  cold  and  weak 
desires,  whose  desires  are  turned  all  into  wishings  and  wouldings ;  they  could  wish 
that  they  had  grace,  and  oh  that  they  had  righteousness,  oh  that  they  were 
delivered  from  wrath  to  come  1  but  they  are  not  so  peremptory  upon  it  as  to  con- 
clude, I  must  have  it  or  I  die.  Now  these  desires  they  come  to  nothing,  they  will 
not  grow  up.  5.  When  men's  desires  are  conditional.  Conditional  desires  are 
false  desires  ;  that  is  thus,  they  would  have  grace  and  holiness  so  far  as  might  stand 
with  such  and  such  ends,  and  to  carry  on  such  and  such  designs  of  their  own — aa- 
to  keej)  their  estates  and  their  liberty,  their  ease  and  credit  in  the  world.  6.  When 
men's  desires  are  fleeting  and  unconstant  desires,  they  have  desires  in  some  good 
moods,  and  in  some  pangs  of  conscience  when  the  terrors  of  God  are  upon  their 
spirits.  But  such  desires  as  these  they  are  hypocritical ;  they  desire  grace  merely 
io  serve  their  own  turn,  to  stop  the  mouth  of  conscience,  and  not  for  grace  sake^ 
7.  When  their  desires  are  lazy  desires,  such  are  false  desires  ;  they  are  not  willing 
to  take  pains  for  what  they  do  desire.  (Ibid.)  Blessed  are  ye  that  weeji 
now :   for  ye  shall  laugh. — The  blessednett  of  tears  and  mourning  • — It  sounda 


set  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHO.  Tt. 

B  paradox  I  We  are  wont  to  regard  monming  and  tears  as  evil  things  that 
come  of  sorrow  and  suffering.  But  here  we  are  told  of  a  mourning  that,  coming 
from  some  hidden  source,  flows  on  until  it  pours  itself  into  the  ocean  of  ever- 
lasting consolation.  What  can  it  mean  ?  Certainly  not  that  God  really  likea 
us  to  be  always  sad.  The  world  of  seen  things  around  us,  so  bright,  so  beau- 
tiful, tells  a  very  different  tale.  And  yet  methinks  it  tells  ns,  too,  that  tears  and 
blessings  have  to  do  with  one  another.  Nature  has  its  storms  and  rain;  it  has  the 
bleak  winds  of  spring,  the  thunder-clonds  of  summer,  the  falling  leaves  of  autumn, 
the  cold,  dark  days  of  winter,  and  we  know  now  that  this  sad  side  of  things  is  not 
the  evidence  of  the  existence  of  angry  deities  who  dwell  in  the  unseen,  but  that 
under  the  overruling  hand  of  a  wise  and  loving  God  there  is  in  these  things  a 
blessing  brought  to  as,  and  to  the  world  in  which  we  live.  Ah,  yes,  it  is  true. 
Continual  laughter  is  not  profitable.  There  are  times  when  laughter  is  unseason- 
able. Even  the  world  pronounces  those  happy  who  can  weep.  Too  much  ease, 
and  pleasure,  and  happiness,  as  the  world  counts  happiness,  wean  the  spirit  away 
from  Him  in  whom  alone  true  blessedness  can  be  found.  There  is  need  of  sorrow 
to  bring  us  back  to  Him  (Psa.  cxix.  67).  God  chastens  to  bless.  His  punishments 
are  always  corrective,  never  vindictive.  Test  by  this  touchstone  all  that  men  say 
of  God's  dealings  with  mankind.  Ay,  answer  with  it  the  troubled  promptings  of 
your  own  conscience  in  the  hour  of  trial  and  mourning.  {C.  J.  Ridgeway,  M.A.) 
Tlie  seriousness  of  the  kingdom : — This  is  expressed  in  the  same  proverbial  form  as 
the  two  preceding  beatitudes ;  and  in  proverbs,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  one 
example  is  selected  to  represent  a  class,  or  one  feature  to  suggest  a  whole  character. 
Thus,  as  weeping  is  generally  accompanied  with  a  serious  frame  of  mind,  or  is  the 
external  symptom  of  sorrow,  so  it  was  probably  employed  to  represent  such  a  state 
(see  Eccles.  vii.  2,  3).  Never  did  any  teacher  present  religion  to  the  world  with  an 
aspect  so  forbidding  as  it  is  done  by  our  Saviour  in  this  passage.  The  Jews 
expected  that  tbe  reign  of  the  Messiah  would  be  distinguished  by  wealth,  grandeur, 
and  joy.  Our  Saviour,  therefore,  took  an  early  opportunity  of  undeceiving  them, 
by  siiowing  them  that  those  who  possessed  few  or  none  of  the  good  things  of  this 
world  were  much  better  fitted  to  be  subjects  in  that  kingdom,  and  even  to  exercise 
authority,  than  those  who  were  favoured  in  a  high  degree  with  opulence  and  plenty. 
(J.  Thomson,  D.D.)  The  blessing  to  Chrintian  weepers : — It  is  obvious  that  this 
blessing  cannot  apply  to  every  kind  of  weeping;  for  there  are  tears  shed  for  reasons 
altogether  earthly,  and  there  is  a  sorrow  of  the  world  that  worketh  death.  But  on 
all  who  weep  as  the  disciples  of  Christ,  or  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  or  because  of  any 
penitential  or  truly  Christian  feeling,  on  all  such  this  blessing  rests.  All  such 
"  shall  laugh,"  that  is,  shall  greatly  rejoice.  (James  Foote,  M.A.)  The  true  j^y 
of  Christianity  : — He  bade  them  even  rejoice ;  not  merely  be  resigned,  but  jubilant, 
and  here  He  struck  that  keynote  of  resounding  triumph  and  exhilaration  which 
remains  to  this  day  the  most  original  and  characteristic  sign  of  the  Christian  life. 
Inextinguishable  joy  in  the  dungeon — at  the  stake — amidst  ruin  and  physical  pain 
and  loss ;  that  is  Christianity.  The  Stoic  bears ;  the  Epicurean  submits ;  the 
Christian  alone  exults — •'  sorrowful,  and  yet  always  rejoicing."  {H.  R.  Haweis, 
M.A.)  Spiritual  mourning: — For  the  first,  I  may  expound  the  point  and  the 
text  both  under  one.  You  see  the  proposition  what  it  is,  every  good  mourner  is  in 
a  happy  condition.  Here  let  us  consider  a  little  the  terms  to  explicate  them.  Who 
is  the  party  in  speech  ?  "  Blessed  is  the  mourner,"  saith  Christ,  in  Matthew ; 
"Blessed,"  saith  He,  in  Luke  vi.  21,  "are  the  weepers."  Both  these,  mourning 
and  weeping,  are  fruits  of  the  same  tree  and  root.  Tiiere  is  a  carnal  mourning, 
when  a  man  mourns  for  the  presence  of  goodness,  and  for  the  absence  of  sin, 
because  he  is  restrained,  and  cannot  be  so  bad  as  he  would  be.  There  is  a  natural 
mourning,  when  a  man  mourns  upon  natural  motives,  when  natural  losses  and 
crosses  are  upon  him.  There  is  a  spiritual  mourning,  when  a  man  mourns  in  a 
spiritual  manner,  for  spiritjial  things,  upon  spiritual  motives,  as  afterwards  we 
pball  show ;  when  he  mourns,  because  good  things  that  are  spiritually  good  are  so 
far  from  him,  and  spiritual  ills  are  so  near  to  him.  This  is  the  mourner  that 
Christ  here  speaks  of,  and  this  is  the  mourning  that  hath  the  blessing.  Other 
mourning  may  occasion  this  through  God's  blessing,  and  may  give  some  overture 
to  this  mourning,  but  the  blessing  belongs  to  the  spiritual  mourner  and  the  spiritual 
mourning.  "Blessed  are  the  mourners, /or  they  shall  be  comforted."  This 
reason  will  not  hold  in  all  kind  of  mourning  and  all  kind  of  comfort.  It  is  no  good 
argument  to  say,  Blessed  is  the  man  that  is  in  pain,  for  he  shall  be  refreshed  and 
relieved ;  blessed  is  the  man  that  is  hungry,  for  he  shall  be  fed  and  have  his  wanti 


OHir.  VI.]  ST.  LVKS,  669 

supplied.  But  yet  this  argument  holds  good,  "Blessed  are  they  that  mourn, /(o; 
they  shall  be  comforted  " ;  namely,  with  God's  comforts,  with  the  comforts  of  the 
Spirit,  with  the  comforts  of  the  Word,  the  comforts  of  heaven.  The  comforts  of 
God  are  beyond  all  the  miseries  and  sorrows  that  a  man  can  endure  in  this  life  ; 
and  though  he  do  mourn  and  weep  for  them,  yet  notwithstanding,  the  comforts, 
the  wages,  will  so  far  exceed  all  his  sorrows  that  he  is  happy  in  this.  He  cannot 
buy  spiritual  comforts  too  dear,  he  cannot  have  them  upon  hard  terms  possibly. 
Tea,  further,  spiritual  mourning  carries  comfort  with  it,  besides  the  harvest  of 
comfort  that  abides  the  mourner  afterwards.  There  are  first-fruits  of  comfort  here 
to  be  reaped,  so  it  is  that  the  more  a  man  mourns  spiritually,  the  more  he 
rejoiceth ;  the  more  his  sorrow  is,  the  more  his  comfort  is.  1.  He  that  mourns 
spiritually  hath  a  good  judgment,  and  therefore  is  happy.  Spiritual  affection 
it  argues  a  spiritual  judgment  and  understanding.  For  the  affections  work 
according  as  they  receive  information.  A  creature  that  is  led  by  fancy  hath 
brutish  affections  ;  a  man  that  is  guided  with  matter  of  reason  hath  rational  affec- 
tions, as  we  term  them  ;  but  a  man  that  hath  his  mind  enlightened  and  sanctified 
hath  holy  affections.  2.  It  argues  a  good  heart  too.  (1)  A  tender  and  soft  heart. 
Por  a  stone  cannot  mourn,  only  the  fleshy  heart  it  is  that  can  bleed.  (2)  As  his 
heart  is  tender,  so  also  it  is  sound.  It  is  a  healthful  soul  and  a  healthful  temper, 
as  I  may  speak,  that  he  hath.  For  mourning  proceeds  out  of  love  and  hatred ; 
out  of  agreement,  if  it  be  a  spiritual  mourning,  with  that  which  is  good,  and  out  of 
a  contrariety  and  opposition  between  us  and  that  which  is  bad.  And  this  is  a 
right  constitution  and  temper  of  soul,  that  makes  a  man  happy.  3.  As  he  is  happy 
in  the  cause,  so  he  will  be  happy  in  the  effect,  too,  of  his  godly  mourning.  For 
godly  sorrow  and  mourning  brings  forth  blessed  fruits  and  effects ;  the  apostle  in 
2  Cor.  vii.  10,  seq.,  delivers  divers  of  them,  as  there  you  see.  (1)  This  is  one 
thing  in  spiritual  mourning ;  it  secures  and  excludes  a  man  from  carnal  and  hellish 
mourning ;  yea,  this  orders  him  and  saves  him  harmless  from  all  other  griefs. 
The  more  a  man  can  mourn  for  his  sins,  the  less  he  will  mourn  for  other  matters. 
So  that  this  mourning  prevents  a  great  deal  of  unprofitable  mourning.  When  a 
man  bleeds  unseasonably  and  unsatiably,  the  way  to  divert  it  is  to  open  a  vein  and 
to  let  him  blood  elsewhere,  and  so  you  save  the  man.  If  he  weep  in  a  holy  and 
spiritual  manner,  he  shall  be  secured  and  preserved  from  poisonful  and  hurtful 
tears.  (2)  This  is  another  happy  effect  of  godly  mourning,  that  spiritual  and  godly 
mourning  alway  doth  a  man  good  and  never  any  hurt.  Worldly  sorrow,  saith  the 
apostle,  causeth  death.  The  more  a  man  dies  this  way,  the  more  he  lives ;  the 
more  he  weeps,  the  more  he  laughs;  and  the  more  he  can  weep  over  Jesus  Christ, 
the  more  lightsome  and  gladsome  his  heart  is,  and  the  more  comfortably  he  spends 
his  time.  (3)  This  spiritual  and  godly  sorrow  and  mourning  is  a  sorrow  never  to 
be  repented  of,  as  the  apostle  there  implies.  All  other  sorrow  a  man  must  unsorrow 
again.  (4)  Spiritual  mourning  works  repentance,  saith  the  apostle :  that  is  to  say, 
it  works  reformation  and  amendment ;  it  sets  a  man  further  from  his  sin,  and 
brings  him  nearer  to  God,  and  nearer  to  goodness.  4.  He  is  happy  in  regard  of  the 
event  and  issue  of  his  mourning,  because  all  shall  end  well  with  him,  and  all  his 
tears  shall  one  day  be  wiped  away,  and  joy  and  gladness  shall  come  in  place  ;  yea, 
he  is  happy  in  this,  that  spiritual  mourning  it  is  always  accompanied  with  joy : 
that  is  a  happy  estate  that  tends  to  happiness.  Use  1.  If  it  be  a  happy  man  that 
mourns  aright,  we  have  reason,  first,  to  bewail  our  unhappiness ;  unhappy  time 
and  unhappy  men  may  we  well  say,  touching  ourselves,  that  vary  so  much  from 
the  mind  and  prescription  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  "  Blessed,"  saith  our  Saviour 
Christ,  "  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  "  Woe  to  you,"  saith 
He,  "  that  now  laugh."  We,  on  the  other  side,  say.  Woe  to  them  that  here  mourn; 
happy  are  they  that  can  here  laugh  and  be  merry.  And  as  we  vary  in  our  judg- 
ment from  our  Saviour,  so  much  more  we  vary  in  our  practice  from  His  direction 
and  counsel.  God  saith,  "Humble  yourselves  that  you  may  be  exalted."  We  on 
the  other  side  say.  Exalt  ourselves,  and  we  shall  not  be  humbled.  God  saith. 
Throw  down  youi  selves ;  we  say.  Secure  ourselves.  God  saith,  Afflict  yourselves, 
and  then  you  shall  have  comfort.  The  Lord  saith,  Let  your  laughter  be  turned 
into  mourning,  that  so  you  may  laugh.  We  on  the  other  say.  Let  our  mourning  be 
turned  intc  laughter,  that  so  we  may  not  mourn.  And  therefore  when  any  grief, 
natural  or  spiritual,  begins  to  breed  or  to  grow  on  us,  presently  we  betake  ourselves 
to  company,  to  sports  and  exercises,  that  may  drown  the  noise  of  conscience,  that 
may  pat  out  of  our  minds  motives  to  spiritual  grief  and  sorrow,  and  that  may 
proToke  as  to  carnal,  or  at  the  best  to  natural  mirth  and  rejoicing.    Wa  think 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap,  ?l. 

many  times  carnal  sorrow,  which  in  truth  is  bnt  poison,  will  do  as  good,  a  great 
deal  of  ease;  and  when  men  have  crossed  us,  and  disappointed  us,  or  dealt 
unkindly  with  us,  we  think  we  wUl  go  and  weep  it  out ;  and  when  we  have  cried 
and  blabbered  a  while,  we  think  that  we  give  ease  to  our  sonls,  and  content  to  our 
hearts.  But  when  we  come  to  spiritual  mourning,  which  only  is  comfortable 
mourning,  we  think  that  undoes  us.  Many  a  man  thinks  he  forfeits  all  his  joy,  all 
his  peace,  all  his  liberty,  all  his  happiness,  and  he  shall  never  see  a  merry  day 
again  in  this  world  if  he  gives  way  to  mourning  for  sin,  to  sound  repentance,  to 
works  of  humiliation,  and  examination  of  his  own  heart  and  ways.  Use  2.  Well, 
in  the  next  place,  we  have  another  use,  to  take  Christ's  direction  for  comfort. 
Who  would,  who  can  be  without  it  ?  Life  is  death  without  comfort.  Every  man's 
aim  is  to  lead  a  comfortable  Ufe.  Mark  the  way  that  Christ  chalks  out :  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  1.  We  must  first  show  you  how 
spiritual  mourning  differs,  and  is  discerned  from  other  mourning,  2.  How  it  is 
gotten.  3.  How  it  is  exercised.  1.  For  the  first  of  this :  Spiritual  mourning  is 
known  by  the  objects.  Such  as  the  object  is,  such  is  the  faculty.  Spiritual 
mourning  hath  spiritual  objects,  either  materially  or  formally,  as  they  speak  in 
schools.  This  spiritual  mourning  is  busied  about  spiritual  goods  and  spiritual  ills. 
We  will  instance  in  this  first.  For,  first,  if  a  man  would  know  whether  his  sorrow 
be  spiritual  sorrow  or  no,  let  him  see  how  he  mourns  for  the  absence  of  spiritual 
good  things,  how  he  mourns  for  the  absence  of  God,  the  chief  good.  That  is 
spiritual  sorrow,  wben  a  man  mourns  because  he  hath  lost  God  in  his  graces,  in 
his  communion,  and  in  his  comforts.  Now,  in  the  next  place,  how  shaU  a  man  do 
to  get  this  spiritual  mourning  ?  First,  He  must  labour  to  have  a  heart  capable  of 
grief  and  sorrow  that  is  spiritual,  a  tender  and  soft  heart.  He  must  see  that  he 
have  a  disposition  to  holy  mourning,  able  and  inclinable  so  to  do,  when  just  oppor- 
tunity and  occasion  is  offered.  Now  how  shall  a  man  get  this  tender  heart  ?  Why 
sorely  he  must  go  to  God  in  His  means  and  ordinances,  who  hath  promised,  as  you 
heard,  in  the  covenant,  to  take  "  the  stone  out  of  our  hearts,  and  to  give  us  soft 
and  fleshy  hearts."  1,  Consider  of  a  method  that  he  must  use  ;  and  then — 2,  Of 
motives  to  stir  him  up  thereunto,  1,  For  method,  (1)  He  must  have  respect  to 
the  time,  that  he  do  not  let  his  heart  lie  fallow  too  long,  Jer.  iv.  3,  it  is  said, 
"Plough  up  your  fallow  ground."  Ground,  if  it  lie  long  unploughed,  will  require 
much  pains  to  rear  it  and  fetch  it  up,  but  if  it  be  oft  done,  it  will  be  the  easier. 
To  this  end  a  man  should  every  day  be  exercised  in  the  duty  of  a  godly  mourning, 
every  night  reckon  for  the  passage  of  that  day,  and  say  with  thyself,  What  sin 
have  I  committed  ?  What  have  I  done  ?  (2)  For  the  time,  a  man  must  be  sure  to 
take  God's  time.  When  God  calls  on  him,  when  God  gives  them  the  heart,  and  is 
ready  to  close  and  to  join  with  him,  then  take  the  advantage,  set  upon  godly 
mourning.  So  when  the  nature  of  grief  is  stirred  by  the  occasion  of  the  Word, 
then  take  the  advantage  of  this,  seize  upon  this  for  the  king's  use;  set  upon  sorrow 
whilst  it  is  there,  turn  it  into  the  right  stream,  into  the  right  channel ;  turn  it  for 
ein,  weep  for  sin,  and  not  for  outward  losses  and  crosses.  Thus  much  for  the 
time.  2.  There  is  another  thing  to  be  done  for  the  order,  and  that  is  this,  that 
a  man  must  be  sure  to  give  over  carnal  mirth  and  carnal  mourning,  if  he  will 
mourn  spiritually.  His  carnal  laughter  must  be  turned  into  mourning,  as  James 
epeaks  (iv.  9) ;  and  his  carnal  mirth  must  be  turned  into  spiritual  mourning, 
too,  or  else  he  will  never  come  to  spiritual  mourning.  The  motives  are  many. 
He  that  wiU  mourn  must  look  to  these.  Now,  in  particular,  consider  these 
motives.  1.  It  is  needful  for  us  to  mourn.  2.  It  is  seasonable  for  us  to  mourn. 
3.  It  is  profitable.  And — 4.  It  is  comfortable.  1.  It  is  needful  to  mourn  in  a 
spiritual  manner.  Whosoever  hath  sin  must  mourn.  2.  As  it  is  needful,  so  also  it 
is  very  seasonable.  The  very  time  tends  that  way,  as  it  were ;  the  season  is  the  time 
of  weeping ;  the  Church  of  God  weeps  abroad.  For  sin  is  now  grown  to  a  fulness, 
to  a  ripeness.  3.  As  it  is  seasonable,  bo  it  is  profitable :  for  godly  mourning  it 
never  hurts,  it  always  helps.  Carnal  sorrow  leaves  a  man  worse  than  it  finds  him. 
It  makes  him  more  sick  and  weak  than  it  finds  him.  Spiritual  sorrow  leaves  him 
better.  4.  It  is  very  comfortable.  It  doth  wondrously  refresh  a  man.  We  pass, 
therefore,  from  the  doctrine  here  delivered,  "Blessed  are  the  mourners,"  and  come 
to  the  reason  of  it,  "  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  Let  us  join  these  together,  and 
Bee  how  they  do  depend.  The  point  will  be  thus  much — 1.  That  spiritual  mourning 
it  ends  in  spiritual  mirth.  He  that  can  mourn  spiritually  and  holily,  he  shall 
ondoubtedly  and  certainly  be  comforted.  Holy  tears,  they  are  the  seeds  of  holy 
joy.    For  tibe  clearing  of  it  farther,  let  us  know  that  we  have  good  security  for  it. 


jmtr.  Ji.]  8T.  LUKE.  ill 

1.  The  promise  of  God :  and  then — 2.  The  experience  of  God's  people.  The  best 
proofs  that  may  be.  First,  the  Lord  undertakes  in  His  promise  two  things  touching 
our  comforts.  1.  That  all  our  godly  sorrow  shall  end  in  true  comfort.  The  next 
is — 2.  That  all  our  godl/  mournings  are  attended  and  accompanied  with  comfort  for 
the  present.  1.  For  the  first  of  these,  you  know  the  promise,  sorrow  and  weeping 
shall  fly  away,  and  joy  and  gladness  shall  come  in  place  (Isa.  xxxv.,  last  yerse), 
which  place  will  refer  you  to  many  more.  God  hath  made  a  succession  of  these 
things,  as  of  day  and  night.  His  children's  day  begins  in  the  night  and  in  dark* 
ness,  and  ends  in  the  day.  God  hath  promised  it  shall  be  so  ;  God  hath  appointed 
Christ,  and  fitted  Him,  and  enabled  Him  to  this  word,  that  so  it  may  be.  God  will 
take  off  the  garment  of  mourning,  and  put  on  the  garment  of  gladness  in  due  time. 

2.  To  this  promise  of  God  let  us  add  the  experience  of  God's  people.  If  all  this 
suffice  not,  let  us  consider  of  these  reasons,  and  then  we  shall  see  that  it  is  but 
reason  that  we  should  do  so.  1.  The  first  reason  is  drawn  from  the  nature  of 
sorrow  and  mourning.  Sorrow  is  a  kind  of  an  imperfect  thing,  as  it  were.  It  is  not 
made  for  itself,  but  for  a  higher  and  for  a  further  end,  to  do  service  to  something 
else,  as  it  fares  with  all  those  that  we  call  the  deciinin'^  affections.  Hatred  is 
servant  to  love ;  fear  doth  service  to  confidence  ;  so  likewise  doth  sorrow  to  joy. 
For  God  hath  not  appointed  sorrow  for  sorrow's  sake,  but  to  make  way  for  joy  and 
true  comfort.  The  physician  doth  not  make  a  man  sick  for  sickness'  sake,  but  for 
health's  sake.  But  now  the  joy  of  a  Christian  man,  a  spiritual  joy,  it  is  a  safe  joy. 
It  hurts  no  man,  but  doth  a  man  good  ;  it  settles  a  man's  mind,  it  strengthens  his 
thoughts,  it  perfects  his  wits  and  understanding.  It  makes  him  to  have  a  sound  judg- 
ment ;  it  makes  for  the  health  of  his  body ;  it  makes  for  the  preservation  of  his  life ;  it 
doth  a  man  good  every  way.  There  is  no  provocation  in  it,  there  is  no  danger  in  it. 
Thirdly,  as  a  Christian's  joy  is  best  in  that  respect,  that  it  is  the  safest,  so  in  this,  that 
it  is  the  surest  joy.  For  this  joy  is  an  everlasting  joy.  The  righteous,  then,  hath  the 
start  of  the  wicked  for  matter  of  comfort  and  joy.  He  hath  a  more  solid,  a  more 
safe  and  sure  joy,  a  more  sweet  joy,  a  more  reasonable  joy  a  great  deal  than  the 
other  hath.  As  he  is  beyond  him  in  his  joy,  so,  in  the  next  place,  he  is  beyond 
him  in  his  sorrow  too.  Our  life  must  have  comfort  and  sorrow.  It  is  compounded 
of  sweet  and  sour.  As  the  year  is  compounded  of  winter  and  summer,  and  the  day 
of  day  and  night,  so  every  man's  life  is  made  up  of  these  two.  He  hath  some  fair 
*nd  some  foul  days,  some  joy  and  some  sorrow.  Now,  as  the  righteous  is  beyond 
the  wicked  in  his  joy  and  comfort,  so  is  he  beyond  him  in  his  sorrow.  First,  his 
sorrow  is  far  better ;  it  is  a  more  gainful,  a  more  comfortable  sorrow  than  others' 
is.  They  are  beyond  the  sorrows  of  the  wicked  in  all  the  causes  and  in  all  the  cir- 
cumstances of  them.  (1)  The  sorrow  of  the  righteous  proceeds  from  a  better 
spring  and  fountain  than  the  sorrow  of  the  wicked.  The  sorrow  of  the  godly 
«omes  from  a  sound  mind,  from  a  pure  heart,  from  an  inside  that  is  purified  from 
hypocrisy,  from  self-love,  from  private  respects.  Whereas,  on  the  other  side,  the 
sorrow  of  the  wicked  comes  from  distemper  of  brain,  from  an  utter  mistake.  Again, 
his  sorrow  comes  from  distemper  of  heart,  from  pride,  from  passion,  from  cursed- 
ness  of  heart  and  spirit,  that  he  cannot  stoop.  (2)  The  sorrow  of  the  righteous,  as 
it  hath  a  better  spring,  so  it  is  busied  and  taken  up  about  better  objects,  aboat 
better  matters.  A  wicked  man  howls  and  cries,  and  takes  on  many  times  for  a 
trifle,  for  a  bauble ;  yea,  many  times,  because  he  is  disappointed  and  crossed  in  his 
lusts,  in  his  base  sins.  The  child  of  God  finds  himself  somewhat  else  to  do  than 
to  weep  and  to  cry,  and  take  on  for  trifles  and  vanities.  He  looks  up  to  God,  and 
is  sorry  he  hath  displeased  Him.  (3)  The  sorrow  of  the  righteous  is  better  than 
sorrow  of  the  wicked  in  regard  of  the  manner  of  their  mourning.  For  the  mourning 
of  the  righteous  is  a  composed  kind  of  sorrow.  He  mourns  in  silence ;  he  weeps 
to  the  Lord;  he  carries  it  with  judgment  and  discretion.  His  sorrow  is  a  moderated 
sorrow  ;  he  holds  it  within  banks  and  bounds.  Whereas  the  sorrow  of  the  wicked 
is  a  tempestuous,  a  boisterous.'a  furious  kind  of  mourning  and  lamenting.  He 
knows  no  mean.  It  is  without  hope.  (4)  Last  of  all,  they  differ  much  in  the  end 
and  upshot  of  their  mourning.  Godly  scrraw,  it  doth  a  man  good.  It  humbles 
him,  as  we  said.  It  drives  him  from  all  purposb,  from  8.^1  practice  of  sin ;  it 
makes  him  resolute  against  sin.  This  sorrow  of  tbe  wicked,  it  hath  not  so  good  an 
issue.  There  is  great  difference  when  a  woman  breeds  a  disease  and  when  she 
breeds  a  child.  Well,  then,  to  shut  up  this  first  reason,  for  information — upon 
which  we  have  stood  the  longer,  because  carnal  judgment  will  not  credit  this  point — 
it  is  clear,  the  righteous  man  in  prosperity  is  better  than  the  wicked,  and  in 
•dversity  better.    Whence  he  hath  occasion  to  rejoice.    A  surgeon  doth  not  Iwioo 


57a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

and  sear  men  because  he  would  put  them  to  pain,  but  because  he  would  give  them 
ease.  The  Lord  of  heaven  delights  not  in  wounding  and  grieving  of  His  children  ; 
but  therefore  He  calls  them  to  sorrow,  that  so  they  might  come  to  comfort.  2.  The 
second  reason  may  be  drawn  from  the  nature  of  tlxis  spiritual  comfort  and  joy  that 
we  speak  of.  For  spiritual  joy  is  very  strong :  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength  "  (Neh.  viii.  10).  A  strong  thing  is  spiritual  joy,  and  therefore 
it  will  overmatch,  and  overcome,  and  drink  up,  as  it  were,  all  our  sorrows  and 
fears  in  due  time,  as  the  sun  overcomes  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  the  fogginess 
of  the  mist  in  the  morning.  3,  A  third  reason  may  be  drawn  from  the  cause  of  our 
spiritual  mourning  and  spiritual  joy  ;  for  these  are  fruits  that  grow  both  from  the 
same  root.  Spiritual  joy  and  spiritual  mourning,  they  come  from  the  same 
fountain,  from  the  same  Spirit.  The  same  Spirit,  it  causeth  us  to  weep  over  Him 
whom  we  have  pierced,  and  it  causeth  us  also  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  whom  we  have 
pierced  :  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  joy,"  saith  the  apostle  (Gal.  v.  22).  The  same 
Spirit  manageth  and  guideth  both  the  one  and  the  other.  Carnal  passions  and 
affections  they  oppose  one  another,  they  fight  one  with  another,  because  they  are 
carried  on  headlong,  without  any  guide  or  order  at  all.  But  spiritual  affection! 
they  are  subordinate  and  subservient  one  to  another ;  the  one  labours  to  further 
and  to  advance  another.  Thus  the  more  a  man  joys,  the  more  he  grieves ;  and 
the  more  he  grieves,  the  more  he  joys.  Joy  melts  the  heart,  and  gives  it  a  kindly 
thaw  ;  grief,  on  the  other  side,  it  easeth  the  heart,  and  makes  it  cheerful  and  light- 
some.  4.  Lastly,  a  reason  may  be  drawn  from  the  effects  of  godly  mourning.  II 
they  be  considered,  it  will  be  cleared,  that  he  that  mourns  spiritually  shall  end  in 
comfort  At  the  last ;  for  this  spiritual  mourning,  what  will  it  do  ?  First,  it  takes 
off  the  power  and  strength  of  corruption.  It  weakens  sin,  it  pricks  the  bladder  of 
pride,  and  lets  out  our  corruption.  Spiritual  mourning  it  takes  down  a  man,  it 
humbles  him;  and  an  humble  heart  is  always  a  cheerful  heart,  so  far  as  it  is 
humbled.  Spiritual  mourning,  again,  makes  way  for  prayer.  For  spiiitual 
mourning  sends  a  man  to  God.  It  causeth  him  to  utter  himself  in  petition,  in 
confession,  and  complaints  to  his  Father ;  to  pour  out  himself  to  the  bosom  of  his 
God  in  speeches,  in  sighs,  and  tears,  in  lamenting  one  way  or  other.  All  this  tends 
to  comfort.  The  more  a  man  prays,  the  more  he  hath  comfort.  "  Pray,"  saith 
Christ,  "  that  your  joy  may  be  full "  (John  xvi.  24).  Now,  the  more  a  man  mourns 
spiritually,  the  more  he  prays  ;  and  therefore  the  more  he  is  filled  with  true  joy. 
Again,  this  spiritual  mourning,  it  is  a  wondrous  help  of  faith.  It  is  a  hopefn] 
mourning;  it  helps  a  man's  faith  in  the  promises  touching  remission  of  sins. 
Now,  the  more  a  man's  faith  and  hope  is  furthered,  the  more  his  joy  is  furthered. 
Still,  the  apostle  speaks  that  they  should  rejoice  in  believing.  Now,  the  more  he 
monrns,  the  more  reason  he  hath  to  believe  that  that  furthers  his  faith;  and  there- 
fore it  advanceth  his  joy  and  comfort.  This  point,  then,  being  thus  cleared,  let  as 
a  little  make  some  use  of  it  to  ourselves.  The  use  is  threefold.  1.  Here  is  one  use 
of  information  touching  others.  Who  is  the  happiest  man  in  the  world  ?  And  for 
the  deciding  of  this  question  we  must  not  go  with  it  to  Solon,  to  Plato,  or  to  the 
philosophers,  but  come  to  a  judge,  the  Lord  Jesus.  And  what  saith  He  to  the 
point?  Blessed  and  happy,  saith  He,  are  they  that  mourn.  His  reason  is,  "  for 
they  shall  be  comforted. "  So  that  here,  then,  is  the  trial  of  a  man's  state  that  is 
blessed.  So  that  that  man,  then,  that  hath  the  best  sorrow  and  the  best  joy,  that 
man,  then,  is  the  happiest  man.  Now  the  Christian  man  is  this  man.  (1)  In  many 
respects,  this  joy  is  a  more  solid  joy  tlian  the  joy  of  the  wicked.  The  wicked  man 
rejoiceth  in  face,  but  not  in  heart.  This  joy  is  rather  in  show  than  in  substance. 
His  joy  is  not  rooted  in  himself.  A  wicked  man  hath  no  matter  of  comfort  within 
himself,  but  his  comforts  they  hang  upon  outward  things.  His  comfort  sometimes 
lies  in  the  bottom  of  a  pot ;  sometimes  it  lies  in  the  bottom  of  a  dish  ;  sometimes 
in  the  heels  of  a  horse ;  sometimes  in  the  wings  of  a  bird  ;  sometimes  in  some  base 
lust,  or  in  some  such  filthy  sin.  Here  lies  the  comfort  of  a  wicked  man;  but  now 
the  comfort  of  the  godly  is  not  so.  The  joy  of  the  righteous,  it  is  a  massy  and  % 
substantial  joy.  His  afflictions  indeed  are  light  and  momentary,  but  then  his  joy 
is  everlasting,  as  I  shall  show  anon.  It  is  a  joy  that  hath  substance  in  it.  The 
joy  of  the  wicked,  at  the  best,  it  is  but  a  little  glazed,  it  is  but  gilt  over,  but  it  is 
naught  within ;  but  the  joy  of  the  righteous  it  is  a  golden  joy,  it  is  beaten  gold,  it 
is  massy  and  substantial  and  precious.  As  we  said  before,  the  root  of  bis  joy  he 
hath  it  in  himself,  he  hath  matter  of  comfort  in  himself.  There  is  faith  and  grace, 
there  is  truth.  Nay,  it  is  not  rooted  in  himself  only,  but  the  root  of  it  is  in  heaven, 
in  his  Head,  in  Christ.     (2)  The  joy  of  the  righteous,  as  it  is  a  more  solid,  so  it  is 


CHAP,  n.]  8T.  LUKE.  B79 

a  more  safe  joy  than  the  joy  of  the  wicked.  A  carnal  joy  is  many  times  prejudicial 
to  a  man  in  his  safety,  therefore  we  may  safely  conclude  the  godliest  man  is  the 
happiest  man.  2.  Now  the  next  use  is  to  the  godly.  First,  a  word  of  exhortation, 
and  then  a  word  of  consolation.  Stop  up,  my  brethren,  all  the  passages,  dam  them 
up  if  you  can,  that  make  way  for  worldly  sorrow  and  for  carnal  grief,  for  this  will 
«ome  but  too  fast  upon  you ;  but,  on  the  other  side,  pluck  up  the  floodgates,  and 
open  all  the  passages,  and  give  all  the  way  to  spiritual  mourning  and  to  godly 
tears.  (1)  Labour  to  mourn  after  spiritual  things  and  spiritual  persons.  (2)  Again, 
Is  it  80,  that  the  Lord  withdraws  Himself  in  His  ordinances,  that  we  hear  not  the 
voice  of  His  word,  that  we  see  not  our  signs  ?  "  There  is  not  a  prophet  amon<»  us 
to  tell  us  how  long"  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  9);  let  us  then  set  ourselves  to  mourn,  as  the 
Church  in  that  pgalm.  "  Lord,  we  see  not  our  signs."  (3)  Is  it  so,  again,  that  in 
our  mourning,  we  see  the  Church  of  God,  those  sorrowful-spirited  men,  that  they 
are  distressed  and  afiflicted  ?  Let  us  weep  for  these  too.  (4)  Is  it  so,  that  the 
Church  of  God  is  foiled  at  any  time  by  the  adversaries  ?  Let  us  take  on,  as  Joshua 
did,  "  rend  your  garments,  and  cast  down  ourselves  before  the  Lord,  and  say, 
What  shall  we  say,  when  Israel  shall  turn  their  backs  and  fly  before  their  ene« 
mies?"  (Joshua  vii.  8).  (5)  In  short,  is  the  Church  of  God  in  heaviness  and 
lamentation?  Oh,  but  how  shall  I  know  that  my  mourning  is  spiritual  monmingf 
I  suspect  it  much  this  way.  And  why  ?  First  of  all,  my  sorrow  begins  in  the 
flesh ;  I  never  mourned,  I  never  went  to  God  in  prayer  and  fasting,  or  any  exercise 
of  religion,  till  God  tamed  me  and  took  me  down  with  crosses  and  afflictions  ;  then 
when  He  laid  load  on  me,  I  went  to  it,  and  not  before.  Well,  my  brethren,  thus  it 
may  be  :  thy  sorrow  may  begin  in  the  flesh  ;  but,  if  it  end  in  the  Spirit,  all  is  well. 
Ay,  but,  will  some  say,  my  sorrow  is  more  for  outward  things  than  for  spiritual 
matters.  I  grieve  when  I  am  sick,  but  it  is  for  pain  more  than  for  sin.  I  mourn 
when  I  am  poor,  but  it  is  because  I  am  poor  in  purse,  because  I  am  poor  in  state, 
rather  than  in  regard  of  my  spiritual  wants;  and  so  for  other  matters  too.  My 
brethren,  this  is  easily  granted.  There  is  no  floor  here  but  there  is  chaff  as  well 
as  wheat  with  it.  There  is  no  precious  mine  here  so  rich  but  there  is  some  dross 
as  well  as  good  gold,  as  well  as  good  metal.  So  it  is  with  a  Christian.  There  is  a 
mixture  of  flesh  and  spirit.  And  if  it  be  so,  it  is  spiritual  sorrow,  that  thou  canst 
shed  some  tears,  vent  some  sighs  and  groans  to  God  in  spiritual  respects,  for 
spiritual  losses,  for  spiritual  evils.  Here  is  matter  of  comfort,  there  is  so  much 
■piritual  comfort,  so  much  spiritual  joy  belongs  to  thee.  But  how  shall  I  know 
that  my  mourning  is  spiritual  mourning,  when  I  cannot  mourn  for  sin  ?  I  have 
abundance  of  tears  for  losses,  and  for  crosses,  and  unkindnesses ;  but  I  am  dry, 
and  barren,  and  tearless,  when  it  comes  to  matter  of  sin  and  offence,  and  trespass 
against  God.  Is  this  well,  that  a  man  should  have  tears  at  command  for  outward 
losses  and  crosses,  and  not  shed  a  tear  in  prayer,  and  in  repentance  for  sin  ?  No, 
my  brethren,  it  is  not  well ;  but  how  shall  we  do  to  amend  this  ?  Surely,  even  go 
to  God  and  confess  how  it  is  ;  complain  of  thyself,  and  desire  Him  to  amend  it; 
and,  if  we  condemn  ourselves,  God  is  ready  to  receive  us.  Ay,  but  the  children  of 
God  are  more  plentiful  in  tears  for  sin  than  for  outward  things.  Ay,  in  what 
sense  ?  Not  in  regard  of  the  bulk,  but  in  regard  of  the  worth,  in  regard  of  the 
value  of  their  tears.  One  tear  spent  for  sin  is  worth  rivers  of  tears  for  outward 
matters.  Further,  it  will  be  said,  How  shall  I  know  my  sorrow  to  be  spiritual 
sorrow  ?  I  answer  in  a  word — 1.  Look  to  the  object,  that  it  be  universal.  So  in 
spiritual  things :  he  that  is  spiritually  sorry  he  mourns  for  the  want  of  goodness 
wheresoever  he  seeth  it,  be  it  in  himself  or  in  other  men,  nay,  be  it  in  his  enemies, 
2.  Our  sorrow  will  be  spiritual  and  holy  if  it  be  accompanied  with  prayer ;  for  holy 
mourning  makes  way  for  prayer.  3.  Again,  it  is  spiritual  sorrow,  when  it  is  accom- 
panied with  thankfulness.  A  carnal  man,  when  he  is  pinched  and  twinged,  and 
knows  not  which  way  to  turn  himself,  he  will  be  glad  to  cry,  when  he  sees  there  is 
no  other  refuge  in  the  world,  but  either  he  must  cry  or  sink.  But  a  man  that  is  a 
spiritual  mourner,  he  will  be  thankful  as  well  as  prayerful.  (R.  Sibbe$,  D.D.) 
Godiy  mournert  shnll  be  comforted: — 1.  There  is  a  foolish  mourning,  in  which  men 
and  women  are  not  blessed — that  is,  they  mourn  they  know  not  for  what.  2.  A 
natural  mourning ;  when  there  is  a  mourning  merely  because  nature  is  pinched, 
and  some  evil  hath  befallen  it,  and  you  go  no  further.  This  hath  not  a  blessedness 
in  it.  3.  A  worldly  mourning ;  worldly  sorrow  causes  death ;  to  mourn  for  the  loss 
of  worldly  things  as  the  great  and  the  chief  loss  of  all.  This  is  not  blessed,  it 
causeth  death ;  and — i.  An  envious  mourning ;  when  men  mourn  and  are  grieved 
for  the  good  of  others.    Surely  this  is  not  blessed,  but  cursed.    5.  And  there  is. 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oai».  ▼* 

further,  a  devilish  mourning ;  when  men  and  women  mourn  that  they  cannot  hava 
opportunity  to  satisfy  their  lusts.  6.  And  lastly,  there  is  a  helUsh,  desperate 
mourning ;  when  men  and  women  mourn  in  despair.  This  is  hellish,  and  not 
blessed.  These  mourners  are  not  blessed.  And  then  all  those  that  mourn  in  a 
gracious  way.  You  will  say.  When  doth  one  mourn  in  a  gracious  way  and  manner? 
Now,  the  ground  of  the  blessedness  ariseth,  first,  from  the  mourning  itself;  secondly, 
from  the  promise.  Surely  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  such  a  mourner.  1.  Because 
that  the  lower  our  hearts  are  in  our  subjection  to  God  in  this  mournful  condition,  the 
higher  are  our  respects  to  God  that  brings  us  into  this  condition.  2.  A  mourning 
condition,  when  it  is  ordered  by  grace,  it  is  a  means  of  much  good  in  the  soul ;  it 
is  that  that  takes  away  the  rankness  in  the  hearts  of  men.  As  weeds  grow  very 
rank  in  summer  time,  now  in  the  winter  the  frost  nips  the  weeds  and  keeps  them 
under ;  but  if  it  be  a  long  frost  it  kills  them.  3.  It  is  that  that  delivers  from  many 
temptations.  You  think  that  jollity  and  bravery  is  the  only  happy  life,  but  know 
there  are  a  great  many  more  temptations  in  that  life  than  in  a  mournful  condition. 

4.  They  are  blessed  that  are  in  a  mournful  condition,  because  God  hath  chosen  for 
them  that  mourning  condition  in  the  most  seasonable  time.  You  know  when  a 
man  is  sick,  then  bitter  things  are  more  seasonable  than  sweet.  Now  we  are  all 
sickly  poor  creatures,  and  it  is  a  great  mercy  of  God  in  this  time  of  our  lives  to 
choose  for  us  a  mournful  condition — bitter  things  rather  than  sweet  and  luscioni 
things.  6.  And  then  especially  here  in  this  text,  because  they  shall  be  comforted ; 
it  is  but  to  make  the  comforts  sweeter  unto  thee  when  they  do  come.  You  know 
that  when  a  man  would  build  a  structure,  a  stately  building,  the  stones  that  he 
intends  principally  to  build  withal  are  hacked  and  hewn,  that  so  they  may  be  comely 
and  fit  for  his  building  ;  but  as  for  other  stones,  they  are  not  regarded  as  those 
that  are  thus  polished  which  he  intends  to  lay.  So  it  is  an  argument  that  the 
Lord  hath  great  things  for  thee,  great  comforts  for  thee;  He  is  now  preparing 
thee  in  this  thy  mournful  condition  for  great  comforts.  1.  They  shall  be  com- 
forted. When  ?  Why,  they  shall  be  comforted  when  the  wicked  shall  be  sorrowful 
(Isa.  Ixv.  13).  2.  And  then,  you  shall  be  comforted ;  there  is  a  time  when  the 
Lord  will  communicate  unto  you  the  choicest  of  His  mercies.  Now  the  Lord  com- 
municates Himself,  but  in  a  very  small  and  little  way  in  comparison  to  what  He 
doth  intend.  And  this  comfort  that  the  mourners  shall  have,  shall  be,  first, 
a  pure  comfort.  We  have  something  that  is  sweet,  but  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  mixture  with  our  sweet.  And  then  they  are  spiritual  comforts. 
Their  comforts  shall  come  more  firstly  in  their  souls,  and  so  they  shall  have 
comfort  to  their  bodies  by  way  of  the  eradiation,  as  I  may  so  say,  of  the 
comfort  that  they  shall  have  to  their  souls.  3.  Divine  comforts  they  are  that 
they  shall  have — that  is,  all  comfort  is  from  God  one  way  or  other,  but  from 
God  more  immediately.  Here  we  have  our  comforts  at  second  or  third  or  fourth 
hand,  but  now  there  shall  be  comfort  that  shall  be  from  God  more  immediately^ 
And  such  comforts  as  are  from  the  very  nature  of  God  Himself — that  is,  such 
comfort  as  God  is  comforted  in,  such  joy  as  God  joys  in,  and  God  joys  with  them 
in  it.    4.  It  is  a  full  comfort,  •'  Ask  and  you  shall  have,  that  your  joy  may  be  full." 

5.  And  then  it  shall  be  a  strong  comfort  (Heb.  vi.  18).  6.  An  eternal  consolation ; 
BO  you  have  it  in  2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;  in  2  Tim.  ii.  11.  As  we  read  concerning  Egypt, 
as  there  were  more  venomous  creatures  there  than  in  other  countries,  so  there  was 
in  no  country  more  antidotes  to  cure  them  than  in  theirs.  So,  though  religion 
may  bring  sorrow  and  trouble,  yet  there  is  nothing  brings  more  cure  and  more  help. 
(J.  Burroughs.)  The  folly  of  men  rebuked  who  are  all  for  mirth  : — 1.  If  thy 
mourning  be  gracious,  thy  very  tears  and  sorrows  is  a  great  deal  better  than  the 
wine  of  the  men  of  the  world ;  thy  tears  are  more  sweet  and  pleasing  to  God  than 
the  mirth  of  wicked  men  can  be  to  them.  2.  Consider  this  for  thy  comfort,  it  may 
be,  if  thou  hadst  not  been  a-mourning  thou  wouldst  have  been  a-sinning,  thoa 
leouldst  have  been  a-doing  that  whereby  thou  wouldst  have  darkened  the  glory  of 
God.  3.  Consider  that  all  thy  sorrows  are  measured  out  by  God,  who  is  thy 
Father ;  thou  dost  not  lie  at  the  dispose  of  wicked  men  to  mourn  how  much  they 
will,  or  when  they  will,  but  thou  art  at  the  dispose  of  God,  who  is  thy  Father. 
4.  Consider  for  thy  comfort  that  Christ  was  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  in  thy  sorrowing 
thou  art  but  conformable  unto  Him ;  and  why  shouldst  thou  think  tiiat  to  be  a 
burden  wherein  thou  art  made  like  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  6.  Let  this  be  for  thy  comfort, 
to  consider  thou  hast  an  interest  in  Him  that  is  the  God  of  all  consolation ;  the 
darkness  of  thy  condition  cannot  hinder  thine  interest  in  God.  And  then  coii- 
«der  that  God  suffers  more  by  thy  sins  than  thou  canst  suffer  from  God's  hand  ie 


fflAT.  VI.]  ST.  LUKE.  671 

thy  afflictions.  The  darkening  of  Hia  glory  in  the  least  degree  is  a  greater  evil 
than  any  affliction  that  thou  canst  endure ;  and  this  should  support  thy  spirit,  to 
consider  that  God  suffers  more ;  and  therefore  thou  shouldst  not  be  unwilling  to 
Buffer  something,  seeing  God  suffers  more  than  thou  canst.  6.  If  thou  wouldst  ba 
comforted,  consider  this:  the  way  that  God  takes  to  comfort  His  saints,  though 
thou  hast  it  not  in  sense,  thou  mayest  have  it  in  faith ;  and  therefore  exercise  faith, 
and  fetch  it  in  that  way.  Set  faith  on  work  in  the  promise,  and  let  that  bring  out 
the  comfort  of  the  promise.  Sense  is  not  the  way  by  which  God  comforts  His 
people,  and  if  we  look  for  comfort  in  a  sensual  way  we  mistake  ourselves ;  there- 
fore let  us  labour  to  fetch  in  comfort  from  the  exercise  of  faith.  And  indeed  we 
should  more  prize  those  comforts  that  come  from  the  exercise  of  our  graces  than 
from  any  sensible  apprehensions.  7.  Consider,  though  it  be  long  before  comfort 
come,  yet  this  is  no  strange  thing  that  thou  art  kept  without  comfort  for  a  while. 
8.  Consider,  that  this  is  the  time  of  mourning,  and  we  know  things  are  seasonable 
and  best  in  their  time.  This  is  a  Christian's  seed-time.  In  the  world  we  must 
have  trouble,  and  through  many  tribulations  we  must  enter  into  heaven.  We 
know  the  husbandman ;  he  is  contented  to  endure  storms  and  hardships  in  seed- 
time,  with  this  consideration — the  harvest  is  a-coming.  So,  though  thou  now  sowest 
m  tears,  there  is  a  time  of  reaping  in  joy.  How  we  may  so  order  our  mourning  that 
it  may  comfort  us.  Now  for  this  I  would  entreat  you  to  take  notice  of  these  rules. 
1.  In  your  mourning  be  sure  that  you  keep  good  thoughts  of  God.  Whatsoever 
your  troubles  be,  let  them  not  raise  tumults  and  hard  thoughts  of  God.  2.  Be 
sure  to  take  notice  of  all  the  mercy  thou  hast  from  God  in  the  afflictions  thou  art 
in.  Let  not  any  affliction  drown  the  mercy  thou  hast.  It  is  very  sad  many  times 
to  see  how  one  or  two  afflictions  hinders  the  sight  of  many  mercies  that  the  saints 
do  enjoy.  A  little  thing  will  hinder  the  sight  of  the  eye ;  a  penny  laid  upon  the 
eye  will  keep  it  from  beholding  the  sun  or  the  element  above ;  so  a  little  affliction, 
it  darkens  and  hinders  the  soul  from  seeing  a  multitude  of  mercies ;  every  httla 
trouble  darkens  God's  mercies.  3.  Take  heed  of  a  sullen,  dogged  disposition, 
either  towards  God  or  man  in  thy  sorrows.  It  is  very  usual  for  men  in  a  troubled 
condition,  when  they  are  in  sorrow,  to  add  frowardness  to  mourning;  but  wa 
■hould  labour  to  take  heed  of  this  as  a  great  evil.  Labour  for  a  quiet  and  meek 
spirit.  4.  Take  heed  of  determining  against  a  comfortable  condition  in  sorrow, 
that  it  will  never  come.  Say  not  that  comfort  will  never  come,  because  thou  hast 
it  not  for  the  present.  (Ibid.)  How  mourners  should  order  their  mourning : — 
Now,  then,  such  as  mourn  thus  for  sin  are  blessed  ;  for — 1,  By  this  they 
do  much  honour  God,  The  sovereignty  of  God  is  honoured,  and  the  holi- 
ness of  God  is  honoured,  and  the  justice  of  God  is  honoured.  2.  It  is  a 
blessed  thing  to  mourn  for  sin,  because  it  is  an  evangelical  grace.  3.  Surely  they 
are  in  a  blessed  condition,  for  it  appears  that  they  come  now  to  have  a  right  judg- 
ment. Their  judgment  is  enlightened  to  understand  what  is  truly  good  and  truly 
evil,  and  to  have  a  right  temper  of  spirit.  4.  This  mourning  for  sin,  it  helps 
against  all  other  mourning,  it  helps  against  other  sorrows.  5.  It  is  a  means  to 
prevent  eternal  sorrows.  Certainly  God  will  have  every  soul  to  know  what  siu 
means  at  one  time  or  other.  6.  It  is  that  that  fits  for  the  grace  of  God.  There  is 
none  that  taste  the  sweetness  of  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  more  than  those  that 
are  mourners  for  sin.  Now  one  drop  of  mercy,  how  sweet  is  it ;  now  it  is  worth 
more  than  ten  thousand  thousand  worlds  !  7.  There  is  one  more,  and  that  is,  they 
are  blessed  ;  why  ?  because  there  are  many  promises  that  are  made  to  those  that 
mourn.  That  is  certain — either  a  man's  sin  will  make  an  end  of  his  mourning,  or 
a  man's  mourning  will  make  an  end  of  his  sin,  one  of  the  two.  If  so  be  a  man 
goes  on  in  sin,  he  will  leave  off  mourning,  but  if  he  doth  not  leave  off  mourning, 
he  will  leave  off  sinning  ;  for  certainly  mourning  for  sin  hath  a  special  efficacy  iu 
it,  it  helps  against  the  sin  that  thou  dost  mourn  for.  This  bitter  aloes  that  now 
thou  hast  is  a  special  means  for  the  helping  against  those  crawling  worms  that 
are  in  thy  soul.  Hence,  in  the  first  place,  the  use  might  be  very  large,  what  shall 
become  of  those  that  rejoice  in  sin  ?  And  then  surely  mourning  for  sin  is  not 
melancholy ;  for  one  to  mourn  and  be  troubled  for  their  sin  is  not  to  grow  heavy 
and  melancholy.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  lays  that  weight  of  sin 
now  upon  the  soul,  beoause  the  Lord  intends  that  this  soul  shall  be  blessed  to  all 
eternity.  And  do  not  think  it  a  foolish  thing  for  people  to  be  troubled  for  their 
■in.    (Ibid.) 

7ers.  32,  23.   Blessed  are  ye,  when  men  aliaH  liat«  yon,  and  when  they  ihall 


67«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  n. 

separate  you  from  their  company,  and  shall  reproach  yon,  and  cast  out  your  nam* 
as  evlL — The  necessity  of  persecution : — Persecution  is  no  accident  in  Christian  life. 
It  is  simply  inevitable  from  the  collision  with  evil  of  Christian  righteousness  when 
it  becomes  positive,  especially  when  it  becomes  aggressive  in  the  cause  of  peace- 
making. It  is  the  activity  of  Christian  life  which  lays  its  own  faggots,  prepares  for 
itself  its  own  martyrdom.  It  is  when  the  disciple  follows  in  the  wake  of  the  first 
great  Peacemaker,  and  from  the  side  of  God  approaches  the  world's  evil  with  im- 
plied rebukes  and  an  open  summons  to  it  to  repent,  submit,  and  be  at  peace,  that 
it  is  most  certain  to  encounter  the  world's  missiles.  A  very  holy  or  unworldly  life 
may  be  itself  so  telling  a  rebuke,  even  though  a  silent  one,  as  to  draw  on  some  meek, 
pure  souls  dislike,  and  calumny,  and  malice.  But  it  is  the  active,  witness-bearing, 
and  missionary  type  of  Christian  character  which  provokes  the  chief  resistance. 
The  Christianity  of  the  wholly  unpersecuted  must  be  a  Christianity  defectively 
aggressive,  which  has  not  advanced  sufficiently  to  the  last  stage,  the  stage  of  peace- 
making. Nor  is  this  all.  Persecution  is  not  simply  inevitable  as  soon  as  the 
development  of  active  Christian  life  leads  it  into  collision  with  evil ;  it  is  an  indis- 
pensable factor  in  the  very  development  and  perfecting  of  Christian  life.  Persecu- 
tion is  not  indeed  a  grace ;  but  persecution  is  the  creator  of  a  grace  (James  i.  3,  4). 
(J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  Bitterness  of  social  and  domestic  persecution ; — I  cannot  but 
think  that  this  has  been,  on  the  whole,  not  less  trying  than  outward  and  violent 
persecutions.  For  persons  assailed  by  it  have  to  bear  their  troubles  mostly  in  secret. 
They  have  little  sympathy  from  others  ;  nor  any  of  the  rising  of  the  spirit  of  passive 
(passing  into  active)  heroism  which,  when  men's  eyes  are  on  it,  is  naturally  roused 
into  energetic  resistance.  For,  indeed,  there  are  several  things  which  tend  to  hold 
a  man  up  in  his  visible  endurance  of  visible  persecution.  He  is  as  a  champion  of 
a  cause ;  his  personal  bravery  and  earnestness,  as  well  as  his  conscience,  are  on 
trial.  He  knows  that  even  among  those  who  hound  on  the  cry  of  persecution 
against  him,  there  are  those  who  admire  his  firmness  in  bearing  it.  He  believes 
that  though  overpowered  himself,  and  put  to  death  perhaps,  yet  suffering  and  death 
bravely  borne  leave  a  seed  behind  them  which  germinates  and  grows  in  spite  of 
persecution,  and  is  wont  to  outlive  it.  All  these  things  and  such  as  these  mingle 
themselves  up  with  the  convictions  of  conscience,  and  strengthen  it,  when  the  per* 
secution  for  righteousness'  sake  takes  place  in  the  sight  of  men.  But  it  is  other* 
wise  with  all  the  secret  and,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  unpicturesque  suffering  of  social  or 
domestic  life — the  chill,  and  the  estrangement,  and  the  unkindness,  and  the  evil 
report,  and  the  misrepresentation,  the  thwarting  and  jealousy,  all  the  details  of 
inward  and  unseen  misery  which  goes  to  make  up  the  real  persecution  which  has 
visited,  and  no  doubt  visits  still,  thousands  of  people  whose  hearts'  desire  it  is  to 
serve  God  faithfully,  and  who  are  content  to  bear  with  evil  for  Christ's  sake.  And 
80  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  "  when  that  last  account  'twixt  heaven  and  earth  shall 
be  made  up,"  it  will  be  found  that  the  persecution  of  private  and  social  Ufe  has 
been  in  total  amount  greater,  and  maybe  its  actual  bitterness  not  less,  and  so  its 
ultimate  title  of  blessedness  in  Christ  as  great,  as  that  of  those  who  have  been  "  per- 
secuted unto  blood"  for  Christ's  sake.  {Bishop  Moberly.)  Why  persecution  is  to 
he  accounted  a  blessing  : — 1.  It  tests  and  proves  the  worth  of  our  religion.  It  tella 
us  whether  our  Christianity  is  positive  and  aggressive,  or  whether  it  is  only  negative. 
2.  It  forms  character,  it  purifies  the  life,  it  develops  graces — the  great  end  of  re- 
ligion. 3.  A  necessary  factor  in  the  spiritual  life.  No  cross,  no  crown.  {C.  J. 
Bidgeway,  M.A.)  Principles  for  suffering : — 1.  Wherefore  the  first  principle  to 
enable  Christians  to  suffer  for  righteousness  is,  that  we  should  look  on  ourselves  as 
sent  into  the  world  for  this  end,  especially  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  2.  The 
seeond  suffering  principle  is  this — It  is  better  to  lose  for  God  than  to  enjoy  for  our- 
selves. 3.  Whosoever  suffers  anything  for  God,  in  the  midst  of  all  their  sufferings 
they  are  in  a  better  case  than  their  persecutors.  4.  That  it  is  a  great  deal  better  to 
suffer  for  Chiist  than  to  suffer  for  sin.  5.  That  God  may  make  me  suffer  in  spite 
of  my  heart.  If  I  find  a  reluctancy  in  me  to  come  off  to  suffer  for  Christ,  I  may  be 
forced  in  spite  of  my  heart  to  do  it ;  and  what  comfort  shall  I  then  have  in  it  ? 
How  much  better  is  it  to  suffer  freely  and  willingly  for  Jesus  Christ  than  to  be  forced 
to  suffer?  and  then  there  will  be  no  exercise  of  grace  in  it,  but  I  shall  be  merely 
passive.  Christ  can  lay  afflictions  upon  you,  and  diseases  upon  you.  6.  No 
creature  hath  any  good  in  it  any  further  than  it  is  enjoyed  in  God,  and  improved  for 
God.  7.  The  seventh  suffering  principle  is  this :  There  is  no  sufferings  of  any  of 
ihe  saints  that  they  are  called  unto  at  any  time,  but  they  are  ordered  by  God,  for 
the  time  of  the  snffenng,  for  the  kind  of  the  suffering,  the  continuance  of  the  suffer- 


OHAF.  n  J  ST.  LUKE,  67? 

ing,  'jhe  inBtruments  of  the  suffering.  8.  That  whenever  we  suffer  for  Christ,  Christ 
Buffers  with  us ;  we  are  partakers  of  His  sufferings,  and  He  is  partaker  of  our  suffer- 
ings (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  9.  There  is  more  evil  in  sufferings  before  they  come,  in  imagi- 
nation,  than  when  they  are  come.  10.  That  there  is  more  evil  in  the  least  sin  than 
in  the  greatest  afflictions.  It  is  an  ill  choice  to  choose  the  least  sin  rather  than  the 
greatest  affliction.  Now  for  the  blessedness  that  there  is  in  suffering,  many  things 
might  be  said,  but  I  shall  but  present  before  you  some  shoii;  view  of  what  blessed- 
ness  there  is  in  suffering  persecution.  1.  If  God  gives  thee  a  heart  to  suffer  for 
Him,  thou  hast  in  this  a  full  evidence  of  the  truth  of  thy  graces,  yea,  and  of  the 
strength  and  the  eminency  of  thy  graces.  2.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  honour  in 
suffering.  It  is  a  speech  of  Ignatius,  "  I  had  rather  be  a  martyr  than  a  monarch  "  ; 
and  so  you  know  Moses  chose  '•  rather  to  suffer  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to 
enjoy  all  the  pleasures  and  riches  of  Egypt."  3.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  suffer  for 
righteousness'  sake,  for  it  is  the  highest  and  greatest  improvement  of  men's  abilities, 
graces,  comforts,  whatsoever  they  enjoy.  It  is  the  highest  improvement  that  can 
be  for  them  to  suffer.  Never  are  men's  graces  so  improved  as  in  times  of  suffering. 
As  the  spices  have  a  more  fragrant  smell  when  they  are  beaten  to  powder  that  when 
thev  are  whole :  and  so  the  saints'  graces  *re  more  fragrant  in  the  nostrils  of  God, 
and  do  grow  up  more  in  the  time  of  suffering  than  ever.  4.  It  is  blessed,  for  those 
that  suffer  are  under  many  blessed  promises.  Why,  "  If  you  suffer  with  Him,  you 
shall  be  glorified  with  Him."  Eead  2  Tim.  ii.  12,  and  in  Rom.  viii.,  there  you  have 
divers  excellent  expressions  wherein  there  are  most  excellent  promises  to  such  as 
suffer  in  the  cause  of  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  29).  {J.  Burroughs.)  Some  arguments 
far  the  helping  of  saints  to  suffer : — First,  to  show  the  history  how  aU  the  prophets, 
disciples,  and  the  saints  that  have  gone  before  have  suffered  great  and  hard  things. 
Secondly,  wherein  the  argument  lies  of  rejoicing  under  persecution.  Thirdly,  what 
use  we  are  to  make  of  the  persecution  of  the  prophets.  I  could  handle  but  the  first. 
To  proceed  to  the  second :  wherein  lies  the  power  of  this  argument  ?  There  is  a 
fivefold  strength  in  this  argument,  or  rather  five  arguments  in  it.  1.  The  same 
spirit  of  wickedness  that  opposed  them  doth  still  prevail,  and  it  is  the  same  spirit 
of  truth  that  is  opposed.  2.  Hence  you  may  see  that  those  that  are  dear  and  pre- 
cious to  God,  that  they  may  suffer  hard  thiugs.  3.  If  so  be  God  should  deal  with 
you  otherwise  than  He  did  formerly  with  others,  then  it  might  discourage  you;  but 
they  are  no  other  things  than  His  servants  heretofore  have  suffered.  4.  It  is  the 
way  that  God  hath  brought  all  His  servants  into  heaven  by.  Why  should  you  think 
that  God  will  bring  you  in  a  better  way  than  He  did  others  ?  5.  That  though  the 
prophets  have  suffered  such  things,  yet  the  trnth  of  God  prevails.  (Tbid.)  Suffer- 
ing for  the  trutNs  sake : — I.  We  cannot  be  servants  of  Jesus  without  suffebing. 
The  contrast  between  the  natural  heart  and  the  ideal  Christian  is  not  less  marked 
to-day  than  it  was  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  Nothing  kindles  so  much  hatred  as 
evangelical  love.  II.  According  to  the  Saviour's  declaration,  suffering  is  a  source 
OF  HAPPINESS.  1.  It  is  a  happiuess  to  suffer  for  a  noble  cause.  2.  The  fact  that 
suffering  for  truth  brings  with  it  its  own  reward  is  also  a  reason  for  joy,  as  it  ensures 
*iie  triumph  of  our  cause.  3.  "Your  reward  is  great  in  heaven,"  said  the  Master, 
thus  adding  the  consolation  of  a  glorious  hope  to  those  which  flow  from  duty  per- 
formed. 4.  This  triumph  of  truth  in  heaven  is  not  enough.  It  must  have  its 
glorious  revenge  on  the  very  theatre  of  its  humiliations  and  conflicts.  The  world 
must  see  how  mistaken  it  was  in  rejecting  it,  and  one  day  it  will  be  forced  to  exclaim, 
*'  0  Galilean,  Thou  hast  overcome."  {E.  de  Fressense,  D.D.)  The  reward  of  the  pioua 
in  heaven : — I.  The  felicity  which  awaits  those  who  persevere,  through  good 

REPORT  AND  EVTL  REPORT,  IN  A  STEDFAST  ADHERENCE  TO  ChRIST,  IS  FREQUENTLY  EX- 
PRESSED IN  THE  Scriptures  by  the  name  of  reward.  1.  It  is  inseparably  joined  to 
obedience,  and  promised  as  a  motive  to  encourage  and  sustain  it.  2.  It  will  be 
bestowed  as  a  mark  of  approbation,  and  acceptance  of  the  obedience  to  which  it  is 
annexed.  3.  It  will  be  proportionate  to  the  degree  of  religious  improvement,  to 
the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  II.  The  superiority  of  heavenly  to  earthly 
REWARDS.  1.  The  rewards  of  heaven  are  certain.  2.  They  are  satisfying.  3.  They 
are  eternal.  {R.  Hall,  A.M.)  Joy  in  persecution : — Somebody  pushed  good  Mr. 
Kilpin  into  the  gutter  and  slapped  him  on  the  face  at  the  same  time,  and  said, 
»*  Take  that,  John  Bunyan  "  ;  whereupon  the  good  man  took  off  his  hat  and  said, 
"  I  would  take  fifty  times  as  much  as  that  to  have  the  honour  to  be  called  John 
Bunyan."  Learn  to  look  upon  insults  for  Christ  in  the  same  light,  and  when  they 
eall  yon  by  an  ill  name  do  you  reply,  "  I  could  bear  a  thousand  times  as  much  aa 
that  for  the  pleasure  of  being  associated  with  Christ  in  the  world's  derision."  (C.  H, 

37 


67§  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [0HA».  n 

Spurgeon.)        Doing  right: — When  the  storm  [concerning  the  slave  trade]  was  at 
its  highest,  one  of  Mr.  Buxton's  friends  asked  him,  "  What  shall  I  say  when  I  hear 
people  abusing  you  ?  "     "  Say  1  "  he  replied,  snapping  his  fingers,  "  say  that.    You 
good  folk  thir^  too  much  of  your  good  name.     Do  right,  and  right  will  be  done." 
(Life  of  Fowell  Buxton.)        The  failure  of  persecution : — And  so  when  bad  men  are 
not  hardened  in  wickedness  they  can  be  won  over  by  the  good,  but  when  they  are 
they  hate  and  persecute  the  good,  whose  mere  silent  lives  rebuke  them.   It  was  thus 
that  Sodom  hated  Lot;  it  was  thus  that  the  Ephesians  expelled  Hermodorus  becaust 
he  was  virtuous  ;  it  was  thus  that  the  Athenians  ostracised  Aristides  because  he  was 
just.     "  The  honourable  and  relipiious  gentleman,"  said  a  slave-holding  member  of 
Parliament,  speaking  of  William  Wilberforce,  in  the  House  of  Commons.     He  was 
properly  scathed  in  reply  with  the  lightnings  of  the  great  man's  eloquence,  but  the 
epithet  spoke  volumes  with  the  silent,  unconscious,  inevitable  rebuke  of  vice  and 
protest  for  holiness  by  every  true  and  righteous  man.     And  mark,  that  when  the 
bad,  hating  the  good,  sneer  them  out  of  court,  repress  them  by  violence,  madden  the 
blind  multitude  by  lies  against  them,  poison  them  as  Socrates  was  poisoned,  banish 
them  as  Epictetus  was  banished,  burn  them  as  Savonarola  was  burnt,  execrate  them 
as  Whitfield  was  execrated,  do  not  think  that  then  the  good  have  failed.    Even  in 
their  ashes  live  their  wonted  fires,  their  voices  even  from  the  grave  sound  in  the 
thunder's  mouth,  their  dead  hands  pull  down  the  stronghold  of  their  enemies,  and 
tyrants  tremble  at  their  ghosts.    What  was  the  nature  of  Jesus  ?    Between  two 
murderers  He  hung  in  agony  upon  the  cross,  amid  the  bowlings  alike  of  secular  and 
religious  hatred.   Before  three  centuries  were  over  that  gibbet  of  torture  and  infamy 
eat  upon  the  sceptres  and  shone  upon  the  crowns  of  kings.      [Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
Sustained  in  persecution  : — The  annals  of  the  Church  furnish  teixible  illustrations 
of  persecution,  and  how  Christians  have  been  sustained  in  trial.     A  youth  who  had 
manifested  extraordinary  patience  under  the  greatest  torture,  said  afterwards,  that 
at  the  time  of  his  agony  an  angel  seemed  to  stand  beside  him,  and  pointing  him  to 
heaven,  enabled  him  to  rise  in  spirit  superior  to  his  pain.     Pastor  Homel,  of  the 
French  Protestant  Church,  had  his  bones  all  so  broken  on  the  wheel  that  he  sur- 
vived but  forty  hours.     But  then,  in  his  dying  agony,  he  said,  "  Though  my  bones 
are  broken  to  shivers,  my  soul  is  filled  with  inexpressible  joy."     {H.  Burton.)       On 
persecution : — I  have  a  large  field  to  go  over,  an  Aceldama,  "a  field  of  blood,"  m 
Golgotha,  "  a  place  of  dead  men's  skulls,"  where  you  shall  see  •*  some  stoned,  some 
sawn  asunder,  some  slain  with  the  sword,  others  having  trial  of  cruel  mockings  and 
scourgings,  of  bonds  and  imprisonment"  (Heb.  xi.  36,  37);  but  withal  (what  the 
eye  of  fiesh  cannot  discover)  blessedness  waiting  upon  them,  and  shadowing  them 
in  the  midst  of  horror.     Here  is  a  fair  inscription  upon  a  bitter  roll,  a  pleasing  pre- 
face to  a  tragical  theme,  a  promise  of  pleasure  in  misery,  of  honour  in  dishonour, 
of  life  in  death,  of  heaven  in  hell.    Here  we  may  see  persecution  making  us  strong 
by  making  us  weak,  making  us  rich  by  making  us  poor,  making  as  happy  by  making 
Qs  miserable,  and  driving  us  through  this  field  of  blood  into  Paradise.     The  parts 
of  the  text  are  manifestly  but  two  :  a  blessing  pronounced — "  Blessed  are  they  that 
suffer  persecution,"  and  a  reason  given — "  For  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
But  we  may,  by  a  plain  and  natural  deduction,  make  them  three — I.  That  they  who 
begin  in  the  other  virtues  and  beatitudes  must  end  in  this ;  or,  in  the  apostle's 
words,  *•  They  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution"  (2  Tim. 
iii.  12).     II.  That  persecution  bringeth  no  blessing  but  to  those  "  who  suffer  for 
righteousness'  sake."    III.  That  to  those  it  doth :  which  comprehendeth  the  in- 
scription, "  Blessedness  " ;  and  the  reason  of  the  inscription,  "  For  theirs  is  the 
kingdom  of  heaven."    I.  We  find  here  persecution  and  blessedness  joined  together, 
wrought  by  the  same  hand,  a  hand  of  mercy,  and  like  sweet  and  bitter  water  flow- 
ing from  the  same  fountain,  a  fountain  of  love.    For  it  is  God's  love  and  mercy  to 
give  us  a  kingdom ;  and  it  is  His  love  and  mercy  to  bring  us  to  it  by  sufferings,  to 
bring  as,  as  the  apostle  speaketh,  "  through  much  tribulation,"  through  the  noise 
and  tumults  of  this  world,  to  a  place  of  rest  (Acts  xiv.  22).     And  the  reason  is  as 
plain,  even  written  with  the  sunbeams.     1.  For,  in  this,  God  dealeth  with  them  as 
B  loving  father ;  He  doeth  it  "  for  the  trial,  or  rather  the  demonstration,  of  their 
faith  " ;  to  make  it  appear  that  they  do  not  "  make  a  profession  of  their  love,  when 
they  hate  Him  in  their  heart " ;  depend  apon  Him  for  their  salvation  and  happi- 
ness, and,  when  persecution  cometh,  leave  Him  and  exchange  Him  for  the  world ; 
rather  yield,  and  fall  under  the  burden,  than  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  and  retain  Him 
•s  their  God.    There  must  some  occasion  and  opportunity  be  offered,  some  danger, 
K>ins  0X088,  that  may  fright  me ;  and  when  I  withstand  all,  and  oI«ave  fast  onto 


eBAT.   TI. J 


ST.  LUKE.  57f 


Christ,  then  it  will  appear  that  I  am  His  friend  and  servant.  *'  A  mariner  is  best 
seen  in  a  tempest,  and  a  Christian  is  best  known  when  persecution  rageth."  2. 
Therefore,  in  the  second  place,  this  is  the  reason  why  God  suffereth  this  mixture  of 
good  and  evil,  why  He  suiiereth  tyrants  and  blood-thirsty  men  to  go  on  and  prospar 
in  their  ways.  3.  Therefore,  in  the  third  place,  if  we  consider  the  Church,  which 
is  at  her  best  nothing  else  but  a  collection  and  a  body  of  righteous  men,  we  shall 
find  that,  whilst  she  is  on  the  earth,  she  is  militant ;  and  no  other  title  doth  so  fully 
express  her.  4.  For,  in  the  last  place,  it  cometh  not  by  chance  that  the  righteous 
are  persecuted.  What  hath  chance  to  do  in  the  school  of  Providence  ?  No  ;  perse- 
cution is  brought  towards  the  righteous  by  the  providence  and  wisdom  of  a  loving 
Father.  I  have  now  brought  you  into  this  Aceldama,  this  "  field  of  blood,"  where 
you  may  behold  the  ungodly  for  their  own  lust  "  persecuting  the  poor  "  (Psa.  x.  2), 
where  you  may  behold  hypocrites  and  deceitful  men  "  bending  their  bow,  and 
shooting  at  the  righteous  in  secret "  (Psa.  Ixiv.  4),  and  mighty  men  drawing  their 
swords  and  drenching  them  in  their  blood.  A  sad  sight,  to  see  righteousness  under 
the  whip  and  hsurrow  1  But  withal  yon  may  discover  not  only  an  angel  going  before 
them,  as  before  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  but  Christ  Himself  leading 
them  through  these  terrors  and  amazements  to  a  place  of  refreshing,  to  "  a  city  not 
made  with  hands,"  to  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Oportct,  "  They  must  suffer  " ; 
but  "there  remaineth  a  sabbath  for  the  children  of  God"  (Heb.  iv.  9).  Persecu- 
tion is  the  lot,  the  inheritance  of  the  righteous  :  that  was  our  first  part.  11.  and 
III.  We  will  now  present  you  with  the  second  :  That  every  man  that  suffereth  hath 
not  title  to  this  blessedness  in  the  text,  but  only  those  "  who  are  persecuted  for 
righteousness'  sake,"  which  comprehendeth  all  those  duties  which  the  gospel  re- 
quireth  at  their  hands  who  have  given  up  their  names  unto  Christ.  For  it  is  pos- 
sible that  a  man  may  sufifer  for  one  virtue,  and  neglect  the  rest ;  may  suffer  to  pre- 
serve his  chastity,  and  yet  be  covetous.  He  can  suffer  for  the  law,  and  yet  break 
it.  1.  And,  first,  the  cause ;  it  must  be  the  love  of  righteousness.  For  we  see,  as 
I  told  you,  men  will  suffer  for  their  lusts,  suffer  for  their  profit,  suffer  for  fear,  suffer 
for  disdain.  Be  sure  your  cause  be  good,  or  else  to  venture  goods  or  Ufe  upon  it  ia 
the  worst  kind  of  prodigality  in  the  world.  2.  In  the  next  place,  as  a  good  cause, 
80  a  good  life,  doth  fit  and  qualify  us  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake.  Augustine — 
"  He  dieth  not  the  death  of  a  martyr  who  livf^th  not  the  life  of  a  Christian."  An 
unclean  beast  is  not  fit  to  make  a  sacrifice.  The  persecuted  and  persecutor  imply 
and  suppose  one  another,  and  are  never  asunder.  1.  But  let  them  that  suffer  have 
the  first  place.  (1)  And,  first,  "knowing  these  terrors,"  as  the  apostle  speaketh 
(2  Cor.  V.  11),  seeing  persecution  is,  as  it  were,  entailed  upon  the  righteous  person, 
seeing  there  is  a  kind  of  providence  and  necessity  it  should  be  so,  let  us  learn,  first, 
as  St.  Peter  speaketh,  "  not  to  think  it  strange  concerning  this  fiery  trial"  (1  Pet. 
iv.  12) ;  not  to  dote  too  much  upon  this  outward  gilded  peace  and  perpetuity 
in  public  profession  ;  or,  when  we  see  these  things,  think  some  strange  thing  is 
come  unto  us.  For  what  strange  thing  is  it  that  wicked  men  should  persecute  the 
righteous  ?  that  a  serpent  should  bite,  or  a  lion  roar  ?  that  the  world  should  be  the 
world,  and  the  Church  the  Church  ?  (2)  And,  that  we  may  not  think  it  strange,  let 
us  not  frame  and  fashion  to  ourselves  a  Church  by  the  world.  (3)  And,  therefore, 
in  the  third  place,  let  us  cast  down  these  imaginations,  these  bubbles  of  wind  blown 
and  raised  up  by  the  flesh,  the  worse  part,  which  doth  soonest  bring  on  a  persecu- 
tion, and  soonest  fear  one ;  and  let  us,  in  the  place  of  these,  build  up  a  royal  fort, 
"  build  up  ourselves  in  our  most  holy  faith  "  (Jude  20),  and  so  fit  and  prepare  our- 
selves against  this  fiery  trial.  2.  And  now,  as  we  have  brought  the  righteous  person 
into  this  field  of  blood,  and  prepared  and  strengthened  him  against  the  horror  of  it ; 
so  must  we  bring  the  persecutor  also,  that  he  may  behold  what  desolation  he  hath 
made.  *'  Why  boasteth  thou  thyself  in  thy  mischief,  0  mighty  man  ?  "  (Psa.  lii.  1), 
that  "  thou  hast  sped,  that  thou  hast  divided  the  prey"  ?  (Judg.  v.  30).  (4.  Farindon, 
D.D.)        Protestants  separated  for  Christ's  Tiame's  sake : — I.  From  whom  Christ's 

DISCIPLEB    SUFFER.      II.    WhAT    IT     IS    WHICH     THE    DISCIPLES   OF    ChRIST    SOFTER.       1. 

Hatred.  2.  Separation.  3.  Eeproaoh.  4.  The  casting  out  of  their  names.  III. 
The  cause  of  the  suffering  of  Christ's  disciples.  And  here  we  meet — 1.  The 
pretended  cause.  "  They  shall  cast  out  your  name  as  evil "  ;  they  shall  fasten,  as 
much  as  in  them  lies,  all  manner  of  calumnies  upon  you  ;  and  report  of  you,  not 
as  indeed  you  are,  but  as  they  who  hate  you  would  have  you  thought  to  be.  But 
as  to  others,  the  supposed  evil  in  the  matter  that  Christ's  followers  are  charged 
with,  is  but  a  pretended  oaase  of  their  being  so  evilly  dealt  «rithal.  2.  The  real 
Mose  for  which  they  suffer.    This  is  that  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  all — it  ia 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi».  wt. 

for  Christ's  sake,  for  their  respect  unto  Him  and  His  institutions,  His  truthi 
•nd  ordinances,  that  His  disciples  suffer.  And  this  we  may  deduce  from  the 
following  scheme.  I.  It  is  for  the  truths  of  Christ,  the  doctrine  owned,  preached, 
and  recommended  by  Him,  that  they  thus  deal  with  us.  II.  It  is  for  the  purity 
of  His  worship,  because  we  would  serve  God  according  to  His  own  will,  and 
not  according  to  their  will-worship,  that  they  thus  abhor  us.  III.  It  is  for  His 
authority's  sake,  because  we  dare  not  take  the  government  from  off  His  shoulders 
(Isa.  ix.  6),  nor  pay  that  respect  to  any  frail  man  which  is  only  due  unto  Him  who 
is  "  God  blessed  for  evermore  "  (Bom.  ix.  5) — or,  if  you  will,  it  is  because  we  dare 
not  worship  the  beast — that  they  serve  us  thus.  To  sum  up  all  in  one — it  is  for 
the  vindication  of  Christ  in  all  His  offices  that  we  endure  these  indignities  at  their 
hands.  Three  consolatory  inferences.  1.  In  that  it  is  but  from  men — "  When  men 
shall  hate  you  "  (Matt.  x.  28).  2.  It  is  "  for  the  Son  of  Man's  sake  "  that  we  thu8 
■uffer.  And  if  He  had  required  greater  matters  of  us,  would  we  not  have  done  them  ? 
3.  Christ  hath  pronounced  such  sufferers  blessed — "  Blessed  are  ye."  (1)  It  is 
Christ's  judgment  on  our  case  and  condition.  And  He,  we  may  truly  say  then,  sees 
not  as  man  sees.  (2)  It  is  not  a  bare  opinion  (though  His  could  not  be  erroneous) 
that  we  are  blessed,  but  it  is  Christ's  effective  sentence.  His  dicere  is  facere  :  Christ 
doth  "make  "  them  blessed  whom  He  " pronounces "  to  be  so  ;  and  He  can  make  a 
blessed  persecution.  If  He  bless,;who  can  curse  ?  (Numb,  xziii.  8).  "  Lord,  let  theni 
curse,  but  bless  Thou  "  (Psa.  cix.  28).     (P.  Vinke,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  But  woe  unto  you  that  axe  rich  I  for  ye  have  received  your  consolation. 

— The  danger  of  riches: — Unless  we  were  accustomed  to  read  the  New  Testament 
from  our  childhood,  I  think  we  should  be  very  much  struck  with  the  warnings  it 
contains,  not  only  against  the  love  of  riches,  but  the  very  possession  of  them.  That 
our  Lord  meant  to  speak  of  riches  as  being  in  some  sense  a  calamity  to  the  Chris- 
tian is  plain  from  His  praises  and  recommendations  of  poverty.  1.  The  most 
obvious  danger  which  worldly  possessions  present  to  our  spiritual  welfare  is  that 
they  become  practically  a  substitute  in  our  hearts  for  tbat  one  object  to  which  our 
supreme  devotion  is  due.  They  are  present;  God  is  unseen.  They  are  means  at 
hand  of  effecting  what  we  want ;  whether  God  will  hear  our  petitions  for  these 
wants  is  uncertain.  Thus  they  minister  to  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  our  nature. 
2.  This,  then,  was  some  part  of  our  Saviour's  meaning,  when  He  connects  together 
the  having  with  the  trusting  in  riches.  3.  The  danger  of  possessing  riches  is  the 
carnal  security  to  which  they  lead  ;  that  of  desiring  or  pursuing  them  is  that  an  object 
of  this  world  is  thus  set  before  us  as  the  end  and  aim  of  life.  It  is  a  part  of  Chris- 
tian caution  to  see  to  it  that  our  engagements  do  not  become  pursuits.  Engage- 
ments are  oar  portion,  but  pursuits  are  for  the  most  part  of  our  own  choosing.  4. 
Money  is  a  sort  of  creation,  and  gives  the  acquirer,  even  more  than  the  possessor, 
an  imagination  of  his  own  power ;  and  tends  to  make  him  idolize  self.  And  if  such 
be  the  result  of  gain  on  an  individual,  doubtless  it  will  be  the  same  on  a  nation ; 
and  if  the  peril  be  so  great  in  the  one  case,  why  should  it  be  less  in  the  other  f 
{J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  The  perils  of  rich  men : — 1.  One  of  the  principal  perils 
of  rich  men  arises  from  their  very  exemption  from  many  temptations  to  gross  sin. 
Hence  they  are  apt  to  think  too  well  of  themselves.  2.  The  rich  man  finds  it  veiy 
easy  to  do  many  kindly  acts.  It  is  very  natural,  therefore,  that  he  should  regard  his 
own  character  and  life  complacently,  and  that  he  should  think  severely  of  the  selfish- 
ness of  those  less  fortunate  than  lumself .  3.  The  rich  man's  Bible,  with  its  morocco 
binding  and  gilt  edges,  has  very  much  less  in  it  than  the  poor  man's  Bible,  bound 
in  sheep.  Pages  which  are  read  and  re-read,  which  are  marked,  and  scored, 
and  thumbed  in  the  one,  are  virtually  mere  blank  paper  in  the  other.  4.  As  the 
rich  man  loses  many  of  the  revelations  of  God's  sympathy,  compassion,  and  care, 
which  inspire  the  poor  with  intense  and  passionate  gratitude,  so  he  loses  some  of 
the  most  urgent  motives  to  communion  with  God,  which  often  make  the  poor  man 
devout.  {R.  W,  Dale,  LL.D.)  Danger  of  rich  men : — A  holy  woman  was  wont 
to  say  of  the  rich :  "  They  are  hemmed  round  with  no  common  misery ;  they  go 
down  to  hell  without  thinking  of  it,  because  their  staircase  thither  is  of  gold  and 
porphyry."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Riches;  or,  a  knife  for  the  canker: — To  the  love 
of  money  we  trace  the  melancholy  apostasy  of  Damas,  the  awful  perfidity  of  Judas, 
the  fatal  lie  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira — all,  and  some  of  them  distinguished,  profes- 
sors of  religion.  Be  on  your  guard.  Watch  and  pray.  Their  history  is  written  for 
our  instruction.  Nor  need  any  of  His  people  who  allow  the  love  of  money  to 
entwine  itself  around  their  hearts,  expect  that  in  saving  them  God  will  do  otherwise 


«AP.  VI.]  n,  LUKB.  581 

than  the  woodman,  who,  seeking  to  save  a  tree,  applies  his  knife  to  the  canker  thai 
eats  into  its  heart,  or  the  ivy  that  has  climbed  its  trunk  and  is  choking  it  in  its 
close  embraces.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Smothered  by  wealth: — Many  of  yon  are  in 
imminent  peril.  God  is  multiplying  the  sources  of  your  power.  Your  resources  are 
becoming  numerous  as  the  sands  of  the  sea.  I  am  not  sorry,  I  am  glad ;  but  I  am 
anxious  that  you  should  rise  up  in  the  midst  of  these  things,  and  show  yourselves 
greater  than  prosperity,  and  stronger  and  better  on  account  of  it.  I  dread  to  see  a 
man  smothered  under  his  wealth.  When  a  man,  driving  from  the  meadow,  sits  and 
sings  cheerily  upon  his  vast  load  of  fragrant  hay,  how  every  one,  looking  nponhim, 
thinks  of  his  happiness  and  content  1  But  by  and  by,  at  an  unlucky  jog,  down 
goes  the  wheel  and  over  goes  the  load,  and  the  man  is  at  the  bottom,  with  all  the 
hay  upon  him.  Just  in  that  way  rich  men  are  in  danger  of  being  smothered.  Tbe 
whole  wain  of  your  prosperity  may  capsize,  and  the  superincumbent  mass  may  hide 
from  you  the  air  and  the  sun  of  a  true  life.  (H.  W,  Beecher.)  Ye  have  received 
your  consolation  : — Let  the  full  force  of  the  word  "  consolation  "  be  observed.  It  ii 
used  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  comfort  which  is  promised  to  the  Christian  in  the 
Beatitudes.  Comfort,  in  the  fulness  of  that  word,  as  including  help,  guidance, 
encouragement,  and  support,  is  the  peculiar  promise  of  the  gospel.  There  is  then 
something  very  fearful  in  the  intimation  of  the  text,  that  those  who  have  riches 
thereby  receive  their  portion,  such  as  it  is,  in  full,  instead  of  the  heavenly  gift  of 
the  gospel.  The  same  doctrine  is  implied  in  our  Lord's  words  in  the  parable  of 
Dives  and  Lazarus :  "  Son,  remember  that  thou  in  thy  lifetime  receivedst  thy  good 
things,  and  likewise  Lazarus  evil  things ;  but  now  he  is  comforted,  and  thou  art 
tormented."  {J,  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  Conjunction  and  separation  of  woe  and 
riches: — We  will  therefore  show — I.  In  what  conjunction  these  two,  woe  and 
riches,  do  stand.  II.  How  they  may  be  sundered :  find  out  why  riches  are 
BO  dangerous  to  receive,  and  how  we  may  receive  them  without  any  danger. 
And  with  these  we  shall  exercise  your  devotion  at  this  time.  "  Woe  to  rich 
men  " ;  which  cannot  be  literally  and  generally  true :  for  all  rich  men  are  not 
accursed.  But  it  is  the  safest  way  to  remove  men  as  far  from  danger  as  may 
be.  It  is  safest  for  some  men  to  conceive  feasting  unlawful,  that  they  may  avoid 
gluttony;  or  sports  unlawful,  that  they  may  not  be  wantons;  to  be  afraid  of  an 
oath,  that  they  may  not  be  perjured ;  not  to  flatter  themselves  too  much  in  the  law- 
fulness of  war,  that  they  delight  not  in  blood,  but  rather  remember  the  lesson  of 
Moses,  or  indeed  of  God:  "When  thou  goest  out  with  the  host  against  thine  enemies, 
then  keep  thee  from  all  wickedness  "  (Deut.  xxiii.  9).  1.  But  so  far  is  the  world 
from  having  that  opinion  of  riches,  that  they  have  goodly  and  glorious  titles 
bestowed  upon  them.  They  commend  themselves  unto  us  under  the  honest  names 
of  "thrift,"  and  "frugality,"  and  "wisdom."  What  poor  glass  is  a  diamond,  to 
him  that  is  familiar  with  virtue  I  What  trash  is  riches,  to  him  who  is  filled  with 
grace  I  What  nicknames  are  the  empty  titles  of  secular  honours,  to  him  that 
knoweth  the  glory  of  a  saint !  What  a  nothing  is  the  world,  to  him  that  hath 
studied  heaven  1  2.  Further  yet :  Eiohes  are  accounted  as  necessaries,  and  as  orna- 
ments of  virtue  ;  and  under  that  name  we  receive  and  entertain  them.  3.  Again  : 
Kiches  are  not  only  not  necessary  to  religion  and  virtue,  but  rather  a  "  hindrance." 
They  take  as  down  from  our  third  heaven,  and  take  us  off  from  "  the  contemplation  " 
of  future  happiness,  and  bind  our  thoughts  to  the  vanities  of  the  earth,  which  so 
press  them  down  and  weary  them  that  they  cannot  aspire.  They  a.re  retinacula 
tpei,  "  fetters  of  our  hope."  For  "  now  where  is  our  hope  ?  "  (Job  xvii.  15.)  Even 
in  the  bowels  of  the  earth.  They  are  degraders  of  our  faith.  For  whilst  we  walk 
in  this  vain  shadow,  how  many  degrees  doth  our  faith  fall  back  I  The  more  we 
"  trust  in  uncertain  riches  "  the  less  we  trust  in  God  (1  Tim.  vi.  17).  They  are 
coolers  and  abaters  of  our  charity :  for,  they  make  us  ungrateful  to  God,  severe  to 
ourselves,  and  cruel  to  our  brethren.  4.  Further  yet :  As  riches  are  a  hindrance 
and  obstacle  to  good,  so  are  they  instrumental  to  evil.  They  facilitate  and  help  it 
forward,  and  are  as  the  midwife  to  bring  it  to  its  birth,  which  otherwise  peradven- 
ture  had  died  in  the  womb,  in  the  thought,  and  never  seen  the  sun.  If  sin  make 
•'  our  members  the  weapons  of  unrighteousness,"  riches  are  the  handle  without 
which  they  cannot  well  be  managed.  Every  man  cannot  grind  the  face  of  the  poor, 
every  man  cannot  take  his  brother  by  the  throat,  every  man  cannot  go  into  the 
foolish  woman's  house,  every  man  cannot  bribe  a  judge,  every  man  cannot  be  sa 
wicked  as  he  would.  And  it  may  seem  to  be  a  part  of  God's  restraining  grace,  to 
take  riches  from  Bome  men,  as  he  took  off  the  wheels  of  I'haiaoh's  chariots,  that 
they  may  not  parsne  their  brethren.    Bat  when  the  purse  is  fuU,  the  heart  will 


SS»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  VI. 

more  easily  vent  all  the  poison  it  hath,  in  a  reproach,  in  contempt,  in  a  blow,  in  an 
injury,  in  oppression.  II.  You  have  seen  the  rich  and  woe  in  a  sad  conjunction,  a 
most  malignant  one  as  any  astrology  hath  discovered.  I  am  unwilling  to  leave 
them  so  ;  and  therefore,  in  the  last  place,  I  must  find  out  some  means  to  put  tbem 
asunder,  that  we  may  receive  riches  without  danger ;  which  is  indeed  "  to  lead  the 
camel  through  the  needle's  eye."  1.  We  must  bring  riches  into  a  subordination^ 
nay,  into  a  subjection,  to  Christianity.  We  may  be  rich,  if  we  can  be  poor.  2. 
That  the  mind  may  be  rightly  affected,  we  must  root  out  of  it  all  love  of  riches. 
For  if  we  set  our  hearts  upon  them,  the  love  of  them  will  estrange  us  from  Christ, 
and  make  us  idolaters.  3.  I  must  bring  you  yet  further,  from  not  loving,  not 
desiring  riches,  to  contemning  of  them.  For  though  I  have  emptied  my  store,  and 
cast  it  before  the  wind,  yet  till  I  have  made  riches  the  object  of  my  fear,  till  I  can 
eay  within  myself,  "i'his  lordship  may  undo  me,"  "These  riches  may  beggar 
me,"  "This  money  may  destroy  me" — till  in  this  respect  I  make  it  the  object  of 
my  contempt,  and  look  npon  it  as  a  bait  of  Satan,  I  am  not  so  far  removed  but  that 
Btill  the  woe  laangeth  over  me.  For  as,  when  a  man  taketh  a  wedge  of  lead  upon 
his  shoulders,  it  presseth  and  boweth  his  body  to  the  earth ;  but  if  he  put  it  under 
his  feet,  it  will  lift  and  keep  him  from  the  ground  :  so,  when  we  place  riches  above 
ns,  and  look  upon  them  aa  upon  our  heaven ;  when  we  prefer  them  before  salvation, 
and  make  gain  our  godliness ;  it  must  needs  be  that  they  will  press  us  down  to 
hell :  but  if  we  keep  them  below  as  slaves,  and  tread  them  under  our  feet,  and  con- 
temn them  as  dung  in  comparison  of  Christ,  they  will  then  lift  as  up  as  high  as 
heaven.  4.  Therefore,  in  the  last  place,  let  me  commend  unto  you  a  godly  jealousy 
of  yourselves.  Suspicion  in  such  a  case  as  this  is  very  useful.  5.  I  am  unwilling 
to  leave  the  rich  and  the  woe  so  near  together,  but  would  set  them  at  that  distance 
that  they  may  never  meet.  To  conclude  then :  Let  us  not  be  too  familiar  with 
riches,  lest  whilst  we  embrace  them  we  take  the  plague,  and  the  woe  enter  into  our 
very  bowels.  The  love  of  the  world  is  a  catching  disease,  and  it  is  drawn  on  with 
dallying,  with  a  very  look.  We  do  not  traffic  for  gold  where  there  are  no  mines : 
nor  can  we  find  God  in  the  world.  He  that  maketh  Him  his  purchase,  will  find 
business  enough  to  take  up  his  thoughts,  and  little  time  left  for  conference  and  com- 
merce  in  the  world,  scarce  any  time  to  look  upon  it,  but  by  the  by  and  in  the  pas- 
sage, as  we  use  to  look  upon  a  stranger.  A  look  is  dangerous  ;  a  look  of  liking  ia 
too  much  :  but  a  look  of  love  will  bury  us  in  the  world,  where  we  are  sown  in  power, 
but  are  raised  in  weakness ;  sown  in  glory,  but  are  raised  in  dishonour.  We  rest 
and  sleep  in  this  dust ;  and  when  we  awake,  the  woe  which  hung  over  oar  heads 
falleth  upon  us.     (A.  Fariudon,  D.D.) 

Yet.  26.  Woe  onto  yoa  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  yon. — The  dangert 
of  praise: — "Woe  unto  you,  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  yon."  1.  First 
of  all,  it  ia  more  than  probable  that,  if  they  do  so,  tboir  judgment  of  you 
is  fallacious ;  you  do  not  deserve  it.  "  In  the  like  manner  did  their  fathers  unto 
the  false  prophets."  Men  are  fallible  judges  of  one  another's  real  character. 
2.  And  yet,  secondly,  you  must  remark  that,  however  fallacious,  however  false^ 
the  popular  estimate,  it  has  a  direct  tendency  to  carry  us  along  with  it.  One  would 
have  imagined  that  no  man  could  be  misled,  in  his  own  judgment  of  himself, 
by  anything  that  another,  or  that  all  the  world,  could  say  of  him.  3.  And 
then  follow,  in  the  third  place,  certain  practical  consequences ;  all  of  them,  in  • 
Christian  point  of  view,  serious  and  even  disastrous.  The  first  of  these  is,  the  loss 
of  humility.  4.  With  the  decay  of  humility  comes  the  loss  of  watchfulness.  6. 
And  with  the  loss  of  humility  and  the  loss  of  watchfulness  comes  as  a  natural  con- 
sequence the  loss  of  strength.  Praise  is  an  essentially  enfeebling  and  enervating 
thing.  It  relaxes  the  sinews  of  the  mind  as  sultry  weather  those  of  the  body.  6- 
Again,  it  is  an  effect  of  being  well  spoken  of,  to  make  a  man  covet  that  approbation 
and  at  last  live  for  it.  The  praise  of  men  has  a  direct  tendency  to  attach  us  to 
earth,  and  to  make  as  forget  heaven.  "  They  loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than 
the  praise  of  God. "  And  this  leads  us,  in  the  last  place,  to  suggest  one  or  two 
cautions  with  which  our  Lord's  words  in  the  text  ought  to  be  guarded,  lest  they 
should  too  mach  discourage  one  class  of  hearers.  There  are  those  whose  characters 
possess  a  beauty  and  a  charm  which  make  it  absolutely  impossible  that  they  should 
not  be  loved.  And  if  there  be  amongst  as  to-day  some  of  whom  all  men  do  not 
speak  well;  some  who,  whether  through  fault  or  no  fault  of  theirs,  are  neither 
generally  popular  nor  in  danger  of  suffering  from  this  kind  of  temptation  ;  do  not 
the  words  of  the  text,  so  wise  in  their  coonsel,  and  (like  all  oar  Lord's  words)  sa 


CHAT.  VI.]  ST.  LUKE,  i8S 

iride  in  their  application,  suggest  to  them  a  sure  ground  of  comfort  under 
what  at  times  they  feel  to  be  a  heavy  trial  ?  {Dean  Vaughan.)  The  woe  of  a 
favourable  reputation: — In  the  life  of  Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D.,  we  are  told 
that  at  one  period  of  his  life,  accusations  were  laid  before  the  public  in 
pamphlets  which  were  well  adapted  to  cause  him  pain  and  annoyance.  The 
experience  was  new  to  him,  who  all  his  life  had  made  no  enemies.  "  You  have  at 
last,"  said  one  of  his  people  to  him,  meeting  him  on  the  street,  "  escaped  one  oi 
the  woea  of  Scripture ;  '  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you  I ' " 
It  is  reported  of  Titus  Vespasian,  that  when  any  spake  ill  of  him,  he  was  wont  to 
say  that  he  was  above  false  reports  ;  and  if  they  were  true,  he  had  more  reason  to 
be  angry  with  himself  than  the  relator.  And  the  good  Emperor  Theodosius 
commanded  no  man  should  be  punished  that  spake  against  him  ;  "  for  what  was 
spoken  slightly,"  said  he,"  was  to  be  laughed  at ;  what  spitefully,  to  be  pardoned ;. 
what  angrily,  to  be  pitied ;  and  if  truly,  he  would  thank  them  for  it." 

Vers.  27-30.  But  I  say  unto  you  which  hear,  Love  your  enemies. — The  ideal  of 

Christianity: — This  passage  is  in  earnest.    You  are  to  do  this.     Why?    In  order 
that  you  may  come  into  the  family  of  God,     Here  is  not  simply  an  additional 
moral  maxim,  but  it  is  a  critical  turning  thing.     Whereas  nature  says,  "  Use  all 
your  powers  of  body  and  mind  to  repel  injuries,  and  to  punish  those  that  are 
against  you  " ;  the  spiritual  kingdom  says,  "  Use  none  of  them ;  forgive,  love, 
pray  for,  bless,  help,  carry  a  little  heaven  in  your  souls,  and  make  it  fair  weather 
around  about  all  those  that  are  your  enemies."    Is  it  possible  that  any  such  thing 
as  that  can  take  place  ?    I  have  known  some  men  that  came  very  near  to  it.     One 
thing  is  certain — Jesus,  whose  life  was  a  commentary  on  His  own  doctrine,  did 
attain  it ;  and  we  find  Him  acting  easily,  familiarly  on  that  very  ground,  returning 
good  for  evil.    Is  it  a  thing,  then,  that  comes  with  conversion  ?     Men  are  turned 
from  darkness  to  light,  from  selfishness  to  benevolence ;  they  are  said  to  be  con- 
verted, but  does  that  state  of  mind  come  with  conversion  ?    I  wish  it  did,  and  I 
know  it  does  not.     It  is  a  thing  that  must  be  the  result  of  spiritual  education  in 
men.     Men  never  come  to  their  graces  all  at  once.     It  is  a  law  that  prevails  in  the 
spiritual  kingdom  as  well  as  in  the  exterior  kingdom,  that  we  come  to  lower  and 
higher  gradations  by  processes  of  unfolding,  step  by  step,  little  by  little,  con- 
tinuously through  periods  of  time.     (H.  W.  Betcher.)        On  the  love  of  enemies: — 
1.  By  the  love  which  is  here  enjoined  we  are  not  to  understand  the  love  of  esteem 
or  complacency,  which  in  some  respects  is  unreasonable  and  impossible  ;  but  that, 
of  benevolence  or  good-will.     2.  The  precept  of  the  text  evidently  disallows  and 
utterly  excludes  all  kinds  of  revenge  and  retaliation.    I.  The  keasonablenebb  of 
THIS  DUTY.    What  can  be  more  agreeable  to  reason  and  wisdom  than  to  keep  evil, 
BO  much  as  possible,  out  of  the  world ;  and  when  it  is  in  to  use  all  proper  means  to 
drive  it  out.     Instead  of  this,  as  enmity  lets  it  in,  so  revenge  keeps  it  there  and 
propagates  it.     II.  The  excellence  op  this  duty.    General  benevolence  is  general 
virtue  ;  the  true  principle  of  a  rational  mind,  and  the  great  support  and  ornament 
of  society.    But  in  benevolence  towards  enemies  there  is  additional  worth,  peculiar 
grace,  for  it  raises  men's  minds,  and  exalts  their  affections  to  the  sublimest  pitch. 
III.  The  advantages  and  BENEriTS  which  bedound  from  the  peactice  op  this  dutt. 
Most  evident  they  are,  both  in  respect  of  society  and  every  individual.    1.  It  would 
be  of  infinite  service  to  the  public  if  the  precept  in  the  text  were  generally  observed 
and  practised.     Innumerable  broils,  feuds,  and  contentions,  would  be  hereby  pre- 
vented or  soon  stopped.     Such  a  disposition,  when  rooted  in  the  minds  of  men,, 
would  grow  up  in  a  firm  bank  against  the  overflowings  of  ill-will  and  the  inunda- 
tions of  strife.     The  wrongs  that  were  done  would  slide  away  gently,  without 
spreading  or  giving  much  disturbance  to  the  community ;  and  in  a  little  time  be 
Bwallowed  up  and  lost  in  the  wide  ocean  of  charity.    2.  And  as  to  the  private 
advantages,  they  are  manifestly  great  and  unquestionable.     The  peace  and  tran- 
quility of  a  man's  own  mind ;    the  delight  of  exercising  benevolence  towards 
enemies,  and  of  conquering  a  wild  affection.     {J.  Balgny,  M.A.)       Love  to  enemiet 
the  outcome  of  Christianity  : — The  Roman  Triumph,  with  its  naked  ostentation  of 
revenge,  fairly  represents  the  common  feeling  of  the  ancients.     Nevertheless,  for- 
giveness even  of  an  enemy  was  not  unknown  to  them.     They  could  conceive  it, 
and  they  could  feel  that  there  was  a  Divine  beauty  in  it,  but  it  seemed  to  them  not 
merely,  like  the  other  Christian  virtues,  more  than  could  be  expected  of  ordinary 
men,  but  almost  more  than  could  be  expected  of  human  nature  itself,  almost 
£aoer^tuman.    A  passage  near  the  dose  of  the  Ajax  of  Sophocles  will  illustrate 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

this.  As  there  was  nothing  of  the  antiqnarian  spirit  about  Greek  tragedy,  as  it 
probably  never  occurred  to  Sophocles  that  the  ancient  heroes  he  depicts  belonged 
to  a  less  civilized  age  than  his  own,  but  on  the  contrary,  as  he  conceived  them  to 
be  better  and  nobler  than  his  contemporaries,  we  may  fairiy  suppose  the  feelings 
described  in  this  passage  to  be  of  the  highest  standard  of  the  poet's  own  age,  the 
age  of  Pericles.  Ulysses,  after  the  death  of  his  enemy  Ajax,  is  described  as 
relenting  towards  him  bo  far  as  to  intercede  with  Agamemnon  that  his  body 
may  be  decently  buried,  and  not  be  exposed  to  the  beasts  and  the  birds.  This  may 
seem  to  be  no  great  stretch  of  generosity.  But  the  request  is  received  by 
Agamemnon  with  the  utmost  bewilderment  and  annoyance.  '•  What  can  you 
mean  ?  "  he  says,  "  do  you  feel  pity  for  a  dead  enemy  ?  "  On  the  other  hand,  the 
friends  of  Ajax  are  not  less  astonished,  and  break  out  into  rapturous  applause, 
•*  but,"  says  Tencer,  "  I  hesitate  to  allow  you  to  touch  the  grave,  lest  it  should  be 
disagreeable  to  the  dead  man."  The  impression  of  strangeness  which  these  words, 
"  Do  you  feel  pity  for  a  dead  enemy  ?"  produce  upon  us  is  a  proof  of  the  change 
which  Christianity  has  wrought  in  manners.  A  modem  dramatist  might  have 
written  the  words,  if  he  had  been  delineating  an  extremely  savage  character,  but 
Sophocles  is  doing  no  such  thing.  He  is  expressing  the  natural  sentiment  of  an 
average  man.  (Ecce  Homo.)  An  illustration  of  the  influence  of  Christian  teaching 
upon  barbarous  customs: — Had  the  Son  of  Man  been  in  body  upon  the  earth  during 
the  Middle  Ages,  hardly  one  wrong  and  injustice  would  have  wounded  His  pure 
Boul  like  the  system  of  torture.  The  main  forces  in  mediseval  society,  even  those 
which  tended  to  its  improvement,  did  not  touch  this  abuse.  Boman  law  supported 
it ;  Stoicism  was  indifferent  to  it ;  Greek  literature  did  not  affect  it ;  feudalism  and 
arbitrary  power  encouraged  a  practice  which  they  could  use  for  their  own  ends ; 
and  even  the  hierarchy  and  a  State  Church  so  far  forgot  the  truths  they  professed 
as  to  employ  torture  to  support  the  religion  of  love.  But  against  all  these  powers 
were  the  words  of  Jesus,  bidding  men  "  Love  your  enemies  I  "  "  Do  good  to  them 
that  spitefully  use  you  1  "  and  the  like  commands,  working  everywhere  on  indi- 
vidual souls,  heard  from  pulpits  and  in  monasteries,  read  over  by  humble  believers, 
and  slowly  making  their  way  against  barbaric  passion  and  hierarchic  cruelty. 
Gradually,  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  the  books  containing  the 
message  of  Jesus  circulated  among  aU  classes,  and  produced  that  state  of  mind 
and  heart  in  which  torture  could  not  be  used  on  a  fellow-being,  and  in  which  such 
an  abuse  and  enormity  as  the  Inquisition  was  hurled  to  the  earth.  (C.  L.  Brace.) 
The  master-word  of  Christianity  is  love.  {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.,  LL.D.)  Loving 
our  enemies  a  Ghrintian  duty: — From  the  words  we  may  observe  —  I.  That 
innocence  is  not  always  a  protection  from  injuries.  II.  That  Christians  must  not 
recompense  evil  for  evil.  I  shall — I.  Lay  before  you  your  pattern,  and  show  you 
how  Christ  loved  His  enemies.  And  then — II.  I  shall  press  the  imitation  of  Him  in 
this  respect.  I.  Our  Saviour,  the  Son  of  God,  when  He  was  here  on  earth,  had 
His  enemies.  Infinite  purity,  and  the  most  extensive  engaging  goodness  could 
not  gain  the  love  of  aU.  II.  Now  I  am  next  to  show  you  how  our  blessed  Saviour 
carried  it  toward  His  enemies  ;  what  spirit  He  was  of  under  such  indignities. 
Christ  is  spoken  of  in  the  Word  of  God  as  subduing  His  enemies  in  a  twofold  sense. 

1.  By  His  vengeance,  when  they  have  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities. 

2.  There  is  another  sense  in  which  Christ  may  be  said  to  conquer  and  subdue  Hia 
enemies  ;  by  His  grace,  by  His  Word  and  Spirit.  Let  us  now  inquire  how  Christ 
our  great  pattern  manifested  His  love  or  good-will  towards  His  enemies,  and  still 
shows  Himself  reconcilable  to  such  as  are  so.  1.  In  His  bearing  their  re- 
proaches with  meekness,  and  a  tender  concern  for  them,  not  using  them  with 
severity,  any  farther  than  He  saw  needful  to  convince  them  of  their  sin,  and 
to  awaken  them  to  repentance.  He  did  not  render  evil  for  evil,  and  railing  for 
railing  (1  Peter  ii.  21,  23).  2.  In  His  forbearing  to  take  vengeance  on  His  enemies, 
as  one  that  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world.  3.  Christ  showed 
His  love  to  His  enemies  in  forgiving  them,  on  condition  of  their  sincere  repentance. 
4.  Our  blessed  Saviour  manifested  His  good-will  towards  His  enemies,  His  desire  of 
their  conversion  and  salvation,  in  His  labours  for  their  good,  His  preaching  the 
Gospel  to  any  that  would  attend  upon  Him,  in  His  warning,  instructing,  and  en- 
treating them.  5.  In  His  praying  for  them.  6.  In  that  charge  mentioned  before, 
which  He  gave  Hia  apostles  after  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  to  preach  repen- 
tanoe  and  remission  of  sins  first  at  Jerusalem.  I  shall  now  close  with  two  or  three 
refections  on  what  hsis  been  delivered.  1.  Let  not  those  who  have  hitherto  shown 
themselves  enemies  to  Christ,  despising  His  love,  dishonouring  His  name,  rejecting 


CHAT.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  68d 

His  graoions  offers  and  abasing  His  gospel,  despair  of  mercy,  and  think  themselves 
utterly  excluded  from  His  favour.  2.  Let  the  friends  of  Christ  rejoice  in  their 
interest  in  His  pecaliar  love.  I  am  now  to  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the 
second  thing  proposed,  to  press  the  imitation  of  our  Lord  in  this  respect.  1.  The 
first  thing  to  be  considered  is,  who  are  oar  enemies.  Not  ministers  who  are 
ordained  of  God  to  show  men  their  sins.  Nor  are  rulers,  such  as  bear  the  sword 
of  justice.  Nor  are  we  to  be  offended  with  any  that  tell  us  of  our  faults,  as  if  they 
were  our  enemies.  This  is  not  always  a  sign  of  men's  disaffection  to  us,  but 
sometimes  of  their  good-wilL  Nor,  further,  are  we  to  reckon  all  our  enemies 
that  differ  from  us  in  their  opinions  about  religion.  But  let  us  see  who  may 
justly  be  called  our  enemies.  Now,  they  are  such  as  have  ill-will,  bitterness 
and  rancour  in  their  hearts  against  us.  Now,  how  are  Christians  to  behave  them- 
selves towards  those  that  hate  them,  and  wrong  them  ?  Why,  corrupt  nature 
presently  dictates  an  answer ;  hate  them  iu  like  manner,  recompense  evil  for  evil, 
take  revenge.  2.  What  is  meant  by  loving  our  enemies  ?  Not  taking  complacency 
and  delight  in  them  ;  not  entering  into  familiarity  with  them,  and  making  them 
our  intimates,  as  we  would  our  particular  friends.  Li  short,  we  should  be  well 
affected  towards  them.  Thirdly  then,  how  are  we  to  express  our  love  to  our 
enemies  t  1.  We  must  suppress  all  immoderate  anger  and  passion.  2.  We  must 
express  oar  good-will  to  our  enemies  by  just  faithful  reproof.  3.  We  must  not 
envy  oar  enemies  their  ease  and  prosperity,  nor  wish  that  their  circumstances  were 
altered  into  worse,  that  God  would  lift  up  His  hand  against  them,  aifliot  and  blast 
them.  In  the  fourth  place,  we  should  be  so  far  from  desiring  the  adversity  of  our 
enemies,  that  we  should  pity  them  in  their  distress.  5.  We  must  pray  for  our 
enemies.  I  am  now  to  offer  to  your  consideration  some  motives  to  this  duty. 
1.  Consider  the  excellency  of  this  duty.  It  is  difficult  indeed,  but  then  there  is  a 
peculiar  beauty  in  it,  which  tends  greatly  to  adorn  Christianity.  2.  This  is  a  duty 
expressly  commanded  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  3.  By  such  a  disposition  of  mind 
as  is  recommended  in  the  text  we  should  be  conformed  to  God.  4.  We  have  the 
example  of  Christ  our  Lord.  6.  We  have  also  the  example  of  the  apostles  of 
Christ,  who  themselves  practised  this  duty.  6.  Hatred  and  malice,  when  they 
lie  fretting  in  the  heart,  and  break  out  in  their  unchristian  inhuman  effects,  can  do 
no  good,  but  mii<^t  needs  be  unprofitable  and  unpleasant.  Lastly,  you  shall  not  lose 
your  reward.  "  My  prayer,"  says  David,  "returned  into  my  own  bosom  "  (Psa.xxxv. 
13).  "Love  your  enemies  and  do  good ;  and  your  reward  shall  be  great"  (Lukevi.  35). 
{Thomas  Whitty.)  The  duty  of  loving  our  enemies  stated UTid  explained : — L  Then, 
I  am  to  STATE  THE  NATTiBE  AND  EXTENT  OF  THIS  PRECEPT.  There  are  two  kiuds  of 
love  which  we  must  distinguish  here ;  the  love  of  approbation  or  esteem,  and  the 
love  of  benevolence  or  good-will.  The  love  of  approbation  and  the  love  of 
benevolence  are,  then,  very  distinct  in  their  own  nature.  Oar  Saviour,  at  the  same 
time  that  He  expressed  His  disapprobation  and  dislike  of  Jerusalem  for  stoning  the 
prophets,  yet  exempUfied  a  very  benevolent  and  compassionate  regard  for  it,  for 
He  wept  over  it.  Even  resentment  does  not  exclude  benevolence,  and  we  are  very 
often  angry  at  a  person  for  committing  a  fault,  even  because  we  love  him.  And  as 
our  Saviour  loved  and  compassionated  the  Jews,  though  He  abhorred  their  un- 
generous treatment  of  Himself  and  the  prophets;  so  we  ought,  with  the  same 
god-like  generosity  ol  soul,  to  love  the  man  at  the  same  time  that  we  detest  his 
vices ;  just  as  we  may  have  an  affectionate  regard  for  a  person  that  lies  ill,  but 
have  an  aversion  to  the  disease  he  labours  under.  As  to  the  extent  and  degrees  of 
this  duty,  the  Scripture  nowhere  enjoins  an  undistinguishing  beneficence  to  men 
whether  friendly  or  injurious.  We  ought  to  do  the  most  good  we  can.  Now,  by 
singling  out  men  of  fortune,  whatever  relations  may  endear  them  to  as,  as  the 
objects  of  our  favour,  we  contribute  little  or  nothing  to  their  real  enjoyments  ;  but 
by  being,  what  God  is  in  a  higher  degree,  the  helper  of  the  friendless  and  forlorn, 
we  make  the  heart  of  one  that  was  ready  to  perish  sing  for  joy.  In  the 
former  case  our  bounty  is  like  a  shower  to  the  ocean ;  in  the  latter  it  is  like  a 
shower  to  dry  and  thirsty  ground.  This  is  a  very  important  rule,  viz.,  that  the 
extreme  necessity  of  even  our  enemies,  much  more  of  other  persons,  is  to  take 
place  of  the  mere  conveniency  of  friends  and  relations,  and  that  we  ought  rather 
to  relieve  the  distressed  than  to  promote  the  happiness  of  the  easy ;  however  the 
practice  of  it  be  disregarded  by  the  world  But  to  proceed ;  the  Scripture  does  not 
require  any  acts  of  kindness  to  our  enemy  which  are  confessedly  prejudicial  to  our 
own  interests  :  for  we  are  not  to  love  our  neighbour  better  than  ourselves.  Our 
meroy  to  oar  enemies  must  not  be  so  far  extended  as  to  expose  us  to  the  mercy  of 


168e  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRAI  JR.  [oha».  n. 

onr  enemies.  II.  Having  thus  stated  the  nature  and  extent  of  this  duty,  I  proceed, 
secondly,  to  show  the  keasonableness  of  it.  1.  The  great  law  of  nature  is  an 
universal,  active  benevolence  to  the  whole  body  of  rational  beings,  as  far  as  tha 
sphere  of  our  power  extends.  We  were  all  sent  into  the  world  to  promote  one 
another's  happiness,  as  being  all  children  of  the  same  Father,  onr  Father  which  is 
in  heaven.  What  Moses  said  to  the  contending  Israelites  is  applicable  to  all  man* 
kind :  "  Why  do  ye  wrong  one  another,  since  ye  are  brethren  ?  "  And  no  injuries 
«an  take  away  or  cancel  that  unchangeable  relation.  For,  do  we  do  good  to  our 
neareat  and  dearest  relations  only  because  they  are  deserving?  Do  we  not 
think  ourselves  obliged  to  serve  them  merely  because  they  are  relations?  This 
relation  is  always  a  strong  reason  for  doing  good,  when  there  is  no  stronger 
reason  to  supersede  or  set  it  aside.  And  this  may  serve  to  show,  that  however  for« 
ward  persons  of  the  first  distinction  in  civil  and  military  offices  may  be  to  engross 
to  themselves  the  character  of  heroism  or  any  uncommon  degree  of  virtue ;  a 
man  in  a  private  capacity  may  be  as  truly  a  hero  in  virtue,  as  they  can  be  in 
a  larger  and  more  public  sphere  of  action.  He  is  like  one  of  the  fixed  stars, 
which  though,  through  the  disadvantage  of  its  situation,  it  may  be  thought  to  be 
very  little,  inconsiderable,  and  obscure  by  unskilful  beholders ;  yet  is  as  truly  great 
and  glorious  in  itself  as  those  heavenly  lights,  which,  by  being  placed  more 
commodiously  for  our  view,  shine  with  more  distinguished  lustre.  For  he  shows, 
by  his  complacency,  that  he  would  have  done  the  same  if  his  abilities  had  been 
equal  to  his  inclinations.  2.  An  argument  may  be  drawn  from  the  consideration 
of  our  own  happiness.  Now  to  cultivate  the  sweet  and  kindly  passions,  to 
cherish  an  affectionate  and  social  temper,  to  beget  in  ourselves,  by  repeated 
acts  of  goodness,  a  settled  complacency,  good  will  and  benevolence  to  all  mankind 
in  general,  is  a  constant  spring  of  satisfaction.  To  contract  an  unrelenting  malice, 
euUenness,  and  discontent,  to  let  a  sudden  discomposure  of  mind  ripen  into  a  fixed 
aversion  and  ill-will,  to  have  a  savageness  of  nature  and  au  insensibility  to  pity  ; 
what  is  this  but  to  make  onr  breast,  which  should  be  the  temple  of  God,  as  it 
were  a  den  of  savage  passions?  In  acts  of  severity,  even  when  necessary, 
there  is  always  something  that  is  irksome  to  a  gentle  and  compassionate  spirit, 
something  of  a  harsh  and  ungrateful  feeling  within  accompanies  them ;  like 
armour,  which,  though  we  may  be  obliged  to  put  it  on  for  our  necessary  self- 
defence,  yet  always  fits  uneasy,  cumbrous,  and  unwieldy.  Some  cool-thinking 
villains  there  may  be,  who  can  lay  plots  to  injure  others  with  a  steadfast  and 
«edate  malice,  and  with  an  untoward  complacency ;  their  minds  being  like  those 
nights,  which  are  very  calm,  silent,  and  close,  and  yet  very  black  and  dark ;  nights 
in  which  there  reigns  a  sullen  stillness.  But  men  of  this  stamp  are  very  rare :  the 
generality  of  mankind,  when  they  strive  to  make  others  uneasy,  certainly  disquiet 
themselves,  and  work  out  the  ruin  of  other  men,  as  they  should  do  their  own  salva- 
tion, with  fear  and  trembling.  3.  A  third  argument  for  the  love  of  onr  enemies 
may  be  dravni  from  the  forgiveness  of  them.  Now,  the  forgiveness  of  our  enemies 
is  a  duty  incumbent  on  us :  because,  in  the  first  place,  malice  is,  as  I  showed 
before,  destructive  of  our  happiness :  because,  secondly,  we  cannot  with  any  reason 
ask  that  of  God  which  we  are  not  willing  to  bestow  :  because,  thirdly,  all  private 
revenge,  and  consequently  the  desire  of  it  too,  is  in  the  natwre  of  the  thing  unlaw- 
ful ;  since  if  it  were  allowed,  it  would  draw  a  fatal  train  of  consequences  after  it, 
and  make  the  world  an  Aceldama,  or  field  of  blood.  We  know  that  the  malignity 
of  the  offence  rises  in  proportion  to  the  dignity  of  the  person  whom  we  offend : 
now,  most  people  are  inclined  to  think  themselves  much  greater  than  they  are ; 
and  consequently  to  think  the  offence  committed  against  them  to  be  so  too  ;  the 
consequence  of  which  is  obvious,  if  we  were  commissioned  to  revenge  ourselves. 
The  mists  of  passion  would  represent  injuries  bigger  than  they  are,  and  it  would  be 
impossible  to  proportion  the  punishment  to  the  indignity.  In  short,  it  can  never 
be  reasonable,  that  one  man's  reputation,  fortune,  or  life  should  be  sacrificed  to 
another  man's  passion  and  malice.  How  are  we  to  behave  ourselves  to  those  whom 
we  forgive?  Are  we  to  behave  ourselves  to  them  as  to  enemies?  Not  as  to 
enemies :  for  then  we  do  not  sincerely  forgive  them.  Besides,  it  is  unnatural  to 
have  a  cold  indifference  to  the  happiness  or  misery  of  our  fellow-creatures,  when 
our  minds  are  divested  of  all  rancour  towards  them.  Benevolence  will  naturally 
shed  abroad  in  our  heart  its  kindly  and  gentle  beams,  when  the  clouds,  which  the 
iinfriendly  passions  cast  over  the  soul,  are  removed  and  dispersed.  4.  A  fourth 
argument  may  be  drawn  from  the  nature  of  God.  No  creature  ought  to  eonnteract 
ills  Creator.    III.  I  proceed  to  show  the  pbactioableness  or  this  duty.    And  here 


▼I.]  ST.  LUKE.  58T 

two  sorts  of  men  fall  under  our  consideration :  1.  Men  of  cool  and  deliberate 
malice,  who,  like  lions  lurking  in  secret  places,  can  wait  a  considerable  time,  till,  a 
convenient  season  offering  itself,  they  spring  to  vengeance,  and  crush  their  unwary 
ioe.  Their  resentment  is  like  a  massive  stone,  slowly  raised  ;  but,  when  once  it  is 
raised,  on  whomsoever  it  falls,  it  will  grind  them  to  powder.  2.  The  men 
of  fire  and  fury,  who  immediately  discharge  the  malignity  of  their  passion  in  words 
or  actions.  As  to  the  first  set  of  men  :  it  is  certain  that  the  same  power  of  mind, 
which  enables  them  to  suspend  the  prosecution  of  their  revengeful  designs  till  a 
eommodious  opportunity,  enables  them  hkewise  to  get  the  better  of  their  revenge- 
ful desires ;  for  a  passion  so  importunate  and  clamorous  in  its  demands  aa 
revenge,  if  it  cannot  be  curbed  and  controlled,  cannot  be  suspended,  and  put  ofif ; 
and  if  it  can  be  controlled,  it  can  likewise  be  quelled  and  overcome.  As  to  the 
second  set  of  men,  viz.,  the  men  of  passion  and  fury,  they  indeed  will  tell  you, 
'•  God  forgive  them,  it  is  their  infirmity  which  they  cannot  help :  they  are  apt  to  be 
transported  into  unseemly  words  and  actions  ;  but  the  storm  is  soon  over."  These 
are  the  excuses  of  those,  who,  when  their  anger  has  spent  itself,  are  very  good- 
natured  ;  and  continue  so,  till  fresh  recruits  of  spirits  enable  their  passions  to  take 
the  field  again.  But  the  misfortune  is,  these  notable  excuses  are  quite  spoiled,  if 
we  consider  that  these  men  can  be,  and  are  very  often,  upon  their  guard.  They  will 
not  fall  into  an  unseemly  rage  before  a  great  person,  whom  they  dread  and  revere. 
After  all,  it  must  be  owned,  that  a  provocation  maybe  so  shocking  and  flagrant,  that 
nature  may  rebel  against  principle,  and  a  desire  of  revenge  may  as  naturally  hurry 
away  the  soul  as  a  whirlwind  does  the  body.  This  is  an  extraordinary  case,  and  no 
doubt  a  gracious  God  will  make  allowances  for  it.  It  is  a  common  saying,  that  few 
people  know  their  own  weakness  ;  but  it  is  as  true  a  one,  that  few  people  know 
their  own  strength  till  they  are  put  to  it,  and  resolved  in  the  prosecution  of  any 
design.  It  has  been  often  observed  that  our  hatred  is  most  implacable  when  it  is 
most  unjust.  IV.  And  lastly,  to  conclude  with  some  practical  advice.  Let  U8 
reflect,  that  we  cannot  expect  to  be  benefited  by  our  Saviour,  as  a  full  sacrifice  for 
sin,  unless  we  imitate  Him,  as  a  complete  model  of  virtue ;  and  this  we  cannot  do 
without  forgiving  and  loving  our  enemies.  Can  a  mind  think  anything  here  worth 
an  implacable  animosity,  whose  comprehensive  views  are  raised  as  high  as  heaven, 
and  extended  as  far  as  eternity  ?  Let  us  think  what  would  become  of  us  at  the 
last  decisive  day,  a  day  decisive  of  our  eternal  happiness  or  misery,  if  God  should 
deal  with  us  with  the  same  unforgiving  disposition  as  we  would  deal  with  others. 
{J,  Seed.)  Of  loving  our  enemies  : — I.  What  is  not  that  love  which  we  must 
SHOW  ODB  enemies:  this  we  shall  find  to  exclude  several  things  which  would 
fain  wear  this  name.  1.  As  first,  to  treat  an  enemy  with  a  fair  deportment  and 
amicable  language,  is  not  the  love  here  enjoined  by  Christ.  Love  is  a  thing  that 
scorns  to  dwell  anywhere  but  in  the  heart.  The  kindness  of  the  heart  never 
kills,  but  that  of  the  tongue  often  does.  Was  ever  the  hungry  fed,  or  the  naked 
clothed,  with  good  looks  or  fair  speeches  ?  These  are  but  thin  garments  to  keep 
out  the  cold,  and  but  a  slender  repast  to  conjure  down  the  rage  of  a  craving 
appetite.  But  we  are  not  to  rest  here ;  fair  speeches  and  looks  are  not  only  very 
insignificant  as  to  the  real  effects  of  love,  but  are  for  the  most  part  the  instruments 
of  hatred  in  the  execution  of  the  greatest  mischiefs.  For  it  is  oil  that  whets  the 
razor,  and  the  smoothest  edge  is  still  the  sharpest:  they  are  the  complacencies  of 
an  enemy  that  kill,  the  closest  hugs  that  stifle,  and  love  must  be  pretended  before 
malice  can  be  effectually  practised.  In  a  word,  he  must  get  into  his  heart  with  fair 
speeches  and  promises,  before  he  can  come  at  it  with  his  dagger.  2.  Fair  promises 
are  not  the  love  that  our  Saviour  here  commands  us  to  show  our  enemies.  For 
what  trouble  is  it  to  promise,  what  charge  is  it  to  spend  a  little  breath,  for  a  man 
to  give  one  his  word,  who  never  intends  to  give  him  anything  else  ?  And  yet, 
according  to  the  measures  of  the  world,  this  must  sometimes  pass  for  a  high  piece 
of  love.  In  a  word,  I  may  say  of  human  promises,  what  expositors  say  of  Divine 
prophecies,  "that  they  are  never  understood  till  they  come  to  be  fulfilled."  3.  But 
thirdly  and  lastly,  to  advance  a  degree  yet  higher,  to  do  one  or  two  kind  ofiSces  for 
an  enemy  is  not  to  fulfil  the  precept  of  loving  him.  It  is  like  pardoning  a  man 
the  debt  of  a  penny,  and  in  the  meantime  suing  him  fiercely  for  a  talent.  Love  is 
then  only  of  reality  and  value  when  it  deals  forth  benefits  in  a  full  proportion  to 
one's  need  :  and  when  it  shows  itself  both  in  universality  and  constancy.  Other- 
wise it  is  only  a  trick  to  serve  a  turn,  and  carry  on  a  design.  The  skilfol  rider 
strokes  and  pleases  the  nnruly  horse,  only  that  he  may  come  so  near  him,  as  to  get 
the  bit  into  his  month,  and  then  he  rides,  and  rules,  and  domineers  orer  him  at  his 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [atu».  yu 

pleasure.  So  be  who  hates  his  enemy  with  a  canning  equal  to  his  malice,  will  not 
strain  to  do  this  or  that  good  turn  for  him,  so  long  as  it  does  not  thwart,  but 
rather  promote  the  main  design  of  his  utter  subversioc.  For  all  this  is  but  like  the 
helping  a  man  over  the  stile,  who  is  going  to  be  hanged,  which  surely  is  no  vei7 
great  or  difficult  piece  of  civility.  II.  And  thus  having  done  with  the  negative,  * 
come  now  to  the  second  general  thing  proposed,  namely,  to  show  positivblt  whai 
IS  INCLUDED  IN  THB  DUTY  OF  iiOViNQ  ouB  ENEMIES.    It  iucludes  these  three  things. 

1.  A  discharging  the  mind  of  all  rancour  and  virulence  towards  an  adversary. 

2.  To  love  an  enemy  is  to  do  him  all  the  real  offices  of  kindness  that  opportunity 
shall  lay  in  oar  way.  Love  is  of  too  substantial  a  nature  to  be  made  up  of  mere 
negatives,  and  withal  too  operative  to  terminate  in  bare  desires.  3.  The  last  and 
crowning  instance  of  our  love  to  our  enemies,  is  to  pray  for  them.  For  by  this  a 
man,  as  it  were,  acknowledges  himself  unable  to  do  enough  for  his  enemy  ;  and 
therefore  he  calls  in  the  assistance  of  heaven,  and  engages  omnipotence  to  com- 
plete the  kindness.  He  would  fain  outdo  himself,  and  therefore  finding  his  own 
stores  short  and  dry,  he  repairs  to  infinity.  Prayer  for  a  man's  self  is  indeed  a 
choice  duty,  yet  it  is  but  a  kind  of  lawful  and  pious  selfishness.  But  when  I  pray 
as  heartUy  for  my  enemy  as  I  do  for  my  daily  bread ;  when  I  strive  with  prayers 
and  tears  to  make  God  his  friend,  who  himself  will  not  be  mine  ;  when  I  reckon 
his  felicity  among  my  own  necessities ;  surely  this  is  such  a  love  as,  in  a  literal 
sense,  may  be  said  to  reach  up  to  heaven.  For  nobody  judges  that  a  small  and 
trivial  thing  for  which  he  dares  to  pray :  no  man  comes  into  the  presence  of  a 
king  to  beg  pins.     III.  I  come  now  to  the  third  and  last  thing,  viz.,  to  assioh 

MOTIVES  AND  ABQUMENTS  TO  ENFOBCE    THIS    LOVE    TO    OUB    ENEMY  ;   and    they  shall   be 

taken — 1.  From  the  condition  of  our  enemy's  person.  For  the  first  of  these,  if  we 
consider  our  enemy,  we  shall  find  that  he  sustains  several  capacities,  which  may 
give  him  a  just  claim  to  our  charitable  affection.  (1)  As  first,  he  is  joined  with  us 
in  the  society  and  community  of  the  same  nature.  (2)  An  enemy,  notwithstanding 
his  enmity,  may  be  yet  the  proper  object  of  our  love,  because  it  sometimes  so  falls 
out,  that  he  is  of  the  same  religion  with  us ;  and  the  very  business  and  design  of 
religion  is  to  unite,  and  to  put,  as  it  were,  a  spiritual  cognation  and  kindred 
between  souls.  (3)  An  enemv  may  be  the  proper  object  of  our  love,  because, 
though  perhaps  he  is  not  capable  of  being  changed  and  made  a  friend  by  it  (which, 
for  any  thing  I  know,  is  next  to  impossible),  yet  he  is  capable  of  being  shamed 
and  rendered  inexcusable.  2.  A  second  motive  or  argument  to  the  same  shall  be 
taken  from  the  excellency  of  the  duty  itself.  It  is  the  highest  perfection  that 
human  nature  can  reach  unto.  The  excellency  of  the  duty  is  sufficiently  pro- 
claimed by  the  difficulty  of  its  practice.  Nothing  certainly  but  an  excellent  dis- 
position improved  by  a  mighty  grace,  can  bear  a  man  up  to  this  perfection.  3.  The 
third  motive  or  argument  shall  be  drawn  from  the  great  examples  which  recom- 
mend this  duty  to  us.  (R.  South,  D.D.)  Example  of  the  early  Christians  : — 
Justin  Martyr,  one  of  the  earliest  writers,  in  his  "  Apology  "  to  the  heathen  in 
behalf  of  the  Christians,  says,  "  We  who  once  hated  and  murdered  one  another, 
we  who  would  not  enjoy  the  hearth  in  common  with  strangers,  on  account  of  the 
difference  of  our  customs,  now  live  in  common  with  them,  since  the  appearance  of 
Christ ;  we  pray  for  our  enemies  ;  we  seek  to  persuade  those  who  hate  us  unjustly, 
that  they  may  direct  their  lives  according  to  the  glorious  doctrines  of  Christ,  and 
may  share  with  us  the  joyful  hope  of  enjoying  the  same  privileges  from  God  the 
Lord  of  all  things."  Example  of  Origen: — Origen,  one  of  the  greatest  scholars 
and  theologians  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  third  century,  when  he  was  cruelly 
persecuted  by  Demetrius,  and  through  his  efforts  excommunicated  by  the  synod, 
beautifully  exhibited  the  same  mild  and  forgiving  spirit.  Speaking  in  his  defence 
against  the  synod,  he  mentions  wicked  priests  and  rulers  thus  :  "  We  must  pity 
them  rather  than  hate  them,  pray  for  them  rather  than  curse  them,  for  we  are 
created  for  blessing  rather  than  cursing."  The  Carthaginian  Christians: — In 
the  time  of  a  great  pestilence,  Cyprian,  Bishop  of  Carthage,  in  the  third  century, 
exhorts  his  flock  to  take  care  of  the  sick  and  dying,  not  only  among  their  friends, 
but  their  foes.  "If,"  says  he,  "we  only  do  good  to  our  own  people,  we  do  no 
more  than  publicans  and  heathens.  But  if  we  are  the  children  of  God,  who  makes 
His  sun  to  shine  and  His  rain  to  descend  upon  the  just  and  upon  the  unjust,  who 
sheds  abroad  His  blessings,  not  upon  His  friends  alone,  but  upon  those  whose 
fhoughts  are  far  from  Him,  we  must  show  this  by  our  actions,  blessing  those  who 
enrse  us,  and  doing  good  to  those  who  persecute  us."  Stimulated  by  their  bishop's 
Admonition,  the  members  of  the  Church  addressed  themselves  to  the  work,  the  rich 


CBMt,  n.]  ST.  LUKE,  589 

contribating  their  money  and  the  poor  their  labour.  Thus  the  sick  were  attended 
to,  the  streets  soon  cleared  of  the  corpses  that  filled  them,  and  the  city  saved  from 
the  dangers  of  a  universal  pestilenee.  Mr.  Burkitt  and  his  injurers : — Mr. 
Burkitt  observes  in  his  journal,  that  some  persons  would  never  have  had  a  par- 
ticular share  in  his  prayers  but  for  the  injuries  they  had  done  him  I  Mr. 
Lawrence's  charge  to  his  soru : — Mr.  Lawrence  once  going,  with  some  of  his  sons, 
by  the  house  of  a  gentleman  who  had  been  injurious  to  him,  charged 
them  that  they  should  never  think  or  speak  amiss  of  that  gentleman  on 
accoont  of  anything  he  had  done  against  him,  but,  whenever  they  passed 
his  house,  they  should  lift  up  their  hearts  in  prayer  to  God  for  him  and 
his  family.  This  good  man  had  read  our  text  to  some  purpose.  A  persimsive 
to  love  our  enemies: — Negative  holiness  is  short  of  Christianity  more  than  the 
one  half.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  do  others  no  ill,  but  we  must  do  them  good  as 
we  have  access.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  fly  not  out  in  passion  and  revenge  on 
those  who  have  wronged  us,  but  we  must  love  them.  L  We  shall  consider  thb 
DOTY  OF  LoviNO  OUR  ENEMIES.  And  here  I  shall  show  who  are  to  be  under- 
stood by  our  enemies.  In  general,  it  aims  at  those  about  whom  there  is  least 
to  engage  our  love  to  them.  1.  Does  not  the  psalmist  say,  "  Do  not  I  Late 
them,  0  Lord,  that  hate  Thee  ?  And  am  not  I  grieved  with  those  that  rise  up 
against  Thee  ?  I  hate  them  with  perfect  hatred :  I  count  them  mine  enemies  "  ? 
(Psa.  czxxix.  21,  22.)  And  does  not  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani  the  seer  say  to  King 
Jehoshaphat,  "  Shouldst  thou  help  the  ungodly,  and  love  them  that  hate  the 
Lord  ?  "  (2  Chron.  xix.  2.)  (1)  There  is  a  hating  of  one's  way  and  course,  and  a 
hating  of  one's  person.  It  is  not  the  latter  that  is  meant  in  these  passages,  but 
the  former.  (2)  There  is  a  hatred  opposite  to  a  love  of  complacency,  and  a  hatred 
opposite  to  a  love  of  good  will :  the  former  is  what  we  should  bear  to  the  enemies 
of  God,  and  is  there  meant ;  the  latter  is  not.  Are  not  the  prayers  of  the  Church 
bent  against  the  enemies  of  Christ?  1,  Tea  they  are,  and  for  them  too,  in 
different  respects  ;  the  former  in  respect  of  their  wicked  works,  the  latter  in  respect 
of  their  persons.  2.  It  is  to  be  understood  of  those  who  are  adversaries  to  us,  or 
are  against  us  any  manner  of  way,  whether  they  in  that  matter  be  against  God  or 
not.  And  so  it  takes  in — (1)  Those  who  are  not  truly  and  properly  our  enemies, 
but  in  our  account  and  reckoning  only  are  enemies  to  us.  (a)  Those  whom  we 
take  for  our  enemies,  but  are  really  only  smiting  friends,  (b)  Those  whom  we 
take  for  our  enemies,  but  are  only  competitors  with  us  in  a  lawful  way.  There  is 
BO  much  selfishness  in  the  world,  and  so  little  regard  to  the  interest  of  our  neigh- 
bour, that  a  great  many  iiu  aginary  enemies  are  made  this  way.  (2)  Those  who 
are  indeed  our  enemies,  whom  we  reckon  so,  and  who  are  truly  what  we  reckon 
them.  1.  Stated  public  enemies,  who,  in  their  principles  and  by  open  profession, 
are  opposite  to  us,  and  practise  accordingly.  8uch  were  the  unbelieving  Jews, 
particularly  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  to  the  followers  of  Christ,  inwardly  hating 
them,  openly  cursing  them.  This  party-enmity  is  frequent  in  the  world,  and  it  ia 
the  bane  of  the  Church.  2.  Stated  private  enemies,  who  set  themselves  in  a  course 
of  enmity  against  such  and  such  persons.  Such  enemies  were  Herod  and  Pilate  to 
one  another  (Luke  xxiii.  12).  Such  had  Joseph's  brethren  against  him,  Ahab 
against  Micaiah,  and  Absalom  against  his  brother  Amnon.  This  is  frequent 
everywhere,  spreading  itself  like  venom  among  neighbours,  yea,  among  relations, 
and  among  neighbours  of  all  sorts.  (1)  Occasional  enemies,  who,  upon  particular 
emergent  occasions,  do  wrong  to  us  ;  but  not  from  a  stated  enmity  against  us.  If 
we  are  to  love  our  stated  enemies,  much  more  these  (Col.  ii.  13).  Both  these 
kinds  of  eaemies  are  of  three  sorts.  1.  Heart-enemies,  who  in  their  hearts  are  set 
against  us,  burning  with  grudge,  malice,  and  rancour  at  us.  The  text  is  plain  as 
to  our  duty  in  that  case,  "  Do  good  to  them  that  hate  you. "  2.  Tongue-enemies,  who 
employ  their  tongues  against  us  like  swords,  arrows,  fire,  and  scourges.  "Bless  them 
that  curse  you."  These  are  very  dangerous  enemies,  and  sometimes  give  very  deep 
and  galling  wounds  (Psa.  Ivii.  4).  And  tongue-love  will  not  pay  that  debt,  it  must 
be  heart-love  (Pro v.  x.  18).  Wit  may  furnish  the  former,  but  true  wisdom  must 
furnish  the  latter  in  that  case.  3.  Hand-enemies,  who  in  their  actions  and  deeds 
kre  enemies  to  us ;  not  only  in  their  hearts  wishing  us  ill,  and  with  their  tongues 
speaking  ill  of  us,  but  to  their  power,  and  as  they  have  occasion,  doing  ill  to  us — 
"  Pray  for  them  that  despitefuUy  use  you,  and  persecute  you."  Our  Lord  binds  us 
even  to  love  these,  and  that  while  they  are  doing  against  us.  The  comipt  heart's 
motion  is  to  do  ill  for  ill,  but  by  grace  we  must  do  good  for  ill :  that  is  heaven's 
exchange.    II.  I  oome  to  show  what  that  lots  is  which  ws  owb  to  oub  bnkmiei  : 


590  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

We  must  love  them.  It  is  necessary  to  explain  this,  both  negatively  and  posi- 
tively. First,  Negatively.  We  are  not  bound  to  love  them — I.  So  as  for  their 
sakes  to  be  reconciled  to  and  at  peace  with  their  sin.  We  must  love  and  strive  to 
please  one  another,  but  to  edification,  not  to  destruction.  2.  Neither  does  this  love 
bar  seeking  redress  of  wrongs  in  an  orderly  way.  If  God  had  meant  that  men 
should  be  in  the  earth,  like  the  fishes  in  the  sea,  where  the  greater  swallow  up  the 
lesser,  without  possibility  of  redress,  nothing  being  left  to  the  weaker  but  to  yield 
themselves,  He  had  naver  appointed  the  magistrate,  "  a  revenger  to  execute  wrath 
upon  him  that  doeth  evil "  (Rom.  xiii.  4).  3.  Neither  doth  it  bind  us  to  a  love  of 
complacency  in  them.  That  is,  we  are  not  obliged  to  take  delight  in  them,  make 
them  our  intimate  and  familiar  companions,  associate  with  them  as  our  friends, 
being  in  a  course  of  enmity  against  God.  Jehoshaphat  was  reproved  for  that 
(2  Chron.  xix.  2).  David  makes  it  a  mark  of  his  sincerity,  that  he  abstained  from 
it  (Psa.  cxxxix.  21).  Solomon  tells  us,  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be 
wise:  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed"  (Prov.  xiii.  20).  Secondly, 
Positively.  There  is  a  threefold  love  that  uses  to  be  distinguished.  First,  We  owe 
to  our  enemies,  our  real  enemies,  a  love  of  good-will  (Bom.  xiii.  9).  1.  We  must 
not  wish  them  ill  as  ill  to  them  (Psa.  xL  14).  We  must  pluck  up  the  roots  from 
which  ill  wishes  to  them  do  spring  up.  Envy,  which  looks  with  an  ill  eye  on  their 
welfare,  and  would  eat  it  up  (Jas.  iii.  16) ;  hatred,  which  blocks  up  all  good  from 
as  to  them  (Lev.  xix.  17) ;  grudge,  which  is  a  train  lying  within  the  heart,  ready  to 
be  blown  up  on  occasion  for  mischief  to  them  (Lev.  xix.  18)  ;  and  malice,  which 
like  a  burning  fire  pursues  them  with  ill-will  (Eph.  iv.  31).  Our  ill  wishes  can  do 
them  no  ill,  but  they  do  ourselves  much.  Every  ill  wish  is  an  item  in  our  acooanta 
before  God,  and  the  reigning  root  of  ill-will  to  our  neighbour  proves  one  to  be 
naught  (1  John  ii.  11).  But  this  extends  not  to  these  two  cases.  (1)  The  wishing 
one  an  Ul  for  good  to  him,  e.g.,  the  losing  of  such  an  one's  favour,  the  having  of 
which  is  a  snare  to  his  soul.  (2)  The  wishing  evil  to  a  person  for  the  good  of 
many,  as  that  one  who  is  a  corrupter  of  others,  and  incorrigible  in  it,  may  be  taken 
out  of  the  way.  2.  We  must  not  take  pleasure  in  any  ill  that  befalls  them,  as  ill 
to  them  (Prov,  xxiv.  17).  3.  We  must  heartily  wish  them  well  (1  Tim.  i.  6). 
"  Pray  for  them,"  says  the  text.  We  must  wish  them  the  best  things,  that  they 
may  be  for  ever  happy  ;  may  have  favour  and  peace  with  God  (Luke  xxxiiL  34) ; 
and  that  for  that  cause  God  may  grant  them  faith,  repentance,  and  all  other 
saving  graces.  For  it  is  a  vain  wish,  and  worse  than  vain,  to  wish  people  happy, 
living  and  going  on  in  their  sins.  4.  We  must  wish  them  well,  as  well  to  them 
(Psa.  cxxii.  8).  Men  may  wish  well  to  their  enemies,  from  a  mere  carnal  principle, 
not  as  being  well  for  them,  but  for  themselves.  That  is,  they  may  wish  them 
repentance,  &c.,  for  their  own  ease,  not  from  any  love  to  their  souls.  Secondly, 
We  owe  to  our  enemies,  our  real  enemies,  a  love  of  beneficence,  whereby  we  will  be 
ready  to  do  them  good  as  we  have  access ;  and  therefore  says  the  apostle  (1  John 
iii.  18).  1.  We  must  not  practise  revenge  upon  them,  by  doing  one  ill  turn  for 
another  they  have  done  us  (Bom.  xii.  19).  2.  We  must  not  withhold  from  them 
the  good  that  is  due  to  them  from  us  by  any  particular  tie ;  but  must  be  sure  to  be 
in  our  duty  to  them,  though  they  be  out  of  their  duty  to  us,  "  Withhold  not  good 
from  them  to  whom  it  is  due,  when  it  is  in  the  power  of  thine  hand  to  do  it " 
(Prov.  iii.  27).  3.  We  must  be  ready  to  do  them  good  as  Providence  puts  an  oppor- 
tunity in  our  hand.  "  As  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do  good  unto  all  men " 
(Gal.  vi.  10).  Now  we  must  be  ready  to  do  them  good — (1)  In  their  temporal 
interest.  "  If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  :  if  he  thirst,  give  him  drink  :  for  in 
so  doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head  "  (Bom.  xii.  20).  (2)  In  their 
spiritual  interest,  contributing  our  utmost  endeavours  as  we  have  access  for  their 
eternal  happiness  (Prov.  xi.  30).  (a)  To  speak  for  their  good  :  for  a  good  word  is 
often  of  such  usefulness  to  men,  that  it  may  be  reckoned  among  good  deeds,  (b) 
To  act  for  their  good  (Bom.  xii.  20).    III.  The  next  general  head  is  to  show,  that 

THIS   LOVINQ   OF   0T7B   ENEMIES   IS  A    NECESSABT    MABE    AND    EVIDENCE   OF  A   CHILD   Or 

God.  1.  The  living  in  malice  and  envy  against  any,  is  an  evidence  of  one  in  the 
black  state  of  nature,  a  child  of  hell.  Hence  says  the  apostle  (Tit.  iii.  3).  2.  To 
love  our  friends  and  hate  our  enemies,  is  nothing  above  the  reach  of  nature,  corrupt 
as  it  is.  3.  The  want  of  it  will  evince  the  person  to  want  the  true  love  of  God; 
and  he  who  wants  that,  surely  is  not  a  child  of  God,  but  a  child  of  the  devil.  4.  It 
is  a  necessary  consequent  of  regeneration,  and  without  that  no  man  shall  see 
heaven  (1  John  iii.  9,  10).  5.  If  we  love  not  our  enemies,  we  are  not  like  God; 
and  if  we  be  aot  like  Him,  we  are  not  His  children :  for  all  His  children  have  Hit 


OHAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE,  591 

Spirit  in  them  (Gal.  iv.  6).  And  they  all  bear  His  image  (Col.  iii.  10).  6.  If  we 
love  not  our  enemies,  we  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  so  are  none  of  Hia 
(Bom.  viii.  9).  7.  Without  this  we  are  murderers  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  so  have 
no  share  in  eternal  life.  "  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer  "  (1  John  iii. 
15).  This  shows  us  that — 1.  It  is  not  easy  to  be  a  Christian  indeed,  however  easj 
it  is  to  take  on  the  name  and  profession  of  it.  2,  Christianity  lies  in  a  Christian 
or  Christ-like  disposition  of  heart,  and  a  conduct  of  life  agreeable  thereto  (Jas.  i. 
22).  8.  Those  who  pick  and  chose  in  religion,  taking  the  easier,  and  not  meddling 
with  the  difficult  duties  thereof  laid  before  them,  do  but  deceive  themselves.  4. 
Christianity  is  the  best  friend  of  human  society.  0  how  happy  might  the  world  be 
if  it  should  obtain  1  What  peace,  safety,  and  ease  would  there  be  among  nations, 
in  neighbourhoods,  and  in  families  ?  It  would  be  an  effectual  quench-coal  to  all 
the  fightings,  quarreUings,  jarrings,  strifes,  and  wrongs,  that  take  away  the  comfort 
of  society.  5.  There  are  few  Christians  in  the  world :  the  children  of  God's  family 
are  very  rare ;  even  as  rare  as  they  are  who  love  their  enemies.  Hereby  ye  may 
discern,  whether  ye  are  the  children  of  God  or  not.  This  is  an  evidence  pro- 
posed by  Christ  Himself,  the  elder  brother  of  the  family.  But  ye  may  safely 
take  the  comfort  of  love  to  your  enemies — (1)  If  it  be  a  loving  of  them  in  deed 
and  in  truth,  and  not  in  word  and  tongue  only  (1  John  iii.  18).  Men  for  their 
own  sake  may  give  their  enemies  their  best  words  and  wishes,  while  these  are 
but  a  white  cover  of  black  hatred.  (2)  If  it  be  evangelical  in  its  spring  and  rise. 
A  good  humour,  some  particular  interest  of  men's  own,  may  go  far  in  toe  counter- 
feit of  this.  But  the  true  love  to  our  ebemies  rises  from  g  .spel  principles.  (3)  If 
it  be  universal,  not  extending  to  some  only  for  whom  we  retain  a  particular  r(  gard, 
but  to  all  whom  we  take  for  our  enemies.  For  if  the  spring  of  it  be  evangelical,  it 
will  be  universal :  since  in  that  case  the  reason  for  bearing  that  love  to  one,  is  a 
reason  for  bearing  it  to  all ;  for  being  in  charity  with  all  the  world.  To  press  this, 
let  me  suggest  the  following  motives.  1.  It  is  the  command  of  God  and  His  Sou 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  Ye  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  God  the  Father,  Sou,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  all  of  you,  and  many  of  you  have  communicated  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  Since 
ye  have  taken  on  the  external  badge  of  the  family,  walk  as  becomes  members  of 
that  holy  society.  3.  The  more  ye  have  of  this,  ye  are  the  more  like  God ;  the 
less  ye  have  of  it,  ye  are  the  more  unlike  Him.  Here  is  your  true  glory.  4.  Thia 
is  the  way  to  be  useful  in  the  world.     5.  It  will  be  much  to  your  own  advantage. 

6.  Your  claim  to  the  family  of  God  depends  on  it.  I  shall  conclude  with  a  few 
directions.  1.  Come  to  Christ,  and  unite  with  Him  by  faith  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  Beat 
up  in  your  hearts  a  deep  sense  of  your  sinfulness,  with  the  faith  of  pardon  thereof. 

3.  Ply  your  hearts  with  the  believing  thoughts  of  the  beneficence  of  God  to  Hig 
enemies,  and  the  love  of  Christ  dying  for  His  enemies  to  redeem  them  from  wrath. 

4.  Consider  that  even  your  enemies  were  made  originally  after  God's  image  f(ien. 
ix.  6),  and  they  may  be  for  all  you  know  the  objects  of  everlasting  love  ;  for  whom 
special  favour  is  secured  by  the  eternal  transaction.  5.  As  there  are  readily  none, 
but  they  have  something  desirable  about  them  ;  so  fix  ye  upon  that,  and  love  them 
for  it,  as  ye  will  love  gold,  though  ye  should  find  it  in  a  mire.  Beware  lest  the 
faults  of  others  and  their  blemishes  blind  your  eyes  to  their  beauties  and  excel- 
lencies.    6.  Consider  them  rather  as  objects  of  pity  and  compassion,  than  of  hatred. 

7.  Consider  the  shortness  of  time,  their  and  your  own  (Eccles.  ix.  6).  We  have  no 
time  to  spend  in  these  petty  quarrels  of  this  world.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Returning 
good  for  evil,  the  wiset^t  course: — Thus,  with  intimate  knowledge  of  our  common 
life,  does  Jesus  trace  the  workings  of  revengeful  irritation  down  from  the  buffet 
which  burns  upon  the  cheek,  to  the  neighbour  who  only  pesters  us  with  his  bor- 
rowing. Everywhere  he  bids  us  substitute  for  the  passion  which  calls  for  retalia- 
tion that  nobler  charity  which  repays  evil  with  good.  Shallow  or  selfish  hearts 
are  apt  to  say  this  is  to  put  a  premium  on  aggression,  and  meekly  inviie  a  repeti- 
tion of  it.  No  doubt  there  are  foolish  ways  of  yielding  a  literal  obedience  to  this 
law,  which  would  have  no  better  effect  than  to  provoke  a  second  blow  on  the  other 
oheek.  Yet  love  is  wise,  not  foolish ;  and  often  wiser  in  its  generous  confidence 
than  selfishness  in  its  calculating  suspiciousness,  which  it  terms  prudence.  God 
has  made  human  souls  more  susceptible,  on  the  whole,  to  kindness  than  to  any 
other  moral  force  ;  and  such  kindness  as  this,  which  can  not  only  forgive,  but 
Buffer,  offence,  is  fit  to  melt  the  rock  and  to  tame  the  brute.  Good,  by  the  simple 
and  lovely  strength  of  its  own  goodness,  does  in  the  end  overcome  evil ;  or  if  it 
does  not,  it  is  because  evil  cannot  be  overcome.  At  all  events,  when  a  patient 
lover  of  men  is  trying,  by  anaffected  meekness  and  unrequited  generosity,  to  weai 


593  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTSATOR.  [chap.  n. 

oat  the  evil-doing  of  the  bad  and  shame  them  into  penitence,  he  is  only  taking  the 
coarse  which  both  God's  wisdom  has  prescribed  and  God's  own  love  bias  followed. 
It  is  not  by  His  words  only,  but  much  more  by  His  acts,  that  Jesus  has  fulfilled 
this  law  which  substitutes  generosity  for  revenge.  In  His  person  we  see  the 
supreme  example  of  His  own  rule.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  good  use  of  an 
enemy : — It  was  the  opinion  of  Diogenes,  that  our  Ufe  had  need  either  of  faithful 
friends,  or  sharp  and  severe  enemies.  And  indeed  our  enemies  oftentimes  do  as 
more  good  than  those  we  esteem  our  friends ;  for  a  friend  will  often  pass  ovei 
ordinary  failings,  and  out  of  respect,  conniv^ince,  or  self-interest,  speak  only  what 
shall  be  grateful,  or,  at  least,  not  displeasing ;  while  an  enemy  will  catch  at  every 
error,  and  sets  himself  as  a  spy  upon  all  our  actions,  whereby,  as  by  a  tyrant* 
governor,  we  are  kept  impaled  within  the  bounds  of  virtue  and  prudence,  beyond 
whose  limits  if  we  dare  to  wander,  we  are  presently  whipped  by  him  into  the  circle 
of  discretion.  Like  the  sergeant  of  a  regiment,  if  we  be  out  of  rank,  he  checks  as 
again  into  the  place  and  file  appointed  us.  To  a  fool,  he  is  the  bellows  of  passion ; 
but  to  a  wise  man,  he  may  be  made  a  schoolmaster  of  virtue.  An  enemy  also,  not 
only  hinders  the  growth  and  progress  of  our  vices,  but  enkindles,  exercises,  and 
exalts  our  virtues.  Our  patience  is  improved,  by  bearing  calmly  the  indignities  he 
strives  to  load  us  with ;  our  charity  is  enfiamed  by  returning  good  for  ill,  and  by 
pardoning  and  forgiving  the  injuries  he  does  us ;  our  prudence  is  increased  by 
wisely  managing  ourselves  in  our  demeanour,  so  as  not  to  give  him  opportunity  to 
wound  us ;  our  fortitude  is  strengthened  by  a  manful  repelling  of  scorns,  and  by 
giving  occasions  for  the  display  of  an  undaunted  courage  in  all  our  actions ;  our 
industry  is  strengthened  and  confirmed  by  watching  all  his  attacks  and  stratagems ; 
and  by  our  contriving  how  we  may  best  acquit  ourselves  in  all  our  contests.  And 
doubtless  we  ought,  in  another  respect,  to  be  thankful  for  an  enemy.  He  causes  us 
to  show  the  world  our  parts  and  piety,  which  else  perhaps  might  go  with  us  to  our 
dark  graves,  and  moulder  and  die  with  us,  quite  unknown;  or,  could  not  otherwise 
well  be  seen,  without  the  vanity  of  a  light  and  ostentatious  mind.  Miltiades  had 
missed  his  trophy,  if  he  had  missed  an  enemy  in  the  Marathonian  fields.  Our 
enemies,  then,  are  to  be  reckoned  in  the  number  of  those  by  whom  we  may  be 
rendered  better  if  we  will.  As  the  hardest  stone  is  the  most  proper  for  a  basis,  so 
there  is  not  a  better  pedestal  to  raise  a  trophy  of  our  virtues  upon,  than  an  outward 
enemy,  if  we  can  but  keep  ourselves  from  inward  enemies,  our  vices  and  our 
weaknesses.  {Owen  Felltham.)  Returning  good  for  evil : — Difference  between 
man's  way  of  doing  it  and  God's  way.  When  we  do  it  we  fail  in  various  ways.  1. 
Sometimes  it  is  done  through  sycophancy  or  cowardice.  2.  Through  weakness  or 
easy  indulgence ;  we  "  return  good  "  to  a  spoilt  child  (or  dependant)  for  evil  which 
requires  checking,  by  selfishly  or  idly  ignoring  it.  3.  Through  indifference  or 
apathy,  want  of  sensitiveness  and  real  abhorrence  of  evil ;  we  "  take  no  notice,"  we 
condone  and  are  tolerant  of  it,  thinking  th'os  to  "  return  good."  4.  We  calculate 
that  our  good-returning  will  pay  us ;  in  praise  and  influence  or  reputation  for 
instance.  5.  We  do  it  at  the  wrong  time  (i.e.,  what  is  good  for  the  evil-doer  at  one 
time  is  bad  for  him  at  another) ;  or  we  return  a  wrong  (i.e.,  unsuitable)  kind  or 
form  of  good  and  in  the  wrong  way  ;  so  that  it  is  perverted  and  misunderstood, 
and  becomes  evil.  6.  We  do  it  so  as  to  encourage  the  evil-doer  to  repeat  his 
injury  on  another,  perhaps  more  helpless ;  we  harden  him  by  impanity,  we  refuse 
to  help  him  against  himself.  There  is  thus  nothing  more  vitally  important  in 
returning  good  for  evil  than  to  be  sure  that  it  is  good  in  the  highest  sense  of  the 
word ;  God's  own  good,  not  our  selfish  or  shallow  or  one-sided  notions  of  it. 
The  difficult  commandment: — I.  Illustrate  this  dutt.  1.  The  objects — "Enemies.** 
2.  The  feelings  we  must  exercise  towards  them — "Love."  (1)  So  as  deeply  to 
compassionate  them — feel  for  them — and  sincerely  pity  them.  (2)  That  we  forgive 
them.  (3)  That  we  pray  for  them.  (4)  That  we  are  ready  to  reheve  them,  and 
do  them  good.  (5)  That  we  are  willing  to  receive  them  to  favour  and  friendship 
on  signs  of  repentance.  IL  Enforce  this  dutt.  1.  On  the  ground  of  Christ's 
indisputable  authority.  2.  On  the  ground  of  Christ's  blessed  example.  3.  Our 
acceptance  with  God  is  suspended  upon  it.  4.  It  is  essential  to  true  religion 
here,  and  to  happiness  hereafter.  III.  Answer  objections.  It  is  objected — 1. 
"  That  it  is  incompatible  with  self-love."  We  reply,  that  we  are  not  to  love  the 
injury,  but  the  injurer;  and  the  soul's  sweetest  felicity  will  thus  be  produced. 
2.  "  Bevenge  is  sweet."  It  is  so  to  demons,  and  wicked  men  who  possess  the  spirit 
of  the  wicked  one.  But  mercy  and  pity  only  are  really  sweet  to  those  who  are 
renewed  in  their  hearts  by  the  saving  grace  of  God.  3.  "  Revenge  is  honoorable."  U 


OHiLP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  SM 

18  false  honour — the  honour  of  a  bad  world,  and  of  depraved  hearts.  It  is  me 
glory  of  the  blessed  God  to  forgive  ns,  who  have  been  enemies  to  Him ;  and  it  is 
oar  highest  dignity  to  be  conformed  to  His  holy  image.  4.  "  It  is  impossible." 
So  it  is  to  the  carnal  mind,  without  Divine  aid,  without  crucifying  our  own  carnal 
self.  Stephen  prayed  for  his  murderers.  And  the  blessed  Jesus,  who  knows  what 
is  in  man,  and  what  he  is  capable  of  doing,  and  whose  yoke  is  easy,  has  enjoined 
it;  and  therefore,  however  diflScuIt,  it  is  evidently  possible.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.) 
Love  to  an  enemy  : — During  the  American  Bevolutionary  War  there  was  living,  in 
Permsylvania,  Peter  Miller,  pastor  of  a  little  Baptist  Church.  Near  the  church 
lived  a  man  who  secured  an  unenviable  notoriety  by  his  abuse  of  Miller  and  the 
Baptists.  He  was  also  guilty  of  treason,  and  was  for  this  sentenced  to  death.  No 
sooner  was  the  sentence  pronounced  than  Peter  Miller  set  out  on  foot  to  visit 
General  Washington,  at  Philadelphia,  to  intercede  for  the  man's  life.  He  was  told 
that  his  prayer  could  not  be  granted.  "My  friend  1"  exclaimed  Miller,  "I  have 
not  a  worse  enemy  living  than  that  man."  "What,"  rejoined  Washington,  "you 
have  walked  sixty  miles  to  save  the  life  of  your  enemy?  That  in  my  judgment 
puts  the  matter  in  a  different  light.  I  will  grant  you  his  pardon. "  The  pardon 
was  made  out,  and  Miller  at  once  proceeded  on  foot  to  a  place  fifteen  miles  distant, 
where  the  execution  was  to  take  place  on  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day.  He 
arrived  just  as  the  man  was  being  carried  to  the  scaffold,  who,  seeing  Miller  in  the 
crowd,  remarked :  "  There  is  old  Peter  Miller.  He  has  walked  all  the  way  from 
Ephrata  to  have  his  revenge  gratified  to-day  by  seeing  me  hung."  These  words 
were  scarcely  spoken  before  Miller  gave  him  his  pardon,  and  his  life  was  spared. 
A  proof  of  the  gospel  being  from  God : — Henry  Clay  once  replied  to  some  sneering 
allusion  to  the  character  of  American  Evangelical  Christianity :  •♦  I  do  not  know 
practically  what  the  Churches  call  religion.  I  wish  I  did.  But  I  do  know  what 
it  effects."  And  then  reciting  the  case  of  a  bitter  feud  between  two  neighbouring 
families  in  Kentucky  which  had  kept  the  community  in  a  ferment  for  years,  but  at 
last  had  been  settled  by  the  conversion  of  both  parties,  he  said  :  "  I  tell  you  that 
whatever  will  change  a  Kentucky  feud  into  a  fellowship  so  soon  and  effectively  is  of 
God.  No  power  short  of  His  could  do  it."  Doing  good  to  an  enemy : — In  the  old 
persecuting  times  there  lived  in  Cheapside  one  who  feared  God  and  attended  the 
secret  meetings  of  the  saints ;  and  near  him  there  dwelt  a  poor  cobbler,  whose 
wants  were  often  relieved  by  the  merchant ;  but  the  poor  man  was  a  cross-grained 
being,  and  most  ungratefully,  from  hope  of  reward,  laid  an  information  against  his 
kind  friend  on  the  score  of  religion.  This  accusation  would  have  brought  the 
merchant  to  death  by  burning  if  he  had  not  found  a  means  of  escape.  Returning 
to  his  house,  the  injured  man  did  not  change  his  generous  behaviour  to  the 
mahgnant  cobbler,  but,  on  the  contrary,  was  more  liberal  than  ever.  The  cobbler 
wag,  however,  in  an  ill  mood,  and  avoided  the  good  man  with  all  his  might,  running 
away  at  his  approach.  One  day  he  was  obliged  to  meet  him  face  to  face,  and  the 
Christian  man  asked  him  gently,  ♦'  Why  do  you  shun  me  ?  I  am  not  your  enemy. 
I  know  all  that  you  did  to  injure  me,  but  I  never  had  an  angry  thought  against 
you.  I  have  helped  you,  and  I  am  willing  to  do  so  as  long  as  I  live,  only  let 
ns  be  friends."  Do  you  marvel  that  they  clasped  hands  ?  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Returning  good  for  evil : — Arcadius,  an  Argive,  was  incessantly  railing  at  Philip  of 
Macedon.  Venturing  once  into  the  dominions  of  Philip,  the  courtiers  reminded 
their  prince  that  he  had  now  an  opportunity  to  punish  Arcadius  for  his  past  inso- 
lences, and  to  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  repeat  them.  The  king,  however,  instead 
of  seizing  the  hostile  stranger  and  putting  him  to  death,  dismissed  him  loaded  with 
courtesies  and  kindnesses.  Some  time  after  Arcadius's  departure  from  Macedon, 
word  was  brought  that  the  king's  old  enemy  was  become  one  of  his  warmest  friends, 
and  did  nothing  but  diffuse  his  praises  wherever  he  went.  On  hearing  this,  Philip 
turned  to  his  courtiers,  and  asked,  with  a  smile,  "  Am  not  I  a  better  physician  than 
you?"  Good  for  evil: — A  man  was  seen  one  day  going  in  a  boat  on  a  river  with 
a  large  dog,  which  he  wished  to  get  rid  of  by  drowning.  He  succeeded  in  throwing 
the  animal  into  the  water ;  but  the  creature  sought  to  re-enter  the  boat.  As  the 
man  was  attempting  to  beat  off  the  dog  from  the  boat,  he  fell  overboard,  and 
would  have  been  drowned,  had  not  the  dog  seized  him  by  his  coat,  and  brought 
him  to  the  shore.  Lave  to  enemies  : — A  few  poor  Cherokee  women,  who  had  been 
converted  to  Christianity,  formed  themselves  into  a  society  for  the  propagation  of 
the  gospel,  which  was  now  become  so  dear  to  them.  The  produce  of  the  first  year 
was  about  ten  dollars,  and  the  question  was,  To  what  immediate  object  this  should 
be  applied  ?    At  length  a  poor  woman  proposed  that  it  should  be  given  to  promote 

88 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  n, 

the  circulation  of  the  gospel  in  the  Osage  nation ;  '•  For,"  said  she,  "  the  Mastei 
has  told  U8  to  love  and  do  good  to  our  enemies,  and  I  believe  the  Osages  are  th« 
greatest  enemies  the  Cherokees  have."  Dr.  Mather's  ambition: — It  was  the 
laudable  ambition  of  Cotton  Mather  to  be  able  to  say,  that  "  he  did  not  know  of  any 
person  in  the  world  who  had  done  him  an  ill  ofiBce,  but  he  had  done  him  a  good 
one  for  it."  The  Chinese  monarch  and  the  rebels  : — A  Chinese  emperor  being 
told  that  his  enemies  had  raised  an  insurrection  in  one  of  the  distant  provinces, 
"  Come,  then,  my  friends,"  said  he,  "follow  me,  and  I  promise  you  that  we  shall 
quickly  destroy  them."  He  marched  forward,  and  the  rebels  submitted  upon  hia 
approach.  All  now  thought  that  he  would  take  the  most  signal  revenge ;  but  were 
surprised  to  see  the  captives  treated  with  mildness  and  humanity.  "How," 
cried  the  first  minister;  "is  this  the  manner  in  which  you  fulfil  your  promise? 
Your  royal  word  was  given  that  your  enemies  should  be  destroyed ;  and  behold  yon 
have  pardoned  them  all,  and  even  caressed  some  of  them  !  "  "I  promised," replied 
the  emperor,  with  a  gracious  air,  "  to  destroy  my  enemies.  I  have  fulfilled  my 
•word  ;  for,  see,  they  are  enemies  no  longer  ;  I  have  made  friends  of  them  1  "  Let 
every  Christian  imitate  so  noble  an  example,  and  learn  to  overcome  evil  with  good. 
Literal  obedience  ;  or,  rules  versus  principles : — It  is  said  that  many  years  ago  an 
eminent  minister  of  the  gospel,  who  had  been  a  great  athlete  in  his  youth,  on 
returning  to  his  native  town  soon  after  he  had  been  ordained,  encountered  in  the 
High  Street  an  old  companion  whom  he  had  often  fought  and  thrashed  in  his 
godless  days.  "So,  you've  turned  Christian,  they  tell  me,  Charley?"  said  the 
man.  "  Yes,"  replied  the  minister.  "  Well,  then,  you  know  the  Book  says,  II 
you're  struck  on  one  cheek,  you're  to  turn  the  other.  Take  that " ;  and  with  that 
he  hit  him  a  stinging  blow.  "There  then,"  replied  the  minister,  quietly,  turning  the 
other  side  of  his  face  toward  him.  The  man  was  brute  enough  to  strike  him  heavily 
again.  Whereupon  the  minister  said, "  And  there  my  commission  ends,"  pulled 
off  his  coat,  and  gave  his  antagonist  a  severe  thrashing,  which  no  doubt  he  richly 
deserved.  But  did  the  minister  keep  the  command  of  Christ?  He  obeyed  the 
letter  of  the  rule :  but  did  he  not  violate  the  principle,  the  spirit,  of  it  ?  Hear  th« 
other  story,  and  judge.  It  is  told  of  a  celebrated  officer  in  the  army  that,  as  he 
stood  leaning  over  a  wall  in  the  barrack-yard,  one  of  his  military  servants, 
mistaking  him  for  a  comrade,  came  softly  up  behind  him,  and  suddenly  struck  him 
a  hard  blow.  When  the  officer  looked  round,  his  servant,  covered  with  confusion, 
stammered  out,  "  I  beg  your  pardon,  sir ;  I  thought  it  was  George."  His  master 
gently  replied:  •♦And  if  it  were  George,  why  strike  so  hard?"  Now  which  of 
these  two,  think  you,  really  obeyed  the  command  of  Christ  ?  the  minister  who  made 
a  rule  of  it  and  kept  to  the  letter  of  the  rule,  or  the  officer  who  made  a  principle 
of  it,  and  acting  on  the  spirit  of  it,  neglected  the  letter?  Obviously,  the 
minister  disobeyed  the  command  in  obeying  it,  while  the  officer  obeyed 
the  command  in  disobeying  it.  And  here  we  may  see  the  immense  superiority 
of  a  principle  over  a  rule.  Take  a  rule,  any  rule,  and  there  is  only  one 
way  of  keeping  it,  the  way  of  literal  obedience,  and  this  may  often  prove 
a  foolish  and  even  a  disobedient  way.  But  get  a  principle,  and  there  are  a 
thousand  ways  in  which  you  may  apply  it,  all  of  which  may  be  wise,  beneficial  to 
you,  and  no  less  beneficial  to  your  neighbour.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Turning  the  other 
cheek  : — A  Swiss  colporteur  entered  a  three-story  house,  in  which,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  country,  three  different  families  lived.  He  began  with  the  highest 
story,  and  sold  copies  of  the  Scriptures  in  this  and  in  the  next.  On  inquiring 
about  the  family  on  the  ground-floor,  he  was  warned  not  to  enter,  but  he  did  enter. 
He  found  both  the  man  and  his  wife  at  home.  He  offered  his  Bibles  ;  his  offer  was 
replied  to  with  abuse,  and  a  positive  order  to  leave  the  house  instantaneously ;  he, 
however,  stayed,  urging  them  to  buy  and  read  God's  holy  Word.  The  man  then 
rose  in  a  violent  rage,  and  struck  him  a  severe  blow  on  the  cheek.  Up  to  this 
moment  the  colporteur  stood  quietly  with  his  knapsack  on  his  back.  He  now 
deliberately  unstrapped  it,  laid  it  on  the  table,  and  turned  up  the  sleeve  of  his  right 
arm,  all  the  while  steadily  looking  his  opponent  in  the  face.  The  colporteur  was 
a  very  strong  man.  Addressing  his  opponent  he  said,  "  Look  at  my  hand — its 
furrows  show  that  I  have  worked ;  feel  my  muscles — they  show  that  I  am  fit  for 
work.  Look  me  straight  in  the  face;  do  I  quail  before  you?  Judge,  then,  for 
yourself  if  it  is  fear  that  moves  me  to  do  what  I  am  about  to  do.  In  this  Book  my 
Master  says,  •  When  they  smite  you  on  one  cheek,  turn  to  them  the  other  also.' 
You  have  smitten  me  on  one  cheek  ;  here  is  the  other  I  Smite  I  I  will  not  return 
ike  blow."    The  man  was  thunderstruck.     He  did  not  smite,  but  bought  the  Book, 


CHAP.  ▼!.]  ST.  LUKE.  595 

which,  tinder  the  influence  of  God's  Spirit,  works  marvels  in  the  hnman  heart.  {W. 
Baxendale.)  Bible  precepts  to  be  spiritualUj  interpreted : — You  cannot  make  language 
more  explicit,  yet  I  say  that  to  carry  it  out  literally  would  be  to  pervert  human  society 
so  that  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  Christianity  in  this  world.  I  affirm  this, 
not  theoretically,  but  as  the  result  of  the  revelation  of  God's  providence  among  men, 
and  as  a  fulfilment  of  God's  teaching  in  revelation — that  great  unending  perpetual 
revelation  that  is  going  on  in  the  human  race.  It  would  destroy  the  whole  frame- 
work and  order  of  society.  That  in  a  far-off  state,  that  in  the  ripeness  of  human 
development,  the  law  of  non-resistance  will  have  a  universal  application,  I  think 
to  be  more  than  likely ;  but  that  it  should  have  a  universal  application  now  is  not 
possible.  Take  another  point,  that  of  almsgiving.  Do  our  friends,  the  Quakers, 
who  insist  upon  the  literal  translation  of  the  passage  on  the  subject  of  non-resis- 
tance, take  a  literal  view  of  this  passage  also  ?  Do  they  put  their  hands  in  their 
pockets  for  ail  that  ask  of  them,  and  draw  them  out  full  ?  No.  "  This,"  they  say, 
"  you  are  to  take  in  its  spirit."  Yes,  I  say  that  you  are  to  take  it  in  its  spirit,  and 
not  in  its  letter.  A  literal  interpretation  of  it  would  slay  mankind,  almost.  It 
would  well-nigh  destroy  the  business-life  of  organized  society.  It  would  break  up 
fellowship  between  man  and  man.  It  would  promote  the  very  opposite  of  that 
which  it  is  the  object  of  the  New  Testament  to  inculcate.  Take  the  spirit  of  the 
command.  Interpret  it  as  enjoining  the  practice  of  generosity,  of  helpfulness,  of 
kindness  one  toward  another.  Accept  it  as  inculcating  a  disposition  in  every  man 
to  look,  not  on  his  own  things,  but  on  the  things  of  others.  That  is  to  say,  make 
it  a  principle  adaptable  according  to  your  feeling  and  judgment.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Cloak  and  coat : — The  Jews  of  the  first  century  always  wore  the  tunic  and  mantle 
or  robe.  These  were  the  two  indispensable  garments.  The  tunic  was  of  linen. 
It  fitted  the  figure,  had  sleeves  and  came  down  to  the  feet.  It  was  worn  next  to 
the  skin,  or  over  an  undergarment  of  linen  very  full  and  long.  That  of  the  rabbi, 
scribe,  or  doctor,  was  specially  large,  and  yet  was  not  to  be  visible  more  than  a 
handbreadth  under  the  mantle.  The  mantle  or  robe  was  worn  over  all.  A  man 
must  be  very  poor  to  have  only  one  cloak,  and  yet  this  is  what  Christ  enjoined  on 
His  disciples.  According  to  Luke's  Gospel  He  said  one  day,  "  If  any  man  will  take 
away  thy  cloak,  forbid  him  not  take  thy  coat  also."  This  precept  can  be  under- 
stood; a  robber  would  naturally  lay  hold  first  of  the  outer  garment.  But  Matthew 
puts  it  the  other  way.  Under  this  form  it  is  harder  to  understand,  and  we  may 
well  suppose  that  in  transcribing  [Matthew's  -version]  the  copyist  may  have 
misplaced  the  two  words  coat  and  cloak.  (E.  Stopfer,  D.D.)  Almsgiving : — Many 
of  you  know  the  name  of  William  Law,  the  author  of  the  "  Serious  Call  to  a  Devout 
and  Holy  Life."  He  was  one  of  the  best  of  clergymen,  and  was  bent  on  leading  a 
life  of  Christian  obedience  in  the  most  thorough  and  unshrinking  manner.  He 
and  two  rich  friends  agreed  to  Uve  together,  and  to  spend  as  little  as  possible  on 
themselves,  and  to  give  away  almost  their  joint  income.  They  did  so  by  relieving 
all  who  applied  to  them  and  who  represented  themselves  as  in  want.  The  result 
was  that  they  attracted  crowds  of  idle  and  lying  mendicants.  For  a  long  time  Law 
ehut  his  eyes  to  the  evil  of  which  he  and  his  friends  were  thus  the  occasion ;  until 
at  last  his  fellow-parishioners  were  driven  to  present  a  memorial  to  the  magistrates, 
entreating  them  in  some  way  to  prevent  Mr.  Law  from  thus  demoralizing  their 
parish.  A  sad  and  pathetic  incident  illustrating  the  perplexities  and  contradictions 
of  human  life  1  The  best  men  are  not  above  the  need  of  learning  wisdom  from 
experience.  The  real  Christian  duty  of  these  good  people  was  not  to  be  less  self- 
denying  and  liberal,  but  to  consider  anxiously  how  they  might  lay  out  their  means 
80  as  to  do  the  most  good  and  the  least  evil.  If  you  give  sixpence  to  a  poor 
creature,  when  you  know,  or  may  know,  if  you  think  or  inquire,  that  the  sixpence 
will  be  turned  at  once  into  intoxicating  drink,  you  are  putting  a  stumbling-block  or 
occasion  of  falling  in  the  way  of  a  brother  or  sister  for  whom  Christ  died.  What 
is  it  that  forbids  you  to  do  this  ?  Is  it  political  economy  ?  Perhaps,  but  it  is  certainly 
also  Christian  duty,  Christian  love.  I  once  heard  an  excellent  clergyman  say, 
*'  Warn  as  you  will,  if  I  were  to  refuse  help  to  the  apparently  hungry  woman  who 
begs  me  to  give  her  food,  I  could  not  eat  my  own  dinner  in  comfort."  My  answer 
to  such  a  remark  would  be,  "What  does  it  matter  whether  you  eat  your  own  dinner 
in  comfort  or  not  ?  This  is  a  very  secondary  consideration,  compared  with  the 
question  of  doing  good  or  harm  to  the  brother  or  sister  for  whom  Christ  died." 
People  are  imposed  upon,  as  we  say,  not  unfrequently  :  when  they  find  it  out  they 
are  vexed ;  but  too  often  their  regret  is  limited  to  their  own  hamiliation,  to  their  own 
imignificant  loss  ;  and  they  fail  to  reproach  themselves  for  having  in  their  oar» 


596  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [aai9.  n. 

lessnesB  pot  an  oooasion  of  falling  in  the  vay  of  (he  weak  brother  for  whom  ChxisI 
died.    (</.  H.  Daviet,  M.A.) 

Yer.  81.  And  as  ye  wotild  that  men  should  do  to  yon,  do  ye  also  to  them  like* 
wise. — What  would  we  that  men  thould  do  unto  us  t — 1.  That  they  should  deal 
with  us  honestly.  2.  That  they  should  treat  us  generously.  3.  That  they  should 
deal  with  us  faithfully ;  warning  us  of  any  danger  into  which  we  are  liable  to  f aU. 
4.  That  they  should  be  patient  with  us.  (H.  S,  Brown.)  The  royal  law : — I. 
The  iiA.w  ITSELF — 1.  Teaches  us  to  take  the  initiative ;  to  begin  to  do  for  others 
what  we  conceive  they  ought  to  do  for  as.  2.  Teaches  as  that  the  standard  we  set 
np  for  others  must  be  the  measure  of  our  own  conduct.  3.  Teaches  us  that  the 
end  of  our  duty  is  the  good  of  humanity.  II.  The  wobkiko  of  the  law.  1.  In 
the  home-life.  2.  In  our  social  relationships.  3.  In  relation  to  business  in  all 
shapes  and  forms.  4.  In  relation  to  party  politics.  6.  In  relation  to  church- 
life.  (J.  B.  Walton,  B.A.)  "Do  at  you  would  be  done  by": — Men  who 
neglect  Christianity  nevertheless  do  acknowledge  this  precept;  men  of  ex- 
perience, practical,  intelligent,  when  talked  to  upon  the  subject  of  religion 
will  not  scruple  to  say:  "My  religion  is  this — *  Do  as  you  would  be  done 
by.'"  And  yet  they  fail  to  apply  this  to  the  claim  of  Jesus  Christ  upon 
them.  All  who  have  lived  and  died,  all  who  are  now  living — all  combined,  have 
not  the  claim  on  my  life  that  Jesus  Christ  has.  I  ask  yoa  how  you  dare  to  say 
that  all  your  religion  is  "  Do  as  you  would  be  done  by,"  if  you  fail  to  apply  it  to 
Him  who  has  done  so  much  for  you.  Do  it,  and  you  must  dedicate  all  you  have 
and  all  you  are  to  His  glory.  (Dr.  Deems.)  Was  the  golden  rule  original  f — 
The  gold  in  the  Golden  Eule  is  not  its  newness  but  its  goodness.  (A.  Macleod, 
D.D.)  The  rule  and  the  test  of  morality  : — The  light  and  warmth  of  the  sun 
no  more  clearly  bespeak  the  hand  that  formed  it,  than  the  excellence  of  this  rule 
of  conduct  declares  it  to  be  from  God.  Although  no  rule  is  perhaps  so  universally 
admired,  yet  none  is  more  universally  broken.  I.  To  explain  the  bule.  In 
explaining  the  rule,  let  us  examine  the  different  parts  of  it.  "  All  things  whatso- 
ever." This  clause  declares  its  universal  extent.  We  may  do  some  things,  perhaps 
many  things,  to  others  which  we  would  wish  them  to  do  to  us,  and  yet  in  many 
other  things  be  wholly  and  habitually  selfish.  A  man,  for  example,  may  give  food 
to  the  hungry,  but  habitually  overreach  and  defraud.  No  matter  who  he  is,  whether 
friend  or  enemy,  if  he  is  a  fellow-creature,  one  of  your  own  species,  a  man,  you 
must  be  governed  by  this  rule  in  all  that  you  do  toward  him,  "  Do  ye  even  so." 
In  this  clause  we  are  directed  not  only  to  do  the  things  themselves  which  we  would 
that  others  should  do  to  us,  but  also  to  the  utmost  exactness  in  doing  so.  What, 
then,  are  we  to  understand  by  the  clause,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should 
do  to  you "  ?  It  has  commonly  been  supposed,  by  commentators,  that  a  literal 
interpretation  of  this  text  is  inconsistent  with  other  plain  scriptural  duties,  and 
that  therefore  the  rule  is  to  be  explained  by  certain  qualifications  or  restrictions 
not  expressed  in  it;  for  our  desires  of  good  from  others  may  be  selfish  and 
extravagant,  and  to  make  such  desires  the  measure  of  what  we  are  to  do  to  others, 
would  in  many  cases  be  doing  what  is  not  required,  as  well  as  what  is  forbidden. 
For  example,  a  rich  man  may  feel  and  say,  "  If  I  were  in  that  poor  man's  place 
and  he  in  mine,  I  should  wish  him  to  give  me  his  estate ;  and  now,  if  I  am  to  do 
as  I  would  be  done  by,  I  am  to  show  him  the  same  kindness,  and  give  him  my 
estate."  This  difficulty  evidently  arises  from  inadequate  views  of  the  text.  The 
rule  contains  its  own  explanation  and  limitation.  If  I  am  to  do  to  others  as  I 
would  that  they  should  do  to  me,  then  I  am  to  love  them  as  I  love  myself ;  not 
them  more  than  myself,  nor  myself  more  than  them.  If,  therefore,  I  were  to  give 
my  estate,  it  I  were  rich,  to  a  poor  man,  I  should  do  that  which  in  this  respect  would 
imply  that  I  loved  him  more  than  myself,  which  would  be  a  palpable  violation  of 
the  rule.  Besides,  how  can  I,  putting  myself  in  the  poor  man's  place,  wish  another 
to  give  me  his  estate — wish  that  he  should  impoverish  himself  to  enrich  me, 
without  violating  the  rule.  In  this  very  wish  I  am  desiring  my  own  happiness 
more  than  my  neighbour's,  and  thus  I  counteract  the  very  spirit  and  letter  of  the 
rule  itself.  In  deciding  what  we  would  that  others  should  do  to  os— 1.«.,  in  form- 
ing our  desires  of  good  from  others — we  are  to  remember  that  we  are  to  cherish 
the  same  desires  to  impart  good  to  them.  Thus  one  desire  is  to  check  and  regulate 
and  define  the  other.  Thus  the  rule  aims  directly  at  the  atter  extinction  of  all 
selfish  inordinate  desires  of  good,  and  requires  simply  that  what  we  would  on 
disinterested  principles  desire  bom  others,  were  we  in  their  eiroomstances  and  they 


CBir.  TT.]  ST.  LUKE.  W7 

in  onrs,  we  are  to  do  to  them.  Let  ns  examine  this  a  little  farther.  We  are  to  do 
to  others  what  we  would  on  truly  benevolent  principles  desire  from  them.  The 
«xistence  of  the  happiness  of  one  man,  other  things  being  equal,  is  of  equal  value 
with  that  of  another.  The  simple  fact  that  the  happiness  of  one  of  the  two  ia 
mine,  gives  it  no  additional  value.  It  has  precisely  the  same  value  as  when  it  is 
the  happiness  of  another.  All  the  value  which  I  can  reasonably  attach  to  my 
happiness,  because  it  is  mine,  he  can  aa  reasonably  attach  to  his,  because  it  is  his. 
All  that  I  am  to  myself  he  is  to  himself,  and  all  that  I  am  as  it  respects  him  he  is  aa 
it  respects  me.  The  reason  why  I  should  regard  his  happiness  as  much  as  my  own, 
circumstances  being  the  same,  is  as  plain  and  conclusive  as  that  things  of  equal 
value  ought  to  be  equally  loved  or  desired.  If  my  right  lays  him  under  obligation 
io  me,  his  right  lays  me  under  the  same  obligation  to  him.  There  is  a  great 
diversity  in  the  character  and  stations  of  men.  It  is  very  desirable  there  should 
be,  and  as  it  is  not  in  our  power  so  it  is  not  our  duty,  on  principles  of  true  benevo- 
lence, to  wish  to  alter  them.  There  is,  therefore,  a  consequent  variety  of  dutiea 
owed  to  men.  But  we  can  easily  determine,  by  the  rule  before  us,  what  these 
duties  are.  Thus  a  ruler  is  to  treat  his  subjects  as  he  would  wish  to  be  treated 
were  he  a  subject.  But  he  is  not  bound  to  yield  that  submission  to  his  subjects 
which,  as  a  ruler,  he  justly  demands  of  them.  This  he  could  not  do  without 
sacrificing  the  public  good  to  private  interest — i.e.,  he  could  not  do  it  on  disin- 
terested principles.  For,  if  he  were  a  subject,  he  could  not  on  such  principles  wish 
for  the  submission  and  obedience  of  a  ruler  to  himself.  A  judge  is  not  required  to 
acquit,  though  he  might  on  selfish  principles  wish,  were  he  the  criminal,  to  be 
acquitted,  because  he  could  not  on  benevolent  principles  wish  the  laws  of  justice 
to  be  abandoned,  and  the  guilty  to  go  unpunished.  Thus,  too,  a  parent  or  head  of 
a  family  is  not  required  to  neglect  to  promote  the  welfare  of  his  own  household,  to 
promote  the  welfare  of  his  neighbours,  because  on  truly  disinterested  principles  he 
could  not  wish  his  neighbour  to  do  so  by  him.  So,  also,  an  individual  is  not 
required  to  sacrifice  his  own  happiness  to  promote  an  equal  degree  of  happiness  in 
another  individual,  because  it  is  as  right  that  the  former  should  enjoy  it,  if  but  one 
can  enjoy  it,  as  that  the  latter  should ;  and  therefore  the  former  could  not,  on 
truly  disinterested  principles,  desire  that  the  latter  should  do  so  by  him.  On  the 
same  principle  we  are  not  required  to  put  our  property  into  common  stock  for  the 
equal  benefit  of  all.  This  would  tend,  as  a  general  rule,  to  promote  so  many  evils, 
that  if  we  were  poor  we  could  not,  on  benevolent  principles,  desire  it.  The  amount 
of  this  rule  of  oar  Lord  is,  that  in  determining  wlmt  our  duty  is  to  others,  and  in 
performing  it,  our  selfishness  is  to  have  no  voice  and  no  influence.  It  is  as  if  our 
Lord  had  said :  Begard  your  neighbour  in  his  wants,  his  rights,  his  happiness,  as 
another  self.  Ask,  then,  how,  as  a  reasonable,  disinterested  man,  you  would  be 
treated  by  him :  and  treat  him  exactly  in  that  manner.  11.  To  enforce  the  duty. 
1.  God  has  commanded  it.  2.  The  duty  is  obviously  reasonable  and  right.  3. 
This  rule  has  a  most  direct  and  effectual  tendency  to  promote  the  happiness  of 
men.  4.  Obedience  to  this  rule  is  the  most  ennobling  character  of  man.  The 
spirit  inculcated  is  the  very  opposite  of  selfishness ;  and  selfishness  is  the  very 
eubstance  of  moral  degradation.  But  behold  the  man  who  loves  his  neigbbour  as 
himself  1  Behold  him  raised,  as  it  were  to  heaven,  by  the  principles  just  described  ; 
behold  his  heart  fixed  on  the  good  of  his  fellow-men,  his  friends,  his  enemies,  his 
neighbour,  and  the  stranger,  as  on  his  own  happiness  !  What  is  there  lovely,  what 
of  good  report,  what  of  moral  beauty,  that  does  not  shine  in  such  a  character  ? 
Is  it  not  real  greatness  to  be  like  him  ?  5.  We  can  neither  be  fit  for,  nor  admitted 
into  heaven  without  this  character.  It  is  impossible  not  to  see  in  every  page  of 
the  Scriptures  the  necessity  of  a  fitness  for  heaven  which  consists  in  the  subjuga- 
tion of  selfish  to  benevolent  principles,  and  which  are  all  summed  up  in  one 
expressive  term,  "Holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  Remarks  : 
1.  We  see  that  many  things  which  are  deemed  consistent  with  this  rule  of  Christ's 
are  direct  violations  of  it.  Why  does  the  duelist  consent  that  his  antagonist  should 
take  his  life  if  he  can  do  it  ?  That  he  may  have  an  opportunity  to  take  that  of  a 
fellow-creature.  Is  this  being  willing  to  give  up  his  life  to  another  from  motives 
of  disinterested  love  ?  Must  one  or  the  other  die ;  and  rather  than  that  his 
ceighboar  should  die,  does  he  consent  to  die  himself  ?  Why,  too,  is  the  gambler, 
or  the  man  who  takes  undue  advantage  of  his  neighbour  in  trade,  willing  that 
others  shoald  do  to  him  as  he  does  to  them  t  For  the  same  reason  snbstantiaUy, 
•a  it  respects  the  morality  of  the  act  that  governs  the  duelist.  They  are  willing 
that  others  shoald  treat  them  thus,  that  they  may  obtain,  or  at  least  have  th« 


598  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  y%, 

opportunity  of  obtaining,  their  neighbours'  property  without  an  equivalent.  For,  iC 
they  are  really  willing  their  neighbours  should  have  their  property  without  an 
equivalent,  why  not  give  it  to  them  directly  ?  My  hearers,  such  is  the  deception 
which  men  practise  on  themselves,  in  these  and  a  thousand  other  cases.  They  are 
not  willing  to  do  as  they  pretend  ;  the  proof  is,  that  they  do  not  do  it.  They  are 
at  most  willing  to  run  the  hazard  of  being  injured  themselves,  for  the  privilege  ot 
injuring  their  neighbour.  2.  We  remark  that  there  is  very  little  genuine  morality 
in  the  world.  3.  How  it  would  commend  the  religion  of  the  gospel  to  all,  if  there 
were  more  of  the  spirit  of  the  text  manifested  by  it«  professors.  4.  I  cannot  close 
without  remarking,  how  much  we  all  need  a  Saviour  1  I  say  all ;  for,  let  it  be  noticed, 
that  to  condemn  what  is  wrong  in  the  professors  of  religion,  does  not  justify  what  ia 
wrong  in  those  who  are  not.  (N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.)  On  the  great  Christian  law  of 
reciprocity  between  man  and  man : — Let  a  man,  in  fact,  give  himself  up  to  a  strict 
and  literal  observation  of  the  precept  in  this  verse,  and  it  will  impress  a  twofold 
direction  upon  him.  It  will  not  only  guide  him  to  certain  performances  of  good  in 
behalf  of  other8,|but  it  will  guide  him  to  the  regulation  of  his  own  desires  of  good 
from  them.  For  his  desires  of  good  from  others  are  here  set  up  as  the  measure  of 
his  performances  of  good  to  others.  The  more  selfish  and  unbounded  his  desires 
are,  the  larger  are  those  performances  with  the  obligation  of  which  he  is  burdened. 
Whatsoever  he  would  that  others  should  do  unto  him,  he  is  bound  to  do  unto 
them ;  and  therefore,  the  more  he  gives  way  to  ungenerous  and  extravagant  wishes 
of  service  from  those  who  are  around  him,  the  heavier  and  more  insupportable  ia 
the  load  of  duty  which  he  brings  upon  himself.  The  commandment  is  quite 
imperative,  and  there  is  no  escaping  from  it ;  and  if  he,  by  the  excess  of  his  selfish- 
ness, should  render  it  impracticable,  then  the  whole  punishment  due  to  the  guilt 
of  casting  aside  the  authority  of  this  commandment,  follows  in  that  train  of 
punishment  which  is  annexed  to  selfishness.  There  is  one  way  of  being  relieved 
from  such  a  burden.  There  is  one  way  of  reducing  this  verse  to  a  moderate 
and  practicable  requirement ;  and  that  is,  just  to  give  up  selfishness  —  just 
to  stifle  all  angenerous  desires  —  just  to  moderate  every  wish  of  service  or 
liberality  from  others,  down  to  the  standard  of  what  is  right  and  equitable; 
and  then  there  may  be  other  verses  in  the  Bible,  by  which  we  are  called  to  be 
kind  even  to  the  evil  and  to  the  unthankful.  But  most  assuredly  this  verse 
lays  upon  us  none  other  thing  than  that  we  should  do  such  services  for  others  aa 
are  right  and  equitable.  The  operation  is  somewhat  like  that  of  a  governor  or  fly 
in  mechanism.  This  is  a  very  happy  contrivance,  by  which  all  that  is  defective  or 
excessive  in  the  motion,  is  confined  within  the  limits  of  equability ;  and  every 
tendency,  in  particular,  to  any  mischievous  acceleration  is  restrained.  The  im- 
pulse given  by  this  verse  to  the  conduct  of  man  among  his  fellows,  would  seem,  to 
a  superficial  observer,  to  carry  him  to  all  the  excesses  of  a  most  ruinous  and 
quixotic  benevolence.  But  let  him  only  look  to  the  skilful  adaptation  of  the  fly. 
Just  suppose  the  control  of  moderation  and  equity  to  be  laid  upon  his  own  wishes, 
and  there  is  not  a  single  impulse  given  to  his  conduct  beyond  the  rate  of  modera- 
tion and  equity.  You  are  not  required  here  to  do  all  things  whatsoever  in  behalf 
of  others,  bnt  to  do  all  things  whatsoever  for  them,  that  you  would  should  be  done 
Tinto  yourself.  This  is  the  check  by  which  the  whole  of  the  bidden  movement  ia 
governed,  and  kept  from  running  out  into  any  hurtful  excess.  And  such  is  the 
beautiful  operation  of  that  piece  of  moral  mechanism  that  we  are  now  employed  in 
contemplating,  that  while  it  keeps  down  all  the  aspirations  of  selfishness,  it  does, 
in  fact,  restrain  every  extravagancy,  and  impresses  on  its  obedient  subjects  no 
other  movement  than  that  of  an  even  and  inflexible  justice.  This  rule  of  our 
Saviour's,  then,  prescribes  moderation  to  our  desires  of  good  from  others,  as  well  as 
generosity  to  our  doings  in  behalf  of  others  ;  and  makes  the  first  the  measure  of 
obligation  to  the  second.  There  is  nothing  in  the  humble  condition  of  life  they 
occupy  which  precludes  them  from  all  that  is  great  or  graceful  in  human  charity. 
There  is  a  way  in  which  they  may  equal,  and  even  outpeer,  the  wealthiest  of  the 
land,  in  that  very  virtue  of  which  wealth  alone  has  been  conceived  to  have  the 
exclusive  inheritance.  There  is  a  pervading  character  in  humanity  which  the 
varieties  of  rank  do  not  obliterate ;  and  as,  in  virtue  of  the  common  corruption, 
the  poor  man  may  be  aa  effectually  the  rapacious  despoiler  of  his  brethren,  aa  the 
man  of  opulence  above  him — so,  there  is  a  common  excellence  attainable  by  both ; 
and  through  which  the  poor  man  may,  to  the  full,  be  as  splendid  in  generosity  aa 
the  rich,  and  yield  a  far  more  important  contribution  to  the  peace  and  comfort  of 
lociety.    To  make  thia  plain — ^H  ia  in  virtue  of  a  generous  doing  on  the  part  of  ft 


VI.]  ST.  LUKE,  89f« 

rich  man,  when  a  sum  of  money  is  offered  for  the  relief  of  want ;  and  it  is  in  virtnt 
of  a  generous  desire  on  the  part  of  a  poor  man,  when  this  money  is  refused ;  when, 
with  the  feeling  that  his  necessities  do  not  just  warrant  him  to  be  yet  a  burden 
apon  others,  he  declines  to  touch  the  offered  liberality ;  when,  with  a  delicate 
recoil  from  the  unlooked-for  proposal,  he  stiU  resolves  to  put  it  for  the  present 
away,  and  to  find,  if  possible,  for  himself  a  httle  longer ;  when,  standing  on  th& 
very  margin  of  dependence,  he  would  yet  like  to  struggle  with  the  difficulties  o£ 
his  situation,  and  to  maintain  this  severe  but  honourable  conflict,  till  hard  necessity 
should  force  him  to  surrender.  Let  the  money  which  he  has  thus  so  nobly  shifted 
from  himself  take  some  new  direction  to  another ;  and  who,  we  ask,  is  the  giver  oi 
itf  The  first  and  most  obvious  reply  is,  that  it  is  he  who  owned  it ;  but,  it  is  still 
more  emphatically  true,  that  it  is  he  who  has  declined  it.  It  came  originally  out 
of  the  rich  man's  abundance ;  but  it  was  the  noble-hearted  generosity  of  the  poor 
man  that  handed  it  onwards  to  its  final  destination.  Thus  it  is,  that  when 
Christianity  becomes  universal,  the  doings  of  the  one  party,  and  the  desires  of  the 
other,  will  meet  and  overpass.  The  poor  will  wish  for  no  more  than  the  rich  will 
be  delighted  to  bestow ;  and  the  rule  of  our  text,  which  every  real  Christian  at 
present  finds  so  practicable,  will,  when  carried  over  the  face  of  society,  bind  all  the 
members  of  it  into  one  consenting  brotherhood.  The  duty  of  doing  good  to  othera 
will  then  coalesce  with  that  counterpart  duty  which  regulates  our  desires  of  good 
from  them ;  and  the  work  of  benevolence  will,  at  length,  be  prosecuted  without  that 
alloy  of  rapacity  on  the  one  hand,  and  distrust  on  the  other,  which  serve  so  much 
to  fester  and  disturb  the  whole  of  this  ministration.  To  complete  this  adjustment,, 
it  is  in  every  way  as  necessary  to  lay  all  the  incumbent  moralities  on  those  who 
ask,  as  on  those  who  confer  ;  and  never  till  the  whole  text,  which  comprehends  the 
wishes  of  man  as  well  as  his  actions,  wield  its  entire  authority  over  the  species, 
will  the  disgusts  and  the  prejudices,  which  form  such  a  barrier  between  the  ranks  of 
human  Ufe,  be  efifectually  done  away.  It  is  not  by  the  abolition  of  rank,  but  by 
assigning  to  each  rank  its  duties,  that  peace  and  friendship  and  order  will  at 
length  be  firmly  established  in  our  world.  We  should  not  have  dwelt  so  long  upon 
this  lesson,  were  it  not  for  the  essential  Christian  principle  that  is  involved  in  it^ 
The  morality  of  the  gospel  is  not  more  strenuous  on  the  side  of  the  duty  of  giving 
of  this  world's  goods  when  it  is  needed,  than  it  is  against  the  desire  of  receiving  when, 
it  is  not  needed.  {T.  Chalmert,  D.D.)  The  golden  rule  taught  by  an  Indian: — 
Some  time  before  the  war  between  the  English  and  the  Indians  in  Pennsylvania 
broke  out,  an  English  gentleman,  who  lived  on  the  borders  of  the  province,  was 
standing  one  evening  at  his  door,  when  an  Indian  came  and  desired  a  little  food. 
He  answered,  he  had  none  for  him.  He  then  asked  for  a  little  beer,  and  received 
the  same  answer.  Not  yet  discouraged,  he  begged  for  a  little  water ;  but  the 
gentleman  only  answered,  "  Get  you  gone  for  an  Indian  dog."  The  Indian  fixed 
his  eye  for  a  little  time  on  the  Englishman,  and  then  went  away.  Some  time  after, 
this  gentleman,  who  was  fond  of  shooting,  pursued  his  game  till  he  was  lost  in  the 
woods.  After  wandering  a  while,  he  saw  an  Indian  hut,  and  went  to  it  to  inquire 
his  way  to  some  plantation.  The  Indian  said,  "  It  is  a  great  way  off,  and  the  sun 
is  near  going  down ;  you  cannot  reach  it  to-night,  and  if  you  stay  in  the  woods  the 
wolves  will  eat  you  up ;  but  if  you  have  a  mind  to  lodge  with  me,  you  may."  The 
gentleman  gladly  accepted  the  invitation,  and  went  in.  The  Indian  boiled  a  little 
venison  for  him,  gave  him  some  rum  and  water,  and  then  spread  some  deer  skins 
for  him  to  lie  upon  ;  having  done  this,  himself  and  another  Indian  went  and  lay 
at  the  other  side  of  the  hut.  He  called  the  gentleman  in  the  morning,  telling  him 
that  the  sun  was  up,  and  that  he  had  a  great  way  to  go  to  the  plantation,  but 
that  he  would  show  him  the  way.  Taking  their  guns,  the  two  Indians  went 
forward,  and  he  followed.  When  they  had  gone  several  miles,  the  Indian  told  hiuk 
he  was  within  two  miles  of  the  plantation  he  wanted  ;  then,  stepping  before  him,, 
he  said,  "  Do  you  know  me?  "  In  great  confusion,  the  gentleman  replied,  "  I  have 
seen  you."  "  Yes,"  said  the  Indian,  you  have  seen  me  at  your  own  door ;  and  I 
will  give  you  a  piece  of  advice :  when  a  poor  Indian,  who  is  hungry,  and  dry,  and 
faint,  again  asks  you  for  a  little  meat  or  drink,  do  not  bid  him  '  get  him  gone  for 
an  Indian  dog. '  "  So  he  turned  and  went  away.  Which  of  these  two  was  to  be 
commended,  or  which  acted  most  agreeably  to  the  Saviour's  golden  rule  in  the 
t«xt? 

Vers.  83-84.  For  if  ye  lore  them  which  love  you,  what  thank  have  ye  7 — T^ 
heroic  in  ChrUtianity : — Oar  Master,  evidently,  from  the  Terses  before  ns,  did  not 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  tx. 

come  into  the  world  to  teach  ns  to  confonn  to  the  ways  of  onr  fellow-men  ;  bnt  H« 
would  have  us  go  far  beyond  the  ordinary  conduct  of  oar  fellows.  If  I  were  called 
to  address  an  ordinary  company  of  men  and  women  npon  feats  of  valour,  I  might 
speak  with  bated  breath  if  I  exhorted  them  to  heroism  in  war ;  but  if  I  had  lived 
some  thousands  of  years  ago,  and  had  been  called  upon  to  talk  to  Spartan  warriors, 
all  equipped  for  battle,  men  graved  and  scored  with  the  scars  of  conflict,  I  should 
set  no  bounds  to  my  exhortations  ;  I  would  bestir  them  as  a  lion  arouses  the  young 
lions  and  urges  them  to  the  prey.  I  should  tell  them  that  their  name  and  parentage 
should  not  be  disgraced  by  the  idea  of  defeat,  but  that  they  must  expect  victory,  and 
seize  it  as  their  right.  No  orator  would  have  spoken  to  Spartans  as  to  Bceotians : 
it  was  their  very  life  and  business  to  fight,  and  deeds  of  prowess  were  therefore  to 
be  looked  for  from  them.  Is  it  not  so  with  you,  ye  followers  of  the  Crucified  ?  I. 
Much  that  is  naturally  good  may  fall  fab  shobt  of  Christian  character.  Do  not 
make  the  mistake  of  saying  that  moral  excellence  is  not  good.  Some  have  broadly 
declared  that  there  is  no  good  thing  in  an  nnconverted  man ;  but  this  is  scarcely  true. 
Many  who  are  total  strangers  to  the  grace  of  God  yet  exhibit  sparkling  forms  of  the 
human  virtues  in  integrity,  generosity,  kindness,  courage,  self-sacrifice,  and  patience. 
If  the  question  be  whether  our  character  is  the  offspring  of  nature  or  of  grace,  it  will 
be  a  sad  thing  if  the  verdict  should  turn  out  to  be  that  it  is  the  dead  child  of  nature 
finely  dressed,  but  not  the  living  child  of  grace  Divine.  We  may  be  decorated  with 
gems  which  glitter  and  glow,  and  yet  they  may  be  mere  paste,  and  none  of  them 
the  work  of  God's  Spirit.  Observe  the  three  things  mentioned  in  the  text  against 
which  there  is  no  law,  but  of  which  much  is  to  be  spoken  in  commendation. 
These  acts  are  good,  but  they  do  not  come  up  to  Christ's  standard.  1.  It  is  very 
proper  and  seemly  that  kindly  feeling  should  awaken  kindly  feeling  in  return; 
that  to  those  who  are  friendly  to  us  we  should  be  friendly  also.  We  say  "Love 
begets  love,"  and  it  is  natural  that  it  should  do  so.  Our  duty  is  not  merely  to  love 
those  who  love  us,  but  to  love  them  that  hate  and  despitefully  entreat  us.  2.  The 
next  thing,  in  the  verses  before  us,  is  grateful  return.  "  If  ye  do  good  to  them 
which  do  good  to  you,  what  thank  have  ye  ?  "  It  is  a  very  right  thing  that  if 
persons  have  served  us  we  should  endeavour  to  repay  the  benefit.  Followers  of 
Jesus  are  called  upon  to  do  good  to  those  who  have  done  them  harm.  You  know 
the  old  saying.  Evil  for  good  is  devil-Uke,  evil  for  evil  is  beast-Uke,  good  for  good 
is  man-like,  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Bise  you  to  that  God-like  point.  If  a  man 
has  taken  the  bread  out  of  your  mouth,  seize  the  first  opportunity  to  help  him  to 
a  livelihood.  3.  Again,  mention  is  made  of  helping  others  in  a  neighbourly  way 
with  the  expectation  of  their  returning  the  friendly  deed.  "  If  ye  lend  to  them  of 
whom  ye  hope  to  receive,  what  thank  have  ye  ?  "  Temporary  help  is  often  rendered 
in  the  expectation  that,  if  ever  we  are  in  the  same  need,  we  shall  only  need  to  ask, 
and  receive  like  aid.  I  lend  you  an  axe,  and  yon  will  one  day  lend  me  a  saw.  I 
help  you  and  you  help  me — a  very  proper  thing  to  do,  and  the  more  of  such 
brotherly  and  neighbourly  co-operation  the  better,  but  still  there  is  nothing  so  very 
virtuous  in  it.  You  as  a  Christian  are  to  rise  to  something  higher  than  this :  to 
be  ready  to  help  without  the  expectation  of  being  helped  again.     11.  Christian 

VIRTUE   IS  IN   MANY   BESPECTB  EXTRAORDINARY,    AND    MIGHT   BE    CALLED    HEROIC.       In 

the  point  of  love,  kindness,  consideration  for  men's  needs,  and  desire  to  do  good, 
the  Christian  life  is  to  rise  above  every  other,  till  it  becomes  sublime.  Heathen 
moralists  recommended  kindness,  but  they  did  not  suggest  its  being  lavished  upon 
enemies.  I  have  been  somewhat  amused  by  the  caution  of  Cicero.  He  says, 
"  Kindness  must  not  be  shown  to  a  youth  nor  to  an  old  man ;  not  to  the  aged, 
because  he  is  likely  to  die  before  he  can  have  an  occasion  to  repay  you  the  benefit ; 
and  not  to  the  young  man,  for  he  is  sure  to  forget  it."  Our  Lord  bids  us  seek  no 
reward  from  men,  and  he  assures  us  that  then  a  greater  reward  will  come.  We 
shall  by  shunning  it  secure  it.  We  shall  find  a  reward  in  being  onrewarded. 
Next,  read  Luke  ix.  54,  55,  and  yon  wiU  see  that  the  Christian  is  to  rise  above 
human  passion  in  the  matter  of  gentleness.  In  the  elevation  of  his  joy  the 
Christian  is  also  to  rise  above  all  other  men.  He  may  rejoice  as  they  do  in  the 
common  bounties  of  providence,  but  that  joy  is  to  hold  very  secondary  rank. 
Even  in  his  own  success  as  a  Christian  worker  he  takes  but  measured  satisfaction. 
Bead  Luke  z.  20.  The  Christian  is  heroic,  next,  in  his  fearlessness  (Luke  xii.  4). 
The  true  believer  is  to  be  willing  to  bear  reproach ;  ay,  and  to  bear  much  more 
than  reproach,  as  saints  of  God  have  done  times  out  of  mind.  See  how  far  the 
tme  behever  is  lifted  up  above  the  world,  as  yon  tarn  to  Lake  xii.  22,  where  the 
Lord  bids  os  eoltivate  a  holy  ease  of  heart  as  to  all  temporal  things.    The  rich 


.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  601 

man  finds  his  wealth  in  his  bursting  barns,  but  the  believer  finds  his  treasure  in 
the  all-sufficiency  of  his  God.  Another  point  in  which  Christian  heroism  is  seen 
is  in  humility  and  in  delight  in  service.  Turn  to  the  fourteenth  chapter  and  see 
our  Lord's  directions  to  His  disciples  not  to  seek  out  the  highest,  but  rather  the 
lowest  room,  for,  saith  He,  "  Whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  Habitually  a  Christian  man  is  to  have  a 
modest  esteem  of  himself.  III.  The  Chbistian  keliqion  supplies  dub  nourish- 
ment FOB  THE  most  heboio  LIFE.  1.  The  ecouomy  of  grace  requires  it.  2. 
Think  again,  brethren,  we  are  helped  to  holy  heroism  by  the  reward  which  it 
brings ;  for  our  blessed  Master,  though  He  bids  us  spurn  the  thought  of  reward  on 
earth,  yet  tells  us  that  there  is  a  reward  in  the  thing  itself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  moral  demands  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ : — Here,  for  instance,  is  one  of  the 
maxims  of  Epictetus,  "  It  is  possible  that  you  observe  some  other  person  more 
honoured  than  yourself,  invited  to  entertainments  when  you  are  left  out,  saluted 
before  you  are  taken  any  notice  of,  thought  more  proper  to  advise  with,  and  his 
counsel  followed  rather  than  yours.  But  are  these  forms  of  respect  which  are  paid 
to  him  good  or  evil?  If  they  deserve  to  be  esteemed  good,  this  ought  to  be 
matter  of  joy  to  you  that  that  person  is  happy  in  them ;  but  if  they  be  evil,  how 
tmieasonable  is  it  to  be  troubled  that  they  have  not  fallen  to  your  own  share." 
That  was  how  a  heathen  moralist  thought  we  ought  to  regard  the  honours  paid 
to  other  men.  I  want  to  know  whether  many  of  us  have  passed  far  beyond  him  ? 
If  we  consider  our  social  life  and  our  political  and  philanthropic  movements, 
is  it  quite  clear  that  we  Christian  Englishmen  are  in  advance  of  this  ancient 
Boman  slave?  Take  another  of  the  maxims  of  Epictetus,  "  My  duty  to  my  father 
is  to  assist  and  take  care  of  him,  to  support  his  age  and  his  infirmities,  to  yield  to 
him  and  pay  him  service  and  respect  upon  all  occasions.  .  .  .  But  you  will  say  he 
is  a  rigorous  and  unnatural  father.  What  is  that  to  the  purpose  ?  You  are  to 
remember,  this  obligation  to  duty  does  not  arise  from  the  consideration  of  his  good- 
ness, but  from  the  relation  he  bears  to  you.  No  failings  of  his  can  make  him 
cease  to  be  a  father,  and  consequently  none  can  absolve  you  from  the  obedience  of 
a  son.  Your  brother  has  done  you  an  injury,  but  do  not  suppose  that  this  dis- 
penses with  the  kindness  you  owe  him.  You  are  still  to  observe  what  becomes  you; 
not  to  imitate  what  misbecame  him."  1  think  that  I  have  known  Christian  mea 
and  women  who  have  supposed  that  the  harshness  of  a  parent  relieved  them  from 
their  obligations  as  children,  and  that  the  injury  they  had  received  from  a  brother 
justified  them  in  showing  an  unbrotherly  and  unsisterly  spirit.  Christ  assumes 
that  our  standard  of  moral  duty  ought  always  to  be  loftier  than  that  which  exists 
among  those  who  have  never  heard  of  His  teaching.  If,  without  self-reproach,  we 
permit  ourselves  to  indulge  in  a  spirit  which  even  heathen  moralists  condemned,  how 
can  we  answer  his  question.  What  do  ye  more  than  others  ?  Epictetus  was  originally 
B  Greek  slave.  Let  us  turn  to  a  man  of  another  sort — Marcus  Antoninus  the  Eoman 
emperor.  "  A  branch,"  he  says,  "  cut  off  from  the  adjacent  branch  must  of  neces- 
sity be  cut  off  from  the  whole  tree  also.  So,  too,  a  man,  when  he  is  separated 
from  another  man,  has  fallen  off  from  the  whole  social  community."  How  many 
of  ns  have  a  profounder  conception  than  the  heathen  emperor  of  the  duty  of 
avoiding  personal  quarrels,  of  suppressing  the  vanity,  the  resentment,  the  wilful- 
ness and  selfishness  by  which  we  might  be  separated  from  our  neighbour  and  so  cut 
off  from  the  life  of  the  race?  Take  his  caution  against  forming  hard  judgments 
of  others.  He  says,  what  is  true  in  innumerable  cases,  "Thou  dost  not  even 
understand  whether  men  are  doing  wrong  or  not,  for  many  things  are  done  with  a 
certain  reference  to  circumstances.  And,  in  short,  a  man  must  learn  a  great  deal 
to  enable  him  to  pass  a  correct  judgment  on  another  man's  acts."  I  wonder 
whether  most  of  us,  before  passing  hard  judgments  on  others,  remember  how  much 
we  must  know,  before  we  can  judge  them  fairly?  Here  is  another  maxim,  "What- 
ever any  one  else  does  or  says,  I  must  be  good — just  as  if  the  gold,  or  the  emerald, 
or  the  purple  were  always  saying  this — '  Whatever  any  one  does  or  says,  I 
must  keep  my  colour.'  It  is  royal  to  do  good  and  to  be  abused."  Some  of  you  are 
masters.  Do  you  see  clearly  that  whatever  your  servants  "  do  or  say  "  you  must 
be  always  just  and  kind  and  considerate  to  them  ?  Some  of  you  are  workmen. 
Have  you  made  up  your  minds  that  you  must  always  be  good  workmen,  no  matter 
whether  you  have  a  good  master  or  a  bad  master ;  that  you  must  serve  a  bad  master 
as  faithfully  and  as  zealously  as  you  serve  a  good  one  ?  And  whatever  our  position 
may  be,  is  it  the  constant  temper  of  our  mind  to  "  do  good,"  whether  we  are  praised 
(or  it  or  not — to  **  do  sood  "  even  when  we  are  "  abused  "  for  doing  it  ?   Again,  "  U 


•fiOf  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  Ti 

any  man  is  able  to  convince  me  and  show  me  that  I  do  not  think  or  aot  right,  I 
will  gladly  change,  for  I  seek  the  truth,  by  which  no  man  was  ever  injured.  But 
he  is  injured  who  abides  in  his  error  and  ignorance."  It  is  not  my  experience  that 
many  Christian  people  cultivate  this  noble  spirit.  But  what  I  am  especially 
anxious  to  insist  upon  just  now  is  that  in  the  writings  of  heathen  moralists  there 
are  maxims  inculcating  virtues  which  some  Christian  people  have  never  thought  of 
trying  to  attain.  Their  moral  standard  is  so  defective  that  in  many  points  they 
are  inferior  to  heathen  men  in  their  conceptions  of  duty.  Christ  assumes  that 
His  servants  will  be  at  least  as  clear-sighted  as  the  heathen,  and  that  the  virtues 
which  the  heathen  honoured  we  shall  honour,  and  He  goes  on  to  require  more. 
What  this  higher  law  is,  in  all  its  applications,  we  have  to  learn,  and  we  learn  it 
very  gradually  ;  it  is  one  of  the  great  subjects  about  which  Christian  men  should 
be  always  learning.  Christ  has  not  given  us  a  complete  code,  but  He  has  given  ua 
specimens  of  the  contrast  between  this  higher  law  and  the  common  laws  recognized 
by  ordinary  men.  We  have  to  work  out  the  whole  code  of  Christian  morals  in  the 
light  of  this  teaching.  This  is  the  method  of  the  new  science.  We  have  to  take 
the  virtues  which  are  recognized  as  virtues  by  all  the  world — honesty,  industry, 
kindness,  temperance,  the  spirit  of  cheerful  contentment  with  our  condition — and 
we  have  to  learn  for  ourselves  the  larger  requirements  of  Christ  in  relation  to  every 
one  of  them.  The  Spirit  of  Christ,  if  we  seek  His  guidance,  wiU  lead  us  into  all 
the  truth.  Every  Christian  man  must  be  left  very  much  to  the  guidance  of  the 
Spirit  in  these  high  matters.  We  can  do  something  to  help  each  other,  but  not 
very  much.  I  should  have  to  be  a  draper  to  learn  what  a  Christian  draper  should 
do  "  more  "  than  other  honest  drapers ;  and  a  carpenter  to  learn  what  a  Christian 
carpenter  should  do  ' '  more  "  than  other  good  carpenters  ;  and  a  banker  to  leam 
what  a  Christian  banker  should  do  "  more"  than  other  upright  bankers.  The  root 
of  the  whole  matter  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  are  the  servants  of  Christ,  and  that 
very  much  of  the  service  we  render  to  Christ  consists  in  the  service  we  render  to  our 
fellow-men,  whether  we  are  ministers,  lawyers,  mechanics,  clerks,  housemaids, 
milUners,  merchants,  or  tradesmen.  If  we  are  zealous  to  please  Christ  we  shall 
find  many  ways  of  doing  it  of  which  some  of  us,  perhaps,  have  no  conception  ;  and 
this  will  result  in  nobler  ideas  of  moral  duty  in  all  the  common  affairs  of  life. 
While  many  other  men,  in  their  business  transactions,  keep  only  just  within  the 
limits  of  the  law  which  is  administered  by  human  tribunals,  let  Christian  men  be 
governed  by  the  rules  of  a  diviner  equity.  While  many  other  men  do  public  work 
as  long  as  they  are  honoured  for  doing  it,  let  Christian  men  go  on  doing  it  whether 
they  are  honoured  or  not,  accepting  it  as  the  service  to  which  God  has  appointed 
them.  Let  the  Christian  manufacturer  recognize  the  Higher  Law,  in  the  quality  of 
his  goods,  in  his  treatment  of  his  partners  and  his  men,  and  in  his  careful 
avoidance  of  whatever  personal  extravagances  and  whatever  commercial  risks  and 
fipeoulations  might  prevent  him  from  paying  his  debts.  Let  the  Christian  builder 
be  so  exact  in  doing  his  work  according  to  the  specifications  that  his  employers 
shall  feel  that  a  clerk  of  the  works  is  a  useless  expense.  Let  the  Christian  car- 
penter and  engine-fitter  make  the  eye  of  the  foreman  unnecessary.  But  perhaps 
some  of  you  will  say  that  conduct  of  this  kind  will  prevent  you  from  getting  on  in 
the  world;  that  if  you  act  in  the  way  I  have  described  you  will  make  money 
slowly ;  that  if  you  do  not  push  to  the  front  and  keep  yourself  there,  you  will  never 
get  your  value  recognized.  The  real  reply — the  Christian  reply — to  your  objection 
is,  ttiat  it  is  not  your  business  to  get  on  in  the  world,  to  make  money,  to  have  your 
worth  recognized,  but  to  serve  God,  You  cannot  serve  both  God  and  mammon.  (R. 
W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Selfishness  the  essence  of  moral  depravity  : — I.  Let  us  consider 
WHT  SINNERS  LOVE  THEMSELVES.  It  is  plainly  supposed  in  the  text  that  sinners  love 
themselves,  for  they  are  said  to  love  those  that  love  them,  which  could  not  be 
accounted  for  if  they  were  wholly  destitute  of  love  to  themselves.  In  other 
passages  of  Scripture,  they  are  said  to  be  lovers  of  their  ownselves,  and  to  seek 
their  own  things  and  not  the  things  of  others.  But  this  is  too  evident  from 
experience  and  observation  to  need  any  proof.  Sinners  certainly  love  themselves. 
But  why?  Every  creature,  perhaps,  whether  rational  or  irrational,  takes  pleasure 
in  receiving  its  proper  food ;  but  this  love  to  its  food  is  not  love  to  itself,  or  selfish- 
neBs.  The  saint  and  the  sinner  may  equally  love  honey,  because  it  is  agreeable  to 
the  taste ;  but  this  love  to  honey  is  neither  interested  nor  disinterested  love,  and  of 
eonrse  is  neither  virtuous  nor  vicious.  Men  never  love  any  particular  food  from  a 
moral  motive,  but  from  the  constitution  of  their  nature,  in  wjiich  they  are  passive, 
•nd  have  no  active  ooncem.     The  case  is  different  in  loving  themselves.     In  thit 


▼I.J  ST.  LUKE,  «09 

they  properly  act,  and  act  from  a  moral  motive.  Sinners  love  themselves  not 
because  they  are  a  part  of  the  intellectual  system,  nor  because  the  general  good 
requires  them  to  regard  their  personal  happiness,  but  because  they  are  themselves. 
They  love  their  own  interest  because  it  is  their  own,  in  distinction  from  the  interest 
of  all  other  created  or  uncreated  beings.  This  is  a  free,  voluntary  exercise,  which 
is  contrary  to  their  reason  and  conscience,  and  which  they  know  to  be  in  its  own 
nature  wrong.  Their  interest  is  reaUy  no  more  valuable  for  being  theirs,  than  if 
it  belonged  to  others ;  and  they  themselves  are  no  more  valuable  than  other 
creatures  of  the  same  character  and  capacity.  To  love  themselves,  therefore, 
because  they  are  themselves,  is  to  love  themselves  from  a  motive  peculiar  to  selfish 
tsreatures.  II.  We  are  to  consider  why  binnebs  love  othees.  Our  Saviour  said 
to  His  disciples,  that  if  they  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  them.  And 
He  said  in  the  text  that  sinners  love  those  that  love  them.  For  the  same  reason 
that  sinners  love  themselves,  they  naturally  love  those  that  love  them  and  are  dis- 
posed to  do  them  good.  As  they  love  their  own  interest  because  it  is  their  own,  so 
they  love  every  person  or  object  which  serves  to  increase  or  preserve  their  own 
interest.  They  do  not  value  and  love  others  because  they  are  valuable  and  worthy 
to  be  loved,  but  merely  because  they  view  them  as  means  or  instruments  of  securing 
or  advancing  their  own  personal  happiness.  They  value  their  fellow-men  for  the 
«ame  reason  that  they  value  their  own  houses  and  lands,  fiocks  and  herds.  III.  It 
remains  to  inquire  why  theee  is  no  mobal  goodness  in  the  love  which  binnebs 
bxbbcise  towabds  themselves  and  othebs  ?  Christ  supposes  that  they  all  know  the 
nature  of  their  love,  and  that  there  is  nothing  virtuous  or  praiseworthy  in  it.  "  If 
ye  love  them  which  love  you,  what  thank  have  ye  ?  "  We  never  thank  men  for 
loving  themselves,  nor  for  loving  us  merely  for  their  own  sake.  It  is  the  unanimous 
sentiment  of  mankind  that  there  is  no  virtue  in  that  love  which  flows  entirely 
irom  mercenary  motives.  But  why  ?  Here  then  I  would  observe — 1.  That  there  is 
no  moral  goodness  in  the  love  which  sinners  feel  and  express,  because  it  is  not  a 
conformity  to  that  love  which  God  feels  and  expresses.  He  is  good  unto  all,  and 
His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works.  He  seeks  not  only  His  own  glory,  but  the 
real  good  of  others.  It  bears  no  conformity  to  the  love  of  God,  which  is  the 
standard  of  all  moral  perfection.  2.  The  selfish  love  of  sinners  has  no  moral 
goodness  in  it,  because  it  is  no  obedience  to  the  Divine  law.  This  law  requires 
them  to  love  God  with  all  the  heart,  and  to  love  their  fellow-men  as  themselves. 
But  when  they  love  themselves  because  they  are  themselves,  and  love  others  only 
because  they  have  received  or  expect  to  receive  benefit  from  them,  do  they  obey  the 
Divine  law?  3.  There  is  no  moral  goodness  in  the  selfishness  of  sinners,  because 
it  is  the  very  essence  of  aU  moral  evil.  All  the  wickedness  of  Satan  consists  in  his 
selfishness.  He  loves  himself  because  he  is  himself,  and  loves  only  those  who  love 
him,  because  their  love  serves  to  promote  what  he  considers  as  his  cause  and 
interest.  Impeovement  :  1.  If  sinners  may  love  themselves  and  others  from  mere 
selfish  motives,  then  it  is  easy  to  account  for  all  their  kind  and  friendly  conduct 
towards  their  fellow  creatures,  consistently  with  their  total  depravity.  2.  If  the 
moral  depravity  of  sinners  consists  in  selfishness,  then  the  moral  depravity  of  Adam 
consisted  in  selfishness,  and  not  in  the  mere  want  of  holiness.  4.  If  sinners  are 
constantly  under  the  governing  influences  of  selfishness,  then  they  must  experience 
an  essential  change  in  their  affections,  in  order  to  be  saved.  5.  If  sinners  love 
themselves  because  they  are  themselves,  which  is  selfish  and  sinful,  then  after  they 
experience  a  saving  change  from  selfishness  to  benevolence,  they  love  themselves  in 
a  manner  totally  different  from  what  they  did  before.  They  love  themselves  in  the 
same  manner  that  God  loves  them.  6.  Finally,  it  appears  from  this  discourse  that 
it  is  highly  necessary  to  explain  and  inculcate  the  total  selfishness  of  sinners.  They 
never  will  believe  that  they  are  totally  depraved,  until  they  see  wherein  total 
depravity  consists.     {N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 

Yet.  35.  And  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  Highest— T^c  Christian  aim  and 
motive  : — 1st.  The  Christian  aim — perfection.  2nd.  The  Christian  motive — because 
it  is  right  and  Godlike  to  be  perfect.  I.  The  Cheistian  aim  is  this — to  be  perfect. 
*'Be  ye  therefore  perfect."  Now  distinguish  this,  I  pray  you,  from  mere  worldly 
morality.  It  is  not  conformity  to  a  creed  that  is  here  required,  but  aspiration  after 
*  state.  It  is  not  demanded  of  ns  to  perfonn  a  number  of  duties,  but  to  yield 
obedience  to  a  certain  spiritual  law.  Will  not  that  inflame  oiu:  pride,  and  increase 
our  natural  vainglory  ?  Now  the  nature  and  possibility  of  human  perfection,  what 
It  is  and  how  it  is  possible,  are  bath  contained  in  one  single  expression  in  the  (exW 


604  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [cHiy.  n. 

«•  Even  as  your  father  which  is  in  Heaven  is  perfect."  The  relationship  between 
father  and  son  implies  consanguinity,  likeness,  similarity  of  character  and  nature. 
God  made  the  insect,  the  stone,  the  lily ;  but  God  is  not  the  Father  of  the  caterpillar, 
the  lily,  or  the  stone.  When,  therefore,  God  is  said  to  be  our  Father,  something 
more  is  implied  in  this  than  that  God  created  man.  And  so  when  the  Son  of  Man 
came  proclaiming  the  fact  that  we  are  the  children  of  God,  it  was  in  the  truest 
sense  a  revelation.  He  told  us  that  the  nature  of  God  resembles  the  naiure  of  man, 
that  love  in  God  is  not  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  but  means  the  same  thing  as  love 
in  us,  and  that  Divine  anger  is  the  same  thing  as  human  anger  divested  of  its 
emotions  and  imperfections.  When  we  are  commanded  to  be  like  God,  it  implies 
that  God  has  that  nature  of  which  we  have  already  the  germs.  And  this  has  been 
taught  by  the  incarnation  of  the  Bedeemer.  Things  absolutely  dissimilar  in  their 
nature  cannot  mingle.  Water  cannot  coalesce  with  fire — ^water  cannot  mix  with 
oil.  If,  then.  Humanity  and  Divinity  were  united  in  the  person  of  the  Bedeemer, 
it  follows  that  there  must  be  something  kindred  between  the  two,  or  else  the  incar- 
nation had  been  impossible.  So  that  the  incarnation  is  the  realization  of  man's 
perfection.  Here,  however,  you  will  observe  another  difficulty.  It  will  be  said  at 
once — there  is  something  in  this  comparison  of  man  with  God  which  looks  like 
blasphemy,  because  one  is  finite  and  the  other  infinite.  Let  us,  then,  endeavour  to 
find  out  the  evidences  of  this  infinitude  in  the  nature  of  man.  First  of  all  we  find 
it  in  this — that  the  desires  of  man  are  for  something  boundless  and  unattainable. 
The  boundless,  endless,  infinite  void  in  the  soul  of  man  can  be  satisfied  with 
nothing  but  God.  Satisfaction  lies  not  in  having,  but  in  being.  There  is  no 
satisfaction  even  in  doing.  Man  cannot  be  satisfied  with  his  own  performances.  A 
second  trace  of  this  infinitude  in  man's  nature  we  find  in  the  infinite  capacities  of 
the  soul.  This  is  true  intellectually  and  morally.  For  there  is  no  man,  however 
low  his  intellectual  powers  may  be,  who  has  not  at  one  time  or  another  felt  a  rush 
of  thought,  a  glow  of  inspiration,  which  seemed  to  make  all  things  possible,  as  if  it 
were  merely  the  effect  of  some  imperfect  organization  which  stood  in  the  way  of 
his  doing  whatever  he  desired  to  do.  With  respect  to  our  moral  and  spiritual 
capacities,  we  remark  that  they  are  not  only  indefinite,  but  absolutely  infinite.  Let 
that  man  answer  who  has  ever  truly  and  heartily  loved  another.  Again,  we  perceive 
a  third  trace  of  this  infinitude  in  man,  in  the  power  which  he  possesses  of  giving 
up  self.  In  this,  perhaps  more  than  in  anything  else,  man  may  claim  kindred  with 
God.  Before  passing  on  let  us  observe  that  were  it  not  for  this  conviction  of  the 
Divine  origin,  and  consequent  perfectibility  of  our  nature,  the  very  thought  of  God 
would  be  painful  to  us.  H.  We  pass  on,  in  the  second  place,  to  consider  the 
Chbibtian  motive — *'  Even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  Heaven  is  perfect."  Brethren, 
worldly  prudence,  miscalled  moraUty,  say — "  Be  honest ;  you  will  find  your  gain  in 
being  so.  Do  right ;  you  will  be  the  better  for  it — even  in  this  world  you  will  not 
lose  by  it."  The  mistaken  religionist  only  magnifies  this  on  a  large  scale.  '•  Your 
duty,"  he  says,  "  is  to  save  your  souL  Give  up  this  world  to  have  the  next.  Lose 
here,  that  yon  may  gain  hereafter."  In  opposition  to  all  such  sentiments  as  these, 
thus  speaks  the  gospel — " Be  ye  perfect."  Why?  "Because  your  Father  which 
is  in  Heaven  is  perfect."  Do  right,  because  it  is  Godlike  and  right  so  to  do.  In 
conclusion,  we  observe,  there  are  two  things  which  are  to  be  learned  from  this 
passage.  The  first  is  this,  that  happiness  is  not  our  end  and  aim.  The  Christian's 
aim  is  perfection,  not  happiness.  The  second  thing  we  have  to  learn  is  this,  that 
on  this  earth  there  can  be  no  rest  for  man.  The  last  thing  we  learn  from  this  is 
the  impossibility  of  obtaining  that  of  which  some  men  speak — the  satisfaction  of  a 
good  conscience.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Concerning  the  ■perfection  of  God: — 
I.  Ths  absolute  perfection  of  the  Divine  nature  supposed — "  As  your  Father 
•which  is  in  Heaven  is  perfect."  1.  I  shall  consider  how  we  are  to  conceive  of 
the  Divine  perfection,  these  two  ways.  (1)  By  ascribing  all  imaginable  and 
possible  perfection  to  God ;  absolute  and  universal  perfection,  not  limited  to  a 
certain  kind,  or  to  certain  particulars.  Some  things  may  seem  to  be  perfection, 
which  in  truth  are  not,  because  they  are  plainly  impossible,  and  involve  a 
contradiction.  And  then  there  are  some  things  which  do  argue  and  suppose 
imperfections  in  them ;  as  motion,  the  quickness  and  swiftness  whereof  in 
creatures  is  a  perfection,  but  then  it  supposeth  a  finite  and  limited  nature. 
And  there  are  also  some  imaginable  degrees  of  perfection,  which,  because  thegr 
are  inconsistent  with  other  perfections,  are  not  to  be  admitted  in  the  Divine 
nature.  And  in  the  Scripture  we  do  everywhere  find  perfection  ascribed  to 
the  nature,  and  works,  and  laws  of  God,  to  everything  that  belongs  to  Rim,  or 


CHAT.  ▼!.]  ST.  LUKE.  605 

proceeds  from  Him  (Job  xxzvii.  16).  (2)  As  we  are  to  ascribe  all  imaginable  and 
possible  perfections  to  God,  so  we  are  to  separate  and  remove  all  maimer  of 
imperfection  from  Him.  We  must  not  obscure  or  blemish  the  Divine  nature  with 
the  least  shadow  or  blot  of  imperfection,  2.  To  lay  down  some  rules  by  which  we 
may  rectify  and  govern  our  opinions  concerning  the  attributes  and  perfections 
of  God :  the  best  I  can  think  of  are  these  following :  (1)  Let  us  begin  with  the 
most  natural,  and  plain,  and  easy  perfections  of  God,  and  lay  them  for  a  founda- 
tion,  and  rectify  all  our  other  apprehensions  of  God,  and  reasonings  about  Him,  by 
these ;  and  these  are  His  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  to  which  most  of  the  rest 
may  be  reduced.  Eight  apprehensions,  and  a  firm  belief  of  these,  will  make  it 
easily  credible  to  us,  that  all  things  were  made,  and  are  governed  by  Him ;  for  His 
goodness  will  dispose  and  incline  Him  to  communicate  being  to  other  things,  and 
to  take  care  of  them  when  they  are  made.  (2)  Let  us  always  consider  the  per- 
fections of  God  in  conjunction,  and  so  as  to  reconcile  them  with  one  another. 
Do  not  consider  God  as  mere  power  and  sovereignty,  as  mere  mercy  and  goodness, 
aa  mere  justice  and  severity ;  but  as  all  these  together,  and  in  such  a  measure  and 
degree,  as  may  make  them  consistent  with  one  another.  Among  men,  indeed,  an 
eminent  degree  of  any  one  excellency  does  usually  shut  out  some  other ;  and,  there- 
fore,  it  is  observed  that  power  and  moderation,  love  and  discretion,  do  not  often 
meet  together;  that  a  great  memory  and  a  small  judgment,  a  good  wit  and  an 
ill -nature,  are  many  times  found  in  conjunction.  But  in  infinite  perfection 
all  perfections  do  eminently  meet  and  consist  together ;  and  it  is  not  necessary 
that  one  excellency  should  be  raised  upon  the  ruins  of  another.  (3)  Among 
different  opinions  concerning  God  (as  there  always  have  been  and  will  be  in  the 
world)  choose  those  which  are  farthest  from  extremity ;  because  truth  as  well  aa 
virtue  usually  lies  between  the  extremes.  And  here  I  will  instance  in  that 
controversy,  which  has  much  disquieted  the  Church  almost  in  all  ages,  concerning 
the  decrees  of  God ;  about  which  there  are  two  extremes ;  the  one,  that  God  per- 
emptorily decrees  the  final  condition  of  every  particular  person,  that  is,  their  ever- 
lasting happiness  or  misery,  without  any  regard  or  consideration  of  the  good  or 
bad  actions  of  men  :  the  other,  that  God  decrees  nothing  concerning  any  particular 
person,  but  only  in  general,  that  men  found  under  such  and  such  qualifications 
shall  be  happy  or  miserable,  and  puts  it  into  their  own  power  to  qualify  them- 
selves.  (4)  Entertain  no  opinion  concerning  God  that  doth  evidently  contradict 
the  practice  of  religion,  and  a  good  life,  though  never  so  specious  and  subtle 
argmnents  may  be  used  to  persuade  it.  Let  us  then  look  upon  all  knowledge 
that  contradicts  practice  as  vain  and  false,  because  it  destroys  its  end.  There 
are  many  things  that  seem  probable  enough  in  speculation,  which  yet  we  most 
pertinaciously  deny,  because  they  are  not  practicable ;  and  there  are  many  things 
which  seem  doubtful  in  speculation,  and  would  admit  of  great  dispute,  which  yet, 
because  they  are  found  true  in  practice  and  experience,  are  to  be  taken  for  certain 
and  unquestionable.  Zeno  pretends  to  demonstrate  there  is  no  motion  ;  and  what 
is  the  consequence  of  this  speculation,  but  that  men  must  stand  still  ?  but  so  long 
as  a  man  finds  he  can  walk,  all  the  sophistry  in  the  world  will  not  persuade  him 
that  motion  is  impossible.  IL  The  perfection  of  God  is  peopounded  as  a  pattebn 
roE  ouB  IMITATION.  To  show  how  far  we  are  to  imitate  the  perfections  of  God, 
and  particularly  what  those  Divine  qualities  are  which  our  Saviour  doth  here  more 
especially  propound  to  our  imitation.  1.  That  our  imitation  of  God  is  certainly 
restrained  to  the  communicable  perfections  of  God,  and  such  as  creatures  are 
capable  of ;  as  I  have  shown  before.  For  it  is  so  far  from  being  a  duty  to  affect  or 
attempt  to  be  like  God  in  His  peculiar  perfections,  that  it  was  probably  the  sin  of 
the  apostate  angels.  2.  Our  imitation  of  the  Divine  perfections,  which  are  com- 
municable to  creatures,  is  likewise  to  be  restrained  to  such  degrees  of  these  per- 
fections, as  creatures  are  capable  of.  For  no  creature  can  ever  be  so  perfectly  good 
as  God  is ;  nor  partake  of  any  other  excellency,  in  that  transcendant  degree,  in 
which  the  Divine  nature  is  possessed  of  it.  3.  But  there  is  no  manner  of  inoon- 
Tenience  in  having  a  pattern  propounded  to  us  of  so  great  perfection,  as  is  above 
cor  reach  to  attain  to ;  and  there  may  be  great  advantages  in  it.  The  way  to  excel 
in  any  kind  is  to  propose  the  highest  and  most  perfect  examples  to  our  imitation. 
He  that  aims  at  the  heavens,  which  yet  he  is  sure  to  come  short  of,  is  like  to  shoot 
higher  than  he  that  aims  at  a  mark  within  his  reach.  Besides  that,  the  excellency 
of  the  pattern,  as  it  leaves  room  for  continual  improvement,  so  it  kindles  ambition, 
•ad  makes  men  strain  and  contend  to  the  utmost  to  do  better.  And  we  may 
Nasonably  presome  that  to  do  all  we  can  towards  the  fulfilling  of  this  precept  will 


SOS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CH4».  wu 

be  as  kooeptable  to  God,  and  as  beneficial  to  onrselves,  as  if  onr  power  had  bees 
greater,  and  we  had  perfectly  fulfilled  it.  4.  And  lastly,  Which  will  fully  clear 
this  matter ;  this  precept  doth  not  oblige  us  to  come  up  to  a  perfect  equahty  with 
the  pattern  propounded  to  us,  but  only  imports  a  vigorous  imitation  of  it ;  that  we 
be  perpetually  ascending  and  climbing  up  higher,  still  advancing  from  one  degree 
of  goodness  to  another,  and  continually  aspiring  after  a  near  resemblance  to  God. 
And  this  seems  to  be  no  inconsiderable  ingredient  and  enhancement  of  the  happi< 
ness  of  h«aven,  that  the  holiness  of  good  men  (which  is  the  similitude  of  God)  is 
never  at  a  stand,  nor  at  its  full  growth  and  period ;  but  that  the  glorified  saints 
(yea,  and  blessed  angels  too)  may  be  continually  growing  and  improving,  and  they 
themselves  still  become  better  and  happier  to  all  eternity.  III.  All  that  now  remains 
is  to  draw  some  useful  inferences  from  this  discourse  which  I  have  made ;  and 
they  shall  be  these  two :  1.  That  the  strongest  and  surest  reasonings  in  religion 
are  grounded  upon  the  essential  perfections  of  God.  2.  That  the  truest  and  most 
substantial  practice  of  religion  consists  in  the  imitation  of  God.    {J.  TilloUon,  D.D.) 

Yer.  36.  Be  ye  therefore  merclfnl,  as  yonr  Father  also  Is  merdfuL — The  blessing 
of  mercy : — "  Mercy  "  is  the  one  great  cry  of  human  nature.  We  dare  not  ask  for 
justice,  we  can  only  plead  for  mercy.  We,  who  want  so  much  mercy  from  God, 
must  learn  to  show  mercy  to  our  fellow-men.  How  can  we  look  to  Him  for  mercy 
if  we  never  show  mercy,  how  can  we  ask  forgiveness  unless  we  forgive  ?  Think  of 
some  of  the  ways  in  which  we  can  show  mercy.  1.  We  must  show  mercy  and 
loving-kindness,  practically,  by  deeds,  not  words.  2.  We  can  show  mercy  by  for- 
giving those  who  injure  us.  Few  things  are  more  talked  of,  and  less  practised, 
than  the  duty  of  forgiveness.  3.  Mercy  ever  brings  its  sweet  reward.  Every  act 
of  loving-kindness  comes  back  to  us  with  abundant  interest.  Once  a  fanner,  out 
on  the  western  prairies  of  America,  started  for  a  distant  town,  to  receive  some 
money  due  to  him.  As  he  left  his  house,  his  only  chUd,  a  little  girl,  clung  lovingly 
to  him,  and  reminded  him  of  his  promise  to  bring  her  home  a  present.  Late  on 
the  same  night  the  farmer  left  the  town  on  his  way  home.  The  night  was  very 
dark  and  stormy,  and  he  was  yet  far  from  his  home,  and  in  the  wildest  part  of  the 
road,  when  he  heard  the  cry  of  a  child.  The  farmer  thought  that  it  might  be  the 
device  of  some  robber,  as  he  was  known  to  carry  money  with  him.  He  was  weary 
and  wet  with  his  journey,  and  inclined  to  hasten  on,  but  again  the  cry  reached  him. 
The  farmer  determined  that  whatever  happened  he  must  search  for  the  child,  if 
child  there  were.  Groping  in  the  darkness,  at  last  he  found  a  little  figure,  drenched 
with  rain,  and  shivering  with  cold.  Wrapping  his  cloak  about  the  child,  he  rode 
homewards  as  fast  as  possible,  but  when  he  reached  his  house,  he  found  it  full  of 
neighbours,  standing  round  his  weeping  wife.  One  said  to  another,  "  Do  not  tell 
him,  it  will  drive  him  mad."  Then  the  farmer  set  down  his  bundle,  and  his  wife 
with  a  cry  of  joy  saw  that  it  was  their  own  lost  child.  The  little  one  had  set  forth 
to  meet  her  father,  and  had  missed  her  way.  The  man  had,  without  knowing  it, 
saved  his  own  daughter.  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  Imitation  of  the  mercy 
of  God : — What  can  be  a  more  endearing  motive  to  the  mind  of  man,  than  to  pro- 
pose to  him  a  resemblance  to  the  most  high  God ;  to  urge  the  conduct  of  the  Father 
of  the  universe,  as  an  example  for  his  imitation.  1.  The  first  excellence  in  the 
mercy  of  God  which  will  naturally  occur  to  our  thoughts,  as  deserving  our  imita- 
tion, is  its  entire  disinterestedness  and  perfect  liberality.  Our  goodness,  therefore, 
must  be  void  of  selfish  and  earthly  motives.  2.  Its  universality.  We  must 
endeavour  to  do  aU  the  good  we  can  to  all  around  us,  neither  slighting  the  ignorant, 
nor  despising  the  mean  and  indigent,  nor  abandoning  the  vicious  and  unworthy  in 
their  distress.  (1)  Although  our  mercy  may  and  ought  to  be  universal  in  will  and 
intention,  yet,  in  consequence  of  our  little  power,  it  must  be  very  Umited  in  reality 
and  in  effect  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  (2)  This  example  of  the  nnconfined  extent  of  the 
Divine  mercy  does  not  hinder  us  from  having  a  more  particular  regard  to  certain 
persons,  and  peculiar  situations  of  distress  (Gal.  vi.  10).  3.  Its  unwearied  perse- 
verance. Let  us,  like  God,  be  "  not  weary  in  well-doing."  4.  Its  long-suffering 
patience.  5.  Its  readiness  and  willingness  to  forgive.  {James  Biddoeh,  M.A.) 
Practical  manifestations  of  mercy : — In  how  many  thousand  instances  does  a  mac 
hold  in  bis  own  hands  the  power  of  manifesting  this  blessed  quality  of  mercy  I 
You  are  an  employer;  there  is  some  boy  in  your  employment  who  commits  his  first 
transgression,  perhaps  not  really  conscious  of  the  evil  that  he  does.  Perhaps  in  an 
unguarded  moment  he  takes  from  you  something  that  belongs  to  you.  You  do  not 
injore  society  by  exercising  mercy  towards  that  boy.    How  often  is  it  the  case  tb«t 


our.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE,  Ml 

yonr  judicions  act  of  mercy,  tempered  by  justice,  has  been  the  means  of  saying  that 
boy  from  open  exposure,  from  public  punishment ;  how  often  it  is  the  salvation  of 
that  boy  I  Do  you  suppose  that  it  is  justice  in  that  case  that  the  penalty  of  the 
law  shall  brand  him — that  he  shall  be  marked  as  a  criminal,  that  he  shall  be  self- 
degraded  ?  This  is  an  instance  which  men  of  business  will  tell  me  often  occurs, 
and  can  there  be  any  doubt  as  to  what  justice  is  in  that  case  ?  So  I  say,  when  a 
man's  reputation  lies  at  our  mercy,  we  are  bound  to  make  all  the  allowance  we  can 
for  his  action.  If  he  does  a  foolish  thing,  let  us  be  disposed,  as  far  as  possible,  to 
make  allowance,  to  think  what  may  have  been  the  peculiar  circumstances  under 
which  he  did  it.  "We  are  all  called  upon  to  exercise  this  prerogative  of  mercy,  and 
that  in  innumerable  forms.  (E.  H.  Chapin,D.D.)  Gospel  for  the  fourth  Sunday 
after  Trinity : — I.  Wk  abe  incited  to  imitation  of  onR  Heavenly  Father.  We 
are  His  children,  and  children  ought  to  resemble  their  parents  (Eph.  v.  1,  B.V.) 
II.  An  appeal  is  made  to  oub  self-interest.  It  is  a  principle  of  the  Divine 
administration  that  the  standard  you  apply  to  others  shall  be  applied  to  you.  III. 
Oub  Lord  bdooests  the  way  in  which  we  may  hope  to  pass  righteous  jxjdo- 
HENTS  UPON  others.  By  being  first  jealous  and  severe  judges  of  ourselves. 
{Homiletic  Quarterly.)  Man  a  child  of  mercy : — When  God,  in  His  eternal 
counsel,  conceived  the  thought  of  man's  creation,  He  called  to  Him  the  three 
ministers  who  wait  constantly  upon  His  throne— Justice,  Truth,  and  Mercy — and 
thus  addressed  them :  "  Shall  we  make  man  ?  "  Then  said  Justice,  "  0  God  !  make 
him  not ;  for  he  will  trample  upon  Thy  laws."  Truth  made  answer  also,  "  0  God  I 
make  him  not,  for  he  will  pollute  Thy  sanctuaries."  But  Mercy,  dropping  upon 
her  knees,  and  looking  up  through  her  tears,  exclaimed,  "  0  God  1  make  ham.  I 
will  watch  over  him  with  my  care  through  all  the  dark  paths  which  he  may  have  to 
tread."  Then  God  made  man,  and  said  to  him,  "  0  man  !  thou  art  the  child  of 
Mercy:  go  and  deal  with  thy  brother."  (Crittenden.)  A  condition  of  receiving 
mercy  : — Being  sent  for  by  a  slave-holder  who  was  seriously  unwell,  to  pray  with 
him.  Father  Craven  approached  his  bedside  and  inquired  if  he  had  in  his  will 
bequeathed  liberty  to  his  slaves  ?  "  No,"  said  the  slave-holder,  •*  I  have  bequeathed 
them  to  my  children."  "  Then,"  said  Father  Craven,  "  prayer  will  be  of  no  avail — 
God  will  not  show  mercy  to  those  who  show  none  to  their  fellow -men."  So  he 
bade  him  farewell.  Soon  after  a  second  message  was  sent  for  Father  Craven  to 
visit  the  slave-holder  and  pray  with  him.  He  went  and  asked  the  slave-holder  if 
he  had  emancipated  bis  slaves  ?  "  Yes,"  said  the  slave-holder,  •'  I  have  now 
emancipated  them  by  my  will.  WiU  you  pray  for  me  ?  "  "  Certainly,"  said  the 
good  man,  and  he  knelt  down  and  commended  to  God  the  soul  of  the  sufferer,  who 
seemed  near  his  end.  Father  Craven  agreed  with  John  Jay,  a  leader  in  the 
American  revolution,  who  said,  *'  Till  America  comes  into  the  measure  (of  abolition) 
her  prayers  to  heaven  will  be  impious."  (Handbook  to  Scripture  Doctrines.)  An 
all-availing  plea : — A  minister  belonging  to  the  Calvinistic  Methodists,  in  a  country 
town,  had  taught  his  little  boy,  who  is  in  his  second  year,  each  night  before  going 
to  sleep,  to  repeat  the  prayer :  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  The  other 
Sabbath,  while  the  minister  had  gone  to  preach  to  a  village  congregation,  the  child 
upset  the  inkstand,  and  was  told  his  father  would  whip  him  for  the  accident.  The 
minister  had  no  sooner  returned,  than  the  child  climbed  bis  knee,  and  putting  his 
mouth  close  to  the  father's  ear,  softly  whispered :  "  Be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner, 
papa."  Moved  by  the  ingenuity  of  the  plea,  the  father  kissed  his  boy,  and  could 
not  find  it  in  his  heart  to  chide  or  correct  the  bright  little  fellow.  Importance  of 
mercy : — Mercy  is  in  the  air  which  we  breathe,  the  daily  hght  which  shines  upon 
us,  the  gracious  rain  of  God's  inheritance.  It  is  the  public  spring  for  all  the 
thirsty,  the  common  hospital  for  aU  the  needy.  All  the  streets  of  the  church  are 
paved  with  these  stones.  What  would  become  of  the  children,  if  there  were  not 
these  breasts  of  consolation  7  It  is  mercy  that  takes  us  out  of  the  womb,  feeds  us 
in  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage,  furnishes  us  with  spiritual  provision,  closes  our  eyes 
in  peace,  and  translates  us  to  a  secure  resting-place.  It  is  the  first  petitioner's 
suit,  and  the  first  believer's  article,  the  contemplation  of  Enoch,  the  confidence  of 
Abraham,  the  burden  of  the  prophetic  songs,  and  the  glory  of  all  the  apostles,  the 
plea  of  the  penitent,  the  ecstasies  of  the  reconciled,  the  believer's  hosannah,  the 
angel's  hallelujah.  Ordinances,  oracles,  altars,  pulpits,  the  gates  of  the  grave,  and 
the  gates  of  heaven,  do  all  depend  upon  mercy.  It  is  the  loadstar  of  the  wander- 
ing, the  ransom  of  the  captive,  the  antidote  of  the  tempted,  the  prophet  of  the 
liTing,  and  the  effectual  comfort  of  the  dying :  there  would  not  be  one  regenerate 
saint  upon  earth,  nor  one  glorified  saint  in  heaven,  if  it  were  not  for  mercy.     (Iha 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tl. 

Dictionary  of  Illustrations.)  Mercy  reciprocated: — The  Marshall  D'Armont, 

having  taken  Grodon,  ordered  every  Spaniard  found  in  the  garrison  to  be  put  to 
death.  Though  it  waa  death  to  disobey  orders,  an  English  soldier  ventured  to  save 
a  Spaniard.  He  was  arraigned  for  the  offence,  confessed  the  fact,  and  declared 
himself  ready  to  suffer  death  if  they  would  save  the  Ufe  of  the  Spaniard.  Surprised 
at  the  request,  they  inquired  why  he  was  so  much  interested.  •'  Because,"  replied 
he,  "  in  a  similar  situation,  he  once  saved  my  life."  The  marshall  waa  so  greatly 
pleased,  that  he  granted  him  pardon,  and  saved  the  Spaniard's  life  as  welL 
Provision  Jor  mercy : — Abraham  Lincoln's  doorkeeper  had  standing  orders  from 
him,  that  no  matter  how  great  might  be  the  throng,  if  either  senators  or  represen- 
tatives had  to  wait,  or  to  be  turned  away  without  an  audience,  he  mast  see,  before 
the  day  closed,  every  messenger  who  came  to  him  with  a  petition  for  the  saving  of 
life.  The  law  of  love : — All  that  is  really  good  is  the  outcome  of  the  law  of  love, 
and  its  first  result  and  inseparable  companion  is  mercy.  L  Fohbeab.  1.  A  passion 
for  judging  others  seems  to  exist  in  men.  Every  one,  however  backward  to  amend 
himself,  is  ready  to  correct  others.  The  origin  of  this  spirit  is  too  clear.  Deep  in 
man's  native  selfishness.  Exalts  self,  depresses  others.  2.  Are  we  never,  then,  to 
judge?  (1)  One  cannot  help  forming  opinions.  It  would  be  indicative  of  a  per- 
verted conscience  to  regard  all  with  equal  complacency.  Yes,  but  this  is  different 
from  the  glad  readiness  to  judge.  (2)  Sometimes  needful  to  speak  as  well  as  to 
judge.  But  not  in  a  censorious  spirit,  or  overbearing  tone.  (3)  The  example  of 
Jesus  is  the  solution  of  the  difficulty.  Reprove  only  when  needful.  Then  in 
righteous  indignation,  or  in  sorrowful  rebuke.  II.  Fobqivk.  1.  Revenge  is  aa 
natural  to  man  as  passing  judgment.  2.  Often  as  false  and  hypocritical,  hiding 
itself  under  similar  disguises.  3.  Its  root  is  ultimately  the  same.  Selfishness- 
contradiction  of  the  law  of  love.  4.  Consequently  condemned  by  example  and 
spirit  of  Christ.  His  forgiving  mercy  was  habitual,  ready,  cordial,  IH.  Giva. 
The  more  active  side  of  mercy.  Opposed  to  bargaining  or  exchange — no  thought 
of  return  An  evidence  of  sonship  of  God.  When  we  are  merciful,  we  come 
nearest  to  the  Divine  perfection.     (W.  R.  Clark,  M.A.)        Mercy  : — I.  Its  actb. 

1.  Consideration.  2.  Compassion.  3.  Prayer.  4.  Helpfulness,  according  to  the 
need  of  the  object.    II.  Its  objects.    Our  neighbour.     1.  Erring  (James  v.  19, 20). 

2.  Offending.  3.  Under  persecution.  4.  In  want.  6.  In  sickness.  6.  In  mis- 
fortune by  the  loss  of  good  friends,  or  the  unkindness  of  bad  relations.  III.  Thb 
UAMNZB  OF  ITS  EXERCISE.  Acts  of  mcrcy  are  to  be  performed — 1.  With  readiness 
and  forwardness  of  mind  (2  Cor.  ix.  7).  2.  With  modesty  and  humility  (Matt.  vi.  1). 
8.  From  a  kind  and  merciful,  not  from  a  selfish  and  mercenary  temper  (Luke  vi,  32). 
4.  Without  delay  (Prov.  iv.  28).  5.  Bountifully  (1  Tim.  vi.  18).  6.  With  minda 
full  of  gratitude  to  God  (1  Chron.  xxix.  13,  17).  7.  As  to  Christ  Hunself  (Matt. 
X.  42).  IV.  The  blessing  pbomised  to  the  mercipul.  As  for  external  mercies, 
the  Bible  promises  them  very  fuUy  to  the  merciful.  1.  Deliverance  out  of  trouble 
(Isaiah  Iviii.  10 ;  Psalm  xli.  1).  2.  God's  blessing  on  his  labours  and  undertakings 
(Dent.  XV.  7-10).  3.  The  staving  off  of  his  trouble,  and  the  lengthening  of  hia 
tranquility  (Dan.  iv.  27).  4.  Plenty  (Prov.  xix.  17 ;  iii.  9).  5.  Honour  (Psalm 
cxii.  9).  6.  Deliverance  from  enemies  (Psalm  xU.  2).  7.  God's  comforts  in  hia 
sickness  (Psalm  U.  3).  8.  A  blessing  on  his  posterity  (Psahn  xxxvii.  26).  9.  More 
particularly,  man's  help  in  distress  and  God's  providence.  (J.  Blair,  D.D.)  Ar* 
we  merciful  in  our  speech  to  men  ? — Do  we  not  sometimes  take  pleasure  in  making  a 
criticism  as  sharp  and  pungent  as  we  can  make  it  ?  Do  we  in  our  literature,  in  our 
judgments  of  the  political  work  or  social  life  of  others,  strive  to  speak  charitably; 
or  rather,  is  it  not  a  keen  gratification  to  think  that  the  world  enjoys  the  criticism 
when  the  writer  is  sharp  and  piquant,  and  seasons  his  criticism  with  that  unkind- 
ness which  sends  it  home  as  the  feather  sends  the  arrow  ?  {Bishop  W.  C.  Magee.) 
Are  we  merciful  as  employers  of  others  t — Do  we  feel  that  those  around  us  in 
domestic  service,  in  business,  should  have  their  feelings  carefully  considered? 
Surely  there  is  a  sad  want  of  thoughtful  mercy  amongst  us  all  1  There  is  no  lack 
of  that  mercy  which  comes  of  being  strongly  appealed  to,  and  which  moves  a  man 
to  give  largely  of  his  money,  time,  and  energy,  for  the  removal  of  suffering.  Bat 
the  thoughtful,  considerate  mercy  which  seeks  to  prevent  suffering  and  to  hinder 
crime  is  what  we  desire  to  see.  {Ibid.)  The  merciful : — The  world  of  the 
natural  man  is  by  no  means  predominantly  a  merciful  world.  "  The  tender  mercies 
of  the  wicked  are  cruel."  A  thoroughly  bad  man  is  seldom  a  kind  man.  The 
kindliness  of  a  bad  man  is  generally  both  capricious  and  selfish.  At  its  best  it 
laoks  the  essential  condition  of  a  Christian  charity.    Not  everything  which  passac 


«AP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  909 

for  kindneBS,  not  everything  which  is  kindness,  is  "  mercy "  in  the  sense  here 
intended.  There  is  another  word  in  Scrij^ture,  which  stands  for  pity,  and  the  two 
ideas  differ.  1.  The  objects  of  pity  are  the  unhappy :  the  objects  of  mercy  are  the 
undeserving.  (1)  Mercy  is  seen  towards  those  who  have  no  claim  upon  us.  The 
good  Samaritan  was  merciful  as  well  as  pitiful ;  because  the  robbed  and  wounded 
man  whom  he  succoured  was  wholly  unconnected  with  him ;  was  not  only  no 
relation,  but  even  an  alien  and  of  a  hostile  race.  (2)  Mercy  is  shown,  yet  more 
strongly,  towards  those  who  have  forfeited  their  claim  upon  us  ;  those  who  had  a 
claim,  and  have  lost  it.  The  prodigal  son.  2,  The  nature  of  mercy.  (1)  Sym- 
pathy. A  fellow-feeling  with  the  undeserving.  A  deep  consciousness  of  personal 
demerit,  making  me  at  once  the  equal  and  the  brother  of  the  undeserving.  (2) 
This  sense  of  fellowship  with  the  sinner  is  accompanied  with  a  sense  of  the  evil  of 
sin.  By  this  it  is  prompted.  (3)  A  desire  for  the  good — the  highest  good — of  the 
sinful.  Mercy  rests  not  in  the  fall.  Mercy  is  not  satisfied  with  bewailing  the 
misery.  Mercy  expends  not  itself  in  sighs  and  tears,  sits  not  down  with  the  sorrow 
and  the  sinfulness  which  she  both  beholds  and  feels :  she  looks  upward,  and  she 
looks  onward — upward  for  help,  onward  to  salvation ;  and  is  as  ready  to  succour  as 
she  is  prompt  to  sympathise.  3.  The  working  of  mercy.  (1)  Compassionate 
thoughts.  Mercy,  like  every  grace,  has  its  seat  within.  We  must  begin  with  the 
heart.  The  thoughts  of  mercy  will  be  disciplined  into  charitableness  before  she 
begins  to  speak  or  to  do.  She  will  recount  inwardly  the  revelation  of  God  concern- 
ing sin  itself  ;  how  it  first  entered  into  the  world  ;  how  it  spread  its  reign  hither 
and  thither,  till  a  flood  of  evil  had  hidden  earth  itself  from  heaven ;  how  it  works 
in  the  child,  struggles  for  mastery  in  the  man,  and  leads  captive  in  unsuspected 
bonds  souls  born  for  immortality  and  for  God.  She  knows  how  subtly  are  its 
workings,  how  fatal  its  delusions,  how  strong  its  chain.?.  She  pities  even  where 
she  must  condemn,  and,  where  she  cannot  trust,  she  can  at  least  hope  still.  (2) 
Compassionate  thoughts  come  forth  naturally  into  kindly  words.  The  merciful 
man  speaks  mercifully.  (3)  Compassionate  thoughts  and  kindly  words  will  run 
on,  lastly,  into  practical  efforts.  A  man  who  has  a  feeling  of  compassion  should 
always  act  upon  it.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Mercifulness  .-—What  is  it  to  be  "  merci- 
ful"? Like  other  virtues,  tbis,  too,  has  its  imitations,  worthless  and  spurious. 
There  is  a  mercy  current  among  men  which  is  merely  an  outlet  for  energy,  or  the 
fashion  of  the  day.  There  is  a  mercy,  so  called,  which  is  in  reality  a  luxury,  a 
refined  sort  of  self-indulgence.  There  is  a  sort  of  mercy  which  people  call  charity, 
which  gives,  but  without  discrimination  or  thought.  But  these,  none  of  these,  are 
mercifulness.  No,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  to  be  confused  with  pity,  a  feeling 
of  compassion  for  the  unfortunate ;  nor  has  it  to  do  with  merely  deeds  of  mercy, 
acts  of  kindness.  For  mercifulness  and  mercy  do  not  mean  the  same  thing. 
Mercifulness  is  what  we  are  and  what  we  do.  Mercy,  as  men  count  it,  may  be  all 
outside,  no  heart  in  it,  or  may  take  its  rise  from  wrong  or  unworthy  motives ;  while 
mercifulness  must  go  down  to  the  inner  springs  of  actions,  not  stop  short  of 
guiding  principles,  have  its  roots  in  sound  and  holy  motives.  It  deals  with  the 
quality  of  the  deed  rather  than  the  quantity ;  it  examines  the  texture  of  which  it 
is  made,  not  the  smoothness  or  bright  shimmer ;  it  asks  not  whether  it  glitters,  but 
whether  it  is  gold  with  the  true  ring.  1.  True  mercifulness  is  a  characteristic  of 
those  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  they  alone  will  be  merciful  in 
God's  way,  seeking  not  to  please  themselves,  but  to  do  His  will  "  who  is  merciful 
and  gracious,  slow  to  anger  and  plenteous  in  mercy."  2.  True  mercifulness  is 
always  guided  by  meekness.  It  is  exercised  towards  those  who  have  ill  requited  our 
kindness,  and  are  undeserving  of  our  mercy.  3.  True  mercifulness  can  only  be  felt 
by  those  who  have  learned  to  mourn  their  sin,  and  in  repentance  turned  unto  God, 
and  so  have  a  fellow  feeling  with  those  who  sin,  and  long  to  rescue  them.  4.  True 
mercifulness  has,  as  its  earliest  beginning,  poverty  of  spirit,  for  only  those  who  in 
humility  know  themselves  aright  will  never  despair  of  others,  or  tire  of  showing 
mercy  to  the  undeserving.  (C.  J.  Ridgevoay,  M.A.)  The  mercifulness  of  God  a» 
teen  in  Christ : — 1.  He  was  merciful  to  all,  not  to  some.  2.  His  mercifulness  was 
provident,  thoughtful,  wise,  seeking  the  real  good  of  men,  marked  by  the  discrimi- 
nation of  prudence,  withholding  to-day  what  will  do  harm  instead  of  good,  giving 
to  one  what  He  refuses  to  another,  always  keeping  before  Him  as  the  only  true 
object  of  mercifulness  the  well-being  of  those  He  came  to  succour.  3.  His  merci- 
fulness is  unchanging.  Time  does  not  wear  it  out,  nor  years  weaken  it.  He  was 
merciful  even  as  He  loved,  unto  the  end.  Many  waters  could  not  quench  it,  neither 
the  floods  drown  it.    The  waters  oame  in  even  onto  Hia  soul,  suffering  and  anguinh 

39 


SIO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

overwhelmed  Him;  but  His  mercifulness  lived  on;  it  burned  like  the  beacon  lighl 
of  the  lighthouse,  undimmed  by  the  great  storm  of  affliction  that  raged  around. 
Nor  is  He  changed  now.  His  mercifulness  is  as  true  in  His  exaltation  as  in  Hi& 
Passion  (Heb.  ii.  17,  18;  vii.  24,  25).  (Ibid.)  Christ's  mercifulnes$  and  ours  ; — 
Compare  what  we  call  mercifulness  with  His.  His  a  mercifulness  which  always 
kept  God's  glory  in  view,  and  ours  so  often  centring  about  self.  His  a  mercifulness 
shown  towards  those  who  were  ever  seeking  His  heart,  and  ours  so  easily  quenched 
by  the  first  appearance  of  ingratitude.  His  a  mercifulness  that  recognized  sin  as 
the  source  of  every  man's  misery,  and  ours  so  indififereut  to  the  deepest  needs  of 
the  men  and  women  around  us.  His  a  mercifulness  that  stooped  to  help,  that 
touched  as  well  as  pitied,  and  ours  always  bestowed  with  a  gloved  hand,  and  at  a 
gafe  distance.  His  a  mercifulness  so  cathoHc  and  wide  in  its  embrace,  and  ours  so 
narrow  and  limited  by  national  or  religious,  or,  worse  still,  party  prejudice.  His  a 
mercifulness  that  was  provident  and  wise,  and  ours  capricious  and  thoughtless, 
giving  to  the  professional  beggar  because  she  importunes  us  at  the  very  door  of  the 
church,  or  to  the  man  who  in  veriest  cruelty  dra{:;s  little  children,  often  hired  for 
the  purpose,  through  the  wet  and  muddy  streets,  in  the  cold  and  wet,  for  they  are 
never  to  be  seen  on  fine  days;  while  to  calls  that  come  from  those  that  can 
guarantee  their  worth,  or  to  the  really  poor  who  will  not  beg,  or  to  the  appeals 
which  are  made  in  God's  house  for  definite  objects,  our  mercifulness  turns  a  deaf 
ear.  Believe  me,  it  is  time  for  us  to  learn  that  true  mercifulness  is  discriminating, 
thoughtful,  wise.  His  a  mercifulness  that  is  always  the  same,  ours  so  fitful,  un- 
certain, unreliable.  His  a  mercifulness  that  cost  Him  self-sacrifice,  ours  a  doing 
or  giving  what  will  not  even  cost  us  a  thought.  His  a  mercifulness  that  permeated 
the  whole  man  in  every  thought,  and  word,  and  deed,  ours  so  superficial,  so  unreal, 
our  thoughts  often  breathing  harsh  judgment  upon  others,  our  actions  marked  by 
Bo  Uttle  consideration  of  those  about  us  or  below  us  to  whom  we  might  be  merciful. 
(Ibid.)  Christian  mercy: — I.  The  natdbe  of  Christian  meecy.  1.  It  has  its 
seat  in  the  heart.  2.  It  is  a  supernatural  quality.  3.  It  is  an  active  principle. 
(1)  It  will  be  manifested  toward  the  inferior  animals.  (2)  To  those  of  our  fellow- 
creatures  who  are  under  bodily  affliction  and  misery.  (3)  It  will  extend  to  the 
spiritual  miseries  of  our  fellow-men.  Mercy  to  the  soul,  is  the  soul  of  mercy.  (4) 
Towards  our  greatest  enemies.  H.  The  grounds  of  Christian  mebct.  1.  Because 
it  is  strictly  enjoined  by  God.  2.  Because  we  stand  in  constant  need  of  Divine 
mercy.  "Were  it  withdrawn,  there  would  be  nothing  before  us  but  a  fearful  looking 
for  of  judgment.  3.  Because  our  profession  binds  us  to  imitate  Christ,  who  is  the 
perfect  pattern  of  mercy.  In  Him  mercy  was  embodied.  If  we  are  His  disciples, 
we  will  walk  even  as  He  walked.  4.  We  should  be  merciful  because  of  the  true 
pleasure  which  is  associated  with  acts  of  mercy.  5.  Because  it  is  an  express  con- 
dition of  our  obtaining  mercy.  III.  The  rewards  of  Christian  mercy.  1.  A 
good  name.  2.  A  peculiar  intereat  in  the  kind  and  merciful  arrangements  of 
Divine  providence.  3.  The  merciful  are  blessed  with  the  prayers  and  blessings  of 
the  miserable  whom  they  have  relieved.  4.  They  shall  be  blessed  with  the  public 
approval  of  Christ  at  the  last  day.  Application  :  1.  Let  the  exercise  of  mercy  be 
pressed  on  all  Christ's  disciples.  Cultivate  it.  Eejoice  in  all  opportunities  of 
doing  good.  2.  Let  the  mercy  of  God  to  us  be  higlily  valued.  We  need  it  daily. 
Only  one  channel  for  its  communication — through  Christ.  Only  one  way  to  obtain 
it — through  faith  in  His  word.  3.  The  unmerciful  shall  have  judgment  without 
mercy.     What  a  dreadful  portion  to  the  guilty  sinner  1    (J.  Burm,  D.D.) 

Ver.  87.  Judge  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be  judged. — Judge  not : — No  man,  avers  Sir 
Thomas  Browne,  can  ju:~tly  censure  or  condemn  another,  because,  in  fact,  no  man 
truly  knows  another.  "  This  I  perceive  in  myself  ;  for  I  am  in  the  dark  to  all  the 
world,  and  my  nearest  friends  behold  me  but  in  a  cloud."  .  .  .  Further,  no  man 
can  judge  another,  because  no  man  knows  himself.  The  Vicar  of  Gravenhurst,  in 
his  position  of  parish  priest,  owns  himself  compelled  to  confess  that  the  best  people 
are  not  the  best  in  every  relation  of  life,  and  the  worst  people  not  bad  in  every 
relation  of  hfe  ;  so  that  with  experience,  he  finds  himself  growing  lenient  in  his 
blame,  if  also  reticent  in  his  praise.  "  Again  and  again  I  say  to  myself  that  only 
the  Omniscient  can  be  the  equitable  judge  of  human  beings,  so  complicated  aie 
our  virtue  with  our  faiUngs,  and  so  many  are  the  hidden  virtues,  as  well  as  hidden 
^ices,  of  oar  fellow-men."  If  judge  at  all  we  dare  and  do,  be  it  in  th«  spirit  and 
to  the  let«er  ot  Wordsworth's  counsel : — 

**  From  an  raah  censure  be  the  mind  kept  free; 

He  only  judges  right  who  weighs,  compares, 


OUP.  yi.]  ST.  LUKE.  611 

and,  in  the  sternest  sentence  which  his  voice  pronounces,  "ne'er  abandons  charity." 
Never  let  it  be  forgotten,  insists  a  Quarterly  Reviewer,  that  there  is  scarcely  a  single 
moral  action  of  a  single  human  being  of  which  other  men  have  such  a  knowledge 
— its  ultimate  grounds,  its  surrounding  incidents,  and  the  real  determining  oaoaM 
of  its  meiits — as  to  warrant  their  pronouncing  a  conclusive  judgmeuL 

**  Who  made  the  heart,  'tis  He  alone 

Decidedly  can  try  us  ; 
He  knows  each  chord — its  various  tone, 

Each  spring  its  various  bias  ; 
Then  at  the  balance  let's  be  mute, 

We  never  can  adjust  it."  (F.  Jaeox.) 

Falsely  judged : — It  is  related  of  a  broker  in  one  of  the  Italian  cities,  that  his  strict 
economy  brought  on  him  the  reputation  of  miserliness.  He  lived  plainly  and 
poorly,  and  at  his  death  a  hundred  thousand  men  in  the  city  were  ready  to  curse 
him  until  his  will  was  opened,  in  which  he  declared  that  early  his  heart  was 
touched  with  the  sufferings  of  the  poor  in  the  city  for  the  lack  of  water.  Springs 
there  were  none,  and  the  public  wells  were  bad  ;  and  he  had  spent  his  life  in  ac- 
cumulating a  fortune  that  should  be  devoted  to  bringing,  by  an  aqueduct,  from 
the  neighbouring  mountains,  streams  that  should  pour  abundantly  into  the  baths 
and  dwellings  of  the  poor  of  the  city  ;  and  he  not  only  denied  himself  many  of 
the  comforts  of  life,  but  toiled  by  day  and  by  night,  yea,  and  bore  obloquy,  that  he 
might  bless  his  fellow-citizens.  He  is  dead  ;  but  those  streams  pour  their  health 
yet  into  that  city.  A  self-denying  brother  misjudged  : — The  majority  of  people 
are  ever  ready  to  judge  the  conduct  of  their  neighbours — in  other  words,  to  "  cast 
the  first  stone."  But  we  have  no  right  to  judge  others  until  we  know  all  the  cir- 
cumstances that  influence  their  conduct.  In  many  cases  we  might  imitate  those 
we  condemn,  under  like  circumstances.  A  young  man  employed  in  a  printing 
office  in  one  of  our  large  towns,  incurred  the  ridicule  of  the  other  compositors,  on 
account  of  his  poor  clothes  and  unsocial  behaviour.  On  several  occasions  subscrip- 
tion papers  were  presented  to  him  for  various  objects,  but  he  refused  to  give  his 
money.  One  day  a  compositor  asked  him  to  contribute  for  a  picnic  party,  but  was 
politely  refused.  Thereupon,  the  other  accused  him  of  niggardliness — an  accusation 
which  he  resented.  "You  little  know,"  he  said,  "how  unjustly  you  have  been 
treating  me.  For  more  than  a  year,  I  have  been  starving  myself  to  save  money 
enough  to  send  my  poor  blind  sister  to  Paris,  to  be  treated  by  a  physician  who  has 
treated  many  cases  of  blindness  similar  to  hers.  I  have  always  done  my  duty  here 
in  this  office,  and  have  minded  my  own  business.  I  am  sacrificing  everything  in 
life  for  another.  Would  either  of  you  do  as  much  ?  Could  any  one  do  more  ?  " 
He  had  been  judged  without  a  knowledge  of  circumstances.  We  cannot  read  the 
heart  of  others,  and  in  many  cases  to  know  all  is  to  judge  all.  "  Judge  not,  that 
ye  be  not  judged."  {Dr.  Cuyler.)  Difficulty  of  judging  aright : — While  we  are 
coldly  discussing  a  man's  career,  sneering  at  his  mistakes,  blaming  his  rashness, 
and  labelling  his  opinions — "Evangelical  and  narrow,"  or  " Latitudinarian  and 
Pantheistic,"  or  "Anglican  and  supercilious" — that  man  in  his  solitude  is,  perhaps, 
shedding  hot  tears  because  his  sacrifice  is  a  hard  one,  because  strength  and  patience 
are  failing  him  to  speak  the  difficult  word,  and  do  the  difficult  deed.  (George  Eliot.) 
The  censorious  spirit : — 1.  Springs  not  from  the  Divine  but  from  the  malign  ele- 
ments of  our  nature.  2.  Some  men  exercise  it  under  the  form  of  a  blunt,  plain- 
speaking  honesty.  There  is  nothing  so  blunt  as  a  bull  ;  but  a  bull  is  not  usually 
considered  to  be  a  good  thing  to  have  in  orphan  asylums  or  in  society.  Men, 
however,  who  have  come  up  along  that  line  of  development,  go  bellowing  and  hom- 
ing their  way  through  life,  and  justify  their  action  because  they  are  blunt,  honest 
plain-spoken  men.  3.  Then  there  are  men  who  "  hate  hypocrisy,"  and  who  are 
always  and  everywhere  looking  around  and  suspecting  people.  4.  There  is  another 
form  of  uncbaritableness  which  in  some  respects  is  harder  to  bear  than  any  other. 
That  is  where  criticism  is  put  in  the  form  of  wit.  Gold  and  silver  are  gold  and 
silver,  whether  they  be  in  the  shape  of  coin  or  not ;  but  when  they  are  in  the  shape 
of  coin  and  are  in  circulation,  they  have  a  power  which  otherwise  they  would  not 
have.  5.  The  spirit  of  uncbaritableness  adds  to  the  irritations,  and  quarrellings,  and 
sufferings  of  life.  6.  To  form  judgments  of  men,  so  far  as  their  superficial  qualities 
are  concerned,  requires  bat  little  ;  but  to  form  judgments  of  their  character  and 
disposition  is  one  of  ihm  most  elaborate  and  difficult  things  possible.     (H.  W. 


S19  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

Beecher.)  Concerning  fault-finders  ; — "  Judge  not  and  ye  shall  not  be  judged" ; 
by  whom  ?  By  your  fellow-men  ?  It  is  to  be  feared  that  whether  a  man  judge  thom 
or  not,  they  will  judge  him.  The  most  uncensorious  man  in  the  world  will  not 
escape  the  censure  of  the  uncharitable  ;  they  will  censure  even  his  uncensorious- 
ness,  and  pronounce  him  hypocrite  or  fool,  because  he  speaks  well  of  all.  When 
your  uncharitably- disposed  man  cannot  find  a  vice  in  his  neighbour,  he  is  so  disap- 
pointed  and  out  of  temper,  that  he  begins  to  pull  his  neighbour's  virtues  to  pieces. 
No,  this  is  a  warning  of  Divine  judgments  ;  judge  not  your  neighbour  lest  God  judge 
you.  God  will  bring  us  into  judgment  for  all  our  unkind  and  unfair  judgments  of 
our  fellow- men.  (H.  S.  Brown.)  The  judging  spirit : — I.  We  do  not  hesitate  to 
judge  those  whom  God  has  placed  in  a  condition,  the  effects  of  which,  in  character 
and  habit,  we  have  no  means  of  correctly  estimating.  II.  And  even  supposing 
actual  sin  in  the  case  of  the  exposed  man,  still  judgment  on  its  proceeding  from  ua 
may  be  a  condenmation  of  ourselves.  What  should  we  have  been  in  his  place  ?  III. 
In  our  common  life  the  judging  spirit  places  us  in  a  hard,  unfriendly  attitude 
towards  both  God  and  man.  IV.  The  judging  spirit,  with  the  injustice  it  leads  to, 
often  displays  a  remarkable  ignorance  of  human  nature  which  would  certainly  be 
corrected  by  something  more  of  self-inspection,  and  by  that  generosity  towards 
others  which  a  thorough  knowledge  of  one's  self  always  excites  in  a  just  mind.  V. 
There  is  one  large  part  of  our  subject  which  I  can  only  name  :  the  habit  of  judging 
of  the  whole  spirit  and  inward  life  of  a  man  from  the  religion  he  has  embraced. 
Creeds  separate,  as  if  the  souls  of  men  were  of  different  natures,  and  one  God  were 
not  the  Father  of  all.  (/.  H.  Thom.)  Against  censoriousnesn  : — "Judge  not."  I. 
Wb  have  not  sufficient  data.  We  see  a  few  of  the  actions  which  a  man  performs, 
we  hear  a  few  of  the  words  he  utters  ;  and  that  is  all  we  know  of  him.  Yet  some 
of  us  imagine  that,  on  the  strength  of  this  knowledge,  we  can  form  a  complete  and 
infallible  j  udgment  in  regard  to  his  moral  worth.  We  could  not  make  a  greater  or 
more  fooHsh  mistake.  In  order  to  arrive  at  a  correct  decision,  we  must  know  the 
history  of  the  man's  ancestors  for  hundieds  of  years  past,  and  the  different 
tendencies  towards  right  and  towards  wrong  which  they  have  transmitted  to  him. 
"  Many  of  us  are  born,"  says  the  author  of  "  John  Inglesant,"  "  with  seeds  within 
us  which  make  moral  victory  hopeless  from  the  first."  II.  We  can  never  see  what 

GOES  ON  IN  ANOTHEE'S  HEART.  III.  EVBN  IP  WB  WERE  ACQUAINTED  WITH  THE  FACTS, 
WB  SHOULD  BE  INCAPABLE  OF  ESTIMATING  COERECTLT  THEIB  MORAL  SIGNIFICANCE.      This 

is  owing  partly  to  the  misleading  influence  of  self-esteem.  According  to  an  old 
Indian  legend,  there  once  appeared  among  a  nation  of  hunchbacks,  a  young  and 
beautiful  god.  The  people  gathered  round  him  ;  and  when  they  saw  that  his  back 
was  destitute  of  a  hump,  they  began  to  hoot  and  jeer  and  taunt  him.  One  of  them, 
however,  more  philosophical  than  the  rest,  said  :  "My  friends,  what  are  we  doing? 
let  us  not  insult  this  miserable  creature.  If  heaven  has  made  us  beautiful,  if  it  has 
adorned  our  backs  with  a  mount  of  flesh,  let  us  with  pious  gratitude  repair  to  the 
temple  and  render  our  acknowledgments  to  the  immortal  gods."  This  quaint 
legend  illustrates  very  forcibly  some  of  the  curious  delusions  resulting  from  self- 
esteem.  We  are  apt  to  plume  ourselves  even  on  our  defects,  and  condemn  those 
who  differ  from  us  merely  because  they  differ.  {A.  W.  Momerie,  M.A.,  D.Sc.) 
On  censoriousness : — Whatever  censuring.is  contrary  to  truth  and  justice,  humanity 
and  charity,  civility  and  good  manners,  is  here  expressly  forbidden.  I.  This  dis- 
position 18  TRACEABLE — (1)  to  pride  and  vanity  ;  (2)  to  ill-will  and  envy  ;  (3)  to 
indolence  and  idleness.  II.  The  great  evil  and  malignity  of  it  consist  in  thb 
FACT  that — (1)  it  implies  great  presumption  and  impiety  towards  God,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  an  invasion  of  His  prerogative  ;  (2)  it  implies  great  injustice  towards  men ; 
(3)  it  is  great  folly  in  respect  of  ourselves — "  With  what  measure  we  mete," 
&c.  (J.  Balguy,  M.A.)  Christ  warns  us  against  judging : — I.  What  is  herb  fob- 
bidden.  It  is  plain  that  the  thing  forbidden  is  not  the  office,  or  the  upright  dis- 
charge of  the  office,  of  a  magistrate  or  a  judge.  When  provision  is  made,  in  a 
Christian  town  or  state,  for  the  due  punishment  of  offenders  against  the  tranquihty 
of  our  streets  or  the  security  of  our  homes,  there  is  nothing  in  this  contrary  to  the 
will  or  precept  of  Christ.  He  was  Himself  a  respecter  of  civil  order,  and  of  the 
authority  by  which  it  is  maintained.  Only  let  the  heart  of  the  judge,  in  the  exer- 
cise of  his  office,  be  full  of  humility  and  of  compassion  ;  only  let  him  remember 
that  common  infirmity,  that  universal  sinfulness,  in  which  he  himself  is  the  fellow 
mi  the  brother  of  him  who  stands  at  his  bar  for  judgment ;  only  let  him  acknow- 
ledge with  becoming  thankfulness  that  Divine  goodness,  of  grace  and  of  providence, 
which  alone  has  made  him  to  differ ;  and  his  administration  of  justice  may  be  th« 


Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  611 

offspring  of  a  Christian  devotion,  the  exercise  of  a  calling  in  which  he  was  called, 
of  a  ministry  acceptable  and  well-pleasing  to  God.  2.  Nor  do  we  understand  Him 
to  blame  the  expression  in  common  society  of  a  righteous  displeasure  against  deeds 
and  against  doers  of  iniquity.  It  is  no  charity  to  call  evil  good,  or  to  refrain,  out 
of  a  misplaced  tenderness,  from  calling  evil  evil.  Only  let  us  remember  what  we 
ourselves  are,  and  where — sinners  living  amid  temptations  ;  and  let  us,  therefore, 
speak  in  humility,  in  sincerity,  and  in  truth.  3.  Yet  the  world  is  full  of  such 
judgments  as  are  here  forbidden.  (1)  How  little  of  our  conversation  upon  the  faults 
of  others  is  in  any  sense  necessary  1  Our  judgments  are  most  often  gratuitous, 
willing,  wanton  judgments  ;  passed  in  idleness  and  unconcern  ;  prompted  by  no 
feeling  of  duty  ;  far,  far  worse,  therefore,  than  any  dulness,  than  any  silence. 
(2)  And,  if  needless,  then  uncharitable  too.  How  full  of  suspicion  I  How  un- 
willing to  allow  a  merit  not  patent  I  How  ready  to  imagine  a  bad  motive,  where,  by 
the  nature  of  the  case  (man  being  the  judge),  we  cannot  see  nor  know  it !  (3)  And 
how  many  of  them  are  false  judgments  1  (4)  Inconsistent  and  hypocritical. 
It  is  always  the  sinner  who  suspects  sin.  It  is  the  practised  deceiver  who 
imagines  and  imputes  deceit.  There  is  no  real  abhorrence  of  evil  where  there 
is  a  readiness  to  declaim  against  it.  IL  Why  it  is  forbidden.  1.  There 
is  a  retaliation  in  such  things.  A  law  of  retribution.  The  censorious  man 
will  have  his  censor,  whereas  the  merciful  man  will  be  mercifully  judged — both 
here  and  hereafter.  Not  that  a  mere  abstinence  from  censorious  judgment  will 
purchase  for  a  sinner  exemption  from  the  sentence  due  to  his  own  sins  ;  but 
this  we  may  say,  that  a  merciful  spirit  in  judging  others  will  both  be  regarded  as 
an  indication  of  good  in  the  man  otherwise  not  blameless,  and  will  save  him  from 
that  aggravation  of  guilt  which  belongs  to  him  who  has  both  sinned  and  judged.  2. 
Such  judgment  as  is  here  forbidden  is  an  invasion  of  God's  peculiar  office  (Rom. 
xii.  19).  3.  To  judge  is  to  betray  in  ourselves  a  root  of  self-ignorance,  self-com- 
placency, and  self-righteousness.  No  man  could  thus  judge,  who  really  felt  him- 
self to  be  a  sinner.  4.  As  the  root  of  this  unchristian  judgment  is  in  self-ignorance, 
BO  the  fruit  of  it  is  definite  injury  to  the  cause  of  the  gospel,  to  the  soul  of  our 
neighbour,  and,  most  of  all,  to  our  own.  Who  can  love  so  unlovely  a  Christianity  ? 
"Who  is  not  disgusted  and  alienated  by  that  religion  which  clothes  itself  in  a  garb 
BO  odious.  5.  The  whole  spirit  of  the  self-constituted  judge  ie,  in  reality,  a  spirit 
of  hypocrisy.  When  he  professes  to  be  distressed  by  the  fault  of  his  brother,  he 
has,  in  truth,  within  him  a  tenfold  greater  fault  of  his  own.  He  knows  not  hia 
own  weakness  ;  he  offers  a  strength  which  he  has  not.  He  cares  not  for  the  cure ; 
he  cares  only  for  the  distinction,  for  the  superiority,  of  the  healer.  Conclusion  : 
No  man  is  fit,  in  his  own  strength,  to  be  the  counsellor  or  the  guide  of  man.  Every 
man  has  his  own  faults  and  his  own  sins  ;  and  it  is  only  self-ignorance  which 
makes  him  overlook  them.  If  any  man  undertakes  to  judge  another,  he  thereby 
judges  himself.  Let  a  man  first  look  into  himself,  try  and  examine  himself  as  in 
the  sight  of  •od,  drag  his  own  transgressions  to  the  light  of  God's  juiigment,  and 
pass  sentence  with  an  unsparing  strictness  upon  his  own  omissions  of  duty  and 
commissions  of  sin.  (JDean  Vaughan.)  The  danger  of  usurping  God's  preroga- 
tives : — God  has  reserved  three  prerogatives  royal  to  Himself — vengeance,  glory, 
and  judgment.  As  it  is  not  safe  for  us,  then,  to  encroach  upon  God's  royalties  in 
either  of  the  other  two — glory  or  vengeance — so  neither  in  this,  of  judgment.  We 
have  no  right  to  judge  ;  and  so  our  judging  is  usurpation.  We  may  err  in  our 
judgment ;  and  so  our  judgment  is  rashness.  We  take  things  the  worse  way  when 
we  judge  :  and  so  our  judging  is  uncharitable.  We  offer  occasion  of  offence  by  our 
judging  ;  and  so  our  judging  is  scandalous  (Deut.  xxxii.  35  ;  Isa,  xli.  8  ;  Bom.  xii. 
10,  xiv.  4).  (Bishop  Sanderson.)  Of  judging  charitably  : — I  never  yet  knew  any 
man  so  bad,  but  some  have  thought  him  honest,  and  afforded  him  love  ;  nor  anj 
one  so  good,  but  some  have  thought  him  vile,  and  hated  him.  Few  are  so 
thoroughly  wicked  as  not  to  be  estimable  to  some ;  and  few  are  so  just,  as  not  to 
seem  to  some  unequal :  ignorance,  envy,  and  partiality,  enter  much  into  th6  opinions 
that  we  form  of  others.  Nor  can  a  man  in  himself,  always  appear  alike  to  all.  In 
some,  nature  has  made  a  disparity  ;  in  some,  report  has  blinded  judgment  ;  and  in 
others,  accident  is  the  cause  of  disposing  us  to  love,  or  hate  ;  or,  if  not  these,  the 
Tariation  of  the  body's  humours  ;  or,  perhaps,  not  any  of  these.  The  soul  is  often 
led  by  secret  motions  and  attachments,  she  knows  not  why.  There  are  impulsive 
instincts,  which  urge  us  to  a  hking  ;  as  if  there  were  some  hidden  beauty  of  a  more 
magnetic  force  than  what  the  eye  can  see  ;  and  this,  too,  is  more  powerful  at  one 
time  than  at  auothez.    The  same  man  that  has  now  welcomed  me  with  a  fro*  ex< 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap,  ti, 

pression  of  love  and  courtesy,  at  another  time  has  left  me  unsaluted  at  all.  Yet, 
knowing  him  well,  I  have  been  certain  of  his  sound  affection,  and  have  found  it  to 
proceed  not  from  an  intended  neglect,  but  from  an  indisposedness,  or  a  mind 
Beriously  busied  within.  Occasion  rules  the  motions  of  the  stirring  mind :  like  mea 
•who  walk  in  their  sleep,  we  are  led  about,  we  neither  know  whither  nor  how,  I 
know  there  are  some  who  vary  their  behaviour  out  of  pride,  and  in  strangers  I  con- 
fess I  know  not  how  to  distinguish ;  for  there  is  no  disposition  but  has  a  varnished 
visor,  as  well  as  an  unpencilled  face.  Some  people  deceive  the  world ;  are  bad,  but 
ere  not  thought  so  ;  in  some,  the  world  is  deceived,  believing  them  ill,  when  they 
are  not.  I  have  known  the  world  at  large  to  fall  into  an  error.  Though  report 
once  vented,  like  a  stone  cast  into  a  pond,  begets  circle  upon  circle,  till  it  meets 
with  the  bank  that  bounds  it :  yet  fame  often  plays  the  cur,  and  opens  when  she 
springs  no  game.  Why  should  I  positively  condemn  any  man,  whom  I  know  but 
superficially  ?  as  if  I  were  a  God,  to  see  the  inward  souL  (Owen  Felltham.)  The 
absurdity  of  judging  others: — One  would  have  thought  that  experience  must  have 
convinced  us,  if  not  of  the  sin,  yet  of  the  absurdity  of  judging  others.  The  ignor- 
ance, the  blunders,  of  other  people  with  regard  to  ourselves,  strike  home  with 
startling  force  to  our  minds.  We  know  the  shame  which  we  have  felt,  when  they 
have  praised  us  for  actions  whose  motives  deserved  blame ;  we  know  how  their  dis- 
approval has  disheartened  us,  when  we  were  making  the  bravest  struggle  to  do  right. 
"We  feel  how  little  they  can  know  of  our  deepest  feelings — of  our  moments  of  fierce 
conflict,  of  passionate  affection,  of  sharpest  suffering.  There  is  nothing  strange  in 
this  ignorance.  But  what  is  strange,  is,  that  in  the  very  teeth  of  this  experience, 
we  should  calmly  sit  in  judgment  on  others,  aud  self- complacently  try  to  determine- 
the  degree  of  their  feelings,  the  depth  or  shallowness  of  their  characters,  the  quality 
of  their  motives,  and  the  precise  measure  of  praise  or  blame  which  they  deserve. 
{E.  C.  R.)  The  way  to  righteousness  : — The  way  to  righteousness  Hes  in  finding  not 
other  people's  sins,  but  our  own.  {Olshauscn.)  The  danger  of  judging  otliers: — 
Of  all  the  faults  into  which  people  are  liable  to  fall,  that  of  judging  others  is  on© 
of  the  most  common.  Pride,  or  envy,  or  a  tinge  of  ill-nature,  or  an  amalgamation 
of  all  three,  causes  them  to  arraign  before  the  bar  of  their  private  judgment  the 
actions,  even  the  motives  and  thoughts  of  others.  Many  evils  result  from  this. 
Even  if  we  do  not  consider  the  habit  as  rather  an  ugly  deformation  of  an  otherwise 
lovable  disposition,  we  may  still  see  that  it  heralds  into  the  soul  some  undesirable 
compauions.  1.  It  engenders  self-esteem  and  self-satisfaction  in  some.  If  a  man 
always  looks  outside  of  himself,  at  the  blots  which  mar  the  characters  which  her 
contemplates,  he  will  forget  what  virtues  he  lacks  himself.  He  will  not  be  con- 
scious of  the  beam  that  is  in  his  own  eye,  yet  he  will  imagine  that  he  is  quite 
capable  of  pulling  out  the  mote  in  his  brother's  eye.  He  will,  so  to  speak,  put  the 
large  end  of  the  contemplative  telescope  to  his  mental  eye  when  he  looks  at  his  own 
heart ;  the  small  end  when  investigating  his  neighbour's.  Consequently,  there  will 
be  an  inverse  ratio  in  the  investigation.  His  neighbour's  motes  will  appear  stand- 
ing out  in  unjust  relief;  his  own  beams — the  withered,  shrivelled,  sapless  stanchion 
of  self-love — the  yawning  chasm  of  avarice — the  covert  jungle  of  hypocrisy — the- 
cngenial  rock  of  pride — will  become  apparently  very  small,  and  in  the  distant  pros- 
pect will  have  almost  a  charm  about  them.  2.  Further,  this  spirit  of  judging  others 
has  the  evil  effect  of  providmg  untenable  excuses  for  faults  committed.  People  who 
are  guilty  of  little  sins,  httle  failings,  little  excesses,  are  in  danger  of  falling  into- 
this  kind  of  error.  They  are,  perhaps,  aware  of  their  shortcomings.  They  may 
even  go  so  far  as  to  acknowledge  that  they  have  them.  But,  in  place  of  grappling 
with  them  and  seeking  to  subdue  them,  they  make  excuses  for  them.  And  this  is 
because  they  judge  others.  They  compare  themselves  with  others,  and  the  com-- 
parison  is  prejudicial  in  their  own  favour.  3.  And  this  judging  of  others  prevents  a 
healthy  spirit  of  self-examination,  and  consequently  of  self -improvement.  The  man 
vho  continually  pries  into  other  people's  affairs  must  neglect  his  own.  So  the  man- 
who  looks  out  constantly  with  a  critical  eye  on  the  motives  of  others,  must  be  un- 
aware of  those  which  actuate  himself.  There  is  a  means,  indeed,  by  which  we  may 
benefit  ourselves  by  a  contemplation  of  others.  We  have  it  summed  up  in  the  say- 
ing of  an  old  Roman  writer — "  Look  into  men's  lives,  as  into  looking-glasses.'* 
That  is,  judge  them  not,  but  seek  to  see  yourself  reflected  in  them.  See  them  in 
their  trials  and  temptations,  see  them  in  crises  of  thought  and  action,  and  consider 
how  you  would  have  fared  in  similar  circumstances.  This  will  help  you  to  solve 
the  problem  of  life,  "  Know  thyself."  It  will  also  teach  you  to  appreciate  the 
Christian  attributes  of  charity  and  forbearance.     Conclusion:  Man's  heart,  as  it 


CBiP.  Ti.]  STi.  LUKE,  615 

'weighs  and  measures  its  judgment,  is  sometimes  harsh  and  hard,  and  the  picture  of 
others  which  it  conjures  up  is  often  a  dark  one.   But  behold  arising  in  the  soul  the 
dayspring  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High  ;  behold,  awakening  to  a  knowledge 
of  self,  the  soul  to  which  Christ  shall  give  His  light,  and  you  will  see  that  light 
reflected  on  to  the  contemplated  scene.  There  may  be  shades,  but  there  are  bright, 
sunny  spots,  too,  and  even  the  shades  take  a  fairer  col  our  from  their  proximity. 
Seen  with  the  eye,  which  faith,  and  hope,  and  love  in  Christ  inspire,  all  hardness 
and  harshness,  all  unkindly  cynicism,  all  uncongenial  sneers,  all  puerile  ill-nature, 
all  sordid  envy,  will  gradually  disappear.  And  as  the  beams  in  the  one  eye  are  thus 
plucked  out,  the  motes  in  the  other  eye  will  be  plucke  d  out  too.  The  one  character  will 
have  its  effect  on  the  other.    Christ's  love  is  too  great,  too  powerful,  too  immense, 
too  vigorous,  to  loiter.     It  will  push  all  before  it.      It  will  reflect  itself  on  and 
on,  like  the  dancing  of  sunbeams  from  wave  to  wave  ;  and  the  motes  and  the  mists 
and   the  fogs  and  the  clouds — whatever   they  be — will   disperse,   even  at  His 
reflected  light,  making  an  entrance  to  prepare  the  soul  for  the  full  glory  of  His  owa 
presence.     So  may  man's  soul  be  a  meet  temple  for  the  mighty  Spirit.     So  may 
something  of  heaven's  warmth  be  felt  on  earth.     (C.  E.  Drought,  M.A.)       On  rash 
and  censorious  judgmfint : — There  is  nothing  more  difficult  in  itself  than  to  judge 
justly  of  the  dispositions  and  conduct  of  other  men  ;  nothing  more  dangerous,  or 
generally  more  hurtful,  to  the  person  who  undertakes  it  ;  hardly  anything  more 
destructive  of  the  peace  and  happiness  of  society  ;  and  bat  very  few  sins  to  which 
we  have  fewer  temptations,  and  from  which  we  can  reap  less  pleasure  or  profit. 
And  yet  there  is  hardly  anything  that  all  of  us  undertake,  with  less  diffidence  of 
our  abiUties  for  the  work — with  less  sense  of  our  danger,  or  apprehension  of  the 
consequences  ;  hardly  any  sin  more  universal,  or  in  which  inhumane  and  unthink- 
ing persons  more  persevere  to  the  end  of  their  lives.     How  few  can  lay  their  hands 
to  their  hearts,  and  say,  "  I  am  entirely  free  from  this  guilt !  "    1.  Eash  censorious 
judgment  of  the  dispositions  or  conduct  of  others,  must  always  arise  from  great 
disorder  in  the  heart,  and  proves  that  it  is  powerfully  influenced,  either  by  pride, 
or  envy,  or  malice  ;  and  therefore  must  be  very  hateful  to  Him  who  knows  all  the' 
secret  and  original  springs  of  every  part  of  our  conduct.     2.  It  is  a  very  presump- 
tuous disobedience  of  the  will  and  laws  of  God.     3.  It  is  an  arrogant  usurpation  of 
the  great  prerogative  of  the  Almighty  Creator,  and  of  the  office  of  our  Blessed 
Saviour  ;  and  an  uncharitable  invasion  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  our  fellow- 
men.     (James  Riddoch,  M.A.)  The  folly  of  judging  others: — 1.  We  have  no 
capacity  to  do  so  with  truth  and  justice.     To  know,  without  judging,  might  be 
modesty  and  charity  ;  but  to  judge  without  knowing,  must  be  always  indiscretion 
and  cruelty  ;  and  we  must  always  be  without  proper  knowledge,  when  we  presume 
censoriously  and  rashly  to  judge  our  neighbour's  conduct.     Upon  what  insufficient 
evidence  do  men  venture  to  censure  and  slander  others.     (1)  They  judge  by  ap- 
pearances.    How  often  has  an  open  and  unsuspecting  temper,  and  a  consciousness 
of  innocence  and  right  intentions  betrayed  men  into  the  appearance  of  faults  which 
their  hearts  detested,  and  exposed  them  to  the  censure  and  condemnation  of  the 
world  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  a  grave,  cautious,  and  designing  conduct  has 
covered  a  multitude  of  sins,  and  procured  esteem  and  applause  to  men  who  needed 
only  to  be  known  to  be  despised  and  detested.     (2)  They  condemn  upon  hearsay. 
That  coming  fame  is  frequently  a  liar,  we  admit  as  a  maxim  estabUshed  by  long 
experience,  and  yet  we  make  it  the  foundation  of  our  rash  and  censorious  judgments, 
and  seem  to  think  that  it  gives  us  a  right  to  condemn  others  with  the  greatest  free- 
dom, vainly  perhaps  imagining  that  the  guilt  remains  with  him  from  whom  we 
received  the  report,  while  at  the  same  time  we  are  repeating  the  crime.    Eumour, 
however  ill-founded,  is  favourably  received ;  an  unhappy  curiosity  makes  us  hearken 
with  attention  ;  a  pernicious  credulity  makes  us  find  it  probable  ;  and  a  desire  of 
telhng  something  new  makes  us  propagate  it.     Thus,  what  at  first  was  only  the 
conjecture,  suspicion,  or  invention  of  one  person,  grows  up  to  be  the  behef  of 
the  multitude,  and  is  raised,  in  their  opinion,  into  certainty  and  fact.     (3)  There  is 
a  too  common  disposition  to  judge  of  the  intention  by  the  event,  and  to  estimate 
the  general  character  by  some  particular  errors.     Nothing  can  be  more  unjust  or 
uncharitable  than  this.    Moses  once  *'  spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips,"  though 
meekness  and  patience  were  the  prevailing  features  of  his  character.   St.  Peter  once 
denied  his  Master,  though  he  sincerely  loved  Him.  2.  By  judging  others  we  expose 
ourselves  to  very  great  danger.     It  is  impossible  for  any  one  habitually  to  censure 
othen,  and  to  judge  of  their  conduct  with   severity,  without  passing  sentence 
against  some  of  his  own  sins  ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  just,  than  that  our  Judg* 


lis  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n, 

should  ratify  these  jadgments  as  far  as  they  respect  ourselves,  and  condemn  us  oul 
of  our  own  mouths.  3.  We  are  rarely  so  much  divested  of  passions  and  prejudices, 
as  to  be  in  a  capacity  to  judge  righteous  judgment.  Dislike,  affection,  interest,  envy, 
connection,  and  a  thousand  other  things  to  which  we  do  not  even  ourselves  advert, 
insensibly  mislead  the  understanding,  and  bias  the  judgment.  Men  judge  accord- 
ing to  the  passions  and  prejudices  that  prevail  in  themselves,  rather  than  accord- 
ing to  the  virtues  or  vices  that  appears  in  their  neighbour's  conduct.  {Ibid.) 
Judging  others  forbidden  : — I.  The  tacviiTY  ot  judgment  may  be  misapplied  to  im- 
PROPEB  SUBJECTS.  This  happens  when  it  is  applied  to  the  character  of  our  neigh- 
bours for  the  mere  purpose  of  detecting  faults.  Now,  the  province  assigned  to  us 
is  the  detection  and  correction  of  our  own  faults,  which  is  a  prior  and  more  impor- 
tant duty  ;  and  which  we  have  it  in  our  power  to  perform  more  correctly  and  more 
usefully  than  we  can  do  respecting  the  faults  of  others.  Besides,  till  we  discover  and 
amend  our  own  faults,  we  shall  be  very  ill-qualitied  to  reform  the  faults  of  our 
neighbour.  II.  This  faculty  may  be  exercised  in  a  crxminaii  and  PEBNicioua 
MANNEB.  In  forming  our  opinions  respecting  our  neighbours,  we  are  apt  to  judge 
without  evidence,  or  from  evidence  very  defective.  Our  knowledge  of  our  neigh- 
boor's  faults  is  obtained  either  by  our  own  observation,  or  from  the  testimony  of 
others.  Our  own  observation  is  often  partial  and  defective ;  and  from  ambiguous 
appearances  we  often  draw  hasty  and  harsh  conclusions.  In  admitting  the  testi- 
mony of  others  we  are  often  incautious.  For  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  many  judge 
from  their  passions  ;  that  some  who  see  only  a  part,  fill  up  what  is  wanting  by  the 
exercise  of  imagination  ;  that  some,  anxious  only  to  amuse  or  surprise,  delight  in 
telling  wonderful  stories  of  their  own  creation  ;  that  many  cannot  see  things  as 
they  are  ;  and  that  others  can  repeat  nothing  correctly.  It  is  a  matter,  then,  of 
great  importance  to  the  justness  of  our  opinions  concerning  our  neighbour,  as  well 
as  to  our  own  respectability,  to  be  able  to  distinguish  among  our  acquaintances 
the  persons  in  whose  testimony  we  can  confide.  Now,  we  shall  easUy 
discover  that  the  man  on  whose  accuracy  we  can  rely  is  not  the  man  who 
employs  himself  in  retailinc;  the  faults  of  his  neighbours.  {/.  Thomson,  D.D.) 
Judging  others: — I.  Consider  one  or  two  things  which  ought  to  check  and 

BEBTRAIN  UB  IN  OUR  JUDGJIENTS  AND   CRITICISMS  UPON  OTHERS.       1.    Let   US    think   hoW 

little  we  really  know.  What  we  see  is  but  a  small  part  of  what  is  unseen  and 
•vhat  can  never  be  seen.  2.  Again,  in  judging  of  others,  we  are  apt  t*  overlook 
dieir  difficulties  and  temptations.     II.  Consider  that  your  judgment  of  OTHBRa 

18   THE   MEASURE    OF   THAT   JUDGMENT   WHICH    MUST   OVERTAKE    YOURSELF.        If    a   man, 

then,  is  rigorous  and  severe — if  he  applies  to  the  conduct  of  others  a  high  standard, 
and  if  he  expects  that  standard  to  be  reached — finding  fault  and  passing  condem- 
nation where  it  is  not  reached — he  is  virtually  laying  claim  to  a  high  knowledge 
of  what  right  and  wrong  really  are;  and  it  is  only  just  and  reasonable  that 
this  knowledge  should  be  the  criterion  to  which  his  own  conduct  and  life 
should  be  brought :  he  cannot  complain  if  he  is  judged  by  what  he  actually  knows. 
So  far,  we  see  how  there  is  no  vindictiveness  in  judging  men  as  they  have  judged 
others.  We  cannot  say  that  this  result  is  attained  all  at  once.  Our  Lord  Himself 
was  an  instance  to  the  contrary  :  He  did  not  receive  into  His  bosom  what  He  had 
given  out ;  He  did  great  good,  and  sought  the  good  of  others,  but  He  was  requited 
with  evil  and  with  ingratitude.  IIL  It  is  carrying  out  the  same  truth  in  figura- 
tive LANGUAGE  WHEN  Christ  says,  "  Why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  is  in  thy 
brother's  eye,  but  perceivest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?  "  To  a  man 
with  the  spirit  of  penitence  in  him,  his  own  faults  are  never  made  less  than  they 
are ;  and  indeed  the  more  he  condemns  himself,  the  more  will  he  be  ready  to  justify 
others.  He  feels  the  mote  in  his  own  eye  to  be  as  a  beam,  and  he  reserves  hia 
highest  condemnation  for  his  own  faults  and  sins.  IV.  Are  we,  then,  to  bb 
blind  to  the  bins  op  the  world  abound  US  ?  Our  Lord's  teaching  ia  calculated 
to  enforce  righteous  judgment,  not  partial  or  false  judgment.  There  is  nothing  in 
Christian  teaching  to  sanction  tolerance  towards  sin.  It  is  not  every  kind  of  judg- 
ment which  Christ  condemns.  Let  the  spirit  of  love  be  in  the  heart,  and  the  spirit 
of  true  judgment  will  follow.  1.  Before  judging  of  the  individual,  then,  in  any  case, 
pause  to  think  how  much  you  really  know,  and  let  not  your  judgment  of  a  man  be 
formed  on  hearsay  and  imagination.  2.  Eemember  that  your  judgment  of  others 
is  the  measure  of  that  judgment  which  must  overtake  you.  3.  Let  your  judgment 
of  others  take  the  tone  of  your  judgment  passed  first  on  yourself.  4.  Let  all  things 
be  done  under  the  remembrance  of  how  much  we  ourselves  owe  to  a  love  which  is 
boundless,  a  forgiveness  which  has  raised  us  from  doubt  and  fear.    {A.  Watson,  D  JD.) 


•HAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  617 

Forgive,  and  y»  sball  be  forglTen. — Forgiveness,  human  and  Divine : — There  is  no 
point  on  which  Christianity  is  more  vital,  searching,  and  severe  than  on  this — the 
requisition  of  a  forgiving  spirit,  as  the  highest  form  of  benevolence  or  well-wishing 
towards  our  fellow-men.  That  we  have  an  average  good-nature  towards  good  folks 
IB  all  very  well ;  that  we  forgive  things  done  against  us  which  we  do  not  feel  is  all 
very  well ;  but  when  an  assault  of  any  kind  has  been  made  in  some  tender  and 
sensitive  point,  and  we  feel  ourselves  to  be  greatly  wronged,  then  to  have  such  a 
Divine  sense  of  the  great  law  of  benevolence  as  that,  under  the  stinging  sensibility 
of  the  wrong,  we  can  rise  out  of  the  selfness  and  think  well  of  the  offender — that  is 
an  example  of  Godhke  love  which  evidences  the  Divine  presence  in  the  soul.  A 
Christian  man  who  hates,  and  will  not  forgive,  is  as  much  worse  than  an  ordinary 
man,  as  salt  that  has  lost  all  saltness  is  worse  than  common  dirt ;  it  is  not  good 
for  manure  ;  it  is  only  good  to  make  paths  with.  The  only  thing  that  it  will  not 
hurt  is  the  bottom  of  one's  foot.  (if.  W.  Beecher.)  Forgiving  others  : — In  the 
Middle  Ages,  when  the  lords  and  knights  were  always  at  war  with  each  other,  one 
of  them  resolved  to  revenge  himself  on  a  neighbour  who  had  offended  him.  It 
chanced  that  on  the  very  evening  when  he  had  made  this  resolution,  he  heard  that 
his  enemy  was  to  pass  near  his  castle  with  only  a  few  men  with  him.  He  deter- 
mined not  to  let  the  opportunity  pass.  He  spoke  of  his  plan  in  the  presence  of  his 
chaplain,  who  tried  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to  give  it  up.  The  good  man  said  a 
great  deal  to  the  duke  about  the  sin  of  what  he  was  going  to  do,  but  in  vain.  At 
length,  seeing  that  all  his  words  had  no  effect,  he  said,  "  My  lord,  since  I  cannot 
persuade  you  to  give  up  this  plan  of  yours,  will  you  at  least  come  with  me  to  the 
chapel,  that  we  may  pray  together  before  you  go  ?"  The  duke  consented,  and  the 
chaplain  and  he  kneeled  together  in  prayer.  Then  the  mercy-loving  Christian  said 
to  the  revengeful  warrior,  "  Will  you  repeat  after  me,  sentence  by  sentence,  the 

Erayer  which  our  Lord  taught  to  His  disciples?  "  "  I  will  do  it,"  replied  the  duke, 
[e  did  it  accordingly.  The  chaplain  said  a  sentence,  and  the  duke  repeated  it,  till  he 
came  to  the  petition,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive."  There  the  duke 
was  silent.  "  My  lord  duke,  you  are  silent,"  said  the  chaplain.  '*  Will  you  be  so  good 
as  to  continue  to  repeat  the  words  after  me,  if  you  dare  to  do  so  ?  "  "I  cannot," 
replied  the  duke.  "  Well,  God  cannot  forgive  you,  for  He  has  said  so.  He  Himself 
has  given  us  this  prayer.  Therefore  you  must  either  give  up  your  revenge,  or  giv« 
up  saying  this  prayer  ;  for  to  ask  God  to  pardon  you,  as  you  pardon  others,  is  to 
ask  Him  to  take  vengeance  on  you  for  all  your  sins.  Go  now,  my  lord,  and  meet 
your  victim.  God  will  meet  you  at  the  great  day  of  judgment."  The  iron  will 
of  the  duke  was  broken.  "  No,"  said  he,  "  I  will  finish  my  prayer.  My  God,  my 
Father,  pardon  me ;  forgive  me,  as  I  desire  to  forgive  him  who  has  offended  me ; 
lead  me  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  me  from  evil."  "Amen,"  said  the  chaplain. 
"Amen,"  repeated  the  duke,  who  now  understood  the  Lord's  Prayer  better  than  he 
had  ever  done  before,  since  he  had  learned  to  apply  it  to  himself.  (Preacher's 
Lantern.)  Christian  forgiveness  : — I.  The  pretence  of  good- will  towaeds  our 
ENEMIES.  "  I  wish  nothing  so  much,"  a  man  will  say,  "  as  to  be  reconciled ;  I  am  per- 
fectly disposed  to  it ;  and,  whenever  my  adversary  pleases,  I  will  receive  him  in  such 
a  manner,  as  to  show  that  no  resentment  remains  with  me."  Now,  this  is  plausible 
language ;  it  seems  to  show  generosity,  and  greatness  of  mind.  But,  would  you  know 
whence  these  fine  words  proceed  ?  From  great  self-love  and  little  Christianity.  You 
wish  to  have  the  credit  of  a  reconciliation  without  the  fancied  mortification  of  it.  H. 
The  pretence  of  sensibility.  "  If  the  affront  were  not  so  very  galling,"  you  may  say, 
"  if  the  injury  were  not  so  personal,  I  could  make  this  sacrifice  to  God  and  religion ; 
but  I  cannot  forget  what  is  due  to  myself,  and  be  void  of  all  feeling."  I  under- 
stand you  well ;  this  is  the  language  commonly  spoken  in  the  world.  And  I  reply, 
"  If  you  were  insensible,  or  if  the  injury  done  to  you  were  not  deeply  felt,  I  should 
not  labour  to  persuade  you  to  forgive ;  I  should  consider  this  precept  of  the  gospel 
as  scarcely  directed  to  you.  You  renounce  both  the  spirit  and  the  example  of  the 
cross.  III.  The  pretenck  of  prudence  is  urged  for  omitting  this  great  Christian 
doty  of  forgiveness.  "  I  cannot  be  heartily  reconcilpd  to  my  adversary ;  he  is  a 
bad  man,  and  has  been  treacherous  and  base  to  me ,  prudence  requires  me  to  avoid 
such  a  one ;  and,  as  to  religion,  it  cannot  enjoin  dissimulation,  nor  oblige  me  to  do 
anythi'ig  imprudent  and  dangerous  I  "  IV.  Let  me  carrt  forward  toub  thoughts 
BETora  DEATH  AND  THE  OBAVB.  (S.  Partridge,  M.A.)  Forgiveness : — I.  Forgive- 
NEse  is  possible.  To  deem  it  impossible  to  forgive  your  offender  is — 1.  A  fatal 
self-delusion.  There  have  always  been  men  who  considered  revenge  a  base  passion, 
and  have  readily  forgiven  the  greatest  offences.    Such  men  have  been  (1)  amongst 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  lonir.  rt. 

the  Gentiles.  Phocion,  a  prominent  citizen  in  Greece,  had  been  gentenoed  by  his 
fellow-citizens  to  drink  the  cup  of  poison.  Before  tasting  it,  he  said  to  his  son, 
"  This  is  my  last  will,  0  son,  that  thou  mayest  soon  forget  this  cup  of  poison,  and 
never  take  revenge  for  it."  (2)  Amongst  the  Jews  :  Joseph,  David.  (3)  Amongst 
the  Christians  :  Stephen.  "  Verily,  I  forgive  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  my  brother 
in  place  of  him  whom  thou  hast  killed,"  said  the  Christian  knight,  John  Gualbert, 
to  the  murderer  of  his  brother,  who,  unarmed  as  he  was,  begged  for  his  life  in  the 
name  of  the  Crucified.  If  to  them  it  was  possible  to  forgive,  why  should  it  not  be 
possible  to  you  ?  2.  A  blasphemy.  God  requires  you  to  forgive  your  offender,  and 
has  a  right  to  do  so.  (1)  As  our  Lord.  (2)  As  our  Father  and  Benefactor.  The 
best  proof  of  our  gratitude.  (3)  As  our  Model.  (4)  As  our  Judge.  II.  Forqivk- 
NESS  IS  NECESSARY.  1.  Ecason  teaches  it.  (1)  Noble  and  generous  is  the  conduct 
of  him  who  is  ready  for  reconciliation.  He  manifests  strength  of  mind  and 
magnanimity  of  soul  by  forgiving  the  offence  inflicted.  He  overcomes  evil  by  good. 
(2)  Dreadful  are  the  consequences  of  implacability.  Man  is  easily  offended.  H 
men  were  not  ready  to  forgive,  where  would  you  find  peace  and  happiness  ?  Would 
not  our  life  upon  earth  and  the  society  of  our  fellow-men  be  a  continual  source  of 
unhappiness  and  misery  ?  2.  Revelation  requires  it  (Lev.  xix.  18 ;  Matt.  v.  38-48, 
vi.  12 ;  Rom.  xii.  19-21 ;  Eph.  iv.  26  ;  Col.  iii.  13).  IIL  Forgiveness  is  laudable 
AND  MERITORIOUS.  1.  By  forgiviug  the  offences  committed  against  you,  you  gaia 
(1)  the  favour  of  men  (Bom.  xii.  20).  (2)  The  complacency  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  14). 
2.  He  who  is  not  williug  to  forgive  those  who  have  offended  him,  sins  (1)  against 
God  the  Father  by  trespassing  one  of  His  commandments  (James  ii.  13).  (2) 
Against  God  the  Son.  He  denies  Him  because  he  denies  the  characteristic  feature 
and  virtue  of  Christianity  (John  xiii.  35).  (3)  Against  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  wlio 
is  the  Spirit  of  love.  (4)  Against  his  fellow-man.  (5)  Against  himself.  Ha 
pronounces  the  sentence  of  condemnation  upon  his  own  head  whenever  he  uses  the 
Lord's  Prayer  (Luke  xix.  22).  Grant  us  then,  0  Lord,  a  heart  always  ready  for 
reconciliation,  that  in  us  Thy  Word  may  be  fulfilled  (Matt.  v.  9).  {Baurdaloue.) 
The  evil  of  an  unforgiving  spirit : — Go  home  to  your  own  breast,  and  ask  your 
heart  these  questions :  "  Hast  thou,  my  heart,  no  other  passions  but  pride  and 
anger?  What  is  become  of  the  humanity  and  benevolence  whereof,  on  soma 
occasions,  thou  hast  given  such  pleasing  proofs  ?  Wilt  thou  suffer  thy  pride  to 
tyrannise  over  thy  love  ?  What  an  heart  art  thou,  if  rage,  revenge,  and  mischief, 
■can  afford  thee  more  pleasure  than  forgiveness  and  acts  of  kindness  and  generosity  I " 
If  an  enemy  is  thus  able  to  transform  and  degrade  a  man  to  the  most  odious  class  of 
beings,  that  man  not  only  is  now,  but  was  before  the  injury  done  him,  a  very 
despicable  being,  and  liable,  it  seems,  to  an  infinitely  worse  sort  of  injury,  than  can 
possibly  be  done  in  regard  to  fortune,  liberty,  character,  or  even  life  itself ;  an 
injury,  I  mean,  in  regard  to  virtue.  The  enemy  who  can  turn  a  good  man  into  a 
bad  one  is  the  worst  of  all  enemies.  No  man,  however,  can  do  this  to  us  without 
our  own  concurrence.  {Philip  Skelton,  M.A.)  God  will  measure  to  you  in  your 
own  btuhel: — Forgive,  saith  a  master  to  one  of  his  servants,  in  your  hearing, 
forgive  your  fellow-servant  the  guinea  he  owes  you,  and  you  shall  be  forgiven  the 
hundred  you  owe  me.  Forgive  that  other  fellow-servant  the  reproaches  he  hath 
flung  at  you,  and  you  shall  be  forgiven  the  theft  you  lately  committed,  when  you 
•were  discovered  stealing  my  goods.  Forgive  that  third  fellow-servant  the  blow  you 
just  now  received  from  him,  and  you  shall  be  forgiven  the  assault  you  committed 
on  me,  your  master,  for  which  you  are  now  under  prosecution.  If  you  do  not 
comply  with  me  in  this,  you  shall  be  paid  your  guinea ;  but  then  I  will  exact  my 
hundred  guineas  of  you  to  the  very  last  farthing.  You  shall  have  satisfaction,  too, 
for  the  affront  offered  you;  but  shall  be  pubUcly  exposed  to  the  infamy  your  theft 
has  deserved.  I  will  punish  the  man  who  struck  you,  as  justice  requires ;  but  will 
also  execute  on  you  the  rigour  of  that  justice  for  your  act  of  rebellion  and  violence 
against  myself.  As  you  measure  from  you,  I  will  measure  to  you;  mercy  for  mercy, 
justice  for  justice,  vengeance  for  vengeance.  Tou  demand  an  exact  account,  and 
shall  have  it ;  bnt  you  shall  also  give  it.  You  think  this  servant  a  perfect  madman 
when  you  hear  him  crying  out,  "  I  insist  on  an  account ;  I  will  be  paid  ;  I  wUl  havu 
satisfaction."  Do  you  indeed  f  Well,  then,  Christ  is  the  Master,  and  thou  art  the 
anan.  What  1  will  you  not  forgive  a  trifle,  to  be  forgiven  that  which  is  infinite  ? 
Will  you  plunge  to  the  bottom  of  the  lake  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  your  enemy 
•wim  on  the  surface  ?  How  is  it  that  you  judge  so  clearly  in  things  of  littk 
moment,  which  relate  to  others,  while  in  a  case  of  the  same  nature,  but  of  the  last 
consequence  to  yourself,  you  are  wholly  stupid  ?    Is  it  self  that  shuts  ;  our  eyes  ? 


•HA*.  ▼!.]  ST.  LUKE.  619 

Belf  I  which  of  all  things  ought  to  open  them,  when  your  salvation  is  brought 
in  question  ?  Amazing  I  Whom  will  you  see  for,  if  you  cannot  see  for  yourself  f 
Whom  will  be  wise  for,  if  you  will  not  be  wise  for  yourself  ?    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  38.  Give,  and  It  shall  be  given  unto  yon;  good  measure,  pressed  down. — 

•On  Christian  giving  : — I.  Get,  gather.  Are  there  not  many  persons  of  a  very 
careless  and  prodigal  disposition  ?  II.  Give.  Begin  to  give  as  soon  as  you  begin 
to  get.  That  will  prevent  the  danger  of  a  growing  covetousness.  III.  The  oivino 
SHODLD  BE  IN  SOME  PBOPORTioN  TO  THE  INCOME.  I  do  not  presume  to  fix  the  pro- 
portion. But  I  the  more  insist  on  the  principle  of  a  fair  and  just  proportion,  and 
on  the  duty  of  the  individual  to  turn  the  principle  into  practice.  This  proportion, 
however,  will  never  be  reached,  or  at  any  rate,  will  hardly  for  any  long  time  be 
continued,  except  in  connection  with  another  principle  of  far  deeper  hold  and 
wider  sway,  the  principle  that — IV.  What  is  left  is  given  too.  It  is  also  true  that 
we  shall  never  understand   really  what    Christian  giving  is  until — V.  We   get 

BEYOND  WHAT  IS  CALLED  THE  DUTY  OF    XT  TO   THE  HIGHER  GROUND  OP   THE  BLESSEDNESS 

OF  IT.  "It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  is  a  universal  truth  applicable 
not  to  money  alone,  but  to  the  whole  of  life's  experiences.  1.  Thought.  2, 
Sympathy.  3.  Life  itself .  The  possibihty  of  giving  life,  self,  to  God  for  ever.  The 
certainty  of  having  at  length  to  yield  the  gift  of  life  into  the  hand  of  God.  (d. 
Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  duty  of  giving  : — I.  Why  should  we  givb?  It  is  our  duty. 
It  is  for  God's  glory.  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  rftceive.  II.  What  should 
WE  GIVE?  1.  Ourselves.  St.  Paul  says  of  the  Macedonians  that  they  "first  gave 
iheir  own  selves  unto  the  Lord."  This  will  make  all  else  well-pleasing  unto  the 
Lord.  2.  Our  time.  3.  Our  influence.  4.  Our  money.  We  are  but  stewards  of 
aU  that  we  possess.  III.  How  are  we  to  give  ?  1.  Willingly.  2.  Unostentatiously. 
*'  Let  not  thy  right  hand,"  &c.  3.  Lovingly — from  a  principle  of  love  to  God  and 
man  in  the  heart.  IV.  How  much  are  we  to  give  ?  The  Bible  does  not  give  us 
exact  and  particular  rules,  but  lays  down  general  principles  by  which  we  are  to 
govern  our  conduct.  We  must  not  offer  to  the  Lord  that  which  doth  cost  us  nothing. 

V.  When  ark  we  to  give  ?  When  cases  of  need,  objects  of  compassion,  or  means 
of  advancing  the  honour  of  God  or  the  good  of  our  fellow-men  come  before  us. 
The  injunction  of  the  apostle  was,  "  On  the  first  day  of  the  week,"  <fec.  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2). 

VI.  Where  are  we  to  give  ?  That  question  may  be  best  answered  by  asking 
another.  Where  are  we  not  to  give  ?  VII.  Who  is  to  give  ?  The  answer  is  "  every 
man  " — the  rich  of  their  abundance,  the  poor  something  even  of  their  poverty. 
Widow  and  two  mites.  "Lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven."  (F.O. 
Morris,  B.A.)  The  reward  of  the  giver: — There  are,  doubtless,  those  who  think 
that  this  statement  is  not  borne  out  by  the  facts  of  their  own  experience.  Too  often 
they  have  obtained  not  even  gratitude.  And  others  there  are  who  listen  doubtfully 
to  such  words,  not  on  account  of  any  personal  disappointments  of  their  own,  for 
they  have  not  put  themselves  in  the  way  of  suffering  such  disappointments,  but 
rather  from  observation  of  other  people's  experience,  as  well  as  from  their  own 
theory  of  hfe.  What,  then,  are  we  to  make  of  our  Lord's  statement  that  men  shall 
give  this  good  measure  ?  1.  Our  Lord  did  not  say  that  men  would  do  anything  of 
the  kind.  We  are  to  hope  for  nothing  again  (ver.  35).  2.  Yet  our  Lord  proposes  a 
reward.  Yes.  "  Ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  Highest."  The  reward,  then,  con- 
sists in  being  like  God.  Whatever  else  is  mentioned  in  the  nature  of  reward  is  not 
an  object  to  be  sought  after,  but  a  consequence  which  must  needs  ensue.  3.  Among 
these  consequences  will  be  found  a  measure  even  of  human  gratitude.  For  if  our 
Lord  did  not  say  that  men  shall  give  the  good  measure,  it  may  also  be  observed  that 
He  did  not  say  they  will  not.  The  good  measure  will  be  given,  and  even  men  will 
have  their  share  in  giving  it.  {H.  Whitehead,  M.A.)  Penalty  of  not  giving  to 
God : — There  are  hundreds  of  business  men,  Christian  men,  in  New  York  city,  who 
have  gone  down,  for  the  simple  reason,  as  I  believe,  that  they  did  not  give  to  God 
that  which  belonged  to  Him.  They  did  not  give  Him  any  per  centage  at  all,  or  such 
a  very  small  per  centage  that  the  Lord  God  collected  His  own  bills,  by  fire,  by 
storm,  or  by  death.  Two  men  I  knew  very  well,  some  years  ago,  on  the  streets  of 
New  York.  They  were  talking  about  the  matter  of  benevolence.  One  said  to  the 
other,  "  You  give  too  much.  I  will  wait  until  I  get  a  large  pile  of  money,  and  then 
I  will  give."  "  No,"  said  the  other,  "  I  will  give  as  God  prospers  me."  Hear  the 
BequeL  The  former  lives  in  New  York  city  to-day,  doUarless.  The  latter  gathered 
two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  dollars.  I  believe  that  the  reason  why  many  people 
•re  kept  poor  is  because  they  do  not  give  enough.    If  a  man  giyes  in  the  right 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n, 

Bpirit  to  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ  and  to  the  Church,  he  is  inaored  for  time  and  for 
eternity.  The  Bank  of  England  is  a  weak  institution  compared  with  the  bank  that 
any  Christian  man  can  draw  upon.  (Dr.  Talmage.)  Righteout  retribution  : — 
One  remembers,  of  course,  the  Regent  Morton  hugged  to  death  by  the  "maiden  "  he 
had  been  the  means  of  introducing  into  Scotland.  The  French  doctor,  Guillotin,  ia 
eren  now  not  uncommonly  believed  to  have  perished  in  the  Reign  of  Terror  by  th« 
instrument  invented  by  and  named  after  him ;  whereas  he  quietly  died  in  his  bed, 
many  many  years  later  than  that.  But  the  Revolution  history  is  well  stored  with 
instances  Uke  that  of  Ch&lier,  condemned  to  death  by  the  criminal  tribunal  at 
Lyons — the  guillotine  which  he  had  sent  for  from  Paris  to  destroy  his  enemies 
being  first  destined  to  sever  his  own  head  from  his  body.  A  bungling  executioner 
prolonged  the  last  agonies  of  this  man,  who,  in  fact,  was  hacked  to  death,  not 
decapitated.  He  tasted  slowly,  as  Lamartine  says,  of  the  death,  a  thirst  for  which 
he  had  so  often  sought  to  excite  in  the  people;  "  he  was  glutted  with  blood,  but  it 
was  his  own."  Alison  recognizes  in  the  death  of  Murat  a  memorable  instance  of 
the  moral  retribution  which  often  attends  on  "  great  deeds  of  iniquity,  and  by  the 
instrumentality  of  the  very  acts  which  appeared  to  place  them  beyond  its  reach." 
He  imderwent  in  1815  the  very  fate  to  which,  seven  years  before,  he  had  consigned 
a  hundred  Spaniards  at  Madrid,  guilty  of  no  other  crime  than  that  of  defending 
liieir  country ;  and  this,  as  Sir  Archibald  adds,  *'  by  the  application  of  a  law  to  his 
own  case  which  he  himself  had  introduced  to  check  the  attempt  of  the  Bourbons  to 
regain  a  throne  which  he  had  usurped."  (Francis  Jaeox.)  God  a  good  paymaster : — 
A  boy,  hearing  the  Rev.  J.  Wesley  preach,  cheerfully  put  a  shilling  on  the  plate. 
Twenty  years  afterwards  the  boy  told  Mr.  Wesley  that  God  was  a  good  paymaster ; 
for  he  was  then  worth  £20,000,  and  had  the  grace  of  God  in  his  heart.  (Sunday  School 
Treasury.)  Happiness  in  doing  good  : — Alexander,  the  Emperor,  was  one  day  out 
hunting ;  and  having  gone  ahead  of  his  suite,  he  fancied  he  heard  a  groan ;  the 
groan  pierced  his  heart ;  he  alighted  on  the  spot,  looked  around  him,  and  found  a 
poor  man  at  the  point  of  death.  He  bent  over  him,  chafed  his  temples ;  excited 
the  poor  man,  or  tried  to  do  so  ;  he  went  by  a  public  road,  and  called  the  attention 
of  a  surgeon  to  the  case  of  the  poor  man.  "  Oh  I  "  said  the  surgeon,  "  he  is  dead; 
he  is  dead."  "  Try  what  you  can  do,"  said  Alexander.  The  surgeon  adopted  a  set 
of  experimental  processes  at  the  command  of  the  emperor ;  and  at  last  a  drop  of 
blood  appeared.  At  the  mouth  of  the  opened  vein  tbere  was  suction;  respiration 
was  forming  in  the  chest  of  the  man.  Alexander's  eyes  flashed  fire,  and  be  said — 
"  Oh  1  this  is  the  happiest  day  of  my  life ;  I  have  saved  another  man's  life  I  " 
What  said  another  great  man  among  ourselves — Lord  Eldon  ?  In  a  letter  to  his 
sister,  which  he  wrote  in  his  old  age,  he  says — "  It  was  my  duty,  as  Lord 
Chancellor,  to  listen  to  the  record  of  the  sentences  passed  by  the  Recorder  of  the 
City  of  London.  It  used  to  be  a  formal  thing,  when  the  sentences  of  death  were 
read  over,  that  the  chancellor  should  give  his  assent ;  but  I  determined  after  the 
first  time  that  I  would  go  into  each  case,  and  have  each  case  clearly  and  distinctly 
stated.  It  used  to  give  me  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in  addition  to  all  my  other  duties; 
but  the  consequence  of  this  was,  that  I  saved  the  lives  of  several  persons."  I  say, 
do  good  in  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  you  will  promote  your  own 
honour  and  happiness  ;  and  when  the  eye  sees  you  it  will  bless  you,  and  when  the 
ear  hears  you  it  will  bear  witness  to  you.  (J.  Beaumont.)  The  naturalness  of 
giving  : — If  we  view  this  microcosm,  the  human  body,  we  shall  find  that  the  heart 
does  not  receive  the  blood  to  store  it  up,  but  while  it  pumps  it  in  at  one  valve,  it 
sends  it  forth  at  another.  The  blood  is  always  circulating  everywhere,  and  is 
stagnant  nowhere ;  the  same  is  true  of  all  the  fluids  in  a  healthy  body ;  they  are 
in  a  constant  state  of  expenditure.  If  one  cell  stores  up  for  a  few  moments  its 
peculiar  secretion,  it  only  retains  it  till  it  is  perfectly  fitted  for  its  appointed  use  is 
the  body ;  for  if  any  cell  in  the  body  should  begin  to  store  up  its  secretion,  its  store 
would  soon  become  the  cause  of  inveterate  disease ;  nay,  the  organ  would  soon  lose 
the  power  to  secrete  at  all,  if  it  did  not  give  forth  its  products.  The  whole  of  the 
human  system  lives  by  giving.  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  foot,  I  have  no  need  of 
thee,  and  will  not  guide  thee ;  for  if  it  does  not  perform  its  watchful  office,  the 
whole  man  will  be  in  the  ditch,  and  the  eye  will  be  covered  with  mire.  If  the 
members  refuse  to  contribute  to  the  general  stock,  the  whole  body  will  become 
poverty-stricken,  and  be  given  up  to  the  bankruptcy  of  death.  Let  us  learn,  then, 
from  the  analogy  of  nature,  the  great  lesson,  that  to  get,  we  must  give ;  that  to 
accumulate,  we  must  scatter  ;  that  to  make  ourselves  happy,  we  must  make  others 
happy ;  and  that  to  get  good  and  become  spiritually  vigorous,  we  must  do  gooi, 


cauf.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  621 

and  seek  the  spiritual  good  of  others.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Reward  of  effort  for 
othert : — A  traveller,  ready  to  perish  &mid  the  snows  of  the  Alps,  meets  a  feUow- 
traveller  in  worse  condition  than  himself.  He  puts  forth  every  effort  to  save  him, 
and  is  rewarded  by  the  life  of  his  fellow,  and  by  new  warmth  and  life  in  his  own 
freezing  limbs.  Benefits  of  liberality : — I  never  prospered  more  in  my  small 
estate  than  when  I  gave  most  and  needed  least.  My  own  rule  hath  been,  first,  to 
contrive  to  need  myself  as  little  a«  may  be,  and  lay  out  none  on  need-nots,  but  to 
live  frugally  on  a  little ;  second,  to  serve  God  in  my  place,  upon  that  competency 
which  He  allowed  me  to  myself,  that  what  I  had  myself  might  be  as  good  a  work 
for  common  good  as  that  which  I  gave  to  others ;  and,  third,  to  do  all  the  ff^odk 
I  could  with  the  rest,  preferring  the  most  public  and  the  most  durable  object,  and 
the  nearest.  And  the  more  I  have  practised  this,  the  more  I  have  had  to  do  it 
with  ;  and,  when  I  gave  almost  all,  more  came  in  (without  any's  gift),  I  scarce  knew 
how,  at  least  unexpected :  but  when  by  improvidence  I  have  cast  myself  into 
necessities  of  using  more  upon  myself,  or  upon  things  in  themselves  of  less  im- 
portance, I  have  prospered  much  less  than  when  I  did  otherwise.  And  when  I  had 
contented  myself  to  devote  that  stock  which  I  had  gotten  to  charitable  uses  after 
my  death,  instead  of  laying  out  at  present,  that  so  I  might  secure  somewhat  for 
myself  while  I  lived,  in  probability  all  that  is  like  to  be  lost ;  whereas,  when  I  took 
that  present  opportunity,  and  trusted  God  for  the  time  to  come,  I  wanted  nothing, 
and  lost  nothing.  (Richard  Baxter.)  The  liberal  man  is  always  rich  : — In 
defiance  of  all  the  torture,  of  all  the  might,  of  all  the  malice  of  the  world,  the 
liberal  man  will  ever  be  rich ;  for  God's  providence  is  his  estate,  God's  wisdom  and 
power  are  his  defence,  God's  love  and  favour  are  his  reward,  and  God's  Word  is  his 
security.      {Isaac  Barrow,  D.D.)  The  reward  of  giving  : — I.  As  to  teupobal 

THINGS.  1.  A  good  conscience.  Sometimes  the  requital  of  a  man's  open-heartedness, 
and  the  readiness  with  which  he  has  bestowed  of  what  he  has  upon  others,  is  fur- 
nished to  him  in  the  feelings  of  his  own  heart;  and  he  herein  gains  a  rich, 
abundant,  and  blessed  recompense.  Labour  may  have  been  sweet  to  him  ;  he  may 
have  been  willing  to  toil  on,  as  he  was  gradually  making  progress  to  his  object ; 
success  has  been  full  of  delight,  as  he  gradually  mastered  difficulties,  and  looking 
back  upon  the  way  which  he  had  passed,  found  how  he  had  climbed  to  heights,  to 
which  his  youthful  ambition  hardly  dared  to  aspire.  But  neither  is  labour  bo 
sweet,  nor  its  most  successful  results  so  delightful,  as  when  a  man  whom  God  has 
prospered  in  his  getting,  has  the  heart  readily  and  liberally  to  bestow.  When  he 
has  gone  to  the  kabitations  of  the  poor,  when  be  has  stoud  by  the  bedside  of  the 
sick,  when  he  has  ministered  to  those  human  necessities  which  fell  within  the 
compass  of  his  ability  to  remove,  then  there  has  been  in  his  own  soul  a  far  better 
requital  for  his  expenditure,  than  if  he  had  bestowed  his  money  in  any  other 
possible  way.  2.  Gratitude  of  those  benefited.  The  most  prosperous  man,  the 
man  to  whom  in  God's  providence  there  seems  to  be  a  larger  than  usual  amount  of 
success  appointed,  has  no  security ;  he  cannot  tell  what  a  year,  or  even  a  day,  may 
bring  forth.  His  fortune  may  be  laid  in  the  dust ;  his  riches  may  make  themselves 
wings ;  he  may  be  reduced  lower  even  than  he  was  at  his  starting-place.  Be  it 
so;  God  has  not  forgotten  him.  Then  will  come  the  very  especial  occasion  on 
which  he  will  prove,  by  his  own  individual  instance,  that  the  promise  of  the  text  is 
true.  When  he  possessed  much,  he  gave  liberally  ;  he  was  the  friend  of  all  who 
were  in  necessity ;  he  turned  no  deaf  ear  to  the  supplications  of  the  desolate ;  he 
was  not  inaccessible  to  the  sons  and  daughters  of  sorrow ;  and  in  his  own  day  of 
disaster,  many  a  heart  and  many  a  hand  are  open  to  him.  For  whom  is  it,  that  a 
whole  neighbourhood  are  anxious  ?  For  whose  affliction  is  it  that  all  are  concerned? 
For  whose  renovated  fortunes  are  all  deeply  anxious  ?  Is  it  not  the  man  who, 
when  he  was  in  other  circumstances,  held  himself  the  steward  of  God,  and  because 
he  possessed  all  things  in  charge,  used  them  as  one  who  had  to  give  account.  Per- 
haps it  may  be  that  even  his  temporal  condition  is  restored ;  but,  whether  that  be 
BO  or  not,  does  he  not  gain  a  most  blessed  return  for  all  his  charges  and  all  his 
labour,  in  that  there  are  hearts  which  feel  for  him,  and  friends  who  sympathise 
deeply  with  him,  and  those  in  whose  prayers  he  knows  that  he  has  a  place  ?  II. 
In  spiritual  things.  Application  to  devoted  preachers  of  the  gospel,  missionaries, 
&o.  Also  to  parents  who  have  brought  up  their  children  conscientiously.  Our  own 
portion  in  heaven  will  be  all  the  more  blessed,  because  of  its  being  shared  with 
those  to  whom  on  earth  we  were  helpers.  (5.  Robins,  M.A.)  The  gift  and  iti 
return." — The  New  Testament  is  fall  of  the  idea  of  a  natural  and  necessary  reciprocity 
between  man  and  the  things  by  which  he  is  surrounded  (Gal.  vi.  7 ;  2  Cor .  iz.  6)i 


<22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHi*.  Vft 

The  world  seems  to  be  a  great  field  in  which  every  man  drops  his  seed,  and  which 
gives  back  to  every  man,  not  just  the  same  thing  which  he  dropped  there,  any  more 
than  the  brown  earth  holds  up  to  you  in  the  autumn  the  same  black  berry  which 
you  hid  under  its  bosom  in  the  spring,  but  something  which  has  its  true  correspond- 
ence and  proportion  to  the  seed  to  which  it  is  the  legitimate  and  natural  reply.  Every 
gift  has  its  return,  every  act  has  its  consequence,  every  call  has  its  answer  in  thia 
great  live,  alert  world,  where  man  stands  central,  and  all  things  have  their  eyes  oa 
him  and  their  ears  open  to  his  voice.  {Phillips  Brooks,  D.I).)  Tlie  law  of 
reciprocity : — It  is  a  law  of  vast  extent  and  wonderful  exactness.  The  world  is  far 
more  orderly  than  we  believe ;  a  deeper  and  a  truer  justice  runs  through  it  than 
we  imagine.  We  all  go  about  calling  ourselves  victims,  discoursing  on  the  cruel 
world,  and  wondering  that  it  should  treat  us  so,  when  really  we  are  only  meeting 
the  rebound  of  oar  own  lives.  What  we  have  been  to  things  about  us  has  made  it 
necessary  that  they  should  be  this  to  ub.  As  we  have  given  ourselves  to  them, 
BO  they  have  given  themselves  to  us.  1.  Even  with  man's  relations  to  the  material 
earth  the  law  is  true.  What  different  things  she  is  to  aU  of  us,  this  earth  we  live 
in  I  Why  is  it  that  one  man  laughs  at  another's  view  about  the  earth,  and  thinks 
him  mad  because  of  some  strange  value  that  he  places  on  it  ?  Three  men  stand 
in  the  same  field  and  look  around  them :  and  then  they  all  cry  out  together.  One 
of  them  exclaims,  How  rich !  another  cries,  How  strange  1  another  cries,  How 
beautiful  1  and  then  the  three  divide  the  field  between  them,  and  they  build  their 
houses  there ;  and  in  a  year  you  come  back  and  see  what  answer  the  same  earth  has 
made  to  each  ol  her  three  questioners.  They  have  all  talked  with  the  ground  on 
which  they  lived,  and  heard  its  answers.  They  have  all  held  out  their  several 
hands,  and  the  same  ground  has  put  its  own  gift  into  each  of  them.  What  hare 
they  got  to  show  yon  ?  One  cries,  "  Come  here  and  see  my  barn  "  ;  another  cries, 
"  Come  here  and  see  my  mnsenm  " ;  the  other  saya,  *•  Let  me  read  you  my  poem." 
That  is  a  picture  of  the  way  in  which  a  generation  or  the  race  takes  the  great  earth 
and  makes  it  different  things  to  all  its  children.  With  what  measure  we  mete  to 
it,  it  measures  to  ns  again.  2.  The  same  law  holds  good  with  regard  to  oar  relations 
to  the  world  of  men.  What  does  it  mean,  that  one  man  cannot  go  among  any  kind 
of  men,  however  base  and  low,  without  getting  happiness  and  good ;  while  another 
man  cannot  go  into  the  midst  of  the  noblest  and  sweetestcompany  without  bringing 
out  misery  and  despair  and  sin  ?  Here  are  Jesus  and  Judas :  both  go  and  give 
themselves  to  the  Pharisees ;  both  stand  in  the  Pharisees'  presence  and  hear  what 
they  have  to  say.  To  Jesus  these  Pharisees  give  back  in  return  every  day  a  deeper 
consciousness  of  His  own  wondrous  nature,  a  devonter  consecration  to  His  Father, 
and  a  more  earnest  pity  for  them.  To  Judas  they  give  only  blacker  dreams  of 
treason,  a  falser  disregard  of  friendship  and  loyalty  and  honour.  Take  two  boys  in 
a  class  at  college;  two  clerks  in  a  shop  in  town.  It  is  not  good  when  either  ot 
them  is  made  cynical,  and  sneers  at  the  possibility  of  virtue  because  of  the  vice 
which  he  has  felt  in  its  contamination  at  his  side.  The  true  soul,  with  a  character 
of  its  own,  will  learn  the  possibility  of  being  good  from  his  own  consciousness,  all 
the  more  strongly  because  of  the  vice  that  tonches  him.  No  sonl,  bad  in  itself, 
can  really  learn  the  possibility  of  goodness  by  mere  sight  and  touch  even  of  a  world 
of  saints,  and  no  soul  really  good  can  lose  the  noble  oonscionsness  that  man  was 
made  for  goodness,  even  though  all  the  world  but  him  is  steeped  in  wickedness, 
nay,  in  subtle  ways  he  will  feed  that  consciousness  there.  8.  The  same  law  applies 
to  the  truths  which  men  believe,  or  the  causes  for  which  they  labour.  Generous 
or  stingy,  large-idead  or  small-idead,  appreciative  or  unappreoiative  of  other  occu- 
pations than  your  own ;  these  things  yon  will  be,  not  invariably  according  to  the 
kind  of  trade  you  are  engaged  in,  but  distinctively  according  to  the  kind  of  man- 
hood which  yon  pat  into  your  trade.  And  so  with  creeds.  A  creed  must  fill  a  man's 
character  before  it  really  takes  possession  of  his  mind,  as  the  ocean  has  to  fill  a 
vessel  with  its  water  before  it  can  swallow  it  up  into  its  depth.  You  cannot  finally 
judge  men  by  their  creeds.  A  man  may  hold  the  most  spiritual  doctrine,  and  be 
carnal  and  mercenary  ;  a  man  may  hold  the  broadest  truth,  and  be  a  bigot ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  all  oar  religious  history  bears  witness  that  a  man  may  hold  hard, 
crude,  narrow  doctrine,  and  yet  gather  out  of  his  belief  in  it  rich,  warm,  sweet 
holiness  which  men  and  God  must  love.  4. 1  turn  to  one  more  illustration  of  the 
working  of  our  law — the  highest,  the  completest  of  them  all.  It  is  the  gift  of  one- 
self to  Jesus.  There  are  different  measures  in  which  men  give  themselves  to  Christ, 
and  Christ  despises  none  of  them ;  but  in  different  measures  He  again  is  compelled 
to  give  Himself  back  to  them.    Sm  how  they  come  I    One  man  approaches  th« 


tiBAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  <23 

Divine  Bedeemer  asking  no  Divine  redemption,  bnt  tonched  and  fascinated  by  the 
beauty  of  that  perfect  life.  He  would  feed  his  wonder,  he  would  cultivate  his 
taste,  upon  it.  To  him  Jesus  gives  what  he  asks,  and  with  delighted  wonder  and 
with  cultivated  taste  the  satisfied  asker  goes  away.  It  is  as  if  a  man  painted  a 
mountain  for  its  pictaresqneness,  and  carried  off  his  picture  in  delight,  never 
dreaming  that  he  left  behind  him  in  the  mountain's  bosom  treasures  of  gold  which 
only  waited  for  his  hand  to  gather  them.  Another  man  comes  to  Jesus  with  a  sell 
that  is  all  alive  with  curiosity.  He  takes  Christ's  revelations — for  Christ  does  not 
refuse  him  either — and  goes  away  content  to  know  much  of  God  and  man,  and 
what  there  is  beyond  this  world.  Another  man  comes  to  Jesus  with  a  self  all 
trembling  with  fear,  all  eager  for  safety,  and  Jesus  satisfies  him;  He  lets  him  know 
that  even  the  humblest,  and  most  ignorant,  and  least  aspiring  soul,  which  repents 
of  and  forsakes  its  sin,  and  seeks  forgiveuesa,  shall  not  be  lost.  Each  gets  from 
Je  us  that  which  the  nature  which  he  brings  can  take.  With  what  measure  each 
gives  himself  to  the  Saviour,  the  Saviour  gives  Himself  in  His  salvation  back  to 
each.  Only  when  at  last  there  comes  a  man  with  his  self  all  open,  with  door 
behind  door,  back  into  the  most  secret  chambers,  all  unclosed,  ready  to  give  himsell 
entirely,  wanting  everything,  ready  to  take  everything  that  Jesus  has  to  give, 
wanting  and  ready  to  take  the  whole  of  Jesus  into  the  whole  of  himself,  only  then 
are  the  last  gates  withdrawn ;  and  as  when  the  ocean  gathers  itself  up  and  enters  with 
its  tide  the  open  mouth  of  the  river,  like  a  conqueror  riding  into  a  surrendered  town, 
80  does  the  Lord  in  all  His  richness,  with  His  perfect  standards.  His  mighty  motives. 
His  infinite  hopes,  give  Himself  to  the  soul  which  has  been  utterly  given  to  Him.  It 
is  not  enough  that  Christ  should  stand  ready  to  give  us  His  blessings.  He  must 
give  us  the  nature  to  which  those  blessings  can  be  given.  What  we  want  of  Him 
is  not  merely  His  gifts;  it  is  ourselves;  He  mast  give  us  them  first.  To  them 
only  can  He  give  Himself,  which  is  His  perfect  gift.  Not  merely  with  outstretched 
hands  but  with  open  hearts  we  must  stand  before  Him.  We  must  pray  not  merely 
that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  may  come,  but  that  we  may  be  born  again,  so  that  we 
may  see  it.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  39.  Can  the  blind  lead  the  blind  t  Shall  they  not  both  fall  Into  the  ditch  r 
The  suggestive  supposition  is  made  by  Dr.  Keid  (♦'  Inquiry  into  the  human  mind  ") 
that  it  had  been  as  uncommon  to  be  born  with  the  power  of  sight  as  it  is  now  to  ba 
born  incapable  of  it,  in  which  case  "  the  few  who  had  this  rare  gift  would  appear 
as  prophets  or  inspired  teachers  to  the  many."  Blind-led  blind : — Many  a  paraptirasa 
of  the  proverb,  and  of  a  perishing  people  where  there  is  no  vision,  might  be  cited 
from  the  histories  and  miscellanies  of  Mr.  Carlyle.  It  is  a  trite  theme  with  him — 
the  need  of  what  he  calls  men  with  an  eye,  to  lead  those  who  need  guidance.  We 
might  apply  what  Shakespere's  Gloster,  in  King  Lear,  says,  after  his  eyes  have 
been  barbarously  put  out,  and  he  seeks  a  guide  in  Mad  Tom,  and  is  warned, 
"  Alack,  sir,  he's  mad  !  "  "  'Tis  the  time's  plague,  when  madmen  lead  the  blind." 
Ill  fare  the  people  that  take  up  with  blind  guides.  Like  Elymas,  when  there  fell 
upon  him  a  mist  and  a  darkness,  they  go  about  seeking  some  one  to  lead  them  by 
the  hand.  Some  one,  any  one.  Who  will  show  us  any  good — who  will  deliver  na 
from  this  hour  and  power  of  darkness  ?  And  sometimes  he  that  is  struck  blind 
takes  for  guide  him  that  is  born  blind.  And  straightway  they  make  for  the  ditch. 
St.  Gregory  the  Great,  in  his  treatise  on  the  pastoral  care,  vigorously  censures 
those  who,  without  proper  qualifications,  undertake  the  care  of  souls,  which  he 
calls  the  art  of  all  arts.  Who  does  not  know,  he  says,  that  the  wounds  of  the  mind 
are  more  difficult  to  be  understood  than  those  of  the  body  I  And  yet  men  un- 
acquainted with  the  spiritual  precepts  will  profess  themselves  physicians  of  the 
heart,  while  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  eflfects  of  drugs  would  blush  to  set  up 
for  physicians  of  the  body.  And  anon  he  quotes  the  proverb  of  the  blind-led  blin(L 
In  no  such  connection,  and  in  no  such  spirit,  Shelley  quotes  it,  when  describing 
priests  and  princes  pale  with  terror,  whose  faith  "  fell,  Uke  a  shaft  loosed  by  th« 
bowman's  error,  on  their  own  hearts." 

"  They  sought  and  they  could  find 
No  refuge — 'twas  the  blind  who  led  the  blind." 

Bat,  after  all,  there  may  be  something  worse  than  eren  a  blind  guide;  for, 
as  South  observes  in  his  sermon  on  the  fatal  imposture  of  words,  "A  blind 
guide  is  certainly    a    great    misohief:    but  a    guide    that   blinds    those    whom 


tt«  TBE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [0HA».  Tk 

he  Bhoald  lead,  is  certainly  a  greater."  The  proverb  wm  full  in  Sonth's  eye 
tfhen,  in  another  sermon,  discussing  the  case  of  a  man  who  exerts  all  the 
faculties  of  his  soul,  and  plies  all  means  and  opportunities  in  the  search  of 
truth  which  God  has  vouchsafed  him,  the  preaeher  oonclades  that  such  a  man  may 
rest  upon  the  judgment  of  his  conscience  so  informed,  as  a  warrantable  guide  of 
those  actions  which  he  must  account  to  God  for :  "  and  if  by  following  such  a 
guide  he  fall  into  the  ditch,  the  ditch  shall  never  drown  him."  But  the  same 
vigorous  divine  elsewhere  deprecates  a  blind  watchman  as  "  equally  a  nuisance  and 
an  impertinence  " — and  such  a  paradox,  both  in  reason  and  in  practice,  he  con« 
tends,  is  a  deluded  conscience,  namely  a  counsellor  who  cannot  advise,  and  a 
guide  not  able  to  direct.  The  will  and  the  affections  are  made  to  follow  and  obey, 
not  to  lead  and  direct ;  and  therefore,  he  goes  on  to  say,  if  error  has  perverted  the 
order,  and  disturbed  the  original  economy  of  our  faculties,  and  a  blind  will  there* 
upon  comes  to  be  led  by  a  blind  understanding,  "  there  is  no  remedy,  but  it  must 
trip  and  stumble,  and  sometimes  fall  into  the  noisome  ditch  of  the  foulest  enormities 
and  immoralities.  {F.Jacox.)  Blind  leaders : — I.  Thk  cash  proposed — "Can 
the  blind  lead  the  blind  ?  "  Upon  this  we  found  the  following  remarks :  1.  All 
men  by  nature  are  in  a  state  of  spiritual  blindness.  The  proofs  of  this  moral  and 
spiritual  blindness  press  upon  our  attention  on  every  hand.  (1)  Consider,  in  the  first 
place,  the  erroneous  and  mistaken  apprehensions  which  men  generally  entertain  of 
the  character  of  God.  (2)  The  unconsciousness  of  men  to  the  moral  and  spiritual 
dangers  by  which  they  are  threatened  is  another  proof  that  darkness  bath  covered 
the  human  mind.  (3)  The  intense  love  and  ardent  pursuit  of  the  things  of  the  present 
world  form  another  striking  manifestation  of  the  blindness  of  the  human  heart 
with  regard  to  spiritual  things.  2.  I  remark  that  to  the  blind  some  sort  of  guidance 
is  absolutely  necessary.  We  all  feel  this  with  respect  to  the  calamity  of  natural 
blindness.  3.  It  is  obvious  to  remark  that  those  who  proffer  themselves  to  be  the 
guides  of  the  blind  should  themselves  possess  the  visual  faculty.  What  supple- 
mental aid  can  the  blind  derive  from  those  who  are  themselves  in  the  same  unhappy 
condition?  II.  The  catasteophe  pkedicted.  "If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  shall 
they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch  ?  "  Upon  this  I  would  remark :  1.  That  ignorant 
and  unfaithful  teachers  are  to  be  considered  as  the  heaviest  imaginable  curse 
wherever  they  exist.  2.  The  text  reminds  us  that  the  consequence  of  this  state  of 
things  is  that  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch.  The  blind  who  are  led,  and  the  blind 
leaders  by  whom  they  are  led,  it  is  much  to  be  feared  will  share  one  common  doom. 
They  will  fall  into  sentimental  errors— they  will  fall  into  practical  immoralities — 
they  will  fall  into  final  perdition — unless  the  grace  and  mercy  of  the  Most  High 
prevent.  (1)  The  ruin  into  which  they  lead  others,  and  which  they  prepare  for  them- 
selves, is,  first,  inexcusable.  (2)  As  this  ruin  will  be  found  to  be  inexcusable,  so 
will  it  be  found  to  be  inevitable.  There  is  nothing  that  can  hinder;  but  from  the 
erroneous  system  which  I  have  described  as  certain,  inevitable  ruin  must  follow. 
(8)  And  the  ruin  will  be  found  to  be  irretrievable.  (4)  This  ruin  which  is  inex- 
cusable, inevitable,  and  irretrievable,  will  be  found  to  be  eternal.  III.  Let  me 
apply  the  principles  which  have  been  thus  briefly  developed  in  favour  of  the 
institution  for  which  I  am  about  to  plead.  You  are  aware  I  am  to  ask  your  bene- 
volent aid  on  behalf  of  the  Home  Missionary  Society.  1.  Let  me  remmd  you  of 
the  necessity  which  there  exists  for  the  interposition  of  such  efforts  as  those  which 
this  society  exerts.  2.  Consider  the  erroneous  guidance  under  which  a  vast  pro- 
portion  of  this  population  is  actually  placed.  (C.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  choice  of 
a  leader: — Two  extremes  exist  in  reference  to  the  pilgrimage  and  scholarship  of 
life.  Some  assert  that  man  needs  no  guide  whatever.  "  Is  he  not  a  noble  creature, 
gifted  with  high  intelligence?  Can  he  not  reason  and  judge,  and  understand  and 
discern  ?  He  can  surely  find  his  own  way,  without  direction  from  without.  As  a 
learner,  why  needs  he  a  teacher  7  He  can  instruct  himself.  Such  self-sufficient 
boasters  will  not,  therefore,  condescend  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  a  master,  or  follow  the 
track  of  a  guide,  and  consequently  they  frequently  become  erratic,  singular,  lawless, 
and  unreasonable  in  their  modes  of  thought,  and  even  of  act.  Into  the  mazes  of 
infidelity  and  atheism  such  pUgrims  wander ;  into  foolishness  and  strong  delusion 
such  teachers  of  themselves  conduct  their  own  minds.  This  scheme  is  dangerous, 
but  its  opposite  pole  is  not  less  so.  Deliver  a  man  from  rationalism,  and  he  often 
swings  into  superstition,  and  says,  "  I  see  that  I  need  a  guide,  I  will  take  the  one 
nearest  to  hand."  Between  these  two  extremes  there  is  a  narrow  path  of  right,  and 
happy  is  he  who  finds  it,  viz.,  the  honestly  and  sincerely  judging  who  the  leader 
and  teacher  should  be,  the  discovery  that  a  leader  has  been  appointed  in  the  person 


omit.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  C2S 

of  the  Lord  Jeans,  and  a  teacher  in  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  then  a  complete,  'willing, 
and  believing  submission  of  the  whole  man  to  this  infallible  guidance.  I.  The  text 
announces  to  us  a  obeat,  qenbhal  prikciplb  as  a  wabnino,  viz.,  that  a  disciple  does 
aot  get  above  his  master,  but  becomes  like  him.  1.  It  is  evident  that  the  disciple 
is  generally  drawn  to  the  master  who  is  most  like  himself.  There  is  about  us  all  a 
natural  tendency  to  admire  our  own  image,  and  to  be  willing  to  submit  to  any  who 
are  superior  to  us,  and  yet  are  of  our  type.  If  the  blind  man  only  could  see  he 
wuuld  not  choose  a  blind  man  to  be  his  guide ;  but  as  he  cannot  see  he  meets  with 
one  who  talks  as  blind  men  talk  ;  who  judges  things  as  they  are  in  the  dark,  and 
who  does  not  know  what  siglited  men  know,  and  therefore  never  reminds  the  blind 
man  of  his  infirmity ;  and  at  once  he  says,  "  This  is  my  ideal  of  a  man,  he  is 
exactly  the  leader  I  require,  and  I  will  commit  myself  to  him."  So  the  blind  man 
takes  the  blind  man  to  be  his  guide,  and  this  is  the  reason  why  error  has  been  so 
popular.  No  error  would  live  if  it  did  not  chime  in  with  some  evil  propensity  of 
human  nature,  if  it  did  not  gratify  some  error  in  man  to  which  it  is  congruous. 
Mind,  then,  whom  you  choose  for  a  guide.  2.  Having  chosen  his  tutor,  the  student 
gradually  becomes  more  and  more  like  his  master ;  or,  having  taken  his  guide,  the 
tendency  is  to  tread  more  closely  in  his  footsteps,  and  obey  his  rules  more  fully 
every  day.  We  imitate  those  whom  we  admire.  3.  The  pupil  does  not  go  beyond 
the  tutor,  nor  does  the  man  who  submits  to  be  led  go  beyond  his  guide.  Such  a 
case  is  very  rarely  found — indeed,  I  may  say,  never ;  for  when  the  one  who  is  led 
goes  beyond  his  leader,  he  is  not  in  truth  led  any  longer ;  rarely  enough  does  it 
ever  come  to  that.  Men,  if  they  outstrip  their  leaders,  generally  do  so  in  a  wrong 
direction.  They  seldom  exaggerate  their  virtues,  those  they  frequently  omit,  but 
they  usually  exaggerate  peculiarities,  follies,  failings,  and  faults.  It  is  said  that  iu 
the  court  of  Kichard  III. ,  because  the  king  was  round-shouldered,  the  courtiers 
gradually  became  hump-backed ;  and  we  have  seen  a  whole  country  idiotic  enough, 
not  in  the  last  century,  but  in  this  century,  to  have  almost  all  its  women  limping, 
because  a  popular  princess  was  afflicted  with  a  temporary  lameness.  4.  When  a 
man  chooses  a  bad  leader  for  his  soul,  at  the  end  of  all  bad  leadership  there  is  a 
dfetch.  A  small  turn  of  the  switch  on  the  railway  is  the  means  of  taking  the  train 
to  the  far  east  or  to  the  far  west :  the  first  turn  is  very  little  indeed,  but  the  points 
arrived  at  are  remote.  Let  us  not  take  any  man  whatever  as  our  leader,  for  if  we 
trust  to  any  mere  man,  though  he  may  be  right  in  ninety -nine  of  the  hundred,  he  is 
wrong  somewhere,  and  our  tendency  will  be  to  be  more  infiuenced  by  his  one  wrong 
point,  than  by  any  one  of  his  righteous.  There  is  One  whom  you  may  follow 
imphcitly,  and  one  only — the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God.    II.  Speciaii 

APPLICATION  OP  THIS  GREAT  GENEBAIi   PRINCIPLE  TO  JeSUS  ChRISX  FOB  OUB  ENOOnRAQB- 

MENT.  If  we  naxe  Him  for  our  leader  we  certainly  cannot  go  beyond  our  leader, 
but  we  shall  be  privileged  to  grow  more  and  more  like  Him,  and  we  shall  be  per- 
fected according  to  our  text,  as  our  leader  is.  1.  This  is  what  we  might  have 
expected.  He  is  the  Creator ;  can  He  not  create  in  us  His  image  I  From  such  an  one 
as  He  is,  we  confidently  expect  it.  (1)  For,  observe,  the  teaching  itself  is  such 
that  it  must  have  power  over  hearts  that  yield  to  it.  Almighty  love.  Divine 
teaching  brought  down  to  human  capacity.  (2)  But  it  is  not  in  His  teaching  alone 
that  His  intiiience  lies ;  the  most  potent  charm  is  Himself.  "Never  man  spake 
like  this  Man ; "  because  never  man  lived  Uke  this  Man.  His  character  gives  Him 
a  right  to  speak.  (3)  We  feel  quite  sure  that  the  disciples  will  grow  like  their  Master 
in  the  case  of  Jesus,  because  He  inspires  them  with  an  intense  love  to  Himself, 
which  flames  forth  in  enthusiasm  for  Him.  Get  a  teacher  whom  all  the  scholars 
love  and  admire,  and  they  will  soon  learn.  Make  them  enthusiastic  for  him,  and 
no  lesson  will  be  too  hard.  (4)  Best  of  all,  our  Great  Teacher  has  a  spirit  with 
Him,  a  mighty  Spirit,  God  Himself,  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  when  He  teaches,  He 
teaches  not  with  words  alone,  but  with  a  power  which  goes  beyond  the  ear  into  the 
heart  itself,  2.  This  was  virtually  promised.  (1)  It  is  promised  in  the  great 
doctrine  of  predestination  (Eom.  viiL  29,  80).  (2)  It  is  promised  in  the  very  name 
of  Jesus — •'  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins,"  i.e.,  bring  them  back  into  a 
condition  of  purity  and  holiness.  3.  What  we  might  have  expected,  and  what  God 
has  virtually  promised,  has  been  actually  seen ;  for  the  disciples  have  been  Uke 
their  Lord.  (1)  In  character.  Some  reflect  this  feature,  others  that.  (2)  In  life-story. 
Melchizedec.  Isaac.  Joseph.  Stephen.  Paul.  (3)  In  struggles  and  temptations. 
(4)  In  their  victories.  Christ's  disciples  overcome  sin ;  by  their  Master's  help  they 
rise  above  doubt,  they  vanquish  the  world,  and  they  stand  in  purity  and  faith. 
(6)  By  ASid  by  they  sbikll  be  like  Him  in  their  reward  (Bev.  ill.  21).     III.  Wb  kax 

40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti, 

pnT  ALL  THIS  TO  THE  TEST  IT  WE  wiijii.  If  you  are  not  already  Christ's  disciple,  yon 
may  be.  He  will  receive  you  though  you  have  been  to  other  masters,  and  learned 
a  great  deal  under  them,  all  of  which  you  will  have  to  unlearn.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  blind  and  the  ditch : — An  awful  warning  to  all  teachers,  especially  preachers, 
followed  as  it  is  by  the  warning  of  the  "  beam  "  that  is  before  "one's  own  eye," 
when  one  sees  a  small  thing  before  another's.  We  know  of  whom  it  was  first 
intended — men  who  were  not  doubted ;  men  who  did  not  doubt  themselves  ;  men 
who  led  confidently  into  the  ditch ;  men  who  killed  the  Lord  of  Glory,  to  save 
their  place  and  nation,  and  then  destroyed  them  both.  They  stand  before  us  as  t 
warning,  how  awful  it  is  to  undertake  to  lead,  only  to  lead  astray  or  into  ruin. 
Blindness  (say  some)  is  no  sin,  "  are  we  blind  also  ?  "  "  If  ye  had  l»een  blind,  ye 
had  not  had  sin,  but  now  ye  say.  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  remaineth."  There  is 
none  so  bad  as  that  which  is  blind  to  itself.  There  are  many  bUndnesses — aa 
defect  of  thought,  or  learning — which  drive  the  hearers  into  what  the  speakers  never 
dreamt  of ;  defect  of  practical  knowledge  of  life  and  circumstances,  making  advice 
untenable  or  pernicious ;  such  as  on  the  clashing  of  submi  sion  to  parents  and  zeal 
for  God ;  want  of  spirituality — how  can  any  teach  what  he  has  never  learnt,  and 
therefore  never  understood  ?  A  dwelling  upon  some  parts  of  truth  to  the  exclusion 
of  all  the  rest,  as  the  Pharisees  did  on  the  letter  of  purification,  or  as  some  on 
self-denial,  till  aU  religion  is  swallowed  up  in  it,  or  some  on  spirituality  and  faith, 
till  plain  moral  laws  are  broken.  It  is  possible  to  dwell  on  sacraments  till  conver- 
sion is  ignored  ;  or  to  make  conversion  a  sole  object,  till  Christian  life  and  edifi- 
cation are  despised,  and  only  strong  excitement  satisfies.  It  is  far  easier  to  preach 
a  party,  or  a  church,  or  a  sect,  than  to  preach  Christ.  All  these  are  blindnesses, 
and,  so  far  as  they  go,  injure  both  guide  and  followers.  But  how  hard  it  is  to  see : 
to  trace  out  all  our  thoughts  to  their  consequences,  to  know  how  to  speak  to  or  of 
all  men,  to  be  thoughtful  and  not  cold,  to  know  the  life  of  the  Spirit  without  pride. 
In  fact,  there  are  none  who  see  all  things,  no  one  perfect  guide,  none  to  whom  we 
can  blindly  trust.  It  is  a  case  of  those  who  see  but  little,  and  have  more  need  to 
advise  together  than  to  lead  and  follow  confidently.  The  work  of  preaching  and 
advice  is  not  to  supersede  thought,  but  to  make  men  think ;  it  is  not  what  you 
hear,  but  what  you  make  of  what  you  hear.  The  best  part  of  a  sermon  is  the 
application,  and  that  is  made  by  the  heart  at  home.  But  remember  that  blind 
leaders  are  made  by  blind  followers.  People  crowd  to  a  preacher  as  others  to  a 
theatre  for  a  new  excitement ;  and  when  they  are  moved,  they  long  for  a  guide. 
Ttjinking  is  a  labour,  following  is  easy,  a  confident  leader  never  lacks  followers. 
This  is  the  attraction  in  our  days  of  the  Church  of  Borne,  and  blind  followers  push 
her  to  greater  extremes,  while  blind  horror  sends  some  into  infidelity,  for  horror 
and  foolhardinesB  go  hand  in  hand.  But  it  is  not  only  in  religion  that  these 
principles  hold ;  in  politics,  in  local  business,  in  fashions  and  customs,  there  are 
the  same  blind  leaders  and  blind  followers.  There  is  the  same  love  of  being  first, 
the  same  desire  to  stick  to  one's  party,  and  be  saved  the  trouble  of  thinking.  Let 
it  warn  us  in  all  these  things  to  try  to  know  where  we  are  going,  not  to  take  other 
men's  fall  on  our  own  shoulders  and  help  a  whole  crowd  to  destruction.  Pause  to 
think.  Is  it  wise  to  follow  ?  Am  I  sure  I  know  my  own  way,  when  I  long  so  to 
lead,  and  am  so  vexed  when  others  do  not  follow  ?  For  in  truth,  though  all  are 
blind  in  something,  in  something  all  can  see.  Our  first  anxiety  must  be  to  see  our 
own  way,  and  then  not  to  make  others  follow  us,  but  to  make  them  see.  There 
are  ditches  enough.  We  see  men  every  day  falUng  into  them,  and  there  are  enough 
l)efi>re  ourselves.  If  we  think,  and  speak,  and  hear  thus — as  one  family — for 
mutual  help — we  shall  find  that  though  the  blind  cannot  lead  the  bhnd,  they  oaa 
help  one  another  very  much.     (Bishop  E.  Steere.) 

Ver.  40.  The  disciple  Is  not  above  bis  Master:  but  eTery  one  that  Is  perfect 
shall  be  as  his  Master. —  The  disciple  not  above  his  master: — This  saying 
was  already  a  proverb  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  or  He  made  it  a  proverb  by 
His  frequent  use  of  it  (Matt.  x.  24,  25;  John  xiii.  12-16,  and  xv.  20).  On  the 
occasion  referred  to  by  St.  Luke,  He  uses  it  in  its  widest,  its  most  general 
scope ;  for  here  He  is  speaking  of  any  and  every  master,  of  any  and  every  disciple. 
"No  disciple,"  He  says,  "  while  he  remains  a  disciple,  can  reasonably  expect  to  be 
wiser  than  his  master,  whoever  his  master  may  be."  On  every  other  occasion  our 
Lord  limits  the  scope  of  the  proverb  by  applying  it  to  Himself  and  to  the  disciples 
who  followed  Him.  Here  it  follows  a  parable  with  which  it  seems  to  many  to  have 
little  connection,  to  some  no  connection  at  all,  although  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how 


CKAP  VI.]  ST.  LUKE.  627 

any  attentive  reader  should  have  missed  it.  Surely  the  meaning  of  the  entire 
passage,  and  its  sequence  of  thought,  are  obvious  enough.  If  a  teacher  be  blind, 
if,  that  is,  he  lack  intellectual  or  spiritual  discernments,  if  he  therefore  frame 
partial  and  erroneous  conclusions,  what  can  be  expected  but  that  his  disciples  should 
fall  into  the  very  same  errors,  and  fall  into  them  all  the  more  surely  in  proportion 
as  they  are  faithful  disciples  ?  The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master  ;  the  learner  is 
not  wiser  than  the  teacher.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  disciple  will  ever  rise  to 
the  level  of  his  master.  He  wiU  have  done  much  if  he  do  so  much  as  that.  From 
our  Lord's  use  of  this  proverb  here  we  may  infer  some  lessons  of  no  small  practical 
importance,  and,  in  learning  them,  still  further  develop  its  meaning.      I.   Thb 

IMMENSE    INPOBTANCE    OF  BOTH  HAVING  AND    PBE8ENTXNG  A  TRUE    AIM,  A   TKDB  IDEAL,  OF 

i/iFB.  What  is  our  aim  then  ?  What  should  it  be  ?  The  old  catechism  answer, 
rightly  understood,  is  surely  as  good  as  any  :  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God, 
and  to  enjoy  Him  for  ever."  But  it  is  of  the  last  importance  that  we  should 
Bet  a  single  aim  before  us,  and  that  the  highest  of  which  we  are  capable.    II.  How 

HAPPT  AKE  WE,  AND  HOW  GKEATLY  ASSISTED  IN  OUR  PURSUIT  OF  IT,  SHOULD  THIS  AIM, 
THIS   ABSTRACT   IDEAL,  CLOTHE    ITSELF   IN    FLESH  AND  BLOOD,  AND  STAND   BEFORE    D8    IN 

THE  PERSON  OF  A  MAN  OF  LIKE  PASSIONS  WITH  OURSELVES  I  An  embodied  ideal,  a 
realized  and  incarnate  ideal,  is  worth  a  thousand  pale  abstractions.  It  is  much  to 
have  a  noble  aim  before  us  ;  but,  oh,  how  much  more  to  have  it  clothed  in  the  love- 
liness of  a  perfect  life.  The  lofty  but  abstract  ideals  of  character  which  men  have 
framed  incarnate  themselves,  clothe  thempelves,  with  life  and  power  and  loveliness, 
in  Christ,  the  Son  of  Man.  III.  If  it  be  important  that  we  should  have  it  for  our- 
eelves,  it  is  also  important  that  we  should  present  a  true  ideal  of  life  to  others. 
We  may  seek  even  the  highest  good  selfishly ;  but,  in  proportion  as  we  find  it,  we 
ehall  cease  to  be  selfish :  we  shall  seek  to  be  good  for  the  sake  of  others  as  well  as 
for  our  own  sake.  Let  us  remember  that  if  in  any  respect — national,  commercial, 
intellectual,  social,  spiritual — we  are  above  any  of  our  neighbours,  to  them,  without 
our  permission  being  asked,  we  have  become  masters,  i.e.,  teachers  and  examples. 
And  therefore  we  should  seek  and  strive  for  grace  to  set  them  a  good  example, 
that  our  influence  may  be  stimulating  and  helpful  to  them.  Above  all,  we  should 
try  80  to  follow  Christ  as  that  we  may  lead  them  to  the  Perfect  Example, 
and  make  them  disciples  of  the  only  Master  who  can  never  mislead  them.  (S. 
Cox,  D.D.)  The  fcyrce  of  example : — This  is  true  as  an  observation :  men  do 
grow  up  into  the  likeness  of  what  they  admire.  It  is  seldom  that  any  come 
quite  up  to  it.  Great  philosophers,  men  of  science,  divines,  soldiers,  statesmen — 
these  are  taken  as  models,  and  each  one  has  shaped  the  lives  of  many  others.  It 
is  not  always  a  conscious  imitation.  But  we  do  grow  Uke  those  we  admire  or  love : 
even  mere  association  shapes  us.  A  man  may  be  known  by  his  associates.  If  he 
is  not  like  them  he  soon  will  be.  They  are  his  masters  in  some  degree,  and  he 
will  be  like  them.  We  should  take  care,  then,  whom  we  imitate.  In  very  many 
cases  men  forget  to  notice  what  was  the  end  of  those  they  admire.  Statesmen  have 
thought  of  Alexander,  Cffisar,  Napoleon,  without  considering  their  deaths,  and  the 
ruin  they  left  behind  them.  Fame  and  power  draw  great  men  to  seek  them,  and 
lead  them  into  the  ditch  into  which  their  masters  fell  before  them.  Our  leaders 
are  not  generally  people  who  have  made  a  name  in  history,  but  some  one  not  far 
off  our  own  station  in  life,  who  has  made  himself  a  name,  and  "  got  on  in  the 
world."  It  is  a  very  good  thing  to  have  examples ;  we  all  want  lifting,  and  want  fresh 
thoughts  to  be  given  us.  But  before  we  give  ourselves  up  to  follow,  we  had  better 
consider  our  masters  as  a  whole.  We  may  never  come  up  to  them,  but  we  cannot 
hope  to  fare  better  than  they.  Are  they  exactly  what  we  should  like  to  be ;  did 
they  end  as  we  should  like  to  end  ?  Now,  we  find  mostly  some  drawback,  something 
we  hope  to  avoid.  We  mus-t  remember  that  it  began  far  back  in  their  career. 
There  is  many  a  man  of  business  who  buys  success  at  the  cost  of  health  and  life, 
or  of  truth  and  honesty,  or  of  family  and  duty,  or  of  eternity.  If  that  is  what  he 
paid,  he  is  no  master  for  us  to  follow.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  that  cannot 
be  bought  too  dear.  And  of  our  masters  in  social  life,  pleasant  companions,  friends, 
clever  fellows:  look  at  them  well — do  we  want  to  be  like  them  1  One  and  another 
of  our  old  acquaintances  are  gone  ;  what  has  become  of  them  f  Take  the  man  who 
has  gone  farthest,  and  then  you  will  see  what  the  road  leads  to.  If  it  leads  to 
peace,  and  honour,  and  health — follow  it.  If  it  leads  at  last  only  to  some  filthy 
ditch — stop  while  you  can.  You  say,  "  I  can  stop  short  " ;  do  it  then.  It  will  not 
grow  easier,  it  will  cost  you  more  every  day.  Many  a  man  says,  "  I  was  a  great 
iool  to  begin,  but  now  I  cannot  help  it."    It  is  always  easiest  to  go  downwards. 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ru 

It  is  not  very  difficnlt,  it  we  deal  honestly  with  ourselves,  to  see  to  what  oar  mod* 
of  life  has  led,  and  we  may  feel  sore  we  shall  be  no  exception  to  the  general  law. 
But  then  there  is  another  sense  in  which  these  same  word^  were  used ;  they  are  a 
comfort  and  support.  We  must  not  expect  to  be  free  from  the  losses,  trials,  diffi- 
culties, which  have  harassed  those  who  went  before  as.  No  man  ever  grew  without 
patient  years  of  work.  Our  Lord  told  His  disciples  to  look  at  Kim,  and  not  expect 
to  be  better  treated.  There  has  never  been  a  time  when  there  has  been  no  imde- 
served  ill-will.  God  does  not  make  us  perfect  by  always  giving  us  what  we  wish 
for.  Others  have  been  tried,  and  where  are  they  ?  Those  who  sought  rest  and 
pleasure,  those  who  faced  difficulty  and  kept  right  and  truth — where  are  they  ? 
(John  xvi.  33.)  A  good  Christian  is  not  known  in  the  world  by  his  good  fortune, 
but  by  a  hope  that  does  not  make  ashamed.  If  we  choose  the  highest  model,  even 
Christ,  what  must  we  expect  ?  Troubles  and  difficulties  enough,  and  after  them — 
to  be  as  our  Master.  Here,  indeed,  is  a  glorious  future  worth  aU  the  effort  it  costs. 
To  be  like  God  Himself  in  heaven  I  What  other  service  can  give  such  a  reward 
as  this  ?  (Bishop  E.  Steer e. )  The  use  of  a  great  leader : — During  one  of  the  cam- 
paigns in  the  American  Civil  War,  when  the  winter  weather  was  very  severe,  some  of 
Stonewall  Jackson's  men  having  crawled  out  in  the  morning  from  their  snow- 
laden  blankets,  half -frozen,  began  to  curse  him  as  the  cause  of  their  sufferings. 
He  lay  close  by  under  a  tree,  also  snowed  under,  and  heard  all  this :  but  without 
noticing  it,  presently  crawled  out  too,  and,  shaking  off  the  snow,  made  some  jocular 
remark  to  the  nearest  men,  who  had  no  idea  he  had  ridden  up  in  the  night  and 
lain  down  amongst  them  1  The  incident  ran  through  the  army  in  a  few  hours,  and 
reconciled  his  followers  to  all  the  hardships  of  the  expedition,  and  fully  re-estab- 
lished his  popularity.  (Mackay.)  Perfect  as  the  Master  : — The  explanation  of 
this  verse  seems  to  turn  upon  the  word  translated  "perfect,"  a  word  entirely 
different  from  that  which  is  so  translated  in  other  passages,  e.g..  Matt.  v.  48. 
The  meaning  is  this:  complete  in  discipline,  finished  or  perfect  in  the  sense 
in  which  we  should  speak  of  a  piece  of  workmanship  as  perfect,  when  it  has 
received  the  last  touch  of  the  workman's  hand.  [R.  V.,  "  every  one  when  he  is 
perfected."]  So  that  when  our  Lord  speaks  of  a  man  who  is  "perfect"  being 
like  his  master.  He  means  to  describe  the  condition  of  a  person  who  has 
received  from  his  master,  whoever  that  master  may  be,  all  the  teaching  and 
discipline  which  the  master  can  give  him,  and  He  asserts  that  all  that  can  be 
expected  from  such  a  finished  disciple  is  that  he  shall  be  equal  to  his  master ;  his 
master  cannot  raise  him  above  himself ;  his  master's  acquirements  are  (as  it 
were),  the  limit  towards  which  the  growth  of  the  disciple  tends.  If  this  be  the 
meaning  of  our  Lord's  words,  we  find  in  them  an  important  warning  not  to  Hia 
apostles  only  but  to  all  teachers.  The  words  show  the  necessity  of  those  who 
would  teach  others  growing  in  grace  themselves  ;  they  must  not  expect  that  they 
can  be  worldly-minded  and  their  disciples  spiritual,  that  they  can  serve  Mammon 
and  their  disciples  serve  God  ;  and  conversely,  they  may  expect  that  as  they  grow 
more  in  the  knowledge  of  their  God  and  Saviour,  their  own  growth  in  knowledge 
will  reflect  itself  in  their  disciples,  and  tend  to  raise  them  to  that  point  of  spiritual 
life  to  which  they  themselves  have  already  attained.    (Bishop  H.  Goodwin.) 

Vers.  41,  42.  And  why  beholdest  thou  the  mote  that  la  In  thy  hrother'a 
eye,  but  perceivest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  I—The  true  and 
the  false  reformer  contrasted: — Now,  as  no  age  has  been  without  its  abomina- 
tions, so  none  has  been  without  its  reformers.  We  read  of  them  alike  in  sacred 
and  in  secular  history.  We  hear  of  them  alike  in  Heathendom  and  in  Christen, 
dom,  in  lands  of  barbarous  darkness  and  in  lands  of  religious  enlightenment; 
Abel,  Enoch,  and  Noah  were  reformers.  So  were  Abraham,  Moses,  Samuel, 
David,  Elijah — in  fact,  all  the  Israelitish  prophets,  and  many  of  the  Israel- 
itish  kings.  Confucius  in  China,  Zoroaster  in  Persia,  Socrates  in  Greece,  Cato 
in  Rome,  were  all  of  the  same  order.  In  truth,  all  genuine  Christians,  rightly 
viewed,  are  reformers.  •'  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  to  rectify  its  putrescencies. 
"  Te  are  the  light  of  the  world,"  to  disperse  its  shades  of  darkness.  But  every 
genuine  good  thing  amongst  men  has  also  its  counterfeit.  The  grand  forger  and  fabri- 
cator of  all  such  hollow,  delusive  imitations  of  the  exterior  of  excellence,  is  tha 
devil.  God  prepares  a  purifying  salt,  Satan  also  manufactures  an  article,  resem- 
bling it  in  appearance,  but  without  its  pungent  savour  and  antiseptic  properties. 
Our  Lord,  in  His  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  warns  us  against  being  deceived  by  these 
pseudo-reformers :  and  also  against  the  still  more  fatal  position  of  actually  belong- 


«BAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  63t 

ing  to  their  ranks.  We  may  gather  from  this  passage  of  stern  rebuke  the  character 
of  a  false  or  pretended  reformer  ;  and,  by  considering  its  contrast,  that  of  a  tru« 
«nd  effective  one  Ukewise.  Both  may  be  zealous  ;  both  may  be  bold ;  both  may  b» 
firm.  Earnestness,  intrepidity,  immobility,  may  belong  to  each  alike.  No  I  the 
distinction  between  the  true  and  the  false  reformer  consists  not  in  any  difference 
of  ardour,  perseverance,  or  resoluteness.  It  is  not  a  variation  of  degrees,  but  a 
variety  of  kind.  It  stands  not  in  diversities  of  intensity,  but  in  contradictions 
of  essential  quality.  We  shall  find,  by  an  analysis  of  our  text,  that  the  false 
reformer  is  at  the  antipodes  of  the  true  in  all  that  goes  to  constitute  fundamental, 
or  radical,  distinctions  in  moral  character.  1.  Tbey  start  from  opposite  points  of 
the  compass.  The  one  begins  by  reforming  his  neighbours ;  the  other,  by  reforming 
himself.  The  one  begins  by  looking  around  ;  the  other,  by  looking  within :  the  one, 
hy  sweeping  the  streets  of  the  city ;  the  other,  by  cleaning  the  rooms  of  his  own 
house :  the  one,  by  attempting  to  remodel  society  ;  the  other,  by  seeking  a  change 
in  his  own  character.  The  one  sees  first  what  is  amiss  abroad  ;  the  other,  what  ia 
«mis8  at  home.  "  First  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye,  and  then  shaltthou 
see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye."  2.  When  both  are  en- 
gaged in  the  work  of  the  world's  reformation,  they  differ  in  the  selection  of  the 
objects  on  which  their  corrective  measures  are  brought  to  bear.  They  not  only 
start  from  contrary  points,  but  they  also  proceed  in  contrary  directions.  The  false 
reformer  is  presumptuous,  the  true  reformer  is  condescending.  The  one  looks 
above  himself,  the  other  looks  below.  All  this,  too,  appears  plainly  from  the  text, 
*'  Cast  out  the  beam  from  thine  own  eye,  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the 
znote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye."  3.  A  distinction  between  the  real  and  the  apparent 
reformer  is  to  be  found  in  the  state  of  their  own  minds  respectively.  The  former 
is  clear  in  his  perceptions  and  correct  in  his  judgments.  He  knows  how  to  dis- 
criminate cautiously  and  accurately,  between  good  and  evil.  But  the  latter  is  ever 
confused  in  his  views  and  erring  in  his  decisions.  Through  precipitancy  and  preju- 
dice, he  mistakes  the  sweet  for  the  bitter,  and  the  bitter  for  the  sweet.  We  do  not 
indeed  claim  infallibility  for  the  true  saint,  but  we  do  claim  for  him  as  correct  a  dis- 
cernment of  character  and  knowledge  of  truth  as  may  be  attainable  by  man  in  this 
world.  The  Scriptures  doubtless  guarantee  this  to  every  simple-hearted,  docile, 
prayerful  man,  who  studies  their  pages.  Hence  we  read  of  the  anointing  of  the 
Holy  One,  which  leads  those  who  receive  it  into  all  truth  :  and  we  are  told,  that  if 
any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God. 
Again,  if  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  shall  be  full  of  light :  and,  if  any  man 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  freely,  and  without  up- 
braiding. Such  as  are  the  sons  of  God  are  represented  as  being  led  by  His  Spirit. 
You  find  him  opposing  only  what  ought  to  be  opposed,  and  promoting  only  what 
deserves  encouragement.  He  does  not  magnify  the  mole-hill  into  a  mountain,  nor 
minify  the  mountain  into  a  mole-hilL  He  does  not  treat  trifles  as  matters  of  essen- 
tial moment,  nor  momentous  matters  as  trifles.  He  is  not  deceived  by  mere,  or  by 
first  appearances.  The  sham  reformer  hides  the  real  nature  of  objects,  or  deceit- 
fully exaggerates  their  dimensions.  He  beholds  all  persons  and  things  through  • 
discolouring  and  perverting  medium.  Through  the  magical  spectacles  of  prejudice 
he  ever  looks,  and  therefore  sees  not  what  really  is,  but  what  his  own  fancy  conjures 
up,  or  his  excited  passions  prompt  him  to  desire.  Whilst  gazing  upon  others,  their 
noblest  virtues  become  transformed  into  foulest  vices,  their  little  infirmities  swell 
into  hideous  sins.  And  how  should  it  be  otherwise?  The  man  has  a  beam  in  his 
€ye.  He  is  dismally  blinded.  His  whole  soul  is  in  darkness.  His  mind  is 
bewitched  by  the  sorceries  of  sin  and  Satan.  A  dreadful  spell  has  bound  his  spirit : 
a  moral  madness  has  distracted  his  heart.  He  can  see  neither  perspicuously  nor 
correctly :  not  afar  off  at  all,  and  nigh  at  hand  only  imperfectly.  Such  is  the  delu- 
sion and  blindness  of  the  pseudo-reformer,  hinted  at  so  intelligibly  in  the  expression 
of  the  text,  "Then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's 
eye."  4.  There  is  a  contrast  between  the  real  and  the  pretended  reformer,  not  only  in 
the  head,  but  in  the  heart ;  not  only  in  the  perceptions,  but  in  the  intentions ;  not 
only  in  the  understanding,  but  in  the  motives  and  affections.  Indeed,  here  lies  the 
root  of  the  whole  matter.  The  one  is  sound,  the  other  "rotten  at  the  core."  The 
one  ia  sincere,  the  other  deceitful.  The  one  rejoices  inwardly  in  the  truth,  the 
other  in  iniquity.  The  one  means  to  amend,  the  other  to  cavil  and  find  fault.  The 
one  is  actuated  by  an  honest  desire  to  see  improvement  in  others,  the  other  by  a 
malignant  censoriousness,  which  rather  revels  in  prevalent  corruption  than  bewails  it. 
The  true  reformer  loves  those  whom  he  strives  to  benefit :  the  false  reformer  really 


<S0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  rt 

despises  or  hates  those  in  whom  he  professes  to  he  interested.  He  is  spiteful  and' 
envious,  a  carping  meddler,  a  dangeroui  busy-body.  He  is  a  disguised  foe  to  society. 
He  has  no  love  of  peace,  no  relish  for  trustful  concord.  1.  We  allude  to  that  com- 
pany of  captious  borderers  just  beyond  the  limits  of  Church  communion,  who  refuse 
to  step  across  those  Umits,  because  of  the  alleged  inconsistencies  or  sins  of  some- 
who  are  already  there.  Such  persons  can  see  nothing  in  the  gospel  but  its  difficul- 
ties, nothing  in  ecclesiastical  organizations  but  their  defects,  nothing  in  Church 
members  but  their  inconsistencies,  real  or  attributed.  2.  There  is  a  class  of  the 
hypocrites,  rebuked  in  the  text,  to  be  found  inside  the  pale  of  Church  communion. 
The  needed  remedy  must  be  applied  to  thine  own  heart.  It  is  at  home  where  reform, 
as  well  as  charity,  must  begin.  Get  all  set  right  between  thine  own  conscience  and 
God.  Let  His  love  again  expand  and  cheer  thy  heart :  and  then  thy  fellow- believer 
vill  appear  more  amiable  in  thy  sight.  If  any  little  inconsistencies  attach  to  him, 
thou  shalt  clearly  see  them,  and  mayest  be  able,  with  all  the  nice  discrimination  of 
a  sound  mind,  and  all  the  delicate  dexterity  of  a  charitable  hand,  to  take  the  mote 
out  of  thy  neighbour's  eye :  and  both  of  you  shall  be  benefited  by  the  operation. 
*'  Brethren,  if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  convert  him ;  let  him  know, 
that  he  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul  from 
death,  and  shall  hide  a  multitude  of  sins."  (Sermons  by  Wesleynn  Ministers.)- 
The  mote  and  the  beam: — 1.  This  parable  implies  that  there  are  different  degrees 
of  sin.  Not  that  any  sin  is  trifling ;  but  some  are  more  heinous  than  others,  either 
in  themselves,  or  by  reason  of  aggravating  circumstances.  2.  Our  sins  often  ar& 
really  very  great  in  themselves ;  and  they  would  appear  so  to  us,  did  we  properly 
consider  everything  with  which  we  are  acquainted  in  our  own  case.  3.  Men  are 
generally  most  ready  to  mark  the  sins  of  others,  when  they  are  insensible  of  their 
own.  4.  To  be  severe  on  the  sins  of  others,  and  indulgent  to  one's  own,  is  very- 
hypocritical.  5.  In  order  to  be  prepared  for  the  office  of  a  reformer,  a  man  must  be  re- 
formed himself.  6.  It  is  the  duty  of  those  who  are  reformed,  to  try  to  reform  others. 
(James  Foote,  M.A.)  On  censuring  others: — Nothing  is  so  easy  as  to  censure,  or 
to  contradict  a  truth  ;  for  truth  is  but  one,  and  seeming  truths  are  many ;  and  few 
works  are  performed  without  errors.  No  man  can  write  six  lines,  but  there  may  be 
something  one  may  carp  at,  if  he  be  disposed  to  cavil.  Men  think  by  censuring  to- 
be  accounted  wise ;  but,  in  my  conceit,  there  is  nothing  shows  more  of  the  fool.  For 
this,  you  may  ever  observe,  that  they  who  know  the  least,  are  most  given  to  censure ; 
and  this  I  believe  to  be  a  reason,  why  men  of  secluded  lives  are  often  rash  in  this 
particular.  Their  retiredness  keeps  them  ignorant  of  the  world ;  if  they  weighed 
the  imperfections  of  humanity,  they  would  be  less  prone  to  condemn  others.  Igno- 
rance gives  disparagement  a  louder  tongue  than  knowledge.  Wise  men  had  rather 
know  than  tell.  Frequent  dispraises,  at  best,  show  an  nncharitable  mind.  Any 
clown  may  see  when  a  furrow  is  crooked  ;  but  where  is  the  man  who  can  plough  m© 
a  straight  one  ?  The  best  works  are  not  without  defects.  The  cleanest  corn  is  not 
without  some  dirt  among  it ;  no,  not  after  frequent  winnowing.  I  would  wish  men, 
in  the  works  of  others,  to  examine  two  things  before  they  judge  :  whether  there  be 
more  of  what  is  good,  than  of  what  is  ill,  in  what  they  examine?  and  whether  they 
themselves  could  at  first  have  done  it  better  ?  If  there  be  most  of  good,  we  do 
amiss,  for  some  errors,  to  condemn  the  whole.  As  man  is  not  judged  good  or  bad 
for  one  action,  or  for  the  fewest  number,  but  as  he  is  most  in  general :  so  in  works, 
we  should  weigh  the  generality,  and  our  censure  should  be  accordingly.  If  there  be 
more  of  good  than  ill  in  him,  I  think  he  deserves  some  praise  for  raising  nature 
above  her  ordinary  flight.  Nothing  in  this  world  can  be  framed  so  entirely  perfect, 
but  it  will  have  in  it  some  imperfections  ;  if  it  were  not  so,  it  were  not  from  human 
nature,  but  the  immediate  Deity.  And  next,  whether  we  could  do  better  than  that 
which  we  condemn  ?  To  espy  the  inconveniences  of  a  house  when  built,  is  easy ; 
but  to  lay  the  plan  weU  at  first,  is  matter  of  more  pate,  and  speaks  the  praise  of  a 
good  contriver.  Judgment  is  easier  in  things  done,  than  in  knowing  what  is  best  to 
be  done.  If  we  decry  a  copy,  and  are  not  able  to  produce  an  original,  we  show  more 
criticism  than  ability.  We  ought  rather  to  magnify  him  who  has  gone  beyond  us, 
than  condemn  him  for  a  few  faults.  Self-examination  will  make  our  judgm<  nta 
charitable.  It  is  from  where  there  is  no  judgment,  that  the  heaviest  judgment 
comes.  If  we  must  needs  censure,  it  is  good  to  do  it  as  Suetonius  writes  of  the 
twelve  Ceesars,  to  tell  both  their  virtues  and  their  vices  impartially,  and  leave  othera 
to  determine  for  themselves.  So  shall  men  learn,  by  hearing  of  the  faults  of  others, 
to  avoid  them,  and  by  knowing  their  virtues,  endeavour  to  practise  the  like.  W« 
ought  rather  to  commend  a  man  for  the  best  part  of  his  character,  than  br^nd  hint 


OHAT.  n.\  ST.  LUKE.  68r 

for  the  worst  part  of  it.  We  are  full  of  faults  by  nature ;  we  are  good,  not  without 
our  care  and  industry.  (Owen  Felltham.)  UypocHsy  and  self-ignorance : — Th» 
words  which  thus  meet  us  are  not  only  proverbial  in  form  but  have  become  prover- 
bial in  their  application.  They  have  passed  into  the  common  speech  of  men.  They 
furnish  the  readiest  answer  to  the  man  who  condemns  another  for  sins  of  which  he 
himself  is  guilty.  The  hypocrite  is  confronted  by  them  at  every  turn.  1.  First, 
then,  we  have  the  law,  that  the  habit  of  judging  others — of  looking  at  tbeir  evil 
deeds — is  a  hindrance  to  self-knowledge.  The  man  forgets  the  beam  that  is  in  his 
own  eye,  because  his  whole  mind  is  bent  on  observing  the  motes  that  are  in  his 
brother's  eye.  And  this  is,  as  the  words  of  Christ  imply,  the  act  of  one  who  is  -i, 
hypocrite.  The  hypocrisy  is  all  the  more  deadly  and  evil  in  its  nature  because  ii  i: 
in  part  unconscious.  The  man  who  strives  to  know  what  God  is — who  lets  the  ight 
shine  in  on  him — who  is  taught  to  see  himself  by  that  light  in  the  mirror  o.  God's 
Word,  will  find  it  impossible  to  go  on  acting  a  part  which  is  not  his  own.  If  he 
knows  truth  and  goodness  to  be  the  great  blessings  of  earth  and  Heaven,  he  will  find 
the  misery  of  seeming  to  be  true  and  good  when  he  is  not  so,  altogether  insupport- 
able. The  warning  which  this  law  involves  is  necessary  for  all  men.  It  is  abso- 
lutely essential  for  those  who  have  been  called,  by  an  outward  or  inward  vocation,, 
by  the  circumstances  of  their  lives  or  the  solemn  purposes  which  God  has  put  inta 
their  hearts,  to  do  battle  in  His  service  against  the  world  and  the  flesh,  to  feel  that 
in  fighting  against  them  they  are  fighting  also  against  the  devil.  Consider  what  the 
work  of  those  disciples  must  have  been,  as  they  preached  the  glad  tidings  of  th& 
kingdom  in  the  cities  and  villages  of  Galilee,  as  they  afterwards  had  to  proclaim  the 
eame  message  in  the  great  cities  of  Asia  or  Europe.  How  often  they  must  have  been 
tempted  to  think  with  scorn  of  those  who  were  living  in  brutalizing  sins,  or  bowing 
befere  dumb  idols,  or  warring  and  fighting  with  each  other  !  Was  it  not  easy  to  think 
that  their  warfare  against  these  monstrous  forms  of  wickedness  was  so  urgent  as  to 
leave  them  no  leisure  for  self-scrutiny  or  self-discipline?  easy  to  forget  the  law  that 
the  battle  could  not  be  fought  successfully  without  it  ?  And  was  there  not  an  almost 
equal  risk,  when  they  protested,  as  their  Lord  had  taught  them  to  protest,  against 
proud,  self-righteous  formalists,  of  their  falling  unconsciously  into  the  sin  which  they 
rebuked  ?  2.  But,  secondly,  we  are  taught  that  this  self-discipline  is  not  to  end  in 
itself.  It  is  the  means  to  something  beyond  it,  the  preparation  for  a  work  which 
could  not  be  done  successfully  without  it  ?  One  who  rested  in  the  first  half  of  the 
precept  might  satisfy  himself  by  a  simple  indifference  to  the  acts,  whether  good  or 
evil,  which  he  witnessed.  Silence  would  seem  an  adequate  fulfilment  of  it.  To 
check  the  expression  of  any  judgment  with  the  lips,  to  endeavour  to  suppress  even 
the  half-formed  judgment  of  the  mind,  to  pass  through  the  world  without  coming 
into  collision  with  its  selfishness  and  godlessness — this  would  be  to  such  a  man  the 
ideal  of  a  blameless  life.  He  might  easily  come  to  persuade  himself  that  this  was 
the  temper  of  the  true  Christian  charity  which  "  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all 
things,  and  believeth  all  things."  But  the  charity  which  Christ  requires — it  would 
be  truer  to  say,  the  charity  which  Christ  gives,  of  which  His  life  on  earth  was  the 
manifestation — is  the  very  opposite  of  all  this.  It  cannot  remain  neutral  in  the 
great  battle  between  good  and  evil,  between  the  armies  of  the  living  God  and  the 
lust  and  hatred  that  war  against  His  order.  It  burns,  as  with  a  consuming  fire, 
against  the  tyranny  and  wrong-doing  wherewith  one  man  works  misery  and  destruc- 
tion for  his  brothers,  against  the  worship  of  sensuous  lusts,  or  the  idolatry  of 
wealth,  which  lead  men  to  forget  the  honour  which  is  due  to  God.  Words  and  acts 
which  are  to  all  appearance  simply  indifferent,  light  things,  which  may  be  passed 
over — idle  words,  for  which  men  think  that  they  shall  not  have  to  render  an  account 
in  the  day  of  judgment — will  be  seen  by  those  whose  eyes  are  opened,  to  be  the  out- 
growths of  some  root  of  bitterness,  stifling  and  strangling  the  growth  of  the  good 
seed,  hindering  it  from  bringing  forth  any  fruit  to  perfection.  They  therefore  will,, 
of  all  men,  be  least  disposed  to  sit  still,  in  the  comfort  of  an  easy-going  Epicurean 
neutrality,  when  there  are  giant  evils  in  the  world  still  unchecked,  and  monstrous 
wrongs  still  unredressed.  They  will  least  allow  those,  the  souls  for  whom  Christ 
died  and  who  are  fellow-heirs  with  them  of  His  eternal  kingdom,  to  perish  for  lack 
of  knowledge  or  continue  in  their  blindness  till  they  sleep  the  sleep  of  death.  But 
then  they  will  have  learnt  to  contend  against  evil  and  falsehood,  without  judging 
the  doer  of  evil  or  him  who  is  the  slave  of  falsehood.  They  will  find  it  possible  to 
make  that  distinction  which  the  man  who  has  not  perceived  and  cast  out  the  mote  that 
was  in  his  own  eye  never  makes,  between  the  offence  which  must  be  condemned,  and, 
if  need  be,  punished,  and  the  offender  who  stands  at  Qod'u  judgment-seat  and  not  at 


68f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  ti. 

oan.  They  can  say,  "  The  thing  that  has  been  done  is  evil ;  the  man  who  has  dona 
it  has  thereby  made  himself  the  slave  of  evil,  and  brought  himself  into  darkness  and 
misery,  and  God  is  calling  us  to  help  him."  Conclusion  :  We  must  not  look,  either 
in  ourselves  or  in  others,  for  a  perfect  union  of  these  two  forms  of  charity.  This 
is  not  reached  at  once.  Even  he  who  is  earnestly  striving  after  it  will  make  mis- 
takes. But  he  will  not  forget  that  these  very  mistakes  form  a  part  of  the  education 
by  which  God  is  training  him  to  do  His  work  on  earth  more  effectually.  They  teach 
him  to  retrace  his  steps,  to  go  through  the  process  of  preparation  once  again,  once 
again  to  east  out  the  beam  that  is  in  his  own  eye  that  he  may  "  see  clearly  "  to  pull 
out  the  mote  that  is  in  his  brother's  eye.  They  tend  to  make  his  sympathy  with 
tbe  hearts  of  his  fellow-men  wider  and  deeper  than  it  was.  (•/.  S.  Hoare,  M.A.) 
The  mote  and  the  beam: — Morality  is  not  religion,  but  morality  and  religion  have  an 
organic  unity.  False  religions  sever  religion  and  morality.  Christ,  in  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount,  makes  moraUty  grow  out  of  religion.  We  are  to  be  kind  because  God 
is  kind  ;  ready  to  forgive  because  God  is  merciful ;  slow  to  judge  because  we  have 
a  Judge  whose  dealings  with  us  will  be  regulated  by  oar  dealings  with  others.  Let 
ns  now  say  something  of  the  caution  in  the  text,  reading  it  in  the  light  of  the  great 
truths  which  we  find  in  the  context.  I.  If  a  Christian  man  be  thoroughly  pene- 
trated witli  the  truth  respecting  his  own  relations,  and  those  of  other  men,  to  God 
it  is  quite  certain  that  jtudgino  and  bepboving  oihebs  will  be  a  wobe  which,  so 
FAB  AS  MAT  BB,  HB  WILL  DECLINE.  And  this  for  two  rsasous :  1.  Because  he  doubts 
his  own  knowledge  of  other  men ;  and — 2.  Because  he  doubts  the  strength  of  his  own 
sympathy.  II.  But  now,  besides  these  thoughts,  there  is  the  most  conclusive 
thought  of  all — ouB  own  demerit  :  our  lying  open  ourselves  to  God's  judgment 
AND  to  man's.  The  case  which  the  Saviour  here  points  to  is  not  simply  that  of  one 
judging  another,  who  is  himself  an  evil-doer,  but  the  case  of  one  judging  another 
whose  sin  is  to  that  of  the  person  he  censures  as  the  beam  to  the  mote.  When  we 
are  wrong-doers  ourselves,  and  when  we  see  our  own  acts  under  the  colouring  lights 
of  self-love ;  when  we  review  them  vnth  the  help  of  all  the  apologies  and  extenua- 
tions which  we  are  able  to  devise,  and  then  turn  to  other  persons'  acts,  all  these 
lights  being  withdrawn,  and  criticise  them  in  a  clear,  cold,  and  speculative  way,  or, 
even  worse,  under  the  influence  of  anger,  or  jealousy,  or  prejudice,  is  it  not  quite 
certain  that  we  shall  think  less  of  the  beam  in  our  own  eye  than  of  the  mote  in  our 
brother's  eye?  {J.  A.  Jacob,  M.A.)  The  splinter  and  the  beam: — This  metaphor 
in  frequent  use  among  the  Jews.  Thus,  for  instance,  Rabbi  Tarphon,  when  lamenting 
tbe  impatience  of  correction  which  marked  his  time,  complains  that  if  any  one  said 
to  his  neighbour,  "  Cast  out  this  or  that  straw  from  thine  eye,"  the  response  was 
sure  to  be,  '*  Cast  out  the  beam  from  thine  own  eye."  The  good  man,  being  one  of 
those  just  persons  who  need  no  repentance,  never  dreamt  that  there  was  a  beam  in 
his  eye,  and  that  therefore  the  retort  was  perfectly  fair.  The  Lord  Jesus  adopted 
the  Hebrew  metaphor,  but  not  in  the  Hebrew  spirit.  On  His  lips  it  does  not  justify, 
but  censures,  those  who  assumed  to  judge  and  rebuke  their  brethren.  1.  If  we  are 
BO  quick  to  see  straws  in  the  eyes  of  our  neighbours  that  we  can  hardly  look  into 
any  face  without  detecting  one,  the  probability  is  that  we  carry  a  beam  in  our  own 
eye  of  which  we  greatly  need  to  be  rid.  2.  The  Lord  Jesus  says  that  we  are  hypo- 
crites, if,  with  a  beam  jutting  from  our  own  eye,  we  say  to  our  brother,  "  Let  me  pull 
out  the  splinter  from  thine  eye."  Is  it  hypocritical,  then,  to  do  a  kindness,  and  to 
offer  help,  when  we  ourselves  stand  in  need  of  help  ?  By  no  means.  But  whileour 
words  mean,  '•  0  it  is  very  wrong  to  suffer  tbe  smallest  speck  to  remain  in  the  eye  " ; 
our  conduct  means,  "  There  is  no  great  harm  in  letting  even  a  beam  remain  in  it." 
That  is  to  say,  we  are  hypocrites ;  we  talk  one  thing  and  act  another.  If  the  sinner 
rebuke  sin,  who  will  listen?  If  the  sinner,  while  rebuking  sin,  affect  a  righteous 
,austerity  and  assume  to  be  innocent  of  transgression,  who  will  not  scorn  both  him 
and  his  rebuke?  3.  But  here  we  touch  on  a  question  of  grave  practical  moment: 
*•  Are  only  the  holy  to  open  their  mouth  against  sin  ?  "  When  Miss  Nightingale  went 
about  among  the  sick  soldiers  of  the  Crimean  hospitals,  there  was  no  need  ro  rebuke 
them  for  profane  language  or  obscene  jests,  although  these  were  familiar  to  many  of 
their  lips.  They  felt  they  could  not  utter  them  in  a  presence  so  kind  and  pure. 
Many  of  them,  we  are  told,  folded  their  hands  as  if  in  prayer  while  she  passed  by. 
Do  you  imagine  that  when  she  spoke  to  a  man,  if  she  ever  did,  of  his  faults  and 
eins,  he  felt  that  she  had  no  right  to  speak,  that  she  was  a  hypocrite  for  her  pains  J 
But  why  not  ?  Simply  because,  as  they  looked  up  into  that  pure,  single  eye,  they 
could  see  the  splinters  in  their  own,  and  grew  ashamed  of  them-  See  what  force 
«  holy  character  gives  to  rebuke  I    4,  From  this  man  with  a  beam  in  his  eye 


CHAP.  VI.]  8T.  LUKE,  633 

we  may  learn  at  least  what  to  avoid.  What  are  his  faults  ?  (1)  He  does  not  know 
that  the  beam  is  there.  (2)  Because  he  is  not  conscious  of  the  beam  in  his  own  eye, 
he  assumes  airs  of  moral  superiority,  and  carries  himself  like  a  judge  instead  of  a 
brother.  Put  these  two  pictures  side  by  side,  and  you  will  not  doubt  from  which  of 
them  we  should  draw  our  inspiration.  There  goes  a  judge,  immaculate  in  his  own 
conceit ;  he  stares  with  cold  rebuke  at  the  splinters  which  deform  all  eyes  but  his,  and 
condemns  in  others  faults  not  comparable  to  the  crimes  with  which  he  pollutes  the 
judgment-seat.  And  here  come  two  brothers ;  and  as  they  fall  on  each  other's  neck, 
they  cry,  ••  Ah,  brother,  I  see  you  are  troubled  with  the  very  straws  and  splinter* 
which  afflict  me  I  help  me,  and  let  me  help  you,  that  we  may  both  be  quit  of  them." 
6.  Is  not  this  parable  true  to  our  experience  of  life  ?  It  is  against  the  unconscious 
eelf- assumption  so  prevalent  among  us  that  our  Lord  warns  us  in  this  parable.  (S, 
Cox,  D.D.)  An  eye  with  a  beam,  and  an  eye  for  a  mote: — It  takes  a  long  time  ta 
learn  by  heart  so  as  to  take  to  heart  Archbishop  Whately's  maxim,  that  ten  thou- 
land  of  the  greatest  faults  in  our  neighbours  are  of  less  consequence  to  us  than  one 
of  the  smallest  in  ourselves.  Elsewhere  he  says,  •'  Never  is  the  mind  less  fitted  for 
self-examination  than  when  most  occupied  in  detecting  the  faults  of  others."  Have 
you  never,  asks  Ellesmere,  found  the  critic  disclose  four  errors  on  his  own  part  for 
one  he  delights  to  point  out  in  the  sayings  or  doings  of  the  persons  he  criticizes  ? 
Shakespeare's  Biron  claims  the  right  to  ask  his  companions,  noble  and  royal  alike, 
Dumain,  Longueville,  and  the  King  of  Navarre,  addressing  iheax  singly  and 
collectively : — 

"  But  are  yon  not  ashamed  ?  nay,  are  yon  not. 
All  three  of  you,  to  be  thus  much  o'ershot? 
You  found  his  mote ;  the  king  your  mote  did  see, 
But  I  a  beam  do  find  in  each  of  three." 

^Hio,  ezeUdmB  Juvenal,  can  stand  hearing  the  Gracchi  oomplaining  of  sedition  t 

"  0  wad  some  pow'r  the  giftie  gie  as 
To  see  oursels  as  ithers  see  as  1 " 

For  that,  inresnmably,  woold  from  many  a  blander  free  as,  and  f ooliah  aotioa— 

**  We,  who  Burroand  a  common  table, 
And  imitate  the  fashionable, 
Wear  each  two  eye-glasses :  this  lens 
Shows  us  our  faults,  that  other  men's. 
We  do  not  care  how  dim  may  be 
This  by  whose  aid  our  own  we  see ; 
But,  ever  anxiously  alert 
That  all  may  have  their  whole  desert, 
We  would  melt  down  the  stars  and  san 
In  onr  heart's  furnace,  to  make  one 
Through  which  th'  enlightened  world  might  spj 
A  mote  apon  a  brother's  eye."  {F,  Jaeom.) 

Atnon§  sins,  which  are  motes  and  which  are  beams  f-'—We  are  apt  to  answer  saoh  a 
question  according  to  onr  taste,  and  our  habits ;  the  motes  being  the  sins  we  '*  axa 
inclined  to,"  the  beams  those  "  we  have  no  mind  to."  To  one  the  mote  iscovetons* 
ness,  and  the  beam  the  drinking  of  a  glass  of  wine  or  the  smoking  of  a  cigar.  To 
another  the  mote  is  sharp  practice  in  business  and  the  beam  taking  a  walk  on  a 
Sunday.  To  a  third  the  mote  is  spending  the  evening  in  scandalising  one's  neigh< 
bonrs  all  round,  and  the  beam  spending  it  at  whist.  To  a  fourth  the  mote  is 
behaving  like  a  bear  or  any  other  brute  in  his  own  house,  and  the  beam  any  offence 
against  good  manners  in  his  neighbour's  house.  To  a  fifth  the  mote  is  swindling 
to  the  extent  of  £100,000,  and  the  beam  the  neglect  of  family  prayer.  To  a  sixth 
the  mote  is  theft,  and  the  beam  the  being  found  out  and  exposed.  To  a  seventh  the 
mote  is  fraudulent  bankruptcy,  and  the  beam  unsound  views  about  original  sin. 
And  so  we  might  go  on,  and  show  that,  in  our  judgment,  the  mote  and  the  beam 
often  take  each  other's  places,  the  less  sin  being  accounted  the  greater,  and  the 
greater  the  less.  Now  when  we  try  to  learn  what  Jesus  meant  by  the  mote  and  what 
by  the  beam,  we  arrive  at  this  result — that  the  sins  of  the  publicans  and  sinners^ 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tu 

who  knew  no  better,  their  drunkenness,  their  lewdness,  their  Sabbath-breaking, 
their  profaneness,  their  disregard  for  all  religion  and  all  morality,  were,  in  Hia 
estimation,  as  motes  compared  with  the  sins  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  who  laid 
claim  to  much  goodness,  and  yet  were  covetous,  unjust,  and  extortionate  under 
the  cover  of  a  religious  profession.  Their  sins  were  beams,  and  the  beam  of  beams 
was  hypocrisy.  There  was  no  open  and  avowed  sin  that  our  Lord  seems  to  have 
detested  so  much  as  a  false  profession  of  religion.  And  it  were  well  for  us  to  bear 
this  in  mind,  so  that  we  may  have  a  just  idea  of  the  greater  and  lesser  sins, 
and  so  neither  deceive  ourselves,  nor  too  severely  judge  our  neighbour,  whose 
Bin  may  be  to  our  own  no  more  than  the  smallest  splinter  of  a  lucifer-match 
in  comparison  with  a  tree  fit  to  make  the  mast  of  a  ship,  {H.  S.  Brown.) 
Correcting  others^  faults : — If  it  was  out  of  place  to  set  up  as  the  censurer  of  your 
brother's  mote  when  your  own  faults  were  to  his  as  a  plank  to  a  splinter,  it  is  surely 
still  more  out  of  place  to  set  yourself  up  for  his  corrector.  The  comparison  sounds 
extravagant;  siuce,  though  minute  fragments  from  a  twig  may  get  into  the  eye 
and  need  to  be  taken  out,  to  speak  of  a  great  beam  of  timber  in  the  same  connec- 
tion is  absurd.  The  extravagance  of  the  phrase,  however,  did  not  hinder  its  being 
a  usual  and  accepted  one  in  oriental  speech  ;  and  as  such  our  Lord  borrowed  it  to 
point  His  moral.  What  that  moral  is,  is  plain  enough.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  in 
a  preposterous  degree  unbecoming  to  be  so  quick  to  see,  much  more  to  propose  to 
mend,  small  faults  in  another  when  one's  own  are  so  very  great.  It  is,  as  we  say, 
like  "  Satan  reproving  sin."  Besides,  it  is  not  only  a  grotesque  betrayal  of  self- 
ignorance,  but  a  presumptuous  over-estimate  of  one's  own  ability.  To  mend  a 
brother's  fault,  one  has  need  of  a  most  clear  and  undistorted  spiritual  vision,  an 
eye  of  the  soul  quite  single  and  limpid.  No  task  asks  cleaner  motives,  a  truer 
insight,  or  more  of  that  perfect  fairness  which  can  only  spring  from  love,  than  this 
task  of  a  reformer  of  manners.  But  there  is  more  to  be  said  than  this.  The  inter- 
ference  of  such  blind  guides  and  ignorant  teachers  is  worse  than  a  blunder.  It  is 
an  hypocrisy.  You  profess  to  be  so  deeply  concerned  for  the  faults  of  your  neigh- 
bour, that  you  would  fain  do  him  a  service  by  ridding  him  of  them  :  you  are  ardent 
in  the  interest  of  his  reformation,  a  self-constituted  preacher  of  righteousness. 
That  looks  well.  But  if  it  were  really  concern  for  the  correction  of  evil  and  the 
cure  of  souls  which  inspired  this  officious  zeal  of  yours,  would  it  not  show  itself 
first  of  all  in  the  reformation  of  yourself  ?  A  very  little  honest  desire  to  have  God's 
kingdom  come  and  His  will  done  would  suffice  to  reveal  to  yourself  how  much  more 
shameful  and  painful  your  own  moral  disorders  are  than  any  you  propose  to 
remedy ;  and  in  the  hard  task  of  casting  out  your  own  huge  sins  of  heart,  you 
wonld  find  work  enough  to  keep  your  hands  full.  The  tu  quoque  rejoinder, 
•*  Physician,  heal  thyself,"  is  in  its  place  here.  "  First  cast  out  the  beam."  This 
Very  officiousness  in  well-doing,  this  arrogant  setting  up  as  a  corrector  of  morals, 
this  immodest  and  loveless  meddling  with  your  neighbours — what  is  it  but  a  sign 
how  pride  has  made  you  stone-blind,  and  a  proof  that  it  is  not  the  sympathy  of  a 
penitent  which  inspires  you,  but  the  conceit  of  a  fault-finder?  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.) 
Fault-finding  reproved : — Why  will  you  search  another  man's  wound  while  your  own 
is  bleeding  ?  Take  heed  that  your  own  vesture  be  not  full  of  dust,  when  you  are 
brushing  your  neighbour's.  Complain  not  of  dirty  streets,  when  heaps  lie  at  your 
own  doors.  Many  people  are  no  longer  well  than  while  they  are  holding  their 
fingers  upon  another  person's  sores  :  such  are  no  better  in  their  conduct  than  crows, 
which  prey  only  upon  carrion.  (Archbishop  Seeker.)  Beholding  others'  faults  : — 
A  wise  heathen  said,  "Every  man  carries  two  wallets  with  him,  hanging  the  one 
before  and  the  other  behind  him.  Into  that  before,  he  puts  the  faults  of  others ; 
into  that  behind,  he  puts  his  own.  By  this  means  he  never  sees  his  own  failings, 
while  he  has  those  of  others  always  before  him."  Ignoring  the  "  Beam  " ; — I 
recollect  firing  a  shot  once  with  much  greater  success  than  I  knew  of.  A  certain 
person  had  frequently  said  to  me  that  I  had  been  the  subject  of  her  earnest  prayers 
lest  I  should  be  exalted  above  measure,  for  she  could  see  my  danger ;  and  after 
having  heard  this  so  many  times  that  I  really  knew  it  by  heart,  I  just  made  the 
remark,  that  I  thought  it  would  be  my  duty  to  pray  for  her  too,  lest  she  should  be 
exalted  above  measure.  I  was  greatly  amused  when  this  answer  came,  "  I  have  no 
temptation  to  be  proud ;  my  experience  is  such  that  I  am  in  no  danger  whatever 
of  being  puffed  up  "  ;  not  knowing  that  her  Uttle  speech  was  about  the  proudest  state- 
ment that  could  have  been  made,  and  that  everybody  else  thought  her  to  be  the 
most  officious  and  haughty  person  within  ten  miles.  Why,  do  not  you  beHeve  there 
may  be  as  much  pride  in  rags  as  in  an  alderman's  gown  t    Is  it  not  just  as  possible 


«BAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  635 

for  a  man  to  be  prond  in  a  dust  cart,  as  if  he  rode  in  her  Majesty's  chariot?  A  man 
maj  be  just  as  proud  with  half  a  yard  of  ground  as  Alexander  with  all  his  king- 
doms, and  may  be  just  as  lifted  up  with  a  few  pence  as  Croesus  with  all  his  treasure. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Self-reformation  the  most  effective: — That  earnest-minded 
man,  Legh  Richmond,  was  passing  once  through  Stockport,  at  a  time  when 
political  strifes  disturbed  the  country.  In  consequence  of  his  lameness,  he  waa 
never  able  to  walk  far  without  resting.  He  was  leaning  on  his  stick  and  looking 
about  him,  when  a  poor  fellow  ran  up  to  him,  and  offering  his  hand,  inquired  with 
considerable  earnestness,  "  Sir,  are  you  a  radical  ?  "  "  Yes,  my  friend,"  answered 
Mr.  Richmond,  "  I  am  a  radical ;  a  thorough  radical."  "  Then  give  me  your 
hand,"  said  the  man.  "  Stop,  sir,  stop,"  replied  Legh  Richmond,  "  I  must  ex- 
plain myself  :  we  all  need  a  radical  reformation  ;  our  hearts  are  full  of  disorders — 
the  root  and  principle  within  is  altogether  corrupt.  Let  you  and  me  mend  matters 
there,  and  then  all  will  be  well,  and  we  shall  cease  to  complain  of  the  times  and 
government."  "Right,  sir,"  answered  the  radical,  "you  are  right,"  and  bowing, 
retired.  (Sword  and  Trowel.)  Goodness  esfit'ntial  to  the  true  reformer: — How 
bitter  is  the  wail  of  the  mighty  Mirabeau,  "  If  I  had  but  character,  if  I  had  but 
been  a  good  man,  if  I  had  not  degraded  my  life  by  sensuality,  and  my  youth  by  evil 
passions,  I  could  have  saved  France."  Many  a  man  has  felt  the  same  ;  he  has 
clipped  his  own  wings,  he  has  suffered  to  be  shorn  away  the  sunny  locks  of  the 
Nazarite  who  once  lay  weeping  upon  his  shoulders,  and  wherein  would  have  lain 
his  strength.  He  has  wounded  himself,  and  even  when  the  wound  is  healed,  the 
fearful  scar  remains.  But  if,  while  he  is  himself  still  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and 
bond  of  iniquity,  he  essays  to  amend  the  morals  of  the  world,  he  will  either  dis- 
grace and  weaken  his  own  cause,  or  the  good  he  does  in  one  direction  will  be  more 
than  undone  by  the  evil  he  is  doing  in  another.  To  such  a  one,  shaming  him, 
warning  him  that  they  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  must  themselves  be 
clean,  come  the  stern  words  of  Christ — "  First  cast  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye, 
and  then  shalt  thou  see  clearly  to  take  out  the  mote  which  is  in  thy  brother's  eye." 
{Archdeacon  Farrar.) 

Vers.  43,  44.  For  a  good  tree  brlngeth  not  forth  corrupt  fruit ;  neither  a  corrupt 
tree  bringeth  forth  good  finiit. — Good  works  the  evidence  of  new  creation: — We 
cannot  perform  any  good  works,  unless  we  are  created  unto  them  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
and  hence  that  creation  in  Christ  Jesus  cannot  be  anywise  the  effect  or  consequence 
of  our  good  works  :  we  were  saved,  as  the  apostle  tells  us,  by  grace,  when  we  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  But  if  we  are  indeed  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus, 
our  good  works  must  follow,  as  a  necessary,  certain,  irrepressible  result.  They  are 
the  only  evidence  of  that  creation  to  others  :  and  they  are  no  less  indispensable  to 
ourselves,  to  certify  us  of  its  reality.  If  we  do  not  bring  forth  good  works,  we  ought 
to  be  convinced  that  we  cannot  have  been  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  in  one 
way  or  other  the  process  of  our  regeneration  has  been  marred.  Good  works  are  the 
mark,  the  proof,  the  evidence  of  Christian  life ;  they  are  the  badge  of  a  Christian 
community ;  and  they  are  the  means  through  which  the  members  of  that  commu- 
nity are  bound  together,  and  the  Christian  life  is  brought  to  pervade  them  all. 
When  they  are  scanty,  the  Christian  life  must  be  feeble ;  when  they  are  totally 
wanting,  whether  in  an  individual  or  a  community,  the  Christian  life  must  be  all 
but  extinct.  They  are  the  evidences  of  the  Christian  life,  and  they  are  also  the 
means  of  growing  in  it ;  for  it  is  by  exercise,  by  action,  that  every  living  principle 
18  strengthened.  This  is  no  way  at  variance  with  the  assertion  that  the  Christian 
life  is  not  the  effect  of  our  good  works.  The  primary  creative  cause  is,  in  all 
instances  except  the  highest,  distinct  from  the  highest  nutritive  causes.  The 
bread  which  feeds  will  not  beget  a  man.  By  study  we  do  not  acquire  the  power  of 
knowing ;  but  we  improve  and  increase  that  power,  and  may  do  so  almost  indefi- 
nitely. By  practising  any  art — be  it  music,  or  painting,  or  statuary — we  do  not 
acquire  that  particular  faculty  of  the  mind  which  fits  a  man  for  becoming  a  musi- 
cian, or  a  painter,  or  a  sculptor,  any  more  than  we  acquire  our  eyes  by  seeing : 
indeed,  if  a  man  has  not  that  faculty  already  within  him,  no  teaching  or  practising 
will  draw  it  out  of  him  ;  but  when  he  has  it,  practice  will  greatly  sharpen  and 
better  it.  Such,  too,  is  the  case  with  the  Christian  hfe.  It  is  not  created  by  oar 
good  works,  but  is  to  be  fostered  and  nourished  by  them,  and  may  be  so  to  a  wonderful 
extent,  if  we  always  bear  in  mind  how  it  originated,  and  are  careful  to  have  it  re- 
plenished from  its  only  source  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  without  them  it  will  pine 
and  die.    Indeed,  in  this  instance  we  have  the  special  assurance :  "  To  him  who 


686  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

hath  shall  be  given,"  &c.  {J.  C.  Hare.)  A  new  nature  needed  to  produce  good 
fruit : — Without  a  change  of  nature,  men's  practice  will  not  be  thoroughly  changed. 
Until  the  tree  be  made  good,  the  fruit  will  not  be  good.  Men  do  not  gather  grapes 
of  thorns,  nor  figs  of  thistles.  The  swine  may  be  washed,  and  appear  clean  for  a 
little  while,  but  yet,  without  a  change  of  nature,  he  will  still  wallow  in  the  mire. 
Nature  is  a  more  powerful  principle  of  action  than  anything  that  opposes  it : 
though  it  may  be  violently  restrained  for  a  while,  it  will  finally  overcome  that 
which  restrains  it.  It  is  like  the  stream  of  a  river,  it  may  be  stopped  for  a  while 
with  a  dam,  but  if  nothing  be  done  to  dry  the  fountain,  it  will  not  be  stopped 
always ;  it  will  have  a  course,  either  in  its  old  channel,  or  a  new  one.  Nature  is  a 
thing  more  constant  and  permanent  than  any  of  those  things  that  are  the  founda> 
tion  of  carnal  men's  reformation  and  righteousness.  When  a  natural  man  denies 
his  lust,  lives  a  strict,  religious  life,  and  seems  humble,  painful,  and  earnest  in 
religion,  it  is  not  natural,  it  is  all  a  force  against  nature  ;  as  when  a  stone  is 
violently  thrown  upwards.  But  that  force  will  be  gradually  spent ;  nature  will  remain 
in  its  full  strength,  and  so  prevails  again,  and  the  stone  returns  to  the  earth. 
As  long  as  corrupt  nature  is  not  mortified,  but  the  principle  left  whole  in  a  man,  it 
is  a  vain  thing  to  expect  that  it  should  not  govern.  But  if  the  old  nature  be  iudeed 
mortified,  and  a  new  heavenly  nature  infused,  then  may  it  well  be  expected  that 
men  will  walk  in  newness  of  life,  and  continue  to  do  so  to  the  end  of  their  days. 
(Jonathan  Edwards.)  Reformation  must  begin  at  the  heart : — If  we  desire  a  true 
reformation,  let  us  begin  on  reforming  our  hearts  and  lives,  in  keeping  Christ's 
commandments.  All  outward  forms  and  models  of  reformation,  though  they  be 
never  so  good  in  their  kind,  yet  they  are  of  little  worth  to  us  without  this  inward 
reformation  of  the  heart.  Tin,  or  lead,  or  any  baser  metal,  if  it  be  cast  into  never 
80  good  a  mould  and  made  up  into  never  so  elegant  a  figure,  yet  it  is  but  tin  or  lead 
still ;  it  is  the  same  metal  that  it  was  before.  If  adulterate  silver,  that  has  much  alloy 
or  dross  in  it,  have  never  so  current  a  stamp  put  upon  it,  yet  it  will  not  pass  when 
the  touchstone  tries  it.  We  must  be  reformed  within,  with  a  spirit  of  6xe  and  a 
spirit  of  burning,  to  purge  us  from  the  dross  and  corruption  of  our  hearts,  and 
refine  us  as  gold  and  silver,  and  then  we  shall  be  reformed  truly,  and  not  before. 
(R.  Cudworth,  D.D.)  Underlying  element  of  moral  character : — Moral  character 
is — 1.  Man's  only  real  property.  2.  The  only  measure  of  man's  real  worth.  3.  The 
only  earthly  product  man  will  bear  to  another  world.  4.  The  source  whence  springs 
lasting  weal  or  woe.  I.  It  is  a  vital  source  of  action.  II.  It  is  either  radically 
corrupt  or  good.  III.  When  corrupt,  generally  disguised.  IV.  When  disguised, 
may,  and  should  be  detected.  (Dr.  Thomas.)  Religion  seen  inprinciple  before  it 
appears  in  conduct : — When  the  Sidonians  were  once  going  to  choose  a  king,  they 
determined  that  their  election  should  fall  upon  the  man  who  should  first  see  the 
Bun  on  the  following  morning.  All  the  candidates,  towards  the  hour  of  sunrise, 
eagerly  looked  towards  the  east,  but  one,  to  the  astonishment  of  his  countrymen, 
fixed  his  eyes  pertiaaciously  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  horizon,  where  he  saw  the 
reflection  of  the  sun's  rays  before  the  orb  itself  was  seen  by  those  looking  towards 
the  east.  The  choice  instantly  fell  on  him  who  had  seen  the  reflection  of  the 
Bun ;  and  by  the  same  reasoning,  the  influence  of  religion  on  the  heart  is  frequently 
perceptible  in  the  conduct,  even  before  a  person  has  made  direct  profession  of 
the  principle  by  which  he  is  actuated.  False  reputation  of  trees  : — The  upas 
tree  once  had  a  bad  name,  as  its  leaves  were  supposed  to  exhale  a  poison,  which, 
spreading  over  a  wide  region,  was  fatal  to  man  and  beast.  But  scientific  investiga- 
tion has  shown  that  the  tree  is  harmless,  and  that  its  reputation  is  due  to  its  grow- 
ing in  a  bad  neighbourhood.  The  tree  grows  in  volcanic  valleys  in  Java,  which  are 
noted  for  their  desolation.  It  is  the  only  green  thing  in  a  region  where  death 
seems  to  reign.  But  the  fatal  poison  comes  not  from  the  tree,  but  from  the 
gases  of  the  volcano,  amid  which  the  upas  thrives  though  all  other  vegetable 
forms  perish.  Another  tree,  the  Eucalyptus,  has  enjoyed  undue  credit,  as  the 
upas  has  suffered  undue  odium.  This  tree  was  said  to  exhale  from  its  leaves 
healthful  influences,  which  made  it  an  antidote  to  many  forms  of  malaria.  It  belongs 
to  Australia,  and  it  was  noticed  that  in  its  neighbourhood  malarial  fevers  were  un- 
known. This  fact  caused  it  to  be  planted  in  some  of  the  worst  malarial  districts 
of  Italy,  and  there,  too,  fevers  gradually  disappeared.  The  inference  seemed  inevi- 
table that  its  foliage  exerted  some  occult,  influence  which  prevented  malaria.  But 
science,  by  careful  examination^,  explains  the  mystery  in  a  new  way.  The  tree  is 
Buch  a  great  absorbent  of  water  that  its  roots  easily  drain  marshy  land.  It  destroys 
malaria,  not  by  giving  out  healthful  influences,  but  by  absorbing  the  moisture  which 


eHAJP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  6S7 

creates  the  disease.  It  is  believed  that  the  terrible  Gampagna  of  Borne  can  be  made 
healthy  by  the  draining  power  of  the  Eucalyptus.  Judging  by  the  fruits : — A 
young  man  of  considerable  gifts  was  introduced  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  in  the 
revival  of  1859,  and  became  an  occasioual  preacher  or  exhorter  at  the  meetings. 
When  he  went  to  study  in  Edinburgh  he  parted  with  all  his  old  beliefs  one  by  one, 
and  ultimately  embraced  Pantheism.  For  several  years  he  lived  a  blameless  Ufa 
morally,  but  an  utterly  blank  life  spiritually,  having  no  hope  and  without  God  in 
the  world.  He  went  out  to  India,  where  the  unnameable  horrors  of  heathenism 
had  the  extraordinary  effect  of  convincing  him  that  Christianity  must  be  true,  and 
could  be  the  only  hope  of  the  world.  Meekly  and  humbly  he  began  to  seek  a  true 
knowledge  of  God,  and  in  due  course  entered  into  the  family  circle  of  the  children 
of  God.     {A.  Craig.)  Christianittfs  fruits  Divine  fruits: — The  subject  of  my 

lecture  this  evening  is.  The  truth  of  Christianity  proved  by  its  fruits.  I.  I  begin, 
then,  by  showing  what  effect  Christianity  has  hab  on  liberty.  What  was  the 
state  of  matters  in  regard  to  Uberty  in  the  Roman  Empire  in  tbe  days  of  the  apostles  ? 
When  we  look  at  Roman  society,  we  Ree  that  there  was  no  recognition  of  indi- 
vidual hberty  as  a  natural  right,  and  that  a  most  debasing  slavery  had  obtained 
gigantic  proportions.  In  the  city  of  Rome  there  was  a  population  of  1,610,000, 
and  of  that  number  900,000  were  slaves  :  that  is  to  say,  that  of  every  five  persona 
in  the  capital  three  were  slaves.  And  if  we  take  the  whole  of  the  empire,  then 
Gibbon's  deliberate  opinion  is  that  "  the  slaves  were  at  least  equal  in  number  to 
the  free  inhabitants  of  the  Roman  world  "  ;  and  the  entire  population  he  estimates 
at  120,000,000  ;  so  that  there  were,  as  stated  in  a  previous  lecture,  60,000,000  slaves. 
Their  numbers  were  recruited,  not  wholly,  indeed,  but  largely  from  war.  The 
Romans  made  slaves  of  those  whom  they  captured.  And  how  were  they  treated  ? 
In  its  mildest  form,  slavery  is  a  galling  burden;  but  Roman  slavery  was  noted  for 
its  cruelty.  The  slaves  were  the  absolute  property  of  their  mastiir.  He  could  treat 
them  as  he  chose,  so  that,  as  it  has  been  said,  "  a  dog  with  us  has  more  rights  than 
a  Roman  slave  had."  Tholuck,  in  his  work  on  the  "  Nature  and  Moral  Influence 
of  Heathenism,"  gives  the  following  description  of  their  treatment:  **A  scanty 
and  disgusting  dress,  and  dog-skin  cap,  distinguished  them  from  all  the  rest  of  the 
inhabitants.  Those  who  were  too  strong  had  to  be  weakened  by  various  kinds  of 
ill-treatment ;  and  if  the  masters  did  not  do  this,  they  became  themselves  liable  to 
a  penalty.  Every  slave  received  annually  a  certain  number  of  stripes  to  remind 
him  that  he  was  a  slave.  Hymns  of  a  nobler  kind  they  were  not  allowed  to  sing, 
but  only  gay  and  sensual  songs.  To  complete  their  degradation,  they  were  some- 
times compelled  to  sing  songs  in  disgrace  and  ridicule  of  themselves  ;  and  to  the 
same  purpose  they  were  also  compelled  to  perform  indecent  dances.  In  order  to 
make  the  sons  of  the  Spartans  loathe  the  vice  of  drunkenness,  the  slaves  were  com- 
pelled to  intoxicate  themselves  in  public  assemblies.  When  they  became  too  nu- 
merous, they  were  murdered  clandestinely ;  every  year  at  a  certain  period  the  young 
Spartans,  clad  in  armour,  used  to  hunt  them,  and  to  prevent  their  increase  they 
were  killed  with  daggers."  Christianity  is  thus  in  its  very  essence  hostile  to 
slavery ;  and  this  was  one  reason  why  the  educated  heathen  opposed  it  so  bitterly. 
But  this  was  what  it  did  ;  and  hence  the  social  change  it  accomplished.  It  under- 
mined and  threw  down  this  monster  evil  of  Roman  slavery.  As  early  as  the  time 
of  Trajan,  a.d.  98-117,  one  Hermes,  who  had  embraced  Christianity,  liberated  1250 
of  his  slaves ;  and  even  under  Domitian,  who  reigned  before  him,  a.d.  81-96,  a 
prefect  of  Rome,  called  Cromacius,  "liberated  1400  slaves,  who  had  been  baptized, 
and  said  unto  them  :  '  Those  who  begin  to  be  the  children  of  God  ought  no  longer 
to  be  the  slaves  of  men,' "  That  was  the  way  in  which  it  began  to  work,  and  as 
the  gospel  leaven  widened  its  area,  slavery  disappeared.  Through  their  contact 
with  the  Mahommedans  in  the  fifteenth  century,  the  Portuguese  began  to  traffic  in 
negro  slaves ;  and  you  know  to  what  the  traffic  grew,  how  it  spread  over  the 
colonies,  and  continued  to  hold  its  ground  in  spite  of  Christian  influence.  But  the 
gospel  has  also  proved  itself  victorious  here.  It  was  through  the  power  of 
Christian  principle  that  Great  Britain,  at  a  vast  pecuniary  sacrifice,  washed  her 
hands  of  all  complicity  with  the  evil  in  her  colonies.  II.  I  next  proceed  to  show 
WHAT  EFFECT  CHRISTIANITY  HAS  HAD  ON  LABOUR.  But  let  US  See  what  change 
Christianity  has  wrought  on  the  industrial  life.  It  gave  no  countenance  to  the 
old  Roman  idea  that  labour  was  unbecoming  a  free  man.  To  labour  was  in  a  sense 
to  pray  ;  work  was  worship.  And  its  civilizing  power  is  especially  striking  when 
we  look  at  what  it  has  wrought  in  our  own  time  in  heathen  lands.  When  Chris- 
tianity has  been  fairly  rooted  in  heathen  soil,  its  inhabitants  are  lifted  up  to  tb* 


•88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohajp.  ti, 

plane  of  a  new  and  civilized  life.  They  begin  to  clothe  themselves,  to  build  proper 
houses,  to  cultivate  the  land,  and  to  develop  all  its  resources.  This  is  the  eSect  of 
their  new  belief ;  this  is  one  practical  shape  which  Christianity  takes  in  them, 
when  it  has  been  received  in  the  love  of  it.  And  so  commerce  has  followed  in  the 
wake  of  the  missionary  enterprise.  Some  have  spoken  contemptuously  of  the  ex- 
penditure on  Christian  missions,  as  if  it  were  a  waste  of  money.  But  I  hold  that, 
even  on  the  low  ground  of  purely  worldly  profit,  they  pay  themselves  many  times 
over  in  commercial  gain,  and  I  adduce  the  following  facts  in  proof : — The  Basutos 
in  South  Africa  are  now  beginning  to  dress  decently,  to  cultivate  the  land,  and 
to  build  proper  villages,  and  they  have  created  a  traffic  of  £150,000  a  year.  And 
every  year  English  goods  find  their  way  to  Kuruman  to  the  value  of  £75,000, 
where,  according  to  Dr.  Moffat,  scarcely  a  pockethandkerchief,  or  string  of  beads, 
or  other  trifle  was  bought.  In  Samoa,  in  the  Pacific,  where  the  people  have  nearly 
all  become  Christians,  the  imports  reach  the  value  of  £50,000  and  the  exports 
£100,000,  and  all  this  within  fifty  years.  Before  that  time  there  was  almost  no  trade 
with  the  island.  An  American  clergyman  has  calculated,  on  the  ground  of  statistical 
data,  that  the  traffic  originated  by  means  of  the  mission  repays  tenfold  the  capital  ex- 
pended. But  can  we  not  give  the  heathen  our  civilization  without  our  Christianity  ? 
I  most  emphatically  answer.  No  ;  for,  as  it  has  been  well  said,  "  no  nation  can  ap- 
propriate the  fruits  of  Christian  civilization  apart  from  its  roots. "  III.  The  next 
point  with  which  I  propose  to  deal  is  the  influence  op  Cheistianity  on  familt 
iiND  SOCIAL  LIFE.  But  let  US  now  turn  to  the  marvellous  and  beneficent  change 
effected  by  Christianity.  It  has  lifted  up  woman,  and  made  her,  as  a  moral  and 
spiritual  being,  man's  equal  in  privilege.  Home  life  under  the  influence  of  Chris- 
tianity became  a  new  thing,  nobler  than  what  had  ever  existed  under  heathenism. 
Moreover,  Christianity  defined  and  hallowed  the  relations  of  parents  and  children. 
And  in  confirmation  of  this,  I  would  adduce  one  or  two  facts  from  the  records  of 
modern  missions  in  savage  lands.  "In  the  Polynesian  Islands,"  says  Dr.  War- 
neck,  "  Christianity  has  the  undeniable  merit — that  it  has  suppressed  cannibalism, 
human  sacrifice,  and  child  murder,  ameliorated  the  family  life,  restrained  drunken- 
ness, and  wherever  it  has  got  a  footing  has  led  to  the  orderly  establishment  of 
rights.  .  .  .  The  weapons  of  war  and  instruments  of  death  may  be  seen  hanging 
from  the  rafters  of  their  bumble  cottages,  covered  with  dust  and  become  unusable, 
or  they  are  converted  into  tools  of  industry,  or  they  are  given  to  visitors  as  useless 
curiosities."  That  is  how  Christianity  has  affected  those  who  were  living  in  a 
savage  state.  I  give  another  quotation,  containing  the  confession  of  a  Christian 
who  had  been  a  cannibal,  and  from  it  you  will  see  what  has  been  in  his  case  the 
gospel's  power.  It  was  a  sacramental  day  at  the  mission  church.  "  When  I  ap- 
proached the  table,"  he  says,  "  I  did  not  know  beside  whom  I  should  have  to  kneel. 
Then  I  suddenly  saw  I  was  beside  the  man  who,  some  years  ago,  slew  my  father, 
and  drank  his  blood,  and  whom  I  then  swore  I  would  kill  the  first  time  that  I 
should  see  him.  Now  think  what  I  felt  when  I  suddenly  knelt  beside  him.  It 
came  upon  me  with  terrible  power,  and  I  could  not  prevent  it,  and  so  I  went  back 
to  my  seat.  Arrived  there,  I  saw  in  the  spirit  the  upper  sanctuary,  and  seemed  to 
hear  a  voice,  '  Thereby  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  My  disciples,  if  ye  have 
love  one  to  another.'  That  made  a  deep  impression  on  me,  and  at  the  same  time 
I  thought  I  saw  another  sight — a  Cross  and  a  Man  nailed  thereon,  and  I  heard  Him 
say,  '  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do.'  Then  I  went  back 
to  the  altar."  All  this  will  show  you  what  great  and  beneficent  changes  Chris- 
tianity has  wrought  in  family  and  social  life,  and  what  evidence  is  thus  furnished 
of  its  being  a  stream  from  the  fountain  of  Divine  love.  IV.  I  proceed  now  to  show 
HOW  Christianity  has  affected  the  intellectual  and  moral  life.  There  has 
been  high  intellectual  culture  without  Christianity.  In  pagan  Greece  and  Rome,  as 
we  have  seen,  it  reached  a  lofty  eminence.  But  neither  the  ancient  religions,  nor 
any  philosophic  teaching,  nor  any  literary  culture,  could  so  transform  the  heart  as 
to  ennoble  the  moral  life  of  society.  The  ancient  religions  did  not  even  attempt 
this.  When  morality  was  taught,  it  was  the  philosophers  who  stepped  forward  and 
not  the  priest.  The  old  mythologies  were  demoralizing.  The  gods  were  repre- 
sented as  fighting  with  one  another,  and  goddesses  as  engaging  in  intrigues  ;  and 
thus  the  conscience  of  the  people  who  believed  in  this  was  debauched.  But  what 
have  been  the  intellectual  and  moral  fruits  of  the  gospel  ?  Christ  came  not  only  to 
free  men  from  guilt,  but  from  corruption.  It  is  the  religious  teaching  of  Christianity 
which  gives  power  to  its  moral  teaching.  As  the  natural  sun  not  only  gives  us  light  but 
beat  to  quicken  life,  bo  from  Chiist,  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness,  come  those  Divius 


««AF.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  689 

rays  which  vitalize  while  they  enlighten.  And  if  we  turn  to  the  New  Hebrides,  we 
find  the  evidence  to  the  regenerating  power  of  Christianity  equally  striking.  Take 
Aneityum,  one  of  the  group.  In  1848  this  was  its  condition,  according  to  the  Rev. 
J.  G.  Paton,  the  devoted  missionary  who  has  long  laboured,  and  is  still  labouring, 
there :  "  Every  widow  was  strangled  to  death  the  moment  her  husband  died ;  in- 
fanticide was  common ;  and  children  destroyed  their  parents  when  long  sick  or 
aged.  Neighbouring  tribes  were  often  at  war  with  each  other ;  and  all  the  killei 
were  feasted  on  by  tiie  conquerors."  But  now  the  whole  population  of  this  island, 
then  3,500,  has  been  led  to  embrace  Christianity.  "  Heathen  practices  have  been 
abolished  ;  churches  built ;  family  worship  established ;  and  the  Sabbath  has  be- 
come a  day  of  rest."  And  they  have  sent  150  of  their  best  and  ablest  men  and 
women  as  teachers  to  the  other  islands.  They  have  paid  £1,400  for  printing  the 
Bible,  and  will  contribute  £200  this  year  (1885)  for  the  support  of  the  gospel.  I 
should  like  to  have  been  able  to  deal  more  fully  with  the  influence  of  Christianity 
on  the  believer  in  all  his  varied  circumstances ;  but  I  have  drawn  so  long  on  your 
attention  that  I  must  close.  {A.  Oliver,  B.A.)  A  fair  test: — When  I  was 
in  Home  a  priest  came  to  one  of  my  meetings  and  asked  me  what  authority 
I  had  to  preach.  I  said,  "  Two  horses  ran  a  race  on  your  Corso.  One  had 
a  grand  pedigree,  but  he  was  lame  in  three  legs  and  could  not  stand  on  the 
other.  The  second  horse  had  no  pedigree,  but  quickly  ran  over  the  course. 
Which  should  have  the  prize  ?  Can  you  show  thieves  made  honest,  drunkards 
sober?  Come  to  my  tabernacle  and  I  can  show  you  hundreds.  These  are 
my  certificates."  The  people  cheered  vociferously,  and  the  priest,  a  notorious 
profligate,  beat  a  retreat.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Personal  effects  of  Christianity 
and  Atheism  contrasted: — A  youth  who  had  been  carefully  brought  up  in  the 
fear  of  God,  and  had  been  a  Sunday-school  teacher,  and  a  frequent  speaker  in 
small  meetings,  went  to  college  to  study  for  the  ministry.  There  he  was  led  to 
become  a  Freethinker.  It  took  a  good  while  to  do,  but  in  course  of  time  he  did  not 
even  believe  in  a  God.  In  this  way  he  lived  about  a  year,  hiding  the  truth  from 
friends  as  well  as  he  could.  One  day,  in  the  class-room,  there  came  a  thought  into 
his  mind  which  he  could  not  get  rid  of.  "  What  kind  of  man  are  you  now  as  com- 
pared with  what  you  were  when  a  Christian  ?  "  Reason  and  conscience  combined 
in  answering :  "  A  worse  man  every  way.  As  a  Christian  you  were  a  better  man  to 
your  parents  and  to  others  ;  you  lived  a  worthier,  nobler,  and  more  unselfish  life ; 
your  unbelief  has  lowered  you  in  every  respect :  what  produces  the  best  life  must 
be  the  right  creed."  The  Father,  whose  loving  heart  had  thus  spoken  to  him,  was 
not  far  away,  speedily  received  him  back  as  a  wanderer  made  welcome,  and  in  due 
time  sent  him  out  to  preach  the  faith  he  had  once  denied.  (A.  Craig.)  Fruits 
of  Godliness : — Faith  in  Jesus  is  the  invisible  root  of  religion  concealed  within 
the  soul;  but  deeds  of  holy  duty  are  the  glorious  outgrowth  of  stalwart  trunk, 
and  branches  broad,  and  luxurious  masses  of  foUage  lifted  into  the  airs  of  heaven. 
And  amid  these  goodly  boughs  are  found  the  fruits  of  godliness,  nhinjng — ^ 
quaint  Andrew  Marvell  said  of  the  Bermuda  oranges — 

"  Like  golden  lamps  in  a  deep  green  night." 

Aim  immediately  at  fruits.    {Dr.  Cuyler.)        The  constant  and  legitimate  result 

is  the  test  of  every  doctrine: — The  general  principle  laid  down  here  is,  that 
the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  a  system  of  doctrine,  is  to  be  tested  by  the  life  and 
conduct  of  its  professors.  Stated  thus  broadly,  the  rule  commends  itself  at 
once  to  the  common  sense  of  men,  partly  in  consequence  of  the  truth  contained 
in  it,  and  partly  from  its  being  mistaken  for  a  statement  that  the  effect  of  a 
practical  doctrine  upon  the  Ufe  of  its  professor  is  the  true  test  of  the  hold 
which  that  doctrine  has  npon  his  mind.  This  is  something  quite  different 
from  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  doctrine  in  itself.  A  hfe  which  would  be  con- 
clusive as  to  a  man's  sincerity  might  be  no  proof  at  all  of  his  doctrinal  soundness. 
L  These  two  questions,  then,  must  bb  kept  distinct  from  one  another  in  the 
inquiry  suggested  by  the  text,  viz.,  how  the  rule  that  good  conduct  is  evidence  o£ 
sound  doctrine  must  be  understood  when  we  come  to  apply  it  to  the  different  cases 
in  which,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  we  need  great  caution  in  its  apphcation.  1. 
AU  the  difficulties  that  meet  us  are  contained  in  this  one,  viz.,  that  men  who  hold 
sound  doctrines  lead  bad  lives,  and  men  who  hold  unsound  doctrines  lead  good 
lives.  This  is  a  useless  weapon  in  controversies  between  conflicting  creeds,  because 
there  never  has  been  a  religious  party  without  discreditable  adherents.     Its 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n, 

tendency  is,  not  to  establish  any  doctrine  as  snperior  to  any  other,  but  to  produce 
au  indi^erence  to  doctrine  altogether.  It  tends  also  to  engender  the  belief  that  it 
is  no  matter  what  any  one  believes  if  his  life  be  such  as  to  call  for  no  unfavourable 
comment.  2.  Time  enough  to  refute  this  view  when  people  apply  it  to  other 
matters  as  well  as  to  religion.  Conventionalisms  in  society,  <6o.  3.  The  question 
is  not  as  to  the  value  of  the  fruit  or  its  desirableness;  but  as  to  its  use  in  enabling 
us  to  judge  of  the  doctrine  from  which  it  springs.  For  this  we  must  take  into 
consideration  something  more  than  the  mere  fact  of  its  being  good  wheu  presented 
to  us  for  examination.  4.  Our  Lord  assumes,  in  those  who  were  to  apply  the  test, 
a  knowledge  of  the  natural  productions  of  trees,  i.e.,  a  knowledge  of  the  tendency 
of  particular  doctrines,  as  a  necessary  qualification  for  judging  how  far  practice, 
presented  in  connection  with  them,  may  be  regarded  as  attesting  their  truth.  5. 
The  fruit  by  which  we  may  judge  of  a  tree  must  be  its  legitimate  fruit  and  its 
habitual,  or  average,  fruit.    II.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  let  us  apply  the  bulb  ov 

THE  TEXT  TO   SOME   OF  THOSE   CASES  IN   WHICH   WE   MIGHT   BE   LED   ASTRAI   BY  A  WANT 

OF  SUFFICIENT  CAUTION.  1.  There  are  trees  artificially  covered,  for  an  occasion, 
with  fruits  by  which,  obviously,  the  tree  could  not  be  "  known."  A  fir-tree, 
adorned  for  an  occasion  with  oranges,  could  assuredly  not  be  known  by  them.  Ita 
power  of  producing  oranges  could  not  be  known.  So,  impulsive  and  exceptional 
acts  of  kindness  and  benevolence  on  the  part  of  persons  without  any  definite  belief 
at  all  furnish  no  tests  as  to  the  practical  creed  of  those  by  whom  they  are  per- 
formed, from  the  circumstance  that  they  are  impulsive  and  exceptional.  2.  When 
conduct,  undeniably  good,  is  found  constantly  to  attend  upon  the  holding  of 
doctrines  which  legitimately  should  issue  in  what  was  positively  bad,  or  in  nothing 
practical  whatever,  we  are  in  danger  of  acceptiug  the  doctrines  on  beholding  the 
fruit.  This  is  as  though  a  mountain-ash  had  been  engrafted  with  a  cutting  of 
a  pear-tree,  and  a  person,  from  seeing  the  fruit,  and  knowing  that  it  grew  upon  a 
particular  stock  in  the  present  instance,  should  thence  conclude  that  in  all  casea 
the  same  stock  might  be  expected  to  bear  the  same  fruit,  and  that  the  surest  way 
to  produce  an  abundance  of  pears  would  be  to  secure  the  multiplication  of 
mountain-ash  trees  1  In  such  cases,  though  the  fruit  is  habitual,  it  is  not  legiti- 
mate.  3.  A  third  kind  of  conduct  which  is  constantly  appealed  to  as  attesting  the 
truth  of  doctrine  is  that  which  may  be  likened  to  fruit  produced  by  means  of 
unusually  stimulating  culture,  and  in  very  high  temperature.  Extraordinary 
means  have  been  used,  and  an  extraordinary  produce  is  the  result  ;  and  its 
worthlessncss  as  a  test  is  the  fact  that  it  is  extraordinary.  III.  The  rule  remains 
thus  :  That  when  condoct,  legitimately  following  from  doctrine  held,  is 
GOOD — HAKiTOALLY  GOOD — THAT  DOCTRINE  IS  TRUTH  ;  that  whcrs  tbcre  is  genuine 
piety,  self-denial,  humility,  where  what  the  New  Testament  calls  the  "fruits  of 
the  Spirit "  are  found  in  place,  in  proportion,  in  constancy,  the  doctrines  of  which 
they  are  the  lawful  consequences  are  true.  1.  To  this  it  will  at  once  be  said  that 
the  spirit  of  the  New  Testament  teaching  has  manifested  itself  in  the  lives  of  men 
whose  creeds  were  widely  different,  and  even  avowedly  antagonistic.  True ;  but 
between  a  man's  "creed"  in  the  sense  of  the  dooument  of  his  Church  or  sect  and 
his  "  creed  "  in  the  sense  of  his  working  belief  there  is  often  a  wide  difference.  If 
the  lives  of  many  men  are  worse  than  their  pure  creed,  the  lives  of  others  may  be 
better  than  their  coirupt  one.  In  the  creed  which  produces  a  life  like  that  sketched 
out  in  the  New  Testament  there  is  undoubtedly  some  of  the  essential  truth  of  the 
New  Testament  doctrine ;  and  it  is  from  this  that  the  practice  springs.  2.  There 
are  many  whose  hearts  are  better  than  their  heads;  who  will  do  what  is  right, 
while  they  maintain  what  is  wrong  ;  or  who  will  hold  at  the  same  time  two 
doctrines  subversive  of  one  another,  without  being  aware  of  it.  They  live  by  truth 
while  they  profess  with  it  a  great  deal  of  falsehood.  3.  It  is  true,  then,  that  men 
of  different  religious  professions  will  produce  the  genuine  fruits  of  righteousness  by 
which  the  trees  may  be  "  known."  But  these  are  not  the  produce  of  the  different 
creeds ;  but  of  such  parts  of  each  of  them  as  agreed  in  being  essential  truth.  They 
are  the  fruits  of  gardens  stocked  very  differently — some  of  them  full  of  tempting 
and  poisonous  shrubs,  through  which  few  could  pass  without  harm — but  still  the 
fruits  of  the  same  tree  in  each  garden.  In  a  garden  bad  on  the  whole,  good  fruit 
may  be  found,  and  it  may  be  spoken  of  as  the  fruit  of  that  garden.  In  a  garden 
good  on  the  whole,  evil  fruit  may  be  pointed  out ;  but  "  a  good  tree  cannot  bring 
forth  evil  fruit,  neither  can  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Wherefore  by 
their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them;  of  thorns  men  do  not  gather  figs,  nor  of  t 
bramble-bush  gather  they  grapes."    Conclusion :  i<'or  the  most  part  men  will  applj 


our.  VI.]  ST.  LUKE.  641 

the  test  of  the  text  inconsiderately,  and  decide  for  or  against  doctrines  on  insuffi- 
cient grounds.  They  will  be  won  to  •  creed,  or  turned  away  from  it,  by  the 
exceptional  conduct  of  its  professors.  Much  is  it  to  be  wished  that  men  had 
sufficient  grounds  for  their  belief,  and  had  them  capable  of  ready  production ;  but 
a  very  little  experience  will  dispel  any  large  expectations  we  may  have  formed  in 
this  direction.  And,  therefore,  so  long  as  men  will  judge  of  doctrines  by  individual 
instances  among  their  professors,  and  the  more  men  do  this,  the  more  important  ia 
the  conduct  of  each  individual  Christian.  (J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  Christians 
known  by  their  fruits : — The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  one  of  deeds,  not  words ;  a 
life  of  action,  not  of  dreaming.  If  we  would  know  whether  we  are  being  led  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  we  must  see  if  we  are  bringing  forth  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  If  we  would 
discover  if  the  works  of  a  clock  are  right,  we  look  at  the  hands.  So,  by  our  words 
and  deeds,  we  shall  show  whether  our  hearts  are  right  with  God.  A  religion  of  the 
lips  is  worth  nothing.  It  is  easy  enough  to  assume  the  character  and  manner  of  a 
Christian,  but  to  live  the  Christian  life  is  not  bo  easy.  A  man  can  make  a  sham 
diamond  in  a  very  short  time,  but  the  real  gem  must  lie  for  ages  in  the  earth  before 
it  can  sparkle  with  perfect  purity.  We  have  far  too  many  of  these  quickly-made 
Christians  amongst  us,  who  have  never  brought  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance, 
nor  gone  through  the  fire  of  trial,  and  sorrow,  and  self-sacrifice.  Do  not  trust  to 
feelings  or  words  in  yourselves  or  others,  but  look  at  your  life ;  a  real  and  a  false 
diamond  are  very  much  alike,  and  yet  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  in 
their  value.  Let  us  look  into  our  lives  very  closely,  and  see  whether  we  are  mis- 
taking outward  form  for  true  religion,  words  and  professions  for  holiness,  leaves  for 
fruit.    What  are  some  of  the  fruits  which  God  looks  for  in  the  life  of  a  Christian  7 

1.  At  the  head  of  all  we  must  place  love.  Really  trying  to  do  God's  will ;  showing 
kindness  to  brethren;  trying  to  lead  others  to  God.    A  Christian  cannot  be  selfish. 

2.  Another  fruit  for  which  God  looks  in  a  Christian's  life  is  humility.  Every  act 
and  word  of  Christ's  earthly  life  teaches  this.  The  longer  we  go  to  His  school,  and 
the  more  we  know  of  the  way  of  godliness,  the  humbler  we  become.  3.  Another 
fruit  God  expects  to  find  in  the  lives  of  BQs  people  is  forgetfulness  of  self.  {H.  J. 
Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.)  The  true  test : — The  most  important  thing  to  know  is 
one's  self.  No  one,  however,  can  know  his  own  character  aright  without  first 
making  himself  acquainted  with  that  of  God,  It  is  in  His  light  that  we  see  light 
•learly.  What  a  miserable  thing  for  a  man  to  know  how  to  make  money,  and  make 
It  too — to  know  science  so  well  that  he  is  familiar  with  the  secrets  of  nature,  can 
measure  the  distance  of  a  star,  and  follow  a  wandering  comet  on  its  fiery  track — 
to  know  statesmanship  so  well  that  his  country,  in  a  crisis  of  her  affairs,  might 
call  him  to  the  helm,  as  before  all  others  the  pilot  that  could  weather  the  storm — 
and  yet  not  to  know  whether  he  is  at  peace  with  God ;  whether,  should  he  die 
to-night,  he  is  saved  or  lost,  is  going  to  heaven  or  to  hell  1  I.  It  is  possible  to 
ASCERTAIN  ODB  BEAL  STATE  AND  cHAEACTEB.  Who  has  any  difficulty  iu  Settling 
whether  it  is  day  or  night  ?  whether  he  enjoys  sound  health  or  pines  on  a  bed  of 
sickness  ?  whether  he  is  a  free  man  or  a  slave  ?  No  man  could  mistake  a  Briton 
Bitting  under  the  tree  of  liberty  which  was  planted  by  the  hands  of  our  fathers  and 
watered  with  their  blood  for  the  negro  who  stands  up  weeping  in  the  auction-mart, 
to  be  sold  with  his  master's  cattle,  or  crouches  in  the  rice-swamp,  bleeding  under 
his  master's  lash.  Degraded  by  a  system  that  curses  both  man  and  master,  the 
black  man  may  be  content  to  eat  the  bread  and  wear  the  brand  of  bondage.  Still 
he,  as  much  as  we  do,  knows  the  difference  between  fetters  and  freedom  ;  he  /jels 
that  he  is  a  slave,  and  I  feel  that  I  am  free.  Even  so  may  we  know  whether  we 
belong  to  the  class  of  saints  or  to  that  of  sinners ;  for  sin  is  darkness,  sickness, 
bondage.  II.  Oub  eeligious  profession  is  not  always  a  test  or  odr  state. 
L  It  may  be  a  test  in  certain  circumstances.  Look,  e.g.,  at  two  men  on  parade. 
They  wear  the  same  dress  and  arms ;  and  both,  the  result  of  drill  and  discipline 
have  acquired  such  a  martial  air  that  you  cannot  tell  which  is  the  hero  and  which 
the  coward.  But  change  the  scene.  Leave  the  parade-ground  for  the  field  of 
battle ;  and  when,  as  bugles  sound  the  charge,  I  see,  through  clouds  of  smoke  and 
amid  the  clash  of  arms,  the  sword  of  one  flashing,  and  his  plume  dancing  in  the 
very  front  of  the  fight,  while  his  comrade,  pale  and  paralyzed  with  fear,  is  only 
borne  forward  in  the  tumult  like  a  seaweed  on  the  rushing  billow — how  easy  now  to 
tell  beneath  whose  martial  dress  there  beats  a  soldier's  heart  I  So,  though  the 
profession  does  not  prove  the  possession  of  religion  in  a  time  of  peace,  show  me  a 
man,  like  the  soldier  following  his  colours  into  the  thick  of  battle,  who  holds  fast 
the  profession  of  his  faith  in  the  face  of  obloquy,  of  persecution,  of  death  itself, 

41 


«41  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  ti. 

and  there  is  little  room  to  doubt  that  his  piety  is  genuine — that  he  has  the  root  of 
the  matter  in  him.  2.  The  profession  of  religion  is  not  a  test  of  the  reality  of 
religion  in  our  times.  Like  flowers  which  close  their  leaves  whenever  it  rains,  or 
birds  that  seek  shelter  and  their  nests  when  storms  rise,  there  are  Christians  so 
timid  by  natural  constitution,  that  they  shrink  from  scorn,  and  could  as  soon  face 
a  battery  of  cannon  as  the  jeers  and  laughter  of  the  ungodly.  Granting  this,  still 
it  is  true  that,  where  there  is  no  profession  of  serious  religion,  we  have  little  reason 
to  expect  its  reality.  Perhaps  there  never  was  a  time  when  the  mere  profession  of 
religion  was  a  less  satisfactory  test  of  its  reality  than  at  present.  There  have  been 
dark  and  evil  days,  and  these  not  long  gone,  when  religion  was,  if  I  may  so  express 
myself,  at  a  discount  :  piety  was  not  fashionable  :  profane  swearing  and  deep 
drinking  were  the  accomplishments  of  a  gentleman ;  the  man  who  assembled  his 
household  for  prayer  was  accounted  a  hypocrite,  the  woman  who  did  so  a  fool  : 
missionary  societies  were  repudiated  by  the  courts  of  the  Church,  and  eyed  with 
suspicion  by  the  officers  of  the  Crown ;  Robert  Haldaue  was  denied  an  opportunity 
of  consecrating  his  fortune  to  the  cause  of  ChriRt  in  India ;  Carey  and  Marshman, 
while  seeking  to  convert  the  Hindoos,  were  driven  from  the  British  territories,  and 
had  to  seek  protection  from  a  foreign  Power  ;  and  such  as  formed  missionary  asso- 
ciations  launched  them  on  society  with  the  anxieties  and  prayers  of  her  who, 
cradling  her  infant  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  committed  bim  to  the  waters  of  the  Nile 
and  the  providence  of  her  God.  Power,  rank,  fashion,  science,  literature,  and 
mammon  were  all  arrayed  in  arms  against  everything  that  appeared  in  the  form 
and  breathed  the  spirit  of  a  devoted  piety.  Thank  God,  it  is  not  so  now  I  He  has 
touched  the  heart  of  the  Egyptian,  and  she  has  adopted  the  outcast  as  her  son. 
From  holes  and  caves  of  the  earth,  religion  has  found  her  way  into  palaces  and  the 
mansions  of  the  great  and  noble.  Science  has  become  a  priestess  at  her  altar. 
Literature  has  courted  her  alliance.  Infidelity  assumes  even  a  Christian-like 
disguise.  Iniquity,  as  ashamed,  is  made  to  hide  her  face.  The  tide  has  turned  ; 
and  those  who  now  make  a  profession  of  zealous  and  active  piety  find  themselves 
no  longer  opposed  to  the  stream  and  spirit  of  the  age.  This  is  a  subject  of  grati- 
tude. Yet  it  suggests  caution  in  judging  of  ourselves  ;  and  warns  us  to  take  care, 
since  a  profession  of  religion  is  rather  fashionable  than  otherwise,  that  in  making 
it  we  are  not  the  creatures  of  fashion,  but  new  creatures  in  Jesus  Christ.  Hence 
the  necessity  for  trying  ourselves  by  such  a  test  as  my  text  suggests.  The  tree  is 
known,  not  by  its  leaves,  nor  we  by  our  professions ;  not  by  its  blossoms,  nor  we  by 
the  promises  of  which  they  are  lovely  images ;  but  by  its  fruit,  and  we  by  those 
things  which  the  fruit  represents — our  hearts  and  habits,  our  true  life  and 
character.  "  The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits  ;  moreover,  every  tree  that  bringeth 
not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire."   III.  The  tbde  evidencb 

OF   OUR    STATE    IS   TO    BE    EODND   IN   OUR    HEART   AND    HABITS.      We    haVe    often    Pat    in 

judgment  on  others ;  it  is  of  more  consequence  that  we  form  a  right  estimate  of 
ourselves.  In  attempting  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  our  own  state  and  character — 
in  the  words  of  the  Greek  sage,  to  know  ourselves — let  us  bring  to  this  solemn  task 
all  the  care  and  the  conscientiousness  with  which  a  jury  weigh  the  evidence  in  a 
case  of  life  and  death.  They  return  from  their  room  to  the  court  to  give  in  a 
verdict,  amid  breathless  silence,  which  sends  him  whom  they  left  pale  and 
trembling  at  the  bar  to  liberty  or  to  the  gallows  ;  yet,  sacred  as  human  life  is,  on 
our  judgment  here  hangs  a  more  momentous  issue.  A  mistake  there  may  send  a 
man  to  the  scaffold,  but  one  here  to  perdition  ;  that  involves  the  life  of  the  body, 
this  of  the  immortal  soul.  Judges  sometimes  find  it  difficult  to  know  how  to  shape 
their  charge,  and  juries  how  to  shape  their  verdicts — the  evidence  is  conflicting — 
not  clear  either  way.  The  case  is  obscure,  perplexing ;  perhaps  a  bloody  mystery, 
from  which  no  hand  but  God's  can  raise  the  veil.  But  light  and  darkness,  life  and 
death,  are  not  more  unlike  than  the  heart  and  habits  of  believers,  on  the  one  hand, 
and  those  of  unbelievers,  on  the  other  ;  and  with  such  a  catalogue  of  the  works  of 
the  flesh  and  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  as  Paul  has  given  us,  how  can  it  be  difficult  for 
&  man  to  settle  under  which  of  these  two  classes  his  are  to  be  ranked — with  which 
they  most  closely  correspond?  A  man  may  faucy  himself  possessed  of  talents 
which  he  has  not,  and  a  woman  of  beauty  which  she  has  not.  But  with  all  our 
strong  bias  to  form  a  favourable  and  flattering  opinion  of  ourselves,  each  "  to  think 
more  highly  of  himself  than  he  ought  to  think,"  it  seems  as  impossible  for  a  man 
who  is  an  adulterer,  a  fornicator,  unclean,  a  drunkard,  whose  bosom  burns  with 
nnholy  and  hateful  passions,  to  imagine  himself  virtuous,  as  to  mistake  night  for 
day,  s  bloated,  fetid  corpse  for  one  in  the  bloom  and  rosy  beauty  of  her  youth.     It 


«HA¥,  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  643 

is  often  only  by  a  careful  application  of  delicate  tests  that  the  chemist  discovers  a 
deadly  poison  or  a  precious  metal ;  but  how  easy  is  it  by  a  few  simple  questions  to 
briuig  out  our  real  character  1  Have  you  suffered  a  heavy  wrong,  for  example,  at 
the  hands  of  another?  You  remember  it.  But  where?  Is  it  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  and  to  pray  with  Him  whose  blood  fell  alike  on  the  head  of  foe  and  friend, 
"  Father,  forgive  them,  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  7  Again,  when  you  think  of 
perishing  souls,  is  yours  the  spirit  of  Cain  or  of  Christ  ?  Can  you  no  more  stand 
by  with  folded  hands  to  see  sinners  perishing  than  men  drowning  ?  Are  yon 
moved  by  such  generous  impulse  as  draws  the  hurrying  crowd  to  the  pool  where 
one  is  sinking,  and  moves  some  brave  man,  at  the  jeopardy  of  life,  to  leap  in  and 
pluck  him  from  the  jaws  of  death  7  There  is  no  better  evidence  that  we  have 
received  the  nature  as  well  as  the  name  of  Christ  than  an  anxious  wish  to  save  lost 
souls,  and  a  sympathy  with  the  joy  of  angels  over  every  sinner  that  is  converted. 
{T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  tei^tinrj  time: — "The  tree  is  known  by  his  fruit."  That 
is  a  fact  with  which  we  are  all  familiar.  To  stock  the  garden  with  fruit-trees,  I 
repair  to  the  nursery,  but  not  in  spring,  when  all  are  robed  alike  in  green,  nor  in 
summer,  when  the  bad  equally  with  the  best  are  covered  with  a  flush  of  blossoms  : 
it  is  when  the  corn  turns  yellow,  and  sheaves  stand  in  the  stubble-iields,  and  fair 
blossoms  are  gone,  and  withered  leaves  sail  through  the  air  and  strew  the  ground — 
it  is  in  autumn  I  go  to  select  the  trees,  judging  them  by  their  fruit.  And  as 
certainly — may  I  not  say  as  easily  ? — as  the  tree  is  known  by  his  fruit,  may  we 
know  our  spiritual  state  and  character,  if  we  will  only  be  honest,  nor  act  like  the 
merchant  who,  suspecting  his  affairs  to  be  verging  on  bankruptcy,  shuts  his  eyes 
to  the  danger,  takes  no  stock,  and  strikes  no  balance.  Or  take,  for  another 
example,  two  houses  that  stand  on  the  banks  of  the  same  stream.  Under  a  cloud- 
less sky,  amid  the  calm  of  the  glen  in  a  summer  day,  with  no  sound  falling  on  the 
ear  but  the  bleatings  of  the  flock,  the  baying  of  a  sheep-dog,  the  muffled  sound  of  a 
distant  waterfall,  the  gentle  murmur  of  the  shallow  waters  over  their  pebbly  bed, 
each  house  in  its  smiling  garden  offers,  to  one  weary  of  the  din  and  dust  of  cities, 
an  equally  pleasant  and,  to  appearance,  an  equally  secure  retreat.  But  let  the 
weather  change ;  and  after  brewing  for  hours,  from  out  the  darkness  that  has 
deepened  into  an  ominous  and  frightful  gloom  let  the  storm  burst!  Suddenly, 
followed  by  a  crash  like  that  of  falling  skies,  a  stream  of  lightning,  dazzling  the 
eye,  glares  out ;  and  now  the  war  of  elements  begins.  Peal  rolls  on  peal ;  flash 
follows  flash;  and  to  the  roar  of  incessant  thunders  is  added  the  rush  of  a  deluge, 
and  the  hoarse  voices  of  a  hundred  streams  that  leap  foaming  from  hill  and  rock 
down  into  the  bed  of  the  river.  Eed,  rolling,  swelling,  it  bursts  its  dykes,  overflows 
all  its  banks,  and,  attacking  the  foundations  of  both  houses,  breaches  the  walls  of 
one,  and  at  length  tumbles  the  whole  fabric,  all  of  a  heap,  into  the  roaring  flood ; 
and  while  the  houseless  family  that  had  fled  from  its  rocking  walls  gather,  shiver- 
ing on  a  neighbouring  height  to  see,  where  once  stood  their  pleasant  home,  only 
the  rush  and  hear  only  the  roar  of  waters — how  easy,  as  we  look  on  the  other,  erect 
and  defiant  in  this  widespread  sea,  to  know  that  the  one  had  been  built  on  sand, 
but  the  other  founded  on  a  rock,  {Ibid.)  The  fruits  of  heathenism  and  of 
Christianity: — The  intellect  of  Greece  was  keen,  her  poetry  splendid,  her  art 
unrivalled,  her  eloquence  overwhelming  ;  and  yet  when  the  poor  worn  Jew  of 
Tarsus  trod  the  streets  of  Athens,  a  hunted,  persecuted  man — when  his  bent  frame 
and  feeble  steps  passed  along  her  avenues  of  noble  sculpture ;  when  his  strange 
words  were  jeered  at  by  philosophers  under  the  shadow  of  the  Acropolis  ;  when  the 
stoic  mocked  at  the  message  of  Jesus  and  the  resurrection — who  could  have  believed 
that  the  might  and  glory  of  the  future  was  with  the  poor  Jew,  not  with  these 
philosophic  and  gifted  Athenians  7  Who  would  have  guessed  that,  in  spite  of  her 
aegis,  and  flaming  helm,  and  threatening  spear,  the  awful  Pallas  of  the  Acropolip 
should  be  forced  to  resign  her  Parthenon  to  the  humble  Virgin  of  Nazareth  ?  Not 
many  years  afterwards,  that  same  suffering  missionary  who  had  been  ridiculed  in 
Athens  was  dragged  a  prisoner  to  Rome.  At  that  time  her  Cffisar  seemed  omnipo- 
tent, her  iron  arms  unconquerable.  And  Rome  did  not  yield  without  a  desperate 
struggle.  She  strove  to  crush  and  extirpate  this  "  execrable  superstition  "  (as  her 
great  writers  called  Christianity)  with  sword  and  flame ;  she  made  Christianity  a 
treason ;  she  made  her  Coliseum  swim  with  the  massacre  of  its  martyrs.  Yet  it 
was  all  in  vain  I  The  worshippers  of  the  Capitol  succumbed  before  the  worshippers 
in  the  Catacombs.  The  thirty  legions,  the  white-robed  senators,  the  ivory  sceptre, 
the  corule  chair,  were  all  defeated  by  the  Cross,  which  was  the  vilest  emblem  of  a 
slave's  torture ;  and  the  greatest  of  earthly  empires,  with  her  dominion  yet  unim- 


644  THK  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rfc 

paired,  embraced  the  gospel  preached  by  the  unlettered  peasants  of  the  race  which 
she  moBt  despised.  "Why  was  it  ?  It  was  because  •  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits,  and 
every  tree  that  brirgath  not  forth  good  fruit  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire. 
The  fruits  of  heathendom  had  been  selfishness,  and  cruelty,  and  corruption ;  th« 
fraits  of  Christianity  were  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  temperance,  goodness, 
faith,  meekness,  charity,  and  the  leaves  of  that  tree  were  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.)  Reasons  for  watching  our  actions  : — The  whole 
value  of  our  deeds  depends  upon  the  state  of  heart  out  of  which  they  come.  As  our 
hearts  are,  so  are  our  deeds.  1.  One  reason,  then,  why  we  ought  to  be  careful  to 
notice  our  actions  is,  because  they  help  us  to  read  ourselves.  We  may  have 
succeeded  in  persuading  ourselves  that  we  are  very  kindly  and  charitably  disposed 
towards  others  ;  many  a  man  goes  on  fancying  this  to  be  the  case,  year  after  year, 
simply  trusting  to  his  own  feeling  that  he  is  so.  But  now,  let  him  just  try  himself 
by  this  simple  practical  test :  let  him  ask  himself.  What  kind  and  charitable  actiong 
have  I  performed  within  the  last  day,  or  week,  or  month  ?  and  if,  in  putting  this 
question  to  himself,  he  finds  that,  with  all  his  warmth  and  kindness  of  heart,  he 
has  done  nothing  in  the  way  of  helping  his  poor  and  distressed  neighbours,  he  must 
confess  that  he  is  very  much  mistaken  in  the  estimate  which  he  has  hitherto  formed 
of  himself.  2.  Not  only  do  our  actions  show  us  exactly  what  we  are,  but  they  also 
materially  contribute  to  make  us  what  we  are;  over  and  above  the  impression 
which  they  receive  from  the  heart  which  originates  them,  they  themselves  in  turn 
react  upon  the  heart.  Take,  e.g.,  the  case  of  a  boy  who  feels  very  much  tempted 
to  take  something  liat  does  not  belong  to  him.  No  doubt  the  very  indulgence  in 
such  a  thought  is  highly  dishonest  in  itself ;  still,  there  is  something  in  the  very  act 
of  stealing,  when  he  at  last  comes  to  it,  that  puts  him  in  a  worse  state  than  he  was 
in  before.  He  has  now  actually  committed  himself  to  what  he  might  still  have 
drawn  back  from  only  a  few  minutes  since ;  he  has  set  his  seal  to  what  was  before 
only  melted  wax,  already  softened  indeed,  and  quite  fitted  to  receive  the  impres- 
sion, still  not  moulded  as  yet  into  any  defined  and  permanent  shape.  3,  A  third 
and  last  reason  why  we  must  attend  carefully  to  the  deeds  which  proceed  from  our 
hearts,  as  well  as  to  our  hearts  themselves,  is,  that  our  deeds  will  form  the  standard 
by  which  we  shall  all  be  judged  at  the  last  day  (Rev.  xx.  11,  12;  2  Cor.  v.  10). 
What  the  body  is  to  the  soul,  so  are  our  deeds  to  the  heart  out  of  which  they 
spring ;  our  deeds  are  the  bodies  in  which  our  hearts  and  desires  show  themselves 
and  clothe  themselves.  And  as  our  bodies  form  a  real  part  of  ourselves,  so  do  our 
actions ;  as  our  bodies  obey  the  direction  of  our  souls,  so  do  our  actions ;  as  our 
bodies  will  rise  again  at  the  last  day,  so  our  actions,  too,  will  rise  again  along  with 
them,  and  will  be  judged  along  with  them.  (Henry  Harris,  B.D.)  "  Every  tree 
is  knovn  by  his  own  fruit "  : — I.  We  observe  of  a  tree,  that  what  it  is  by  natubb 
IT  WILL,  rr  LEFT  TO  ITSELF,  EVEB  BEMAiN.  The  thom  wiU  coutinue  a  thorn,  the 
bramble-bush  will  ever  be  a  bramble-bush.  If  you  go  and  seek  for  fruit  on  either, 
you  will  be  disappointed,  and  the  prickly  branches  may  wound  your  hands.  No 
mere  pruning  of  the  tree  or  fertilizing  of  the  soil  around  its  roots  will  alter  its 
nature.  IL  Having  thus  seen  that  the  natural  man,  when  left  to  himself,  mast 
ever  continue  unproductive  in  good  works  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God,  let  us 

NOW  OBSEBVB  TH8   WOEK   OF  GEACE   IN  THE   HEART  FOLLOWINO  UPON  BEPENTANCB,  AN© 

CAUSING  AMENDMENT  OF  LIFE.  "  Every  tree  is  known  by  his  own  fruit."  The  wild 
vine,  the  wild  olive,  the  wild  apple,  bear  each  a  semblance  of  fruit.  So  in  the 
natural  man  there  may  be  a  semblance  of  good  works.  Moral  virtues,  amiable 
qualities,  a  noble  disposition,  adorn  the  character  of  many  an  unrenewed  nature, 
spring  from  many  an  unconverted  heart.  Moral  excellencies  and  Christian  graces 
often  so  nearly  resemble  each  other,  that  they  are  confounded  together  in  the 
estimation  of  man,  but  never  in  the  judgment  of  God.  Our  Saviour  said  of  the 
Pharisees,  who  rested  upon  an  outward  appearance  of  holiness, "  Every  plant  which 
My  heavenly  Father  hath  not  planted  shall  be  rooted  up."  When  a  bud  or  graft 
has  been  made  upon  a  wild  tree,  all  which  springs  from  that  scion  resembles  the 
parent  stem  from  which  it  was  taken.  The  rose  will  have  the  same  colour,  frag- 
rance, and  shape  ;  the  apple  will  have  the  same  taste  and  form.  The  beauty  of  the 
flower  and  the  sweetness  of  the  fruit  are  owing,  not  to  the  nature  of  the  stock,  but 
to  the  character  of  the  graft  made  upon  it.  And  yet  the  roots  and  stem  of  the  wild 
tree  are  in  a  measure  necessary  and  conducive  to  the  fruitf ulness  of  the  graft.  The 
sap,  in  being  conveyed  through  a  new  branch,  undergoes  such  a  change,  that  it  is 
made  to  produce  fragrant  and  beautiful  flowers  or  fine  and  luscious  fruit.^  So  with 
(he  converted  man  who  has  been  united  by  living  faith  to  Jesas :  by  onion  to  his 


«HAJ.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  645 

Savioar  his  moral  virtues  become  Christian  graces.  There  is  the  same  brain,  the 
same  heart,  in  their  material  properties,  but  aU  the  thouglits,  feeliugs,  and  desires 
which  they  originate  flow  through  a  renewed  nature,  and  become  changed  in 
principle  and  action.  Even  the  very  passions  which  expended  themselves  in  vice 
and  lust,  now  flowing  through  the  pare  channel  of  a  sanctified  mind  and  will, 
breathe  the  fragrance  and  assume  ihe  loveliness  of  heaven-born  virtues.  In 
gardening,  we  can  perceive  and  understand  how  the  process  of  grafting  is  carried 
on.  The  bud  or  shoot  is  made  so  to  adhere  to  the  stock  on  which  it  is  placed,  that 
it  unites  to  the  stem,  and  grows  into  it  and  with  it ;  the  flow  of  the  sap  passes 
on  unchecked,  and  produces  growth  and  fertility  to  the  scion.  It  is  by  the  close- 
ness of  the  union,  and  the  assimilation  of  the  parts,  that  life  is  maintained,  and 
vegetation  proceeds.  In  spiritual  things,  we  know  that  it  is  by  our  union  to  Christ 
that  the  life  of  faith  and  the  fruits  of  righteousness  are  produced,  through 
the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  practical  application  of  our  subject  leads 
to  the  personal  inquiry,  "  What  fruit  do  I  bear  ?  "  The  vitality  of  our 
spiritual  Ufe  depends  upon  our  union  with  Christ.  {S.  Charlesioorth,  3I.A.) 
The  fruits  of  Christianity  : — Let  us  not  be  guilty  of  the  rashness  that  ascribes  all 
the  good  of  earth  to  the  Christian  philosophy.  There  are  those  who,  in  a  zeal 
without  knowledge,  will  declare  all  our  arts  and  sciences,  our  compass,  telegraph, 
and  steam-engine,  to  have  come  to  the  world  through  the  evangelical  religion.  But 
all  such  generalities  damage  the  cause  they  are  designed  to  support.  The  youth 
drilled  in  this  kind  of  declamation  subsequently  find  that  the  Greek  and  Roman 
worlds  were  wonderful  in  science,  art,  literature,  law,  and  inventions  before  our 
era  began  ;  that  they  had  grand  things  which  we  boastful  ones  of  the  nineteenth 
century  cannot  equal.  Four  thousand  years  before  Christ  came,  God  the  Father 
declared  the  world  to  be  "  very  good,"  and,  having  such  a  Creator,  the  goodness 
po'ired  into  man  at  his  creation  burst  forth  from  the  soul  all  along,  from  Adam  to 
Soirates.  We  need  not  take  the  garlands  from  the  Father  to  bestow  them  upon 
the  Son.  The  world  of  God  was  good,  the  world  of  Christ  only  better.  The  first 
great  fruit  of  the  Christian  tree  is  certainly  the  better  path  of  salvation  it  brought. 
It  brought  no  wholly  new  method  ;  but  it  perfected  the  ideas  that  lay  only  in  out- 
line. The  idea  of  sacrifice  can  never  go  beyond  the  death  of  Christ.  After  God 
came  with  His  Lamb  there  was  no  more  need  of  the  flocks  and  herds  of  a  thousand 
hills.  And  after  Christ  taught  His  ethics  there  was  room  for  nothing  more ;  His 
hopes,  His  penitence,  His  virtue,  His  love,  were  all  the  zenith  of  those  moral 
heights.  Let  us  pass  by  these  fruits  and  go  to  fields  less  familiar  to  all  our 
thoughts.  It  is  a  great  injustice  to  Christianity  if  one  views  it  only  as  being  an 
escape  from  hell  hereafter  to  a  heaven  also  beyond.  The  real  truth  is,  Christ  has 
blended  Himself  with  all  the  annals  of  Christian  lands,  and  He  has  given  new 
colour  to  all  the  days  of  the  great  era  that  wears  His  name.  As  the  setting 
sun  shining  through  a  watery  air  makes  all  things — fence,  hut,  log,  forest,  and 
field — to  be  gold  like  himself,  so  Christ  blends  with  the  rich  and  the  humble  details 
of  society,  and  sheds  His  heavenly  blush  upon  the  great  pageant  of  humanity 
marching  beneath.  If  we  dare  not  say  Christianity  invented  the  steamboat  and 
the  railroad,  we  may  say  that  it  reshaped  literature  and  all  the  arts,  and  has  deeply 
affected  law  and  the  whole  moral  aspect  of  civilization.  There  is  an  art  which 
Christianity  created  almost  wholly,  asking  little  of  outside  aid.  Music  is  that 
peculiar  child.  The  long-continued  vision  of  heaven,  the  struggle  of  the  tones  of 
voice  and  of  instrument  to  find  something  worthy  of  the  deep  feelings  of  religion, 
resulted  at  last  in  those  mighty  chants  that  formed  the  mountain- springs  of  our 
musical  Nile.  There  could  have  been  no  music  had  not  depths  of  feeling  come  to 
man.  The  men  who  went  up  to  the  pagan  temples  went  with  no  such  love,  with 
no  sorrow  of  repentance,  with  no  exultant  joy.  It  was  necessary  for  Jesus  Christ 
to  come  along  and  transfer  religion  from  the  form  to  the  spirit,  and  from  an  "  airy 
nothingness  "  to  a  love  stronger  than  life,  before  hymns  like  those  of  Luther,  and 
Wesley,  and  Watts  could  break  from  the  heart.  The  doctrine  of  repentance  must 
live  in  the  world  awhile  before  we  can  have  a  "  Miserere,"  and  the  exultant  hope  of 
the  Christian  must  come  before  the  mind  can  invent  a  "  Gloria."  There  could  be 
no  music  until  the  soul  had  become  full.  Therefore,  when  John  drew  his  picture 
of  heaven,  when  Magdalen  shed  her  tears,  when  Christ  died  on  the  cross,  when  the 
Christian  martyrs  began  to  die  for  their  faith,  when  Paul  astonished  the  world  with 
his  self-denial  and  heroism,  when  the  religion  of  Jesus  began  to  picture  the 
immortality  of  man,  then  the  foundation  of  music  began  to  be  laid,  wide,  and 
massive,  and  deep.    Thus  you  may  glance  over  all  the  arts,  and  find  that  the  grefti 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n.. 

ideas  and  emotions  of  the  new  religion  affected  them  all — the  paintings  of  Eaphae! 
and  Angelo,  and  the  architecture  of  all  the  great  middle  centuries,  great  in  the 
construction  of  temples.  Christianity  helped  to  make  Angelo  and  Raphael  by 
furnishing  them  with  grand  themes.  As  no  lips  can  be  eloquent  unless  they  are 
speaking  in  the  name  of  a  great  truth,  so  no  painter  can  paint  unless  some  one 
brings  him  a  great  subject.  Heaven  and  hell  made  the  poet  Dante  ;  Christianity 
made  Beatrice  ;  paradise  made  John  Milton  ;  the  mother  of  our  Lord  and  the  last 
judgment  made  Angelo.  It  is  the  great  theme  that  makes  the  orator,  the  painter^ 
the  poet.     (David  Swing.) 

Ver.  45.  A  good  man  out  of  the  good  treasnre  of  Ills  heart. — Religion,  seated  in 
he  heart : — 1.  Christ  referred  true  religion  to  the  heart  as  the  seat  of  its  vitality. 
2.  Nor  is  it  in  essence  alone  that  religion  is  thus  intensely  spiritual  and  inward  ; 
religious  acts,  to  have  reality  and  value,  must  proceed  from  the  heart,  and  fairly 
represent  its  spiritual  frames.  3.  What,  then,  is  this  good  treasure  of  the  heart  f 
Irue  religion  is  an  inward  priiiciple  of  holy  living,  through  consecration  to  a  holy 
God.  (J,  P.  Thompson.)  Prepared  heart  treasures: — Out  of  the  abundance  of 
the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh  ;  and  our  best  abundance  of  the  heart  must  be  slowly 
and  in  quietness  prepared.  The  cattle,  when  they  rest,  are  yet  working  to  prepare 
from  the  grass  that  sweetest  and  most  wholesome  of  beverages — milk.  So  must  we 
prepare  the  abundance  of  the  heart.  If  the  milk  of  our  word  is  to  flow  from  u» 
nourishingly,  we  must  turn  the  common  things  of  daily  life — the  grass — by  slow 
and  quiet  processes,  into  sweet  wisdom.  In  retired,  meditative  hours  the  digesting 
and  secreting  powers  of  the  spirit  act ;  and  thus  ourselves  are  nourished,  and  we 
store  nourishment  for  others.  (T.  T.  Lynch.)  Words  reveal  hearts: — Our  words 
are  the  commentaries  on  our  wills ;  for,  when  we  speak  we  make,  as  it  were,  a 
dissection  of  our  own  hearts,  and  read  an  anatomy-lecture  upon  ourselves.  Out 
wanton  talk  discovers  a  stew  in  our  heart ;  when  our  words  are  swords,  our  hearts 
are  a  slaughter-house ;  when  we  bear  false  witness,  that  is  the  mint ;  when  we 
worship  Mammon,  that  is  the  temple.  The  heart  is  the  shop  and  workhouse  of  all 
evil  (Prov.  iv.  23,  24 ;  Matt.  xv.  19).  (A.  Farindon.)  The  rising  of  the  sun  is 
known  by  the  shining  beams  ;  the  fire  is  known  by  its  burning  ;  the  life  of  the  body 
is  known  by  its  moving :  even  so  certainly  is  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  known  by 
the  shining  light  of  a  holy  conversation ;  even  so  the  purging  fire  of  grace  is  known 
by  the  burning  zeal  against  sin,  and  a  fervent  desire  to  keep  God's  commandments ; 
even  so,  certainly,  the  life  and  liveliness  of  faith  is  known  by  the  good  motives  of 
the  heart,  by  the  bestirring  of  all  the  powers,  both  of  the  soul  and  body,  to  do 
whatsoever  God  wills  us  to  be  doing,  as  soon  as  we  once  know  He  would  have  us  do 
it.  He  that  hath  this  evidence  hath  a  bulwark  agaiust  despair,  and  may  dare  the 
devil  to  his  face  ;  he  that  hath  this  hath  the  broad  seal  of  eternal  life,  and  such  a 
man  shall  live  for  ever  (Acts  ix.  6  ;  1  John  ii.  3).     [J.  Mede.) 

Ver.  46.  And  why  call  ye  Me  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the  thlngrs  which  I  say  1 — Reli- 
gion, the  doing  of  God's  will : — I.  In  the  first  place,  let  us  be  wabned  against  making 
OUR  RELIGION  A  MATTER  MERELY  OF  OPINION.  Said  William  Law  to  Johu  Wesley, "  The 
head  can  as  easily  amuse  itself  with  a  living  and  justifying  faith  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  as  with  any  other  notion."  It  is  even  so.  A  truer  word,  pointed  in  warning 
against  a  greater  peril,  was  never  uttered.  The  mistake  in  question  is  a  very  subtle 
one,  but  very  serious,  and  more  common  than,  perhaps,  we  think.  As  thus  of  th» 
doctrines,  so  also  of  the  duties  of  our  religion.  These  duties  may  be  objects  merely 
of  belief,  arranged  in  well-ordered  systems,  and  acknowledged  to  be  the  proper  code 
of  life,  without  being  actually  reduced  to  practice.     II.  In  the  second  place,  let  n» 

BE  WARNED  AGAINST  MAKING  OUR  RELIGION  A  MATTER  MERELY   OF   FEELING.       This  piety 

of  moods  and  feelings,  which  goes  by  spasms,  and  not  by  the  even  pulses  of  a 
robust  life,  is  not  the  sort  of  pietv  we  need,  my  hearers.  It  dishonours  our  Master, 
■who  has  something  larger  to  do  for  us  than  simply  to  make  us  happy  in  our 
religion.  It  wrongs  our  own  souls,  which  ought  to  be  looking  higher  than  their 
own  enjoyment.     III.  Finally,  let  us  be  moved  to  make  our  religion  a  matter 

OF  THE  LIFE  ;  riNDINQ  THE  TEST  AND  MEASURE  OF  OUB  DTSCIPLE8HIP,  NEITHER  IN 
WHAT    WE    BELIEVE,    NOR    IN     WHAT    WE    FEEL,    BUT     IN    WHAT    WB    ABE,    AS    ANNOUNCING 

ITSELF  IN  WHAT  WE  DO.  Not  that  we  counsel  the  disparagement  of  Christian 
doctrine.  There  must  be  religious  <tpinions,  more  or  less  clearly  defined,  condition- 
ing the  religious  life ;  and  the  more  clearly  defined,  the  better.  And  the  nearer 
ve  come  to  the  teachings  of  Scripture,  as  interpreted  by  the  Christian  oonsoiousnetMt 


twAP.  ▼!.]  ST.  LUKE,  647 

of  the  snccessive  generations  of  believors ;  the  nearer  we  come  to  those  grand 
settlements  of  doctrine  effected  by  the  great  expounders  of  doctrine,  as  Athanasias, 
Augustine,  Luther,  Calvin,  and  Edwards,  the  nearer  we  shall  come  to  the  hidings 
of  Christian  power.  Neither  would  we  disparage  religious  feeling.  The  new  life 
has  its  begiuning  in  feeling ;  while  to  be  past  feeling  is  the  surest  mark  of 
reprobation.  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  to  be  convinced  of  sin  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
without  being  profoundly  agitated.  {R.  D.  Hitchcock,  D.D.)  Obedience — not 
profession : — I.  Why  is  doing  the  will  of  God  like  bdildino  upon  a  bock  ? 
1.  Doing  is  the  way  to  being.  God's  doing  flows  from  His  being  ;  His  work  is  the 
outflow  of  His  nature.  He  radiates  outwards  into  all  the  departments  of  the 
universe  from  a  settled  centre  ;  and  because  He  is  so  gloriously  good,  all  His  works 
are  gloriously  good.  The  work  derives  its  character  from  the  being — the  unchange- 
able being  or  nature  of  God.  But  there  is  a  vast  immeasurable  distance  between 
us  and  God ;  and  the  grand  question  is,  How  a  nature  so  disordered,  so  miserably 
poor  in  knowledge,  so  shallow  in  thought  and  conviction,  so  low  in  aspiration,  so 
uncertain  in  the  use  of  its  freedom,  prostituting  it  so  often  to  low  ends,  and  so 
seldom  using  it  for  our  emancipation  from  evil ;  how  is  such  a  nature  as  ours 
to  find  its  way  up  to  God  till  it  shall  have  attained  to  His  settled  goodness  and 
unchangeable  excellence  ?  The  answer  is,  By  exercising  ourselves  in  those  rules  of 
goodness  which  Christ  has  given  us  as  Divine.  We  must  do  in  order  to  be.  You 
must  learn  how  to  love  your  enemy,  how  to  pray  for  them  that  despitefuily  use  you. 
For  there  can  be  no  true  and  perfect  love  in  a  nature  that  harbours  hatred  even 
towards  an  enemy.  Self-denial  and  self-sacrifice,  constraint  and  cross-bearing,  are 
painful  now,  because  we  are  only  learning  ;  but  when  we  have  left  school,  and  our 
nature  has  reached  the  standard  for  the  attainment  of  which  it  has  been  under 
discipline,  to  love  God  and  all  creatures  will  involve  no  effort  or  constraint  or  pain- 
ful cross-bearing;  for  love  in  us  will  be  as  spontaneous  as  it  is  in  God  :  we  shall 
have  become  a  law  unto  ourselves,  and  we  shall  instinctively,  and  of  our  own  free 
impulse,  choose  the  good,  the  right,  and  the  pure.  2.  Doing  is  the  way  to  knowing. 
To  know  physical  facts  is  the  way  to  gain  material  power ;  to  know  the  hidden 
laws  that  govern  nature  is  to  become  its  lord  and  master,  able,  as  with  a  magician's 
wand,  to  call  forth  her  inexhaustible  resources  for  the  service  and  advantage  of 
man.  To  know  human  nature  in  its  prejudices  and  passions  is  necessary  to  the 
statesmen  who  would  make  laws  that  are  to  be  beneficial  to  our  empire.  And 
Christ  says,  if  you  will  do  the  will  of  God,  you  shall  know  what  doctrine  is  Divine 
and  what  is  not.  Such  knowledge— growing  out  of  a  hallowed  experience — plants 
our  feet  immovably  upon  the  Bock  of  certainty,  and  not  all  the  storms  of  opinion 
and  doubt  will  be  able  to  dislodge  ns.  '6.  Doing  is  the  way  to  bless  others.  Even 
when  a  man  is  not  making  his  fellow-man  the  object  of  his  thought  or  deed — ^when 
he  is  not  directly  fulfilling  some  social  duty,  but  while  he  is  more  specially  engaged 
in  nourishing  his  own  interior  manhood,  strengthening  his  own  attachment  to  what 
is  true,  and  pure,  and  brave — he  is  nevertheless  blessing  others.  For  such  a  man 
creates  unconsciously  a  moral  atmosphere  around  him  which  his  neighbours  breathe 
he  loads  the  air  with  a  sacred  perfume ;  an  influence  goes  forth  from  him,  like  heat 
from  fire,  which  insensibly  leavens  the  minds  of  others.  But  when  such  a  man 
comes  into  contact  with  his  fellows  in  the  relations  of  life — in  business,  in  friend- 
ship, and  in  religion — he  strengthens  and  perpetuates  his  unconscious  influence. 
He  does  the  will  of  God  ;  he  does  to  others  as  he  would  they  should  do  unto  him. 
He  upholds  the  laws  of  justice  and  generosity  against  injustice  and  meanness.  II. 
Heabinq  but  not  doing  is  like  building  on  the  sand.  1.  It  issues  in  a  falsa 
self-deceptive  life.  "  Lord.  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  Thy  name  ?  and  in  Thy 
name  have  cast  out  devils  ?  and  in  Thy  name  done  many  wonderful  works  ?  " 
"  Then  will  I  profess  unto  them,  I  never  knew  you."  One  of  the  most  portentous 
facts  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature  is — the  power  we  have  of  self-deception. 
And  yet  when  we  come  to  consider,  there  is  nothing  capricious  or  malignant  in  it. 
It  begins  in  conscious  unfaithfulness.  We  hear  the  Word  of  God,  but  knowingly 
neglect  to  do  it.  We  do  not  obey,  but  we  must  come  to  terms  with  the  conscience. 
2.  Hearers  and  not  doers  will  be  convicted  of  egregious  folly.  "  I  will  liken  him 
unto  the  foolish  man."  Disobedience  to  known  duty  is  not  only  a  violation  of  the 
conscience,  which  is  guilt ;  it  is  also  a  violation  of  the  reason,  which  is  folly. 
Beason  says  it  is  folly  to  choose  the  evil  and  reject  the  good.  No  man  would  prefer 
the  delusions  of  madness  to  the  realities  of  a  healthy  mind.  Beason  savs  -i  la 
folly  to  parcliase  the  present  at  the  cost  of  the  future.  But  this  is  what  men  ar« 
doing  who  are  only  hearers.     For  if  our  life-house  should  fall,  great  will  be  ih» 


€48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oHAy.  n. 

fall  of  it.  A  mighty  catastrophe  is  th«  fall  of  a  soul  I  (C.  Short,  M.A.) 
The  sin,  folly,  and  danger  of  men^s  calling  Christ  their  Lord,  and  not  yielding 
obedience  to  His  laws  ;  or  the  sinfulness  and  hazard  of  a  profession  of  religion,  with- 
rut  a  correspondent  practice : — Wherein  we  have — 1.  A  concession.  He  grants  they 
.bade  a  fair  profession ;  they  called  Him  Lord,  their  Lord.  2.  A  charge.  Ha 
iharges  them  with  nothing  like  this  in  their  practice.  Though  they  called  Him 
iheir  Lord,  they  carried  not  themselves  at  all  as  His  subjects  and  servants.  3.  An 
fexpostulation.  He  puts  them  to  consider  the  inconsistency  of  these  things,  and 
(he  nnacoountableness  of  yoking  together  a  profession  and  a  practice  that  de- 
Utroyed  one  another.  Why  wiU  ye  plead  the  relation  and  yet  throw  off  the  duty  of 
the  relation  f  *'  If  ye  call  Me  your  Lord,  why  do  ye  not  what  I  say  or  bid  you  ?  If 
yon  will  not  do  what  I  say  or  bid  you,  why  do  ye  call  Me  your  Lord  ? "  Two 
doctrines  are  deducible  from  the  text  thus  explained.  I.  There  are  who  call 
Christ  their  Lord,  owning  His  authority  over  them,  and  looking  for  benefit  by  Him, 
who  yet  make  not  conscience  of  doing  the  things  whioh  He  as  a  Lord  says  to  them, 
and  requires  of  them.  In  discoursing  this  doctrine  I  shall — I.  Consider  men's 
calling  Christ  their  Lord.  II.  Consider  their  not  doing  the  things  which  He  says, 
notwithstanding  of  their  calling  Him  their  Lord.  III.  Show  how  it  comes  to  pass 
that  people  call  Christ  Lord,  and  their  Lord,  and  yet  make  not  conscience  of  doing 
what  He  says.  IV.  Apply  the  doctrine.  L  I  will  consider  men's  calling  Christ 
THEiB  Lord.  Under  this  head,  I  will  show — 1.  How  men  call  Christ  their  Lord. 
2.  What  they  do  call  Christ,  that  call  Him  their  Lord.  3.  What  is  the  import  of 
their  calling  Him  Lord.  1.  I  will  show  how  men  call  Christ  their  Lord.  Men  call 
Him  their  Lord — (1)  Professing  Christianity.  Christians  is  the  name  of  Christ's 
disciples  who  owned  Him  for  their  Lord  and  Master — '•  The  disciples  were  called 
Christians  first  at  Antioch  "  (Acts  xi.  26).  "One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ" 
(Matt,  xxiii,  10).  Nay,  at  that  rate  ye  take  the  name,  and  throw  off  the  thing. 
(2)  Being  baptized  in  His  name  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  They  are  thereby  externally 
marked  for  His  subjects  and  servants,  and  renounce  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the 
flesh.    (3)  Praying  unto  Him,  or  to  God  in  His  name  (Acts  vii.  59  ;  Dan.  ix.  17). 

!4)  Attending  the  assemblies  of  His  people  to  hear  His  word  (Ezek.  xxiii.  31). 
5)  Consenting  personally  to  the  covenant  (Isa.  xliv.  5).  Thereby  they  say.  He  is, 
and  shall  be  for  ever  their  Lord,  and  that  they  shall  be  His  only,  wholly,  and  for 
ever.  (6)  Lastly,  Partaking  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper.  The  very 
name  of  that  ordinance  bears  the  partakers  to  call  Him  so  (1  Cor.  xi.  23,  26). 
2.  I  will  show  what  they  do  call  Christ,  that  call  Him  their  Lord.  (1)  They  call 
Him  their  Lord  God;  as  Thomas  did — "My  Lord,  and  my  God"  (John  xx.  28). 
(2)  Their  Lord  Proprietor,  Master,  and  Owner,  however  little  regard  they  show  to 
the  will  of  His  providence  and  precepts  (Eom.  xiv.  9).  (3)  Their  Lord  Eedeemer 
(Exod.  XX.  2),  however  unsuitably  they  walk  to  the  redemption  purchased  by  Him. 
(4)  Their  Lord  Husband,  however  refractory  and  disobedient  they  prove  to  Him 
(Jer.  iii.  14).  (5)  Their  Lord  King,  however  rebelHous  they  be — "The  Lord  ig 
our  Judge,  the  Lord  is  our  Lawgiver,  the  Lord  is  our  King,  He  will  save  us  "  (Isa. 
sxxiii.  22).  3.  What  is  the  import  of  their  calling  Him  Lord  ?  Men  calling  Him 
so,  do  in  effect  own,  acknowledge,  and  profess — (1)  His  undoubted  authority  to  com- 
mand and  prescribe  duty  to  them :  owning  Him  as  their  Lord  Husband,  King,  and 
God,  they  cannot  deny  but  He  has  authority  to  bind  them  with  laws.  (2)  The 
justice  and  equity  of  His  commands — "  The  law  is  holy  ;  and  the  commandment 
holy,  and  just,  and  good  "  (Bom.  vii.  12).  (3)  Our  absolute  obligation  to  obey  Him. 
As  the  clay  is  in  the  hand  of  the  potter,  so  are  we  in  His,  The  potsherds  of  the 
earth  may  strive  with  one  another,  but  shall  they  strive  with  their  Maker  f  (4)  The 
strongest  ties  upon  us  to  be  for  Him.  If  He  is  our  Proprietor  and  Bedeemer,  are 
we  not  bound  by  all  the  ties  of  honour  and  gratitude  to  be  wholly  EQs?  (5)  The 
expectation  of  happiness  from  Him.  Calling  Him  our  Lord,  we  expect  from  Him 
and  by  Him  the  pardon  of  our  sin,  the  favour  of  God,  and  a  part  in  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  (Matt.  vii.  21).  IL  I  will  consider  men's  not  doing  the  things  which 
He  says,  notwithstanding  all  this.  We  may  take  it  up  in  three  things. 
1.  Christ  as  a  Lord  prescribes  duty  to  His  subjects.  He  has  not  an  empty  title  of 
lordship  and  dominion,  but  is  a  Lawgiver — "  He  is  our  Lawgiver  "  (Isa.  xxxiii.  22). 
And  the  law  of  the  ten  commands,  in  their  spirituality  and  extent,  is  His  law, 
binding  by  His  authority  on  all  that  call  Him  Lord  (Exod.  xx.  2,  3,  Ac).  2.  Ha 
intimates  His  will  to  them  as  to  their  duty.  He  says  what  He  would  have  them 
to  do.  We  have  His  written  laws  in  the  Bible,  which  is  God's  Word  to  every  one 
mto  whose  hand  it  comes.      8.  Yet  men  neglect  it,  and  regard  it  not  in  their 


CHAP.  VI.]  ST.  LUKE.  W» 

practice.  They  plead  the  relation  to  Him,  but  make  no  conscience  of  the  duty  of 
it.  (1)  They  have  no  due  sense  of  their  being  absolutely  bound  up  to  BLis  will,  but 
fancy  themselves  to  be  at  some  liberty  to  walk  according  to  their  own,  as  if  the 
government  were  divided  betwixt  Christ  and  themselves  (Psa.  xii.  4).  They  do  not 
feel  the  tie  ol  the  yoke  of  Christ  always  upon  them,  but  are  like  bullocks  un- 
accustomed to  the  yoke,  skipping  at  ease  according  to  their  own  pleasure.  (2)  They 
frame  not  their  life  according  to  His  will.  (3)  They  never  set  themselves  to  do  all 
that  He  says ;  contrary  to  what  the  Psalmist  did  (Psa.  cxix.  6),  who  "  had  respect 
unto  all  God's  commandments."  (4)  They  habitually  do  against  what  He  says, 
making  their  own  lusts  and  inclinations  their  law ;  like  those  who  said,  "  I  have 
loved  strangers,  and  after  them  will  I  go  "  ( Jer.  ii.  25).  They  call  Him  their  Lord ; 
but  Satan  and  their  lusts  are  really  their  lords,  to  whom  they  yield  tbeir  obedience, 
being  captives  at  their  pleasure.  (5)  They  do  nothing  purely  because  He  says  it, 
else  they  would  endeavour  to  do  all.  In  what  they  do,  they  have  other  ends  than 
to  please  Him  :  they  do  it  to  please  themselves,  for  their  own  profit,  pleasure,  or 
safety.  III.  The  third  general  head  is,  to  show  how  it  comes  to  pass,  that  peoplb 
CALii  Chbist  Lord,  and  their  Lord,  and  tet  make  not  conscience  of  doing  what 
He  SATS.  The  springs  of  this  ruining  practice,  that  so  prevails,  are  many:  as — 
1.  The  want  of  a  thorough  change  in  their  nature  ;  "  A  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth 
corrupt  fruit :  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit  "  (Luke  vi.  43,  44)» 
(1)  Good  education  and  religious  company  embalms  Pome  dead  souls  ;  but  still  they 
want  the  principle  of  the  Spirit  of  life  ;  like  those  of  whom  the  apostle  says  (Jude 
ver.  19).  (2)  The  gospel  being  new  to  some,  makes  a  reel  among  their  affections; 
as  it  did  among  the  stony-ground  hearers  (Matt.  xiii.  20,  21).  (3)  They  get  some 
new  light  into  their  heads,  but  no  new  life  into  their  hearts.  (4)  Many  get 
awakening  grace,  that  never  get  converting  grace.  2.  Entertaining  wrong  notions 
of  religion.  They  form  to  themselves  such  notions  of  religion,  as  leave  them  at 
liberty  in  the  course  of  their  walk.  (1)  They  thmk  that  is  religion  to  call  Christ 
Lord  in  performing  duties  of  worship,  praying,  Ac,  and  consider  not  that  the 
substance  of  religion  hes  in  holy,  tender  walking  (Tit.  ii.  11,  12).  (2)  They  think 
that  faith  will  save  them,  though  it  be  dead,  idle,  and  inactive ;  contrary  to  what 
the  apostle  saith :  "  What  doth  it  profit,  my  brethren,  though  a  man  say  he  hath 
faith,  and  have  not  works  ?  can  faith  save  him  ?  "  (James  ii.  14.)  '*  As  the  body 
without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also  "  (ver.  26).  They  do 
not  consider  that  that  faith  is  not  saving  faith  which  is  so.  8.  Beigning  unbelief. 
Of  this  our  Lord  complained :  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  Me,  that  ye  might  have  life  " 
(John  V.  40).  4.  Want  of  consideration  (Luke  xv.  17).  6.  The  natural  enmity  of  the 
heart  prevailing  against  conviction  (Eom,  viii.  7).  6.  Unmortified  lusts  still 
keeping  the  rule  and  dominion  over  the  soul,  though  Christ  has  the  name  of  their 
Lord.  Doctrine  II.  It  lies  on  men's  consciences  before  the  Lord,  to  take  it  home 
to  themselves,  to  consider  and  answer  it,  how  they  come  to  call  Christ  their  Lord, 
and  yet  not  make  conscience  of  doing  the  things  which  He  as  a  Lord  says  to  them, 
and  requires  of  them.  In  discoursing  this  doctrine,  I  shall  only  show  the  import 
of  the  expostulation  in  the  text,  and  then  conclude  with  a  word  of  application.  I 
will  show  the  import  of  this  expostulation.  It  imports — 1.  That  Christ  is  in 
earnest  for  our  obedience.  He  is  not  indifferent  what  regard  we  show  to  what  He 
Bays  as  our  Lord  (Psa.  cxix.  4).  (1)  The  evidence  of  our  belonging  to  Christ,  in  a 
saving  relation,  lies  upon  it.  "  Ye  are  My  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command 
you  "  (John  xv,  14).  (2)  The  evidence  of  your  right  to  heaven  lies  on  it.  "  Blessed 
are  they  that  do  His  commandments,  that  tbey  might  have  right  to  the  tree  of 
life,  and  may  enter  in  through  the  gates  into  the  city  "  (Bev,  xxii.  14).  2.  It  is  possible 
for  us  in  this  life  to  get  the  things  that  Christ  says,  done  acceptably,  in  all  the 
paits  thereof.  If  it  were  not  so,  .then,  by  the  text,  nobody  at  all  would  be  allowed 
to  call  Him  Lord  ;  which  is  certainly  false  (Matt.  vii.  21).  So  there  are  two  sorts 
that  call  Him  Lord ;  some  that  do,  some  that  do  not  what  He  says ;  the  former 
allowed,  the  other  rejected.  The  doctrine  of  the  imperfection  of  the  saint's 
obedience  is  a  stone  of  stumbling  to  many  a  blind  souL  To  prevent  your 
stumbling — (1)  Distinguish  between  doing  the  will  of  Christ  in  all  its  parts,  and  in 
all  its  degrees.  A  whole  family  hears  so  many  particular  pieces  of  work  prescribed 
to  them  all  by  the  father  and  master  of  the  family.  His  grown  children  do  them  all 
exactly  to  his  mind ;  the  younger  children,  who  are  but  learning  to  work,  put 
hand  to  every  one  of  them,  and  baulk  none  of  the  pieces ;  but  they  do  none  of  them 
exactly,  Befractory  servants  do  some  of  them,  but  others  of  them  they  never 
notice.     Just  so  it  is  with  the   saints  in  heaven,   true  believers  on  earth,  and 


eSO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (OHi*.  n, 

hypocrites.  (8)  Distinguish  between  doing  the  will  of  Christ  perfectly,  and 
acceptably.  So  man  in  this  life  can  do  the  former  (Philip,  iii.  12).  But  every  true 
believer  does  the  later  (Acts  x.  25).  (3)  Distinguish  between  ability  in  ourselves 
to  do  the  will  of  Christ  acceptably,  and  ability  for  it  in  Christ,  offered  to  us  in  the 
gospel,  and  to  be  brought  in  by  faith.  No  man,  saint  nor  sinner,  has  the  former. 
"  We  are  not  sufiBcient  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  5). 
But  all  true  believers  do  get  the  latter  (Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  Notwithstanding  the  thin<?3 
that  Christ  says  may  be  got  done  acceptably,  yet  many  that  call  Him  Lord 
will  not  do  them.  •'  They  profess  that  they  know  God ;  but  in  works  they 
deny  Him,"  &a.  (Tit.  i.  16).  (1)  Obedience  to  sin,  and  disobedience  to  Christ,  is 
their  choice.  (2)  They  have  neither  heart  nor  use  for  the  grace  and  strength  that 
is  in  Christ  Jesus  (John  v.  40 ;  Psa.  Ixxxi.  11).  1.  Christ  is  highly  displeased  with 
the  disobedience  of  those  that  call  Him  Lord,  who  will  not  do  what  He  says  (Psa.  1. 
16-22).  But  to  persuade  you  of  it,  consider — (1)  His  infinite  purity  and  bolinesa 
(Isa.  vi.  3).  He  is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  (2)  The  dreadful  strokes  He  has 
brought  on  such  as  called  Him  Lord,  for  not  doing  the  things  that  He  gays. 
(8)  Does  he  not  refuse  communion  with  such  persons  in  holy  ordinances,  and 
thereby  testify  his  displeasure  against  them?  "I  will  go  and  return  to  My 
place,  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  My  face "  (Hos.  v.  15). 
Lastly,  Consider  how  He  will  treat  them  at  the  last  day  (Luke  xix.  27). 
5.  There  is  a  great  evil  in  calling  Christ  Lord,  and  not  doing  what  He  says  ; 
an  evil  that  highly  provokes  Him,  as  casting  dishonour  on  Him  in  a  very 
special  manner.  (1)  Their  sins  and  looseness  of  life  reflect  a  peculiar  dishonour 
on  Him,  as  pretending  a  relation  to  Him  (Bom.  ii.  24).  (2)  They  do  Satan  a 
peculiar  pleasure.  (3)  They  wound  the  heart  of  the  real  children  of  God,  and 
make  the  whole  family  sigh  more  heavily  than  the  sins  of  others  would  do  (Psa. 
Iv.  12).  But  there  are  three  things  they  do  not  consider.  (1)  What  inconsistency 
is  in  this  course:  "  \Miat  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unrighteousness? 
and  what  communion  hath  light  with  darkness  ?  and  what  concord  hath  Christ  with 
Belial?"  (2  Cor.  vi.  14,  15).  (2)  How  heinously  the  Lord  Christ  takes  it,  that  men 
should  joke  Satan's  service  with  His  (2  Cor.  vi.  15,  forecited).  (8)  What  the  end 
of  fiuch  a  course  will  be,  what  it  will  issue  in  at  length.  "  0  that  they  were  wise, 
that  they  understood  this,  that  they  would  consider  their  latter  endl "  (Deut.  xxxii. 
29).  6.  People  ought  to  consider  it,  see  what  account  they  can  make  of  it,  and 
how  they  will  answer  it.  And — (1)  How  tbey  will  answer  it  to  their  own  consciences. 
(2)  How  they  will  answer  it  to  the  Lord  Christ  in  the  judgment.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.) 
Practical  obedience : — I.  In  the  first  place,  outwabd  obediencb  IB  the  necessaei 
FBuiT,  AND  THE  ABSOLUTE  TEST  OF  iNWAED  LIFE.  He  alouc  wiU  enter  iuto  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  "that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Let  ua 
pause  over  the  words.  They  cannot  refer  to  the  man  who  accidentally  does  the 
will  of  God  because  it  so  happens  that  his  pleasure  coincides  with  God's  pleasure, 
just  as  a  person  may  walk  in  the  same  path  as  another  without  intending  to  be  his 
companion.  In  such  an  act  there  would  be  no  inward  element.  But  they  must 
refer  to  the  man  who  intentionally  does  God's  will ;  does  it,  that  is,  because  it  is 
God's  will ;  independently  of  any  fiurther  consideration  of  whether  it  be  pleasant  or 
not  in  itself.  Observe,  therefore,  there  is  no  picking  and  choosing  in  such  an 
obedience.  The  word  "  doeth  "  does  not  mean  intention,  profession,  or  promise, 
but  action  in  those  practical  details  of  actual  life,  which  make  up  the  real  sum  total 
of  human  existence.  A  saving  religion  is  not  that  which  is  up  in  the  air,  but  that 
which  plants  its  sacred  feet  on  the  solid  earth  of  daily  life.  Such  a  religion  is  ex- 
ceedingly difficult,  and  there  is  one  power  alone  which  can  accomplish  it  in  us.  It 
is  the  power  of  God.  To  use  an  inspired  illustration,  "  we  are  God's  workman- 
ihip."  Not  only  does  an  artist's  work  show  the  genius  of  the  artist,  but  every  artist 
has  his  own  touch  and  style.  We  look  at  an  exquisite  picture,  and  we  recognize 
the  hand  of  the  painter:  we  exclaim,  with  undoubting  confidence,  "Raphael," 
"Guido,"  "  Rembrandt."  Thus  when  we  look  at  a  true  Christian  who  bears  and 
reflects  Christ  all  over  him,  we  say,  *'  God."  That  is  God's  work ;  God's  Spirit 
alone  can  have  done  that.  God  is  "  admired  in  His  saints,  and  glorified  in  all 
them  that  believe. "  And  how  can  it  be  otherwise  if  we  reverse  the  order,  and, 
instead  of  looking  from  the  act  to  the  principle,  trace  the  principle  down  into  the 
Act  ?  For  what  is  salvation,  but  deliverance  from  sin  ;  and  what  is  sin,  but  oppo- 
eition  to  the  will  of  God  ?  To  be  saved,  therefore,  is  to  be  brought  into  conformity 
with  God's  will.  A  good  man  is  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  can 
no  more  abide  in  a  heart  without  making  it  holy,  without  compelling  it  by  the  most 


«HAr.  wu]  ST.  LUKE.  661 

Bweet  inward  necessity  to  do  God's  will,  than  there  can  be  a  sun  without  light,  a 
stream  without  water,  a  summer  without  flowers,  a  life  without  activity.  II.  But 
there  is  another  point  of  view  from  which  the  lesson  may  be  regarded.    Outward 

OBEDIENCB  MAT  BE,  IN  THE  HANDS  OF  THE  SpIEIT  OF  GoD,  THE  INSTRUMENT  OF  INWARD 
lilFE,  AND  THEREFORE,  WHERE  INWARD  LIFE  ALREADY  EXISTS,  THE  MEANS  AND  STIMULANT 

OF  A  HIGHER  GROWTH  IN  GRACE.  A  man  is  truly  in  earnest,  and  sets  himself  without 
reserve  to  do  God's  will  as  he  finds  it  in  His  Word.  What  is  the  first  experience 
that  such  a  man  will  gain  ?  what  his  earliest  lesson,  his  first  upward  step  Godward, 
although  it  be  apparently  a  step  downward  into  the  dark?  I  say  that  it  is  a  know- 
ledge of  failure  and  of  sin.  He  cannot  keep  God's  will  in  its  inward  spirit  and  power 
through  the  weakness  of  his  flesh.  Must  he  not  ask  himself  why  he  fails  P  Ah, 
why,  indeed,  but  from  indwelling  sin  I  Thus  there  flashes  upon  the  soul  a  sense  of 
sin  and  a  consciousness  of  guilt  before  God.  And  when  the  soul  once  stands  face 
to  face  with  this  truth,  the  impossibility  of  self-righteousness  and  of  doing  God's 
will  as  he  fondly  thought  in  his  own  strength  must  become  clear  as  the  flash  of  the 
sunshine.  *•  Then  I  am  a  helpless  sinner,"  he  exclaims,  *'  vile  and  worthless,  and 
where  shall  I  find  help  and  hope  ?  If  I  cannot  save  myself,  who  can  save  me  1 " 
He  flings  the  arms  of  his  faith  around  the  feet  of  the  dying  Jesus,  and  cries  out, 
•*  My  Lord  and  my  God,  my  Saviour,  Wisdom,  Bighteousness,  Sanctifi cation." 
{E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  necessity  of  doing  the  will  of  God  : — Some  of  you,  perhaps, 
suppose  that  you  do  enough  to  show  that  you  are  Christians  if  you  come  here  on 
Sundays.  One  purpose  for  which  you  come  here  is  to  learn  how  to  live  elsewhere. 
It  can  be  no  excuse  for  breaking  God's  commandments  on  Monday  that  you  made 
«  great  effort  on  Sunday — came  a  mile  and  a  half  through  the  wind  and  rain — to 
learn  what  God's  commandments  are.  Suppose  a  man  were  caught  trespassing  in 
a  gentleman's  private  grounds,  and  when  asked  for  a  defence  of  his  conduct 
answered  that  though  no  doubt  he  was  trespassing,  he  hoped  that  it  would  be  a 
palliation  of  his  offence  that  once  a  week  for  twenty  years  he  had  taken  care  to 
read  the  notice  on  the  board — "Private  road.  Trespassing  forbidden."  Would 
that  be  a  rational  excuse  7  Or  suppose  you  had  a  man  in  your  works  who  was 
constantly  breaking  some  of  the  printed  regulations  which  are  put  up  in  the  shops, 
what  would  you  say  if  he  asked  you  to  look  over  his  bad  conduct  because  he  always 
read  through  the  regulations  every  Monday  morning  7  We  see  the  folly  of  a  plea 
of  that  kind  when  alleged  to  cover  a  violation  of  any  of  our  own  rules  and  regula- 
tions ;  and  yet  so  easily  do  we  deceive  ourselves,  that  we  are  all  in  danger  of  sup- 
posing that  because  we  read  the  Bible  and  come  to  public  worship  in  order  to  learn 
God's  laws  we  have  something  to  set  off  against  breaking  them.  Christ's  words  are 
clear.  We  are  none  the  better  for  knowing  the  will  of  God ;  we  must  obey  it. 
We  must  do  the  will  of  God.  Some  men  have  such  a  keen  admiration  for  moral 
goodness  that  they  take  it  for  granted  that  they  are  really  good.  You  admire  industry 
— good ;  but  if  you  are  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  you  must  be  industn* 
OQS.  Emotion  of  otber  kinds — good  in  its  place — is  also  mistaken  for  actual  well- 
doing. When  we  begin  to  hold  political  meetings  in  the  winter  there  will  be 
hundreds  of  men,  belonging  to  both  political  parties,  who  will  think  that  they  are 
animated  by  a  generous  patriotism  and  a  noble  zeal  for  the  pubUc  good,  because 
they  give  enthusiastic  cheers  to  the  eloquence  of  their  favourite  orators ;  but  ask 
them  to  do  some  canvassing,  or  to  give  a  subscription  towards  the  expenses  of  a 
contested  election,  and  you  will  find  that  their  patriotism  and  their  zeal  have  all 
Tanished.  Doing  God's  will  is  one  thing,  being  sorry  for  not  doing  it  is  a  different 
thing  altogether.  But  suppose  we  resolve  to  do  better — is  not  this  satisfactory  ? 
Satisfactory 7  No;  not  unless  we  actually  do  better  as  the  result  of  our  good 
resolutions.  Christ  does  not  say  that  the  man  who  resolves  to  do  the  will  of  God 
will  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  the  man  who  does  it ;  and  between  good 
resolutions  and  good  deeds  there  is  apt  to  be  a  very  precarious  connection.  Some 
people  appear  to  use  up  all  their  strength  in  making  good  resolutions,  and  they 
have  no  strength  left  to  carry  them  out.  We  must  do  the  will  of  God  if  we  are  to 
enter  into  heaven.  However  perfect  our  excuses  may  seem  for  not  doing  it,  I  can- 
not see  that  these  excuses  are  admissible.  One  man  pleads  his  natural  tempera- 
ment as  a  justification  of  the  violence  or  irritability  of  his  temper.  Another  pleads 
the  sharp  necessities  of  business  as  an  excuse  for  resorting  to  accommodation  bills 
and  other  illegitimate  methods  of  raising  money.  Another  pleads  the  bad  treat- 
ment he  has  received  from  a  relative  or  a  friend  in  defence  of  rough  and  hard  and 
nncharitable  words  about  him.  God  who  made  us,  knows  our  frame  and  He  re- 
members that  we  are  dust ;  Christ  can  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  Ofur  infirmities« 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {caiv.  wu 

having  been  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are.  We  may  rely  on  the  Divine  tendemesi 
and  mercy.  God  will  not  deal  hardly  with  us ;  He  treats  us  more  generously  than 
we  treat  each  other ;  sometimes  He  treats  us  more  mercifully  than  we  treat  our- 
selves.  But  to  allege  temptation  as  an  apology  for  sin  is  clearly  to  defy  the 
authority  of  the  Divine  law  and  to  dissolve  all  moral  obligations.  [R,  W.  Dale, 
LL.D.)  The  folly  of  a  fruitless  profession : — I.  Show  who  thby  abb  who  deservb 
THE  CEN8CBE  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  Mere  nominal  Christians.  2.  Formal,  self- 
righteous  persons.  3.  False  professors.  II.  Expostulate  with  them  on  thb 
FOLLT  of  theib  CONDUCT.  1.  Is  HOt  a  Conformity  to  Christ's  precepts  practicable  T 
2.  Is  not  obedience  to  Him  necessary  ?  3.  Will  not  a  feigned  allegiance  be  dis- 
covered by  Him  ?  4.  Shall  we  not  wish  at  last  tbat  we  had  been  sincere  and  up- 
right. Application.  (1)  Let  us  all  seek  to  become  Christians  indeed.  (2)  Let 
ns  not  be  afraid  to  confess  our  Lord  before  men.  (3)  Let  our  lives  be  consistent 
with  our  professions.  (4)  Let  us  trust  in  the  Lord  as  simply  as  if  obedience  were 
not  required.  (5)  Let  us  obey  the  Lord  as  zealously  as  if  obedienoe  only  were 
required.    {Theological  Sketch  Book.) 

Vers.  47-49.  Whosoever  cometh  to  He,  and  heareth  My  sayings,  and  doetb 
them,  I  will  show  you  to  whom  he  Is  like. — 2'he  similitude  of  hearing  Christ's 
sayings: — I.  What  is  meant  by  the  sayings  op  Christ.  1.  The  doctrine  of  faith 
and  repentance.  2.  The  doctrine  of  regeneration.  3.  The  doctrine  of  self-denial. 
4.  But,  more  particularly,  tbat  doctrine  and  those  sayings  which  He  had  just 
concluded,  urging  a  holy  life,  and  explaining  the  nature  and  spirituality  of  the 
moral  law.  II.  What  is  meant  by  hearing  Christ's  sayings.  1.  To  hear  His 
word  and  sayings  with  attention  :  to  hear  in  hearing.  2.  To  hear  His  sayings  and 
holy  doctrine,  as  it  is  His  word,  not  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  it  is  indeed  the 
Word  of  God.  Thus  those  in  Thessalonica  heard  it,  and  received  it,  which  becomes 
efifectual  in  all  that  believe.  3.  They  hear  Christ's  sayings  with  holy  trembling. 
Thus  the  good  king  Josiah  heard  the  book  of  the  law.  4.  To  hear  Christ's  sayings 
and  heavenly  doctrine  believingly  ;  "Who  hath  believed  our  report?  "  (Isa.  liii.  1). 
6.  To  hear  with  understanding  ;  many  hear  but  remain  ignorant  of  their  state,  do 
not  understand  the  purport  of  the  word,  which  is  to  convince  them  of  the  evil  of 
sin,  and  of  their  woful  and  undone  condition  thereby,  and  of  the  necessity  of  a 
Mediator,  or  of  a  Saviour;  as  also  of  the  excellency  of  that  blessed  Saviour, 
together  with  that  mighty  power  and  ability  that  He  is  clothed  with  to  save.  6. 
The  wise  hearer  hears  Christ's  sayings  and  retains  them,  he  is  not  a  forgetful 
hearer ;  he  sees  the  excellency  of  the  word  ;  likes  and  approves  of  the  sayings  and 
doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ ;  he  is  like  to  Mary  who  pondered,  "  And  kept  all  these 
sayings  in  her  heart."  These  persons,  with  holy  David,  love  God's  Word  above 
gold,  yea,  above  fine  gold ;  "  therefore  I  esteem  all  thy  precepts  concerning  all 
things  to  be  right,  and  hate  every  false  way"  (Psa.  cxix.  127,  128).  7.  It  is  a 
hearing  of  Christ's  word  and  sayings  subjectively ;  such  hear  and  come  to  Christ. 
"  Whosoever  cometh  to  Me,  and  heareth  My  sayings,"  &o.,  (Luke  vi.  47).  In  coming 
to  Christ  they  hear,  and  in  hearing,  come,  that  is,  then  believe,  and  receive  Jesus 
Christ.  III.  What  is  meant  by  doing  Christ's  sayings.  1.  It  is  to  believe  what- 
soever is  matter  of  faith ;  and  to  do  and  practise  whatsoever  is  matter  of  practice 
and  duty.  2.  He  may  be  said  to  do  what  Christ  saith  that  hath  his  whole  trust 
and  dependence  upon  Him,  or  that  resteth  wholly  upon  Christ's  merits  and  right- 
eousness for  justification  and  eternal  life.  3.  To  do  Christ's  sayings  is  to  yield 
ready  and  hearty  obedience  to  the  precepts  He  hath  given  forth  in  the  gospel: 
some  will  not  hear  what  Christ  says ;  others  will  hear,  but  they  hear  carelessly ; 
others  hear  but  do  not.  •*  If  I  am  your  Lord  and  Master,  why  do  ye  not  what  I 
say  ?  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of 
My  Father  which  is  in  heaven  "(Matt.  vii.  21).  4.  They  that  uprightly  do  Christ's 
sayings,  do  them  sincerely,  in  truth,  not  out  of  by-ends  and  aims;  neither  for 
loaves,  not  for  self  and  carnal  profit,  nor  for  self-applause.  5.  They  do  Christ's 
sayings  from  right  principles,  from  a  principle  of  life,  from  faith  in,  and  love  to 
Christ :  if  ye  love  Me,  keep  My  commandments ;  that  obedience  which  proceeds 
not  from  faith  and  love,  is  not  regarded,  nor  accepted  of  by  Jesus  Christ.  6.  They 
are  such  that  do  all  Christ's  sayings ;  •'  Ye  are  My  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I 
say"  (John  xv.  14).  7.  Such  continue  in  doing  Christ's  sayings ;  they  abide  in 
their  obedience,  they  obey  always,  or  continue  in  well  doing.  IV.  What  is  meami 
BY  His  house.  1.  By  this  house  is,  doubtless,  meant  his  hope  of  salvation; 
"  Whose  hope  shall  be  cut  off,  and  whose  trust  shall  be  as  the  spider's  web  "  (Job 


oiTAP.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  858 

viii.  14).  1.  A  honse  is  that  which  we  rest  in,  and  where  we  take  oar  repose ;  a 
true  believer  resteth  on  Christ,  he  builds  his  house,  i.e.,  his  hope,  hit  soul,  and  all 
he  doth,  on  Christ ;  he  that  hath  a  right  hope,  a  true  faith,  he  hath  a  firm  and 
well-built  house,  where  he  reposeth  himself,  or  resteth  continually.  2.  A  house  is 
a  place  of  shelter  to  us,  in  a  tempestuous  or  stormy  season,  when  rain,  hail,  snow, 
thunder,  &o.,  are  like  to  annoy  us ;  so  this  man  that  builds  his  hope  in  Christ 
is  secured  and  safe,  when  Satan  raises  storms  of  temptations  upon  him  ;  he  is  safe 
also  from  the  thunderings  of  mount  Sinai,  or  the  thunderbolts  of  the  law  and  of 
the  wrath  of  God,  which  all  unbelievers  lie  open  to.  8.  A  house  is  often  assaulted 
by  thieves,  and  if  not  firm  and  strong,  may  be  broke  up,  and  all  that  dwell  in  it 
may  be  robbed,  nay  murdered ;  so  is  the  hope  of  a  Christian  often  attacked  by 
Satan,  and  if  his  faith  and  hope  was  not  built  upon  Christ,  he  was  certainly  in 
danger  of  losing  all  he  hath  ;  nay,  his  precious  soul  for  ever,  V.  What  is  meant 
BY  THK  BOOK.  By  the  rock  is  no  doubt  meant  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  often  called  a 
rook  ;  •♦  The  Lord  is  my  rock  and  my  fortress  "  (Psa.  xviii.  2).  '•  Who  is  a  rock  save 
our  God  ?  "  (Psa.  xviii.  13.)  "  0  Lord,  my  rock,  be  not  silent "  (Psa.  xxviii,  1).  "  Upon 
this  rock  will  I  build  My  Church  "  (Matt.  xvi.  18 ;  1  Cor.  x.  4).  Jesus  Christ  may 
be  fitly  compared  to  a  rock.  1.  A  rock  is  a  firm  and  immovable  thing,  therefore 
good  for  a  foundation ;  that  which  is  built  on  a  rock,  stands  sure ;  so  Christ  is  a 
firm  and  sure  foundation — "  Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church,  and  the  gates 
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it "  (Matt,  xvi,  18).  2.  Christ  may  be  compared 
to  a  rock,  in  regard  that  in  ancient  times  people  built  their  houses  in  rocks, 
as  well  as  built  upon  them ;  •*  they  hewed  out  houses,  or  habitations  in  rocks  " 
(Isa.  xxii.  16),  Christ  is  a  believer's  spiritual  habitation ;  "  they,  like  the 
dove,  make  their  dwelling  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,"  "He  that  dwelleth  in 
love,  dwelleth  in  God."  3.  Eocks  are  strong,  and  were  made  use  of  for  places 
of  defence;  no  fortifications  like  some  rocks,  they  are  impregnable:  David  for 
security  fled  into  a  rock ;  in  this  respect  Christ  may  also  be  compared  to  a  rock, 
because  He  is  our  refuge  from  the  wrath  and  vengeance  of  God,  the  curse  ol  the 
law,  and  rage  of  wicked  men,  sin,  and  devils;  a  believer  in  Christ  is  safe,  his 
dwelling  place  is  impregnable.  4.  Bocks  are  durable,  permanent,  and  lasting ; 
Jesus  Christ  hath  the  stability  of  a  rock.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever ;  hence  He  is  called  the  Bock  of  Ages.  VI.  Why  a  godly  man  is  called  a 
WISE  MAN.  1.  A  godly  man  ponders  well  all  future  dangers.  2.  All  future  safety 
and  security ;  how  he  may  avoid  and  escape  the  one,  and  enjoy  the  other.  If  he 
builds  not  with  wisdom,  he  foresees  the  danger  that  will  follow,  for  his  soul  will 
fall  into  hell.  3.  A  godly  man  may  be  looked  upon  to  be  wise,  because  he  so  consults 
matters,  that  he  may  not  suffer  the  loss  of  all  his  labour  and  cost ;  such  who  hear 
Christ's  sayings  and  do  them  not,  that  do  not  believe  in  Him,  nor  obey  His  precepts ; 
though  they  may  make  a  visible  profession,  and  do  many  things,  and  give  to  the 
poor,  and  suffer  much  external  loss,  yet  all  their  labour,  pains,  and  costs,  and 
future  hopes,  will  be  utterly  lost;  but  a  true  Christian  ia  so  wise  aa  to  close 
saviugly  with  Christ,  and  obey  His  precepts,  by  which  he  knows  his  labour  will  not 
be  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  4.  A  godly  man  is  a  wise  man,  because  he  complies  with, 
and  approves  of  that  great  and  glorious  design  and  purpose  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ ; 
it  being  the  contrivance  of  His  infinite  wisdom,  this  way  only  to  restore  and  save 
lost  man :  Now  seeing  a  true  Christian  accepteth  of  Christ  alone,  and  builds  upon 
Him  as  the  only  foundation,  it  shows  he  is  a  wise  man.  5.  Because  he  seeks  tha 
honour  of  his  blessed  Lord  and  Master,  and  thereby  keeps  in  His  love  and  favour ; 
it  is  not  his  own  good  only,  but  Christ's  glory  which  he  seeks,  and  this  is  a  great 
point  of  wisdom.  Because  nothing  but  God,  and  an  interest  in  Him,  and  the 
eternal  enjoyment  of  this  God,  will  satisfy  his  soul ;  if  God  be  the  chief  good,  then 
to  place  all  our  hope  and  happiness  in  Him,  and  to  enjoy  Him,  must  needs  be  a 
part  of  highest  wisdom.  •'  He  that  keepeth  his  commandments,  dwelleth  in  God, 
and  God  in  him  "  (1  John  iii.  24),  This  man  hath  God  to  be  his  God ;  0  what 
man  is  wise,  save  this  man  only?  Others  have  the  shell,  but  this  man  hath  the 
kernel :  others  have  the  cabinet,  and  that  contents  them,  but  this  man  hath  also 
the  jewel,  7.  Because  these  men  are  the  declared  friends  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  only 
favourites  of  heaven :  "  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you  " 
(John  XV.  14).  8.  He  is  a  wise  man,  because  he  is  resolved  to  keep  a  good 
conscience:  brethren,  conscience  is  a  tender  thing,  and  to  offend  it  is  a  piece  of 
greatest  folly ;  it  is  for  a  man  to  arm  himself  to  murder  his  own  soul,  or  kill  himself ; 
better  to  have  all  men  in  the  world  against  us,  and  to  reproach  us,  than  to  have  our 
cwn  coDsoience  to  aoeuae  and  reproach  us.    YII.  Whbbeim  his  wisoov  ooMsuxib 


654  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

1.  In  his  thoughtf  ulness  of  soul.  3.  In  hia  care  to  provide  a  honse  for  his  booL 
3,  In  building  his  house  upon  a  good  and  safe  foundation.  4.  In  digging  deep. 
If  it  be  a  great  and  famous  building,  some  magnificent  fabric  which  a  man  designs 
to  build,  he  will  dig  deep  to  lay  a  firm  and  sure  foundation,  he  digs  until  he  cornea 
to  a  rock,  or  sound  bottom :  now  it  is  a  great  and  glorious  fabric  that  a  Christian 
is  to  build,  a  building  that  is  to  stand  for  ever,  and  endure  all  storms  and  assaults 
of  Satan,  and  all  other  enemies  of  the  soul.  Besides,  pardon  of  sin,  justification, 
and  eternal  life,  are  great  things ;  and  the  soul  being  so  excellent,  bo  precious,  the 
bouse  that  is  to  be  built  for  it,  ought  to  bear  some  proportion  unto  it ;  also  Jesua 
Christ  the  prince  of  kings  of  the  earth,  designs  to  dwell  with  the  soul,  so  that  it 
may  be  truly  said  to  be  a  house  for  the  great  king ;  therefore,  on  all  these  respects, 
it  behoveth  us  to  dig  deep,  and  to  lay  a  safe  and  sure  foundation.  5.  In  building 
his  house  of  proper  and  fit  materials.  6.  In  building  by  rule.  7.  In  building  in 
the  proper  time.  8.  In  sitting  down  to  count  the  cost.  (1)  What  the  digging  up 
the  old  foundation  will  cost  him.  (2)  What  old  habits  must  be  changed,  and  what 
right-eye  sins  must  be  pulled  out,  and  what  right-hand  sins  must  be  cut  off.  (3) 
What  old  companions  must  be  forsaken,  and  what  enticements  must  be  withstood 
and  resisted.  (4)  What  reproaches  for  Christ's  sake  must  be  borne,  and  what 
external  losses  and  persecutions  must  be  endured.  (5)  He  counts  his  own  weak- 
ness and  inability  to  do  any  of  these  things,  and  so  consults  the  power,  faithful, 
ness,  and  promises  of  Christ,  on  which  he  solely  and  wholly  depends,  and  thereby 
knows  and  is  sure  he  cannot  fail ;  he  doth  not  begin  nor  go  on  in  his  own  strength, 
but  sees  his  riches  and  strength  is  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  therefore  strengtheneth 
himself  in  that  grace  that  is  in  him,  which  is  sufficient  for  him,  as  Paul  was  told 
after  he  had  begun  to  build,  when  assaulted  by  the  messenger  of  Satan.  (6)  He 
accounts  what  temptations  must  be  withstood,  from  Satan,  from  his  carnal  rela- 
tions, and  from  the  corruptions  of  his  own  heart.  (7)  And  what  reproaches  and 
persecutions  must  be  endured.  VIII.  Exhortation  to  foolish  builders.  1. 
Tremble,  all  ye  foolish  builders,  who  hear  Christ's  sayings,  but  do  them  not,  that 
hear  His  woi  d,  but  do  not  believe ;  who  are  reformed  perhaps  in  your  Uves,  but  not 
changed  in  your  hearts.  2.  Be  exhorted  to  try  yourselves,  examine  your  hearts, 
see  with  what  materials  you  have  built  your  house,  I  mean  your  hope  for  heaven ; 
if  it  be  not  upon  JesusChrist,  if  it  be  on  the  sands  of  your  own  works,  or  inherent 
righteousness,  or  on  your  duties,  or  upon  your  external  privileges,  or  on  gifts,  parts, 
or  knowledge,  or  traditions ;  pull  down  your  house  and  new  build  it,  build  it  on 
the  only  and  sure  foundation.  3.  Let  all  professors  prepare  for  a  storm ;  the  winda 
will  blow,  the  rain  will  fall,  and  the  floods  will  come ;  you  shall  all  be  tried  ;  God 
will  try  every  man's  work.  If  temptations  of  Satan,  if  tribulation  and  persecution 
from  men,  do  not  beat  down  your  house  and  hope,  yet  death  will.  4.  We  infer 
from  hence,  that  the  state  of  false  professors,  or  all  such  who  are  no  more  than 
bare  hearers  of  the  word,  is  very  sad  and  deplorable,  their  hope  will  be  as  ths 
spider's  web.  5.  Sinners,  doubtless  you  have  got  some  house,  or  hope,  or  another; 
but  any  hope  will  not  serve  your  turn.  0  how  near  may  you  be  to  a  storm,  death 
may  be  at  the  door,  and  then  your  hope  will  perish,  and  your  souls  be  lost. 
6.  What  comfort  is  here  for  believers,  they  are  safe!  (Benjamin  Keach). 
The  wise  and  the  foolish  hearers : — The  contrast  intended  is  not  that  between  two 
men  deliberately  selecting  different  foundations  on  which  to  build,  but  that  between 
two  men,  one  of  whom  makes  the  foundation  a  matter  of  deliberate  consideration, 
while  the  other  never  takes  a  moment's  thought  about  a  foundation,  but  proceeds  to 
build  at  hap-hazard,  on  the  surface,  anywhere,  just  where  he  happens  to  be — on 
the  loose  sands  on  the  banks,  or  even  in  the  bed  of  a  river  dried  up  by  severe 
drought  and  scorching  heat  of  summer,  as  rivers  are  so  apt  to  be  in  the  East.  1. 
In  the  light  of  the  true  distinction  between  the  two  builders,  as  above  stated,  w« 
can  see  the  special  appropriateness  of  the  emblem  employed  by  our  Lord  to  repre- 
sent two  different  types  of  men  in  reference  to  religion.  The  characteristics  of  the 
one  builder  are  considerateness  and  thoroughness,  as  those  of  the  other  are  incon- 
siderateness  and  superficiality.  2.  But  the  difference  between  the  two  classes  of 
men  is  too  important  to  be  disposed  of  in  a  sentence.  Our  Lord  Himself  dis- 
tinguishes the  two  classes  by  representing  a  man  of  the  one  class  as  one  who 
heareth  His  sayings  and  doeth  them,  and  a  man  of  the  other  class  as  one  who 
heareth  His  sayings  and  doeth  them  not.  No  man  who  is  thoroughly  in  sympathy 
with  the  teaching  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  in  danger  of  making  any  serioua 
mistake  as  to  the  footing  on  which  he  stands  before  God.  Thoroughgoing  moral 
earnestness  is  the  sure  road  to  faith  in  Divine  grace  as  the  source  of  salvation,  aa 


CHAi.  Ti.]  ST,  LUKE.  655 

the  history  of  Paul  and  of  Luther  shows.  A  little  earnestness  may  make  a  man  a 
Pharisee,  but  a  great  consuming  earnestness  will  make  him  a  Christian,  after  the 
Pauline  type.  Two  points  of  difference  in  character  are  clearly  hinted  at.  (1)  The 
wise  builder  has  a  piudent  regard  to  the  future.  (2)  The  wise  builder  does  not 
look  merely  to  appearance.  3.  We  have  thus  ascertained  the  distinctive  charac- 
teristics of  the  two  classes  of  hearers.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  discriminate  between 
these  two  classes  on  paper,  another  thing  to  discern  and  judge  between  them  as 
existing  in  real  life.  Who,  then,  is  to  decide  as  to  the  merits  of  the  two  builders  ? 
The  Divine  preacher,  with  true  insight  into  the  state  of  the  case,  replies,  "  The  ele- 
ments." The  rain,  the  winds,  and  the  floods,  are  the  infallible  judges  of  the 
builders  and  their  work.  The  elements  in  the  metaphor  represent  generally  times 
of  severe  trial,  the  judgment-days  which  overtake  men  even  in  this  world  occa- 
sionally, and  in  which  many  fair  edifices  of  religious  prufessiou  go  down.  The 
forms  in  which  the  trial  may  come  are  vei^  diverse.  (1)  The  great  thing  to  be 
laid  to  heart  is  that  trial,  in  one  form  or  another,  is  to  be  expected.  (2)  And 
another  thing  should  be  remembered :  the  crisis  that  is  to  try  us  may  come  sud- 
denly, leaving  no  time  for  preparation,  no  time  for  saving  one's  household  furniture, 
barely  time  to  save  one's  own  life.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  B.D.)  Foundations: — 1.  All 
men  are  building.  2.  All  builders  have  a  choice  of  foundations.  3.  All  foundations 
will  be  tried.  4.  Only  one  foundation  will  stand.  {W.  W.  Wythe.)  My  say- 
ings:— We  may  claim  for  Christ's  sayings  an  originality,  a  compass,  and  lov.n^ 
energy,  such  as  have  not  been  rivalled  by  any  speaker.  "  Never  man  spake  hka 
this  man,"  was  the  testimony  of  His  enemies.  After  reading  the  doctrines  of  Plato, 
Socrates,  or  Aristotle,  we  feel  that  the  specific  diiierence  between  their  words  and 
Christ's  is  the  diiierence  between  an  inquiry  and  a  revelation.  1.  The  sayings  of 
Christ  may  be  said  to  be  Divine  because  they  are  so  human.  2.  The  sayings 
of  Christ  determined  the  destiny  of  all  who  heard  tliem.  To  have  heard 
these  sayings  is  to  have  incurred  the  gravest  reeponhibility.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Hearert  and  doers:  —  I.  First  then,  the  distinction  or  characteb.  II.  Now, 
observe  next,  the  contrast  in  the  hopes  op  these  two  charaotkks.  The  man 
who  builds  his  house  on  the  rock  is  said  to  dig  deep  before  he  begins  to  build ; 
but  the  man  who  is  likened  to  the  foolish  man  takes  no  trouble  about  digasing 
deep.  He  is  "  like  a  man  that  without  a  foundation  builds  his  house  upon  the 
earth."  1.  Here,  then,  is  the  first  contrast  between  a  real  believer  in  Christ,  and  a 
mere  professor  of  religion.  The  believer's  safety  is  preceded  by  anxiety.  The 
mere  professor's  hope  of  heaven  it  has  cost  him  no  trouble  to  attain ;  he  has  formed 
it  without  any  previous  anxiety.  Now,  it  is  just  so  with  a  real  believer  in  Jesus 
Christ — one  who  has  any  anxiety  about  his  soul's  salvation.  He  dares  not  take  it 
for  granted  that  he  is  all  right.  A  man  who  does  take  for  granted  that  he  is  right 
for  heaven,  is  like  a  man  who  builds  on  the  surface.  One  who  is  really  anxious 
about  his  soul  digs  to  see  whether  his  foundation  is  good  before  he  begins  to  build. 
2.  Observe,  next,  that  the  Christian's  hope  rests  thus  upon  a  solid  foundation. 
Until  the  sinner  finds  that  salvation  which  God  has  laid,  of  course  he  cannot  rest 
npon  a  solid  foundation.  3.  The  real  believer  finds  that  his  house  stands  in  the 
time  of  trial.  There  may  be  afSiction,  there  may  be  persecution,  there  may  be 
peculiar  temptations ;  or  if  he  escape  these,  there  is  the  great  trial  of  death  and 
th«  prospect  of  judgment ;  but  he  who  finds  that  he  is  resting  on  Christ — that  he 
has  been  trying  to  know  what  Christ  would  have  him  do,  and  then  to  do  it— finds 
himself  secure.  The  promise  of  his  Saviour,  the  oath  of  his  covenant  God,  omni- 
potence itself  secures  his  safety.  He  may  be  shaken  in  his  mind  in  consequence  of 
trouble  and  adversity,  but  he  cannot  be  moved  off  from  the  rock  on  which  he  rests. 
Storms  come  very  suddenly  sometimes  aud  very  unexpectedly.  Men  may  be  in  the 
enjoyment  of  health  and  strength  and  vigour,  and  may  be  lawfully  pursuing  their 
worldly  duties,  when  some  unexpected  sickness  reaches  them,  and  after  a  few  days, 
it  may  be,  of  pain  and  anguish,  their  medical  attendants  signify  that  there  is  no 
hope  of  their  recovery ;  and  now  comes  a  time  to  test  whether  we  have  been  building 
on  a  foundation  or  not.  (W.  Cadman,  M.A.)  The  two  builders: — Much  as  all 
men  resemble  one  another,  there  is  yet  between  us  a  most  affecting  difference.  Our 
form  and  nature  are  the  same;  our  conditions,  and  wants,  and  troubles  are  alike; 
but  beneath  this  outward  resemblance  there  lies  unseen,  and  perhaps  unthought  of, 
a  dissimilarity  of  the  very  utmost  importance.  Some  of  us  are  the  friends  of  the 
living  God,  while  others  are  His  enemies.  I.  As  to  the  similakitx  of  the  two  men 
mentioned  in  the  text.  1.  They  were  both  builders.  Both  are  described  as  actually 
at  work.    Not  the  openly  profane  or  careless,  bat  professing  Christians.    8.  Thej 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [flSAT.  n. 

were  building  a  hooBO.  A  dwelliDg-pIsoe,  refuge,  home.  A  shelter  for  support 
under  the  cares  of  life,  for  consolation  in  its  troubles,  and  a  protection  from  the 
'wrath  of  God  throughout  eternity.  3.  The  house  of  each  of  these  builders  has  its 
strength  severely  tried.  We  must  expect  our  religion  to  be  brought  to  the  test,  and 
its  real  character  to  be  disclosed.  Till  this  trial  comes,  we  can  know  but  little  of 
ourselves.  Almost  any  religion  will  stand  in  a  calm.  It  is  temptation — trifling, 
worldly,  and  sensual  companions;  it  is  affliction — disappointment,  poverty,  sick- 
ness, mental  oppression ;  it  is  a  change  of  scene,  or  circumstances,  or  society ; 
these  are  the  things  which  show  us  what  manner  of  men  we  are,  and  often  surprise 
and  confound  us  by  the  discovery  which  we  make.  II.  Thzib  dissimilabities.  1. 
One  of  these  men  built  his  house  with  foresight ;  the  other  heedlessly.  A  Christian 
must  look  forward,  and  labour  for  something  that  will  stand  a  storm ;  a  faith  that 
will  support  him  when  everything  else  gives  way :  a  hope  that  will  bear  him  up 
when  conscience  stings,  and  Satan  accuses,  and  death  strikes  ;  a  refuge  for  his  soul 
amidst  all  the  convulsions  and  terrors  of  a  departing  world.  2.  One  of  these  men 
is  a  painstaking  builder ;  the  other  is  comparatively  indolent.  True  religion  is  a 
laborious  work,  and  the  most  important  parts  of  it  are  those  which  require  the 
most  labour  and  make  the  least  appearance.  The  foundations  must  be  dug  deep, 
and  built  on  the  solid  rock.  3.  One  of  these  builders  looks  well  to  the  foundation 
of  his  house ;  the  other  is  indifferent  about  it.  4.  Mark  the  difference  in  the  end 
of  these  men.  Conclusion :  This  parable  may  teach  us— 1.  The  object  of  true 
religion.  Salvation.  2.  The  nature  of  true  religion.  A  building,  a  work,  a  pro- 
gressive labour.  An  earnest  and  unceasing  effort  for  the  working  out  of  salvation. 
8.  The  wisdom  ol  true  religion.  The  pursuing  of  a  good  end  by  the  best  means. 
Simple  obedience  to  the  commands  of  Christ ;  earnest  labouring  after  salvation  in 
God's  way  and  manner.  4.  The  folly  of  that  religion  which  trusts  for  salvation  in 
itself.  (G.  Bradley,  M.A.)  He  only  is  a  Christian  who  does  vJiat  Christ  bids 
him: — This  closing  lesson  is  rendered  impressive  and  memorable,  not  only  by  the 
vivid  double  simile  under  which  it  is  conveyed,  but  still  more  even  by  the  full 
round  roll  of  the  style ;  the  intentional  repetition  of  the  same  phrases  in  both 
halves  of  the  parable  ;  the  continuous  solemn  sweep  of  the  long,  redoubled  eentence 
which  seems  to  dwell  upon  the  ear,  and  afterwards  to  haunt  the  memory.  The 
materials  of  the  picture  were  famiUar  to  His  audience.  Syrian  houses  of  the 
poorer  class  were  then  probably  (as  they  still  are)  very  slight — built  of  mud  or  a 
few  unhewn  stones,  roughly  daubed  with  "  untempered  mortar,"  and  roofed  in  by 
no  stouter  materials  than  brushwood,  with  a  layer  of  grass-grown  earth  over  it. 
Two  such  houses  have  been  erected  in  one  of  the  precipitous  wadys  which  every- 
where seam  the  limestone  ranges  of  Palestine,  and  swiftly  drain  off  its  superfluous 
rainfall.  So  long  as  summer  lasts  and  the  bed  of  the  watercourse  is  dry,  both  of 
them  stand  equally  well,  and  appear  to  be  equally  secure.  But  a  day  of  testing  comes. 
One  of  those  terrific  storms  of  rain  and  hail  which  the  treacherous  winds  of  the 
Levant  bring  up  suddenly  from  the  sea,  swells  the  brook  in  a  few  hours  into  a 
torrent ;  and  when  the  flood  sweeps  down  its  narrow  channel  like  a  tide,  turbid 
and  white  with  foam  from  one  rocky  bank  to  the  other,  while  the  fierce  rain-storm 
drives  up  the  ravine  before  the  western  gale,  and  lashes  on  roof  and  sides ;  then  is 
put  to  proof  the  stability  of  both  dwellings;  then  everything  depends  on  the 
character  of  their  foundation.  The  one  has  been  built,  with  careless  want  of  fore- 
sight, upon  nothing  better  than  the  layer  of  loose  sand  or  gravel  brought  down  by 
former  floods.  Of  course,  the  waters  which  eddy  now  about  its  base  fret  away  from 
beneath  it  the  very  soil  on  which  it  stands,  till  the  force  of  the  storm,  beating  down 
upon  its  undermined  and  unsupported  walls,  crushes  it  into  ruin.  It  was  a  *'  refuge 
of  lies,"  for  it  pretended  to  a  foundation  which  it  had  not ;  and  "  the  overflowing 
scourge  "  rolls  it  indignantly  to  the  sea.  The  other  builder,  on  the  contrary,  when 
he  began  to  build,  took  the  precaution  to  clear  away  that  drift  sand,  deep  though  it 
was,  and,  digging  down  to  the  rock  beneath,  laid  his  foundation  there.  Now  he 
finds  the  reward  of  his  prudent  pains  and  thoroughness.  The  flood  may  wash 
away,  no  doubt,  whatever  is  movable  from  about  the  base  of  his  house,  even  as 
from  his  neighbour's ;  but  when  its  walls  are  laid  bare  to  the  very  rock,  the  secret 
strength  of  his  "  hiding-place  "  is  only  discovered  to  view ;  and  though  roof  and  sides 
may  suffer  here  and  there  in  their  weaker  portions  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  14,  15,)  from  the 
searching  of  wind  or  rain,  yet  his  house  at  least,  as  a  place  to  shelter  him,  is  secure 
from  demolition :  it  falls  not,  for  it  is  founded  on  the  rock.  So  Jesus  leaves  His 
parable  to  interpret  itself.  The  contrast  betwixt  a  superficial  profession  of  disciple- 
ghip,  in  which  self-deceived  Christians  confide  as  sufficient,  and  that  thoroughgoingt 


CHAP.  Ti.]  8T,  LUKE.  657 

profound  moral  eaiiiestness  which  is  ooncemed  to  make  sare  work  of  it,  and  to  be 
all  that  it  seems  to  be :  this  lies  on  the  surface  on  the  parable.  But  it  seems  not 
anreasonable  to  find  in  our  Lord's  words  something  more  than  this.  That  moral 
thoroughness  in  the  Christian  life  which  aims  at  consistent  obedience  to  Christ, 
Bucceeds  in  doing  His  word  only  by  coming  into  close  and  trustful  contact  with 
Himself.  He  who  would  be  practically  a  Christian,  must  have  nothing  betwixt  his 
naked  soul  and  the  eternal  Bock,  Christ ;  for  it  is  only  as  based  on  Him,  fastened 
to  Him,  that  any  disciple  learns  to  love  His  word,  or  gets  strength  to  do  it.  Let 
us  look  each  one  to  his  foundation.  There  are  so  many  who  seem  to  be  taking 
their  stand  for  eternity  on  Jesus  Christ ;  there  are  possibly  so  few  whose  lives  are 
built  into  the  Eock.  So  many  of  us  hear,  so  few  are  manifestly  doing.  His  words 
(James  i.  22).     (J.  Oswald  Dykes,  D.D.)  A  solid  foundation  : — Yon  lighthouse 

tower,  that  stands  among  the  tumbling  waves,  seems  to  have  nothing  but  them  to 
rest  on  ;  yet  there  stately  and  stable  it  stands,  beautiful  in  the  calm,  and  calm  in 
the  wintry  tempest,  guiding  the  sailor  on  to  his  desired  haven,  past  the  rolling 
reef,  through  the  gloom  of  the  darkest  night,  and  the  waters  of  the  stormiest  sea. 
Blessed  tower  that  with  its  light,  piercing  the  gloom,  shines  and  rises  on  many  an 
eye  as  a  star  of  hope.  Why  is  it  stable  ?  You  see  nothing  but  the  waves,  but 
beneath  the  waves,  down  below  the  rolling,  foaming,  tumbling  billows,  its  founda- 
tion is  the  solid  rock.  And  what  that  tower  is  to  the  house  on  yon  sand-bank, 
which  the  last  storm  threw  up,  and  the  next  shall  sweep  back  into  the  sea,  Christ's 
righteousness  is  to  mine — Christ's  works  to  my  best  ones.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
Safe  on  the  rock : — Mr.  Moody,  in  his  Christian  Convention  at  Northfield,  said, 
"  We  want  more  Christians  like  the  Irishman  who,  when  asked  if  he  didn't  tremble 
during  a  certain  storm  when  he  was  standing  out  upon  a  rocky  eminence,  said, 
'  Yes,  my  legs  trembled,  but  the  rock  didn't,  and  because  my  feet  were  on  the  rock 
I  felt  safe.'  "  Laying  hold  on  the  rock  : — The  wind  had  been  blowing — it  was  a 
dreadful  hurricane,  and  Gotthold  walked  into  a  forest  and  saw  many  trees  torn  up 
by  the  roots  ;  he  marvelled  much  at  one  tree  which  stood  alone  and  yet  had  been 
unmoved  in  the  tempest.  He  said,  '*  How  is  this  ?  The  trees  that  were  together 
have  fallen,  and  this  alone  stands  fast  1  "  He  observed  that  when  the  trees  grow 
too  closely  they  cannot  send  their  roots  into  the  earth  ;  they  lean  too  much  upon 
each  other ;  but  this  tree,  standing  alone,  had  space  to  thrust  its  roots  into  the  earth , 
«nd  lay  hold  on  the  rock  and  stones,  and  so  when  the  wind  came,  it  fell  not.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  only  firm  foundation : — Men  who  stand  on  any  other  foun- 
dation than  the  rock  Christ  Jesus,  are  like  birds  that  build  in  trees  by  the  side  of 
rivers.  The  bird  sings  in  the  branches,  and  the  river  sings  below,  but  all  the  while 
the  waters  are  undermining  the  soil  about  the  roots,  till,  in  some  unsuspected  hour, 
the  tree  falls  with  ft  crash  into  the  stream ;  and  then  its  nest  is  sunk,  its  home  is 
gone,  and  the  bird  is  a  wanderer.  But  birds  that  hide  their  young  in  the  clefts  of 
the  rock  are  undisturbed,  and,  after  every  winter,  coming  again,  they  find  their 
nest  awaiting  them,  and  all  their  life  long  brood  the  summer  in  the  same  places, 
impregnable  to  time  or  storm.  (H.  TV.  Beecher.)  Sandy  foundations  : — BecoUect 
that  all  religion  which  is  not  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart  will  have  to  be 
unravelled,  let  it  be  woven  ever  so  cunningly.  We  may  build,  as  our  little  children 
do  on  the  sea-shore,  our  sand  houses,  and  we  may  pile  them  up  very  quickly  too, 
and  be  very  pleased  with  them,  but  they  will  all  come  down  as  the  tide  of  time 
advances;  only  that  which  God  the  Holy  Ghost  builds  upon  the  foundation  of 
Christ's  finished  work  will  stand  the  test  of  time  and  eternity.  {G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
On  laying  foundations : — All  hearers  are  builders  of  houses  for  their  souls :  they 
are  each  one  doing  something  to  set  up  a  spiritual  habitation.  Some  of  thcjse  go  a 
considerable  distance  in  this  house-building,  and  even  crown  the  structure  by 
publicly  confessing  Christ.  They  say  unto  Him,  "Lord,  Lord":  they  meet  with 
His  followers,  and  join  with  them  in  reverence  to  the  Master's  name  ;  but  they  do 
not  obey  the  Lerd ;  they  hear  Him,  but  they  fail  to  do  the  things  which  He  says. 
I.  Our  first  subiect  will  be  a  common  temptation  with  spiritoal  bdildbrs.  A 
common  temptation  with  hearers  of  the  Word  is  to  neglect  foundation  work,  to  get 
hurriedly  over  the  first  part  of  the  business,  and  run  up  the  building  quickly,  1. 
This  temptation  is  all  the  more  dangerous,  first,  because  these  young  beginners 
have  no  experience.  Even  the  most  experienced  child  of  God  is  often  deceived ; 
how  much  more  the  pilgrim  who  has  but  just  entered  the  wicket-gate !  The  tried 
saint  sometimes  mistakes  that  for  a  virtue  which  is  only  a  gilded  fault,  and  he 
fancies  that  to  be  genuine  which  is  mere  counterfeit;  how,  then,  without  any 
experience  whatever,  can  the  new  babe  in  grace  escape  deception  unless  he  b« 

42 


858  THE  BTBLTCAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  wt, 

graciously  preserved  ?  Newly  awakened,  and  rendered  seriona,  earnest  hearts  get 
to  work  in  the  Divine  life  with  much  hurry,  seizing  upon  that  which  first  comefl 
to  hand,  building  in  heedless  haste,  without  due  care  and  examination.  Something 
must  be  done,  and  they  do  it  without  asking  whether  it  is  according  to  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Lord.  They  call  Jesus  "  Lord  " ;  but  they  do  what  others  say  rather 
than  what  Jesus  says.  2.  There  is  this  to  help  the  temptation,  too,  that  this  plan 
for  the  present  saves  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  Your  mind  is  distressed,  and  you 
want  comfort ;  well,  it  will  comfort  you  to  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  though  you  do  net 
the  things  that  Christ  says.  3.  This  kind  of  building  without  foundation  has  this 
advantage  to  back  up  the  temptation — it  enables  a  man  to  run  up  a  religion  very 
quickly.  He  makes  splendid  progress.  He  takes  every  good  thing  for  granted, 
and  votes  that  all  is  gold  which  glitters.  See  how  fast  he  goes !  The  fog  is 
dense,  but  he  steams  through  it,  heedless  of  danger  ?  He  has  joined  the  Church ; 
he  has  commenced  work  for  God  ;  he  is  boasting  of  his  own  attainments;  he  hints 
that  he  is  perfect.  But  is  this  mushroom  building  safe  ?  Will  it  pass  muster  in 
the  last  great  survey  ?  When  a  man  travels  upon  a  wrong  road,  the  faster  he  runs 
the  further  he  will  go  astray.  If  you  build  quickly  because  you  build  without  a 
foundation,  your  time  and  toil  are  thrown  away.  4.  How  common,  how  deceptive, 
is  this  temptation  !  For  the  young  beginner,  the  man  who  is  just  aroused  to  seek 
the  Lord,  will  find  a  great  many  to  help  him  in  his  mistake,  should  he  neglect  the 
foundation.  Kind,  good.  Christian  friends  often,  without  a  thought  of  doing  so, 
help  to  mislead  seeking  souls.  Let  us  beware  lest  we  cry  "  Peace,  peace,"  where 
there  is  no  peace.  5.  No  doubt  many  are  encouraged  in  slight  building  by  the 
fact  that  so  many  professors  are  making  a  fair  show,  and  yet  their  building  is  with- 
out foundation.  We  cannot  shut  our  eyes  to  the  fact  that  in  all  Churches  there 
are  persons  who  have  no  depth  of  spiritual  root,  and  we  are  afraid  no  real  spiritual 
life.  Beware  of  loose  professors,  who  are  as  wreckers'  lights  that  lure  men  upon 
the  rocks.  Make  sure  work  for  eternity,  and  bid  triflers  begone.  6.  Again,  there 
is  always  at  the  back  of  all  this  an  inducement  to  build  without  a  foundation 
because  it  will  not  be  known,  and  possibly  may  not  be  found  out  for  years. 
Foundation-work  is  quite  out  of  sight,  and  the  house  can  be  got  up  and  be  very 
useful  in  a  great  many  ways,  and  it  may  stand  a  good  while  without  the  under- 
ground work;  for  houses  without  foundations  do  not  tumble  down  at  once ;  they 
will  stand  for  years ;  nobody  knows  how  long  they  may  keep  up ;  perhaps  they  may 
even  be  inhabited  with  comfort  till  the  last  great  flood.  Death  alone  will  discover 
some  impostures.  II.  So  I  advance  to  the  second  step,  and  there  we  will  consider 
A  WISE  PRECAUTION  WHICH  BATK  BUILDERS  NEVER  FORGET.  They  dig  deep,  and 
never  rest  till  they  get  a  good  substantial  foundation ;  they  are  glad  to  get  to  the 
bottom  of  all  the  loose  earth  and  to  build  on  the  rock.  Let  me  commend  this 
wise  precaution  to  all  of  you.  1.  Follow  the  text,  and  learn  to  see  to  your 
sincerity.  The  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  Why  call  ye  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  and  do  not  the 
things  which  I  say  ?  "  May  the  Holy  Ghost  make  you  true  to  the  core.  Be  afraid 
to  say  a  word  more  than  you  feel.  2.  The  next  thing  is  thoroughness.  For  observe, 
according  to  our  Lord,  the  wise  builder  digged  deep.  You  cannot  do  a  right  thing 
too  well.  Dig  deep  if  you  do  dig  a  foundation.  3.  Next  to  that  add  self-renuncia- 
tion ;  for  that  is  in  the  parable.  When  a  man  digs  a  deep  foundation  he  has  much 
earth  to  throw  out.  So  he  that  builds  for  eternity  has  a  great  deal  to  get  rid  of. 
Self-trust  must  go  at  the  beginning ;  love  of  sin  must  follow ;  worldliness,  pride, 
self-seeking,  all  sorts  of  iniquity — these  must  be  cast  aside.  There  is  very  much 
rubbish,  and  the  rubbish  must  go.  4.  Then  must  come  solid  principle.  The 
man  who  is  determined  that  if  he  does  build  he  will  build  securely,  digs  down  to 
the  rock.  What  God  has  said  is  a  rock  ;  what  man  teaches  is  mere  shifting  sand. 
5.  These  truthful  principles  must  be  firmly  adhered  to.  Remember  the  huge  shaft 
at  Bradford,  and  how  many  were  slain  by  its  fall,  and  let  it  teach  you  to  hold  hard 
to  foundation  truths,  and  never  depart  from  them.     III.  Gather  from  the  text  a 

SET   OF   ARGUMENTS,    URGING    OS   TO   TAKE    CARE   OF   THE    FOUNDATION.         1.     We     OUght 

to  build  with  a  good  foundation  at  the  beginning,  because  otherwise  we  shall  not 
build  well  in  any  other  part  of  the  house.  Bad  work  in  the  foundation  influences 
all  the  rest  of  the  courses.  In  the  Revised  Version,  at  the  end  of  the  forty-eighth 
verse,  instead  of  "For  it  was  founded  upon  a  rock,"  we  read,  " Because  it  had 
been  well  builded."  The  house  was  built  well  at  the  bottom,  and  that  led  the 
workman  to  put  in  good  work  all  the  way  up,  so  that  all  through  "it  had  been 
well  builded."  The  other  man  built  badly  underground,  and  did  the  same  up  to 
(he  root.    When  you  get  into  the  habit  of  slovenly  work  in  secret,  the  tendency  iv 


«up.  Ti.]  ST.  LUKE.  W9 

to  be  slovenly  in  public  too.  If  the  underground  part  of  our  religion  is  not  firmly 
laid  upon  Christ,  then  in  the  upper  part  there  will  be  rotten  work,  half-baked 
bricks,  mud  instead  of  mortar,  and  a  general  scamping  of  everything.  When  a 
great  Grecian  artist  was  fashioning  an  image  for  tiie  temple,  he  was  diligently 
carving  the  back  part  of  the  goddess,  and  one  said  to  him,  "You  need  not  finish 
that  part  of  the  statue,  because  it  is  to  be  built  into  the  wall."  He  replied,  "  The 
gods  can  see  in  the  wall."  He  had  a  right  idea  of  what  is  due  to  God.  That  part 
of  my  religion  which  no  man  can  see  should  be  as  perfect  as  if  it  were  to  be 
observed  by  all.  The  day  shall  declare  it.  When  Christ  shall  come  everything 
shall  be  made  known,  and  published  before  the  universe.  Therefore  see  to  it 
that  it  be  fit  to  be  thus  made  known.  2.  See,  again,  that  we  ought  to  have  good 
foundations  when  we  look  at  the  situation  whereon  the  house  is  to  be  built.  It  is 
clear  from  this  parable  that  both  these  houses  were  built  in  places  not  far  from  a 
river,  or  where  streams  might  be  expected  to  come.  Certain  parts  of  the  South  of 
France  are  marvellously  like  Palestine,  and  perhaps  at  the  present  moment  they 
are  more  like  what  the  Holy  Land  was  in  Christ's  day  than  the  Holy  Land  now  is. 
Wlaen  I  reached  Cannes  last  year  I  found  that  there  had  been  a  flood  in  the  town. 
This  flood  did  not  come  by  reason  of  a  river  beiug  swollen,  but  through  a  deluge 
of  rain.  A  waterspout  seems  to  have  burst  upon  the  hill-side,  tearing  up  earth, 
and  rocks,  and  stones,  and  then  hurrying  down  to  the  sea.  It  rushed  across  the 
railway  station,  and  poured  down  the  street  which  led  to  it,  drowning  several  per- 
sons in  its  progress.  When  I  was  there  a  large  hotel — I  should  think  five  stories 
high — was  shored  up  with  timber,  and  was  evidently  doomed;  for  when  this  stream 
rushed  down  the  narrow  street  it  undermined  the  lower  courses  of  the  building, 
and  as  there  were  no  foundations  at  all  able  to  bear  such  a  test,  the  whole  erection 
was  rendered  unsafe.  The  Saviour  had  some  such  case  in  His  mind's  eye._  A 
torrent  of  water  would  come  tearing  down  the  side  of  the  mountain,  and  if  a 
house  was  built  on  the  mere  earth,  it  would  be  carried  away  directly,  but  if  it  were 
fastened  into  the  rock  so  that  it  became  part  and  parcel  of  it,  then  the  flood  might 
TOsh  all  around  it,  but  it  would  not  shake  the  walls.  Beloved  builder  of  a  house 
for  your  soul,  your  house  is  so  situated  that  one  of  these  days  there  mast  come 
great  pressure  upon  it.  "How  do  you  know?"  Well,  I  know  that  the  house 
wherein  my  soul  lives  is  pitched  just  where  winds  blow,  and  waves  rise,  and 
storms  beat.  Where  is  yours  ?  Do  you  live  in  a  snug  corner  ?  Tes,  but  one  of 
these  times  you  will  find  that  the  snug  comer  wiU  be  no  more  shielded  than  the 
open  riverside  ;  for  God  so  orders  providence  that  every  man  has  his  test  sooner 
or  later.  3.  The  next  argument  is,  build  deep,  because  of  the  ruin  which  will  result 
from  a  bad  foundation.  What  happened  to  this  house  without  a  foundation? 
The  stream  beat  vehemently  on  it.  The  river's  bed  had  long  been  dry,  but  sud- 
denly it  was  flooded,  and  the  torrent  rolled  with  tremendous  power.  Perhaps  it 
was  persecution,  perhaps  prosperity,  perhaps  trouble,  perhaps  temptation,  perhaps 
prevalent  scepticism,  perhaps  death  ;  bat,  anyhow,  the  flood  beat  vehemently  upon 
that  house — "and  immediately  it  fell  "  I  It  did  not  stand  a  prolonged  assault,  it 
was  captured  at  once.  Then  it  is  added,  "  And  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great." 
The  house  came  down  with  a  crash,  and  it  was  the  man's  all.  The  man  was  an 
eminent  professor,  and  hence  his  ruin  was  all  the  more  notable.  For,  lastly,  and 
perhaps  this  will  be  the  best  argument,  observe  the  effect  of  this  good,  sure 
building,  this  deep  building.  We  read  that  when  the  flood  beat  upon  the  wise 
man's  house  "  it  could  not  shake  it."  That  is  very  beautiful.  Not  only  could  it 
not  carry  it  away,  but  "  it  could  not  shake  it."  I  see  the  man  ;  he  lost  his  money 
and  became  poor,  but  he  did  not  give  up  his  faith — "It  could  not  shake  it."  He 
was  ridiculed  and  slandered,  and  many  of  his  former  friends  gave  him  the  cold 
Bhouldsr,  but  "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  went  to  Jesus  under  his  great  trial,  and 
h»  was  sustained — "  It  could  not  shake  it."  He  was  very  sick,  and  his  spirit  wag 
depressed  within  him,  but  still  he  held  his  confidence  in  Christ — "  It  could  not 
shake  it."  He  was  near  to  die ;  he  knew  that  he  must  soon  depart  out  of  this 
world,  but  all  the  pains  of  death  and  the  certainty  of  dissolution  could  not  shake 
him.  He  died  as  he  lived,  firm  as  a  rock,  rejoicing  as  much  as  ever,  nay,  rejoicing 
more,  because  he  was  nearer  to  the  kingdom  and  to  the  fruition  of  all  his  hopes. 
"  It  could  not  shake  it."  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  have  a  faith  which  cannot  be 
shaken.  I  saw  one  day  a  number  of  beech  trees  which  had  formed  a  wood ;  they 
had  all  fallen  to  the  ground  tbroagh  a  storm.  The  fact  was  they  leaned  upon  one 
another  to  a  great  extent,  and  the  thickness  of  the  wood  prevented  each  tree 
from  getting  a  firm  hold  of  the  soil.     They  kept  each  other  up,  and  alio  oonstrainad 


eeO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [o«A».  n, 

each  other  to  grow  np  tall  and  thin,  to  the  neglect  of  root-growth.  When  th« 
tempest  forced  down  the  first  few  trees  the  others  readily  followed  one  after 
the  other.  Close  to  that  same  spot  I  saw  another  tree  in  the  open,  bravely  defying 
the  blast,  in  solitary  strength.  The  hurricane  had  beaten  upon  it,  bat  it  had 
endured  all  its  force  unsheltered.  That  lone,  brave  tree  seemed  to  be  better 
rooted  than  before  the  storm.  I  thought,  "  Is  it  not  so  with  professors?"  They 
often  hold  together,  and  help  each  other  to  grow  up,  but  if  they  have  not  firm 
personal  roothold,  when  a  storm  arises  they  fall  in  rows.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  two  builders  : — 1.  We  are  here  admonished  of  the  duty,  and  vast  importance, 
of  what  has  been  called  "  building  for  eternity  "  ;  that  is,  attending  to  the  salva- 
tion of  our  souls.  Every  one  is  building,  labouring  corporeally  and  materially,  or 
speculating  mentally,  in  one  way  or  another.  Some  are  engaged  with  great 
schemes ;  and  some,  who  have  neither  substance  nor  strength  to  expend  on  great 
works,  are  nevertheless  as  deeply  engaged  as  those  who  have.  How  many,  how- 
ever, are  building,  as  we  may  say,  only  for  this  world  1  Their  schemes  terminate 
here.  But  "  he  builds  too  low,  who  builds  beneath  the  skies."  To  have  a  hope 
for  heaven  ought  to  be  the  great  object  with  us  all.  This  is  the  one  thing  need- 
ful. 2.  Every  wise  man  will  be  careful  to  found  well — "  on  the  rock."  Some 
even  proceed  on  religion  so  much  at  random  that  they  have  never  thought  of  any 
determinate  principles;  they  cannot  teU  what  their  foundation  is;  in  fact,  they 
have  no  foundation  at  all — they  are,  spiritually,  building  castles  in  the  air.  It  ia 
not  so,  however,  with  the  wise  builder ;  he  is  not  so  easily  satisfied.  And,  as  in 
the  literal  case  of  a  building,  so  in  the  spiritual  case  under  consideration,  two 
things  are  necessary  to  be  attended  to  in  laying  the  foundation — the  one  is,  that 
the  builder  know  what  is  a  sufficient  foundation ;  and  the  other  is,  that  he  do 
actually  cause  his  building  to  rest  upon  it.  An  error  with  respect  to  either  of  these 
things  is  fatal.  God  has  laid  the  foundation,  and  we  must  build  upon  it.  A 
Saviour  is  offered,  and  we  must  accept  Him.  3.  The  wise  do  not  neglect  the 
superstructure  because  they  have  a  good  foundation.  Bather,  the  knowledge  that 
he  has  begun  well  is  an  encouragement  for  him  to  go  on  well — with  confidence 
and  with  care.  4.  In  the  time  of  trial,  the  hope  of  the  true  Christian,  like  the 
house  of  the  wise  builder,  will  stand ;  while  the  hope  of  the  hypocrite  and  the 
formalist,  like  the  house  of  the  foolish  builder,  will  be  overthrown.  When  the 
great  day  of  wrath  is  come,  then  it  will  be  seen  who  shall  be  able  to  stand.  God  will 
set  His  own  people's  feet  on  a  rock,  and  wiU  establish  their  goings.  {James  Foote,  M.A .) 
The  rock  and  the  sand : — Last  April,  on  the  same  morning  I  set  my  eyes  on  the 
island  of  Corsica  where  Napoleon  I.  was  born,  and  on  the  island  of  Elba  on  which 
he  was  confined  as  a  discomfited  prisoner — the  coming  shadows  of  Waterloo  hung 
over  his  bleak  exile.  The  next  day  I  saw  the  spot  where  another  famous  prisoner 
landed  on  his  way  to  Rome,  and  where  he  "  thanked  God  and  took  courage." 
Napoleon's  boasted  "  rock  "  of  imperial  power  proved  to  be  but  a  fog-bank.  What 
a  contrast  between  the  defeated  and  disappointed  exile  of  Elba,  and  the  glorious 
old  prisoner  of  Cffisar  who  sang  triumphantly  in  his  cell :  "  I  have  fought  a  good 
fight  I  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness  which  the  Lord, 
the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day  I  "  The  French  Emperor's  crown 
was  a  lost  bauble  ;  the  apostle's  diadem  will  blaze  with  stars  through  all  eternity. 
There  is  no  sharper  contrast  in  all  history  between  the  wisdom  of  building  on  the 
rock  and  the  fatal  folly  of  building  on  the  quicksand.  Yet,  on  a  smaller  scale,  tens 
of  thousands  among  us  are  constantly  repeating  this  folly.  One  man  rears  his  ex* 
pectationa  upon  wealth.  This  is  his  foundation  on  which  he  will  build  np  solid 
happiness  for  himself  and  his  family.  He  means  to  be  happy  in  making  money, 
happy  in  holding  it,  and  happy  in  all  the  social  iclat  and  luxuries  which  it  will 
purchase  for  him.  "  Other  men  don't  know  how  to  keep  money  or  to  enjoy  it ;  but 
I  mean  to  enjoy  mine."  He  calls  it  mine — not  the  Lord's  ;  and  he  does  not  mean 
that  the  Lord  shall  have  it.  Ere  long  the  coveted  riches  take  wing,  like  a  swallow, 
and  fiy  away.  Even  if  he  holds  on  to  them,  they  do  not  give  the  happiness  he 
dreamed  of ;  they  do  not  fill  up  the  gnawing  emptiness  of  his  soul.  They  do  not 
bring  quiet  sleep  or  a  contented  conscience ;  his  Government  bonds  cannot  stop  the 
heartache.  Gold,  unless  used  for  God,  makes  a  hard  dying  piUow.  When  the 
richest  American  of  his  day  was  in  his  last  fatal  sickness,  m  Christian  friend  pro- 
posed to  sing  for  him ;  and  the  hymn  he  named  was  "  Come,  ye  sinners,  poor  and 
needy."  "  Yes,  yes,"  replied  the  dying  millionaire,  "  sing  that  for  me,  I  feel  poor 
and  needy."  Yet  at  that  moment  the  stock-markets  of  the  globe  were  watching 
and  waiting  for  the  demise  of  the  man  who  could  shake  them  with  a  nod  ol 


«BAP.  Tl.]  BT.  LUKE.  «ei 

his  head.  "  Poor  and  needy  I  "  How  the  sand  sweeps  from  under  a  man's  son!  is 
Buch  an  honr  as  that  1  Literary  fame  is  no  solider  a  footing  for  an  immortal 
being's  happiness  than  wealth.  There  is  hardly  a  sadder  verse  in  the  English 
language  than  that  which  the  brilliant  Byron  addressed  to  his  own  weary  and 
wretched  soul — 

•  Conni  o'er  the  joys  thine  hoars  have  seen; 
Count  o'er  thy  days  from  anguish  free ; 
And  know — whatever  thou  hast  been, 
'Tis  something  better — not  to  be  I " 

What  a  fearful  thought  that  a  human  soul,  in  the  very  height  of  its  coveted  intel- 
lectual renown,  should  seek  a  refuge  for  its  misery  in  utter  annihilation !  Last  year 
a  poverty-stricken  invalid  in  Brooklyn,  who  sustained  her  helpless  husband  and 
only  child  by  her  needle,  made  her  little  dingy  home  bright  as  sunshine  by  her 
brave,  cheerful  trust  in  God.  Her  daily  song  was,  "  The  Lord  liveth,  and  blessed 
be  my  Eock."  In  many  a  hut  of  poverty,  where  faith  eats  its  scanty  loaf  and 
gives  thanks  for  it ;  from  many  a  room  of  sickness,  where  Jesus  has  cheered 
the  long  wakeful  nights  ;  over  many  a  casket  in  which  a  darling  child  waa 
Bleeping  in  its  last  slumber,  has  the  believer's  testimony  come  forth  clear  and 
strong  :  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  ;  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  to  Him  uutil  that  day."  God  never  intended  that  we  should  have  mora 
than  one  rock.  All  else  is  quicksand.  When  we  take  His  inspired  Word  for  our 
guide,  embrace  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  rest  on  His  atonement  for  pardon  and  Hi3 
grace  for  support,  then  are  we  "  founded  on  a  rock."  A  solid  character  for  this  life 
and  a  solid  hope  for  eternity  can  be  built  on  this  sure  foundation.  Christ  really 
onderlies  a  genuine  Christian  as  the  everlasting  mass  of  Moriah's  rock-bed  under- 
lay the  ancient  temple  of  Jerusalem.  Those  only  are  the  solid,  reliable,  and 
enduring  members  in  our  various  Churches,  who  have  Christ  embedded  in  the  very 
depths  of  their  hearts.  Such  never  fall  away  under  the  stress  of  strong  temptations. 
(T,  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Deep  life : — I.  The  life  which  is  simply  a  surface  life.  Not 
exactly  what  we  call  a  wicked  life,  but  a  vain,  thoughtless,  shallow  Ufe.  An  animal 
life,  finding  pleasure  only  in  the  senses  ;  a  childish  life,  occupied  only  with  trifles ; 
a  life  in  which  there  is  no  deep  thought,  feeling,  conviction,  purpose.  One  would 
think  it  almost  impossible  to  lead  such  a  life,^  The  Spirit  of  God  within  us  is  ever 
seeking  to  awaken  solemn  and  holy  thoughts.  And  this  is  truly  a  thought-pro- 
voking world.  Many  will  scarcely  suffer  a  large  thought,  a  serious  thought.  They 
dwell  on  the  most  exterior  surfaces,  and  their  little-mindedness  is  seen  in  every- 
thing, felt  in  everything.  Mark  their  pleasures.  Consider  their  reading — the 
emptiest,  silliest  trash.  Listen  to  their  conversation — chaff  which  the  wind 
driveth  away.  And  all  their  aims  in  life  are  unspeakably  contemptible.  Better  be 
the  desolate  tree  on  the  naked  heath  bowed  by  the  storm,  stripped  by  the  storm,  if 
it  only  give  us  depth  of  life,  than  the  green  bay-tree  rooted  only  in  the  sod.  We 
may  be  thankful  for  anything  that  knocks  the  toys  out  of  our  hands,  that  stops  our 
idiot  joy,  and  drives  us  inward,  downward,  to  the  reality  of  things  and  the  grand 
purpose  of  existence.  Notice  again — II.  The  life  which  dips  below  the  subfacb 
AND  TBI  DOES  NOT  BEACH  THE  DEPTHS.  Many  men  cousider  themselves  as  serious, 
deep-souled  men  who  are  not  really  so.  There  is  an  iron  pillar  at  Delhi,  a  very 
ancient  column,  and  the  Hindus  believed  that  its  roots  were  in  the  centre  of  the 
earth,  but  the  profane  European  took  to  digging  and  found  its  foundation  only 
twenty  inches  below  the  surface.  And  so  many  among  us  fancy  their  life  rooted  in 
the  centre  of  things  when  a  little  examination  would  show  them  they  have  only 
dipped  below  the  surface.  There  is  an  intellectual  life  which  goes  beneath  the 
surface,  but  not  to  the  depths.  Thinking  men,  full  of  intellectual  power  and 
penetration,  but  who  concern  themselves  only  with  the  universe  that  passes  away, 
are  of  this  order.  One  would  think  the  scientific  men  who  sound  the  depths  of  the 
ocean  or  the  star-depths  of  the  heaven,  had  gone  deep,  but  in  truth,  with  all  their 
parade  of  dredges,  telescopes,  spectroscopes,  they  have  gone  but  twenty  inches 
below  the  surface  who  miss  the  Almighty  Spirit,  of  whom  are  all  things,  by  whom 
are  all  things,  to  whom  are  all  things.  There  is  a  moral  life  which  goes  below  the 
surface,  and  yet  fails  to  grasp  the  depths.  A  morality  which  find*  its  origin,  its 
reasons,  its  sanctions,  its  inspirations,  its  compensations  altogether  within  humaa 
society  and  temporal  interests,  is  but  rooted  in  the  sand.  There  is  a  religious  lif« 
vhich  sinks  below  the  surface  without  sounding  the  depths.    The  Pharisees  failed 


MS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  ti. 

here — they  thought  the  pillar  on  which  they  leaned  had  its  roots  in  the  centre  of 
the  world,  but  Christ  made  them  understand  that  proud  ancient  pillar  of  theirs 
was  only  twenty  inches  in  the  sand.  III.  The  life  which  digs  deep  and  kSsts  on 
A  EOCK.  The  Word  of  God  assures  us  that  there  is  rock.  The  universe  is  not  a 
theatre  of  dissolving  views,  itself  a  dissolving  view.  There  is  an  Eternal  Being. 
There  is  an  Eternal  World.  ••  A  city  that  hath  foundations  " — a  realm  of  infinite 
endless  perfection  and  blessedness.  There  is  an  Eternal  Eighteousness.  There  ia 
an  Eternal  Life.  He  only  digs  deep  who  gets  down  to  these  central  realities. 
1.  Only  in  this  deeper  life  do  we  find  true  satisfaction.  Men  think  sometimes,  I 
know,  that  a  deeper  life  means  much  of  strife,  of  sorrow,  of  sadness ;  and  so  it 
does.  But,  yoa  must  remember,  out  of  those  depths  breaks  forth  the  sunshine,  out 
of  those  depths  breaks  forth  the  music.  You  will  never  find  true  light,  harmony, 
joy,  until  you  reach  the  depths  of  self-despair,  until  you  live  the  life  of  thought, 
contrition,  prayer,  humility,  reverence.  2.  Only  as  we  live  this  deeper  life  does  our 
character  acquire  strength  and  fulness.  The  superficial  Pharisee  was  ever  working 
at  the  outside  of  character ;  Christ  showed  them  more  radical  work  was  wanted ; 
they  must  go  to  the  depths  of  life.  And  this  is  the  teaching  of  the  Epistles. 
Our  modern  gardeners  think  far  less  of  pruning  the  branches  of  trees  than  the 
old  husbandmen  used  to  think ;  the  gardeners  of  to-day  are  persuaded  tbat  the 
tree  must  be  treated  in  its  roots.  3.  Only  as  we  live  this  deeper  life  is  our  joy 
assured  for  ever.  The  teaching  of  our  Lord  in  this  parable  is  that,  whatever  in 
character,  joy,  hope,  is  not  based  on  the  deepest  Ufe,  life  in  Himself,  must  be  over- 
thrown. As  most  of  you  know,  in  connection  with  the  principal  palace  at  Babylon 
was  the  remarkable  construction  known  to  the  Greeks  as  "  the  Hanging  Garden." 
Several  tiers  of  arches  formed  an  artificial  imitation  of  a  mountain,  and  on  the  top 
of  this  structure  was  a  mass  of  earth  on  which  grew  flowers,  and  shrubs,  and  trees. 
Where  are  these  artificial  elevations  now?  Gone,  gone  long  ago,  shaken  to  the 
earth,  buried  in  the  ditch.  Now  all  around  us  you  see  the  glory,  the  joy,  the  hope 
of  men  resting  like  the  *'  Hanging  Gardens  "  of  Babylon  on  quite  an  artificial  basis, 
and  any  slight  accident  brings  the  whole  fabric  to  the  ground.  A  sickness,  a  death, 
any  one  of  a  thousand  changes  wrecks  the  treasure  and  pride  of  life.  But  the  natural 
gardens  of  Babylon  which  rested  on  the  granite  pillars  of  the  earth  bloom  to-day  aa 
they  ever  did — the  grass  as  green,  the  blossoms  as  sweet,  the  trees  as  magnificent. 
So  it  is  when  we  build  on  Christ,  and  find  our  strength  and  felicity  and  hope  in  Him. 

•*  Wliat  can  our  foundations  shock  ? 

Though  the  shattered  earth  remove, 
Stand 8  our  city  on  a  rock. 
On  the  rock  of  heavenly  Love.'* 

Live  below  the  senses,  live  above  society,  live  beyond  time,  get  to  the  root 
truths  that  are  in  Christ,  nay,  get  to  Christ  Himself,  the  root-truth,  and 
your  life  shall  be  full  of  energy,  freedom,  brightness,  fruitfulness,  blessing, 
and  you  shall  bloom  for  ever  in  the  paradise  of  God,  (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
The  two  principles  of  life : — It  is  here  indicated  by  our  Lord  that  every  one  must 
live  his  life  on  some  principle  or  plan ;  and  He  plainly  states  the  utter  ruin  of  any 
life  which  hears  the  Word  of  God,  and  does  not  act  accordingly.     I.  Apply  it  first 

to   THE    CONSCIOUS  ACTION   OF    MEN    UNDER   THE    INFLUENCE    OV  THE    SpIEIT.       To  build 

without  foundation  is  to  put  off,  make  only  some  slight  resolution  for  good,  go  on 
the  old  way,  only  with  a  little  more  earnestness,  or  choosing  the  easiest  way  of 
religion  as  a  salve  to  the  conscience.  II.  The  warnings  that  come  generally  later 
IN  life.  UI.  Thk  way  of  dealing  with  borrow  for  bin.  Two  kinds.  1.  The 
sorrow  of  the  world — mere  regret :  hopes  to  do  better ;  time  will  bring  relief.  2. 
Godly  sorrow,  real  repentance — going  to  the  very  root  of  the  matter ;  content  with 
nothing  but  laying  bare  the  whole  heart  to  God ;  probing  to  the  very  centre  the 
wounds  of  nature,  in  spite  of  pain  and  discomfort ;  determined  at  any  cost  to  get 
rid  of  all  corruption  and  its  cause.  The  result  of  this  is  true  healing  and  benefit. 
Conclusion  :  The  great  lesson  is  one  of  thoroughness  and  heartiness  in  all  our  life  r 
no  more  trifling;  no  resting  satisfied  with  partial  relief — the  pleasant  weather  for  the 
present,  without  any  thought  of  the  storms  that  may  be  coming.  (George  Low,  M.A.) 
Doing  and  dreaming: — Now, in  the  course  of  my  travels,  I  have  met  with  three  distinct 
dreamers.  I.  There  is  the  rationalistic  dreamer.  He  beholds  his  face  in  a  glass, 
and  stands  before  it,  admiring  it.  To  him  religion  is  a  system  of  ideas,  and  no  idea 
represents  reality.  His  religion  is  "  a  face  in  the  glass,"  or  an  onsabstantial "  housw 


tHAP.  n.]  ST.  LUKE.  66S 

on  the  sand."  II.  There  is  the  sentimental  dreamer.  He  will  talk  to  yon  for 
hours  of  the  presence  of  God  in  nature.  A  house  of  sentiment  is  the  last  place  X 
should  fly  to,  to  shelter  me  from  the  storm.  III.  There  is  the  pietistio  dreamer. 
There  is  a  form  of  church-going  piety  which  does  not  influence  daily  conduct ;  people 
whose  religion  is  an  impersonated  sigh.  1.  The  religion  of  the  dreamer  is  a  religioa 
of  theory.  The  religion  of  the  doer  is  one  of  experience.  2.  The  religion  of  the 
dreamer  will  always  be  one  of  doubt.  The  religion  of  the  doer  will  always  be  a  re- 
ligion of  evidence.  This  follows  the  last  remark,  because  doing  leads  to  knowing, 
3.  Hence,  let  me  say,  the  dreamer  confines  his  religion  to  solitude  ;  the  doer  finds 
a  vent  for  his  in  society.  Beligion  comforts  solitude,  and  consoles  it ;  it  does  not 
encourage  the  spirit  of  it.  If  we  are  to  enter  the  solitude,  it  is  that  we  may  collect 
the  moral  forces  of  our  nature,  and  come  forth,  inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  to 
cry  aloud,  "  0  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord."  4.  The  religion  of 
the  dreamer  is  a  religion  without  love.  But  the  life  of  the  doer  is  love.  Our  love, 
in  fact,  is  proportioned  to  our  labours — our  labour  proportions  our  love.  Love  ia 
the  fountain  of  all  true  knowledge.  Every  man  understands  more  by  his  affections 
than  by  his  reason.  5.  And  there  is,  finally,  no  salvation  for  the  dreamer.  Come, 
let  us  walk  along  the  sands,  and  see  the  houses  they  build  there ;  these  are  the 
buildings  of  which  the  apostle  spoke,  "wood,  hay,  and  stubble";  these  are  the 
buildings  which  will  not  stand  either  the  flood  or  the  fire  ;  these  are  the  buildings 
reared  by  the  religious  dreamers,  whose  houses  are  unsubstantial  as  the  palaces  in 
the  clouds.  Here  is  the  house  of  wood — the  building  reared  out  of  notions  of 
natural  amiability  and  goodness,  a  religion  of  politeness  and  native  grace :  in  thia 
house  the  inhabitants  will  tklk  to  you  of  God,  and  of  worshipping  God,  but  you  will 
hear  nothing  of  God  in  Christ,  nothing  of  the  love  of  the  Father  for  a  lost  world. 
The  Unitarian  builds  his  edifice  from  such  material,  and  thus  all  those  buildings 
rise  which  leave  out  of  view  the  supernatural  in  the  ruin  and  recovery  of  man.  How 
unsubstantial  1  there  is  not  one  brick  of  all  the  building  made  from  "  these  sayings 
of  Mine,"  and  here  "  the  flood  will  come  and  sweep  them  all  away."  Let  us  walk 
further  along  the  sands.  Here  is  a  house,  strangely  built  of  hay  ;  of  rhetoric,  and 
philosophy,  and  superstitious  notions ;  and  sometimes,  when  the  ice  hangs  its  pen- 
dukts  on  the  absurd,  grotesque  building,  and  the  sun  shines  in  its  cold  wintry  ray, 
it  Beem«  aa  uncouth  but  glittering  cave  upon  the  sand  :  within,  the  inhabitants  have 
so  many  pretty  sentiments  about  religion,  and  so  many  brilliant  sayings,  and  so 
many  deep  and  philosophical  views,  and  strange  pretences  glide  to  and  fro  through 
the  heavy  chambers,  and  even  the  neighbourhood  to  the  awful  sea  makes  the  build- 
ing sometimes  seem  so  safe  for  shelter  ;  but  in  the  incongruous  building  nothing  is 
reared  from  "  these  sayings  of  Mine,"  and  the  "flood  will  come  and  sweep  them  all 
away."  Now,  come,  I  will  carry  you  to  two  death-beds  ;  for  they  die  in  the  castle 
on  the  rock  and  in  the  palace  on  the  sand.  Ah  !  how  fine  it  looks  1  By  the  two 
death-beds  you  may  hear  the  two  confessions.  I  draw  the  curtain  in  the  palace  : 
let  us  hear.  "  How  are  you ;  are  you  happy  ?  "  "  Well,  I  am  easy."  "  What  are 
your  foundations  ?  "  "  Well,  Lord,  Thou  knowest  I  have  had  some  very  pretty 
notions  in  religion.  I  have  usually  gone  to  church  once  a  day.  I  was  certainly 
away  frequently  on  account  of  our  dinner-parties;  but  I  am  sure  God  won't  be 
strict.  On  the  whole,  I  am  happy  I  I  have  ever  tried  to  pay  everybody  their  own, 
twenty  shillings  in  the  pound — and  God  is  love."  Now  step  into  the  poor  room  on 
the  Rock.  " How  do  you  feel T  "  "I  feel  happy,  but  only  by  taking  hold  on 
Christ,  Lord,  I  feel  I  am  a  poor  creature,  but  I  come  to  Thee  through  Christ ;  and 
I  can  only  oty,  Mercy,  Mercy,  Mercy,  Mercy."  Hark  1  the  rain  is  on  the  roof  ;  what 
a  tempest.  Oh  that  cry — The  Flood  1  the  Flood  I  the  Flood  I  Yes ;  the  rain  de- 
scends, and  the  flood  comes,  and  the  winds  blow  and  beat;  behold  yonder  the 
advancing  floods  ;  and  see  yonder  the  drifting  soul  on  the  broken  spar.  What  is  the 
hc^e  of  the  hypocrite,  when  God  shall  take  away  his  soul?  Yonder  they  drilt  away. 
Hark  !  it  is  a  voice  of  singing  from  the  eternal  Rock,  a  strain  from  the  heights  of 
the  strong  foundations.  (E.  P.  Hood.)  Designing  the  home  not  enough : — It  is  not 
enough  to  have  gotten  an  abstracted  mathematical  scheme,  or  diagram,  of  this  spiritual 
building  in  our  brain ;  it  is  the  mechanical  labouring  part  of  religion,  that  must 
make  up  the  edifice,  the  work,  and  toil,  and  sweat  of  the  soul,  the  business  not  of 
the  designer,  but  the  carpenter ;  that,  which  takes  the  rough  unpolished,  though 
excellent,  materials,  and  trims  and  fits  them  for  use  ;  which  cuts  and  polishes  the 
rich  but,  as  yet,  deformfid  jewels  of  the  soul,  and  makes  them  shine  indeed,  and 
sparkle,  like  stars  in  the  firmament.  .  .  .  The  divinity  and  learning  of  these  timetr 
floats  and  hovers  too  much  in  the  brain,  hatb  not  either  weight  or  sobriety  enough 


664  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«"!».  fl. 

in  it,  to  sink  down  and  settle  in  the  heart.  {Dr.  Hammond.)  Digging  deep  :— 
Inasmuch  as  it  is  said  that  the  wise  builder  "  digged  deep,"  let  ns  remember  that 
Gk>d  is  not  to  be  found  on  the  surface.  {Oregory.)  Insecure  foundations  : — There 
is  a  twice-told  tale  about  Julian  the  apostate :  how  in  youth  he  essayed  to  raise  a 
memorial  shrine  to  the  holy  Mamas ;  but  as  he  built,  the  earth  at  the  foundations 
crumbled ;  for  God  and  His  holy  martyr  deigned  not  to  accept  the  labour  and 
offering  of  his  hands.  It  is  an  allegory  of  men  who  toil  and  build  on  rotten  and 
insecure  foundations.  Neglecting  the  foundation: — On  the  corner  of  one  of  the 
bufliest  streets  of  a  certain  town,  there  is  a  large  brick  building  with  stone  finishings 
and  no  little  display  of  fancy  work,  both  on  cornice  and  corners.  It  looks  well  at 
a  distance.  Closer  inspection,  however,  shows  that  this  building  is  sadly  disfigured 
with  ugly  cracks  and  misshapen  walls,  and  the  whole  structure  is  in  danger  of 
tumbling  down.  On  investigation  it  was  discovered  that  the  cause  of  all  this  was 
the  bad  foundation  put  under  the  buildiug  by  an  inefficient  and  dishonest  contractor. 
He  had  employed  cheap  workmen  and  put  in  cheap  material,  because  the  founda- 
tion being  out  of  sight,  he  thought  no  one  would  ever  see  it,  and  it  would  make  no 
difference.  Two  kinds  of  foundations : — Two  young  fishermen  came  to  the  water-side 
to  live,  and  to  try  their  luck  in  a  new  home.  Now,  here  they  were  very  succcessful, 
and  soon  had  a  ready  sale  for  all  they  caught  in  the  village  beyond  the  hill.  • '  Now, 
we  will  each  build  a  hut  for  ourselves,  for  this  is  a  good  place,  and  here  we  will  each 
bring  a  wife,  and  have  a  home."  "  That  is  a  good  thought,"  replied  Simplex ; 
"  here  is  a  fine  stretch  of  beach,  and  we  shall  have  no  trouble  in  drawing  stones  and 
timber,  and  making  comfortable  dwellings  at  small  co^t  and  labour."  *'  Oh,  no," 
answered  Prudens ;  the  storms  and  winds  and  waves  wul  come  and  sweep  away  our 
houses.  Look  yonder  among  that  grass  there ;  up  beyond  are  some  rocks.  They 
will  make  a  fine  foundation,  and  we  need  fear  nothing."  "  Oh,  you  fooUsh  Prudens, 
to  give  yourself  so  much  trouble !  The  season  of  storms  is  past ;  the  beautiful  days 
are  coming ;  and  how  will  you  climb  up  among  those  rocks  when  you  are  worn  out 
and  tired  ?  See  how  easy  it  will  be  to  run  up  a  house  here,  and  then  to  sit,  after 
oar  day's  work  is  over,  and  gaze  out  upon  the  water,  and  see  that  no  one  molests 
our  boats  or  nets."  "  Well,  brother,  storms  may  come  even  during  the  beautiful 
days,  and  I  shall  build  up  yonder  on  the  rocks."  So  each  man  built  during  the 
next  few  weeks  each  a  neat  little  hut,  and  I  must  confess  that  Prudens'  was  not 
nearly  so  pretty  as  Simplex's,  because  it  was  much  harder  for  Prudens  to  draw  his 
materials  away  up  the  rocks,  and  to  plan  so  that  the  foundations  should  be  firm, 
and  the  windows  protected.  But  in  time  both  houses  were  complete,  and  in  each 
a  pretty  little  wife  kept  the  home  in  good  order,  and  the  men  were  well  content  with 
their  plans.  But  one  night  there  were  signs  of  a  change  of  weather.  The  waters 
sighed  and  moaned  and  groaned  and  muttered  as  if  they  were  angry,  and  the  men 
hastened  to  make  all  secure,  for,  said  they,  "  the  waves  are  coming  and  the  tide  ia 
rising."  Prudens  went  to  Simplex  to  beg  that  he  and  his  wife  would  come  up  to 
his  house,  lest  haply  the  waters  should  cume  over  the  beach.  Simplex  laughed  at 
the  fears  of  his  friend  ;  but  the  wife  was  timid,  and  she  persuaded  her  husband  just 
for  one  night  to  accept  the  invitation.  *'  You  will  smile  at  your  fears  in  the  morn- 
ing, Gretchen  dear,  but  for  your  sake  I  will  go — what  can  harm  our  home  except  a 
few  dashes  of  salt  water?  You  are  not  much  of  a  sailor's  wife."  Then  they  went, 
and  the  fearful  storm  came,  and  the  wind  rose  and  beat  away  the  nets  and  the  boats. 
The  women  could  not  sleep,  and,  when  the  morning  broke,  they  hastened  to  see 
what  had  happened  in  the  night.  They  looked  first  towards  the  cottage  of  Simplex. 
'There  was  no  cottage  there,  but  timbers  and  a  heap  of  stones  and  a  low  wall,  and 
•the  beach  strewn  with  the  wreck  of  the  house.  Gretchen  began  to  cry,  but  Simplex 
dared  not  look  at  Prudens.  Safe  on  the  rocks,  his  house  had  stood  out  the  storm. 
-"  Alas,  my  brother,  why  did  I  not  heed  your  advice  ?  I  built  on  the  sand,  and  my 
house  has  fallen.  Yours  stood  because  founded  on  a  rock."  This  story  is  a  parablflk 
Wlu>  will  tell  what  it  means,  and  Irom  what  part  of  Scripture  it  is  taken  7 


.  Tn.)  ST.  LUKE.  <6f 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

YsBS.  1-10.  And  a  eortaln  centurion's  servant,  who  was  dear  unto  Idm,  wai 
tick,  and  ready  to  die. — The  centurion  and  his  servant ; — A  Eoman  soldier,  a  stem, 
imbeuding  man,  accustomed  to  be  obeyed  absolutely ;  accustomed  to  oppress  a 
downtrodden,  conquered  race,  no  one  daring  to  raise  a  murmur ;  a  heathen,  too,  a 
man  whose  religion  was  odious  and  contemptible,  a  man,  therefore,  without  real 
power  over  his  actions,  the  creature  of  caprice :  such,  at  least  by  instinct  and 
education,  must  the  good  ceoturion  have  been.  Yet  the  grace  of  God  is  well-nigh 
irresistible,  it  triumphs  against  desperate  odds.  At  first  he  has  nothing  but  con- 
tempt for  a  religion  which,  good  in  itself,  was  made  almost  insufferable  by  its 
priests  and  professors.  As  he  looks  deeper  down  ;  as  he  begins  to  think ;  takes  the 
trouble  to  examine  this  old  creed,  at  first  it  may  be  with  a  sort  of  antiquarian 
interest,  then  with  growing  curiosity,  then  with  an  honest  desire  to  learn ;  God 
teaches  him,  the  Holy  Spirit  enlightens  his  heart,  and  he  begins  to  love  the  nation 
whom  he  had  been  sent  to  trample  upon  rather  than  to  rule.  So  between  this 
rough  soldier  and  his  neighbour  there  sprang  up  mutual  confidence,  even  love  ;  at 
last,  so  drawn  was  he  towards  the  people  of  God,  that  with  boundless  generosity 
he  built  the  men  of  Capernaum  a  synagogue.  Nor  was  this  soldier's  love  only  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Capernaum  ;  his  servant,  a  poor  slave,  a  youth  stolen  from 
home  and  friends,  expecting  only  cruelty  and  stripes,  "  was  dear  unto  him,"  and 
he  lay  at  home  sick  and  ready  to  die.  1.  The  wisdom  of  accepting  God's  plan  of 
life  as  the  one  by  which  we  can  most  glorify  Him.  Who  does  not  often  wish  that 
his  place  in  life  had  been  quite  differently  cast  ?  If  we  only  had  had  more  money, 
leisure,  scope  for  talents,  friends,  what  could  we  not  have  done  for  God,  what  might 
not  God  have  accomplished  in  us  ?  See  the  correction  of  this  foolishness  in  the 
saintly  centurion's  history.  A  heathen  soldier  mixing  with  men  whose  actions, 
however  brave  they  might  be,  were  always  cruel  and  hard,  living  amongst  coia- 
panions  coarse  and  low,  where  passion  was  unbridled,  pity  unknown  ;  a  man  sent 
to  serve  in  despised  Galilee,  amongst  a  nation  utterly  degraded,  hopelessly  vile ; 
his  headquarters  one  of  the  most  corrupt  cities  of  that  land  of  darkness;  how  could 
circumstances  be  apparently  more  against  him  ?  Yet  what  seemed  hindrances,  he 
turned  into  hflps.  If  he  had  not  been  in  the  Eoman  army  he  had  never  seen 
Capernaum  ;  if  he  had  not  been  quartered  near  Capernaum,  he  had  never  built  a 
synagogue  ;  but  for  bis  sorrow  he  would  never  have  had  personal  intercourse  with 
the  Lord  of  Life  ;  but  for  his  great  need  he  would  never  have  won  so  gracious  a 
benediction  from  God's  Son.  So  is  it  with  every  one  born  of  woman.  Where  our 
lot  is  cast,  what  our  circumstances  may  be — all  this  is  God's  plan.  Therefore  it 
follows,  they  are  the  best  circumstances  conceivable,  by  which  we  may  mount  to 
Him.  Shun  discontent.  Ourselves,  not  our  circumstances,  are  our  hindrances. 
2.  There  is  another  line  of  thought  suggested  by  the  relationship  which  existed 
between  this  master  and  those  whom  God  had  placed  in  his  home — "  his  servant 
was  dear  unto  him."  It  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  the  strangeness  of  the  situa- 
tion. Christianity  has  taught  men  pity,  tenderness,  sympathy  for  weakness  and 
suffering,  yet  this  centurion  was  not  even  a  Jew.  Somehow  the  tender  heart  of 
this  valiant  soldier,  illuminated  by  the  light  of  conscience,  taught  him  that  his 
slave  lad  was  brought  into  his  home,  in  order  that  he  might  lift  him  out  of  the  lower 
depths  of  degradation,  succour  and  help  him  in  his  need.  How  clear  the  leSFOn  to 
a  Christian,  to  a  soldier  of  the  cross.  Are  we  not  taught  the  strange  responsibility 
which  is  placed  on  each  as,  in  turn,  he  becomes  a  master  or  a  messenger,  as  parents 
or  teachers — immediately,  that  is,  God  gives  us  any  authority  ?  Home,  the  centre 
of  Christian  influence,  home,  the  place  where  servants,  children,  guepts,  are  all 
brought  together  for  this  end  alone,  that  by  love  those  in  authority  may  win  those 
over  whom  they  are  set,  and  so  God  may  win  them  too  ;  this,  indeed,  is  the  lesson 
of  the  good  centurion's  action.  {T.  B.  Dover,  M.A.)  The  centurion's  faith:— 
Notice  some  of  the  lessons,  naturally  lessons  touching  faith,  which  this  passage 
is  designed  to  teach.  I.  We  learn  that  orkat  spibitual  advantages  abb  not 
ALWAYS  necessaby  TO  OBEAT  FAITH.  Let  US  ucver  despair  of  truth-sowing,  in  waste 
and  unlikely  places.  The  so-called  rose  of  Jericho  drops  its  dried-up  germ  on  the 
parched  desert  sand.  But  God's  mind  does  not  leave  it  to  perish.  Swept  hither 
and  thither,  it  finds  at  last  its  oasis,  some  hidden  spot  of  moisture,  and  there  it 
abides  and  sprouts,  and  becomes  again  a  thing  of  life  and  beauty.  A  drifting 
eocoa-nut,  cast  by  the  surf  ashore  upon  some  barren  limestone  reef,  seems  in  itaetf 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha*.  tiu 

the  very  image  of  failure  and  utter  loss.  But  see  I  this  apparent  waif,  under  th« 
watchful  eye  of  Providence,  becomes  the  beginning  of  an  earthly  paradise.  It  is 
faith  in  sowing  that  brings  the  harvest  of  faith  (Eccles.  xi.  6).  II.  It  is  more  thaa 
hinted,  further,  that  great  faith  is  most  likely  to  bb  found  in  connection  with 
A  NOBLE  NATUBE.  Equity,  generosity,  sympathy,  humility,  such  traits  were 
prominent  here,  and  they  made  room  for  the  working  of  great  faith  in  Christ. 
Faith  is  something  that  has  to  do  with  ideas,  and  hence  holds  mere  things  cheap. 
It  is  not  80  much  what  they  achieve  as  what  they  believe  in  and  strive  for  that 
makes  men  noble  and  great,  "  What  I  admire,"  said  Turgot,  "  in  Christopher 
Columbus,  is  not  that  he  discovered  the  New  World,  but  that  he  went  to  look  for  it 
on  the  faith  of  an  idea."  III.  Again,  geeat  faith  here,  as  always,  is  accom- 
panied BY  A  SENSE  OP  GBEAT  NEED.  IV.  Further,  it  follows  also  from  what  has 
just  been  said,  that  great  faith  is  accompanied  also  by  great  humility.  Its 
sublimest  flights,  like  those  of  the  birds,  are  always  preceded  by  a  settling  low 
down.  There  are  some  beautiful  plants  whose  leaves  grow  even  smaller  as  tha 
plant  grows  higher.  V.  Still  again,  the  great  faith  of  the  centurion  was  no 
UNREASONING  FAITH.  A  great  deal  is  said  about  believing  blindly.  And  there  are 
times  when  a  simple  trust  is  all  that  is  left  us ;  but  generally  speaking,  we  may 
reason  from  the  seen  to  the  unseen,  from  ourselves  and  our  finite  circumstances 
to  God  and  His  unlimited  might.  Faith  is  not  blind,  except  to  trifles.  It  sees  I 
It  sees  more,  not  less.  It  sees  with  new  light  and  new  powers.  This  earth  of  ours 
is  but  a  simple  birthplace,  a  nest  of  sticks  and  mud  on  the  swinging  bough.  It  is 
the  point  of  departure,  not  the  place  of  rest,  and  the  man  of  faith  has  realized  this 
in  some  degree.  He  has  looked  over  its  borders  into  the  unsounded  depths.  Ha 
has  gazed  on  the  immeasurable  vault.  He  has  the  evidence  of  things  unseen.  He 
knows  that  though  "  the  steps  of  faith  fall  on  a  seeming  void,  they  find  the  Eock 
beneath."    VI.  It  is  interesting  to  notice,  in  the  next  place,  the  kind  of  moral 

IBAININO   that    SEEMS   TO    FIT  ONE  FOR  THE  EXERCISE  OF  GBEAT  FAITH.       1.  Obedience. 

Our  centurion,  as  a  soldier,  had  learned  to  submit  his  will,  to  obey.  But  it  is  still 
better  to  learn  obedience  in  the  family  than  in  the  army.  A  loving,  filial  obedience 
towards  Christian  parents  is  of  all  earthly  things  the  nearest  to  that  service  which 
our  heavenly  Father  claims  from  us.  2.  Liberality.  Our  centurion  was  a  generous 
giver,  too.  There  is  a  really  potent  moral  discipline  in  giving.  Just  as  the  largest 
ships  only  venture  into  the  deepest  harbours,  so  it  is  safe  to  expect  that  the  Divine 
blessing — especially  an  all-conquering  faith,  one  of  the  greatest — will  only  there 
come  richest  and  fullest  where  the  sluices  are  held  widest  open,  through  a  noble, 
perpetual  outgush  of  kindly  feeling  and  generous  doing  towards  one's  fellow-men. 
VII.  Great  faith  does  not  lift  one  out  of  the  reach  of  intercessory  prayer 

ON   THE   PAKT   OF   THOSE    HAVING    LESS.       VIII.    GrEAT    FAITH  IB  ABLE  TO  BEAR  WITHOUT 

PERIL  GREAT  BLESSINGS.  Ships  that  are  well  ballasted  you  may  load  high,  and  they 
will  not  careen  or  refuse  to  mind  the  rudder.     IX.  Whether  faith  be  great  ob 

SMALL,  IT  IB  the  SAME  THING   IN  ESSENCE,  AND   INEXPRESSIBLY    WELL-PLEASING    TO   OUB 

Lord.  The  principal  thing  is  to  have  some  faith,  though  it  be  little.  It  is  that 
which  brings  us  into  the  blessed  circle  of  the  beneficiaries  of  Jesus,  while  the  want 
of  it  shuts  us  wholly  out.  Men  have  had  it  who  had  litt'e  else  that  was  good,  who 
had,  in  fact,  much  else  that  was  bad,  and  yet,  because  they  had  it,  were  enrolled 
among  the  heroes  of  God's  shining  host.  {Edwin  C.  Bissell.)  Kindness  to 
inferiors : — Xenocrates,  though  a  heathen,  was  pitiful  to  a  poor  sparrow,  which, 
being  pursued  by  a  hawk,  fled  to  him  for  succour.  He  sheltered  her  until  the 
enemy  had  flown  off,  and  then,  letting  her  go,  said  that  he  had  not  betrayed  hia 
poor  suppliant.  A  Christian  should  have  more  pity  for  a  distressed  Christian  than 
a  heathen  has  for  a  bird.  A  master  should  be  a  physician  to  his  servants ;  aa 
careful  to  preserve  their  health  and  prevent  their  death,  as  to  provide  them  work. 
Another  heathen  told  his  wife  that  it  was  part  of  her  office,  and  the  most  grateful 
part  of  it,  in  case  a  servant  fell  sick,  to  tend  him  and  promote  his  recovery.  This 
centurion,  though  a  soldier  (and  their  hearts  usually  are  more  obdurate  and  less 
compassionate  than  others),  was  earnest  and  diligent  for  the  help  of  his  sick 
servant.  (G.  Swinnock.)  The  increase  of  faith : — I.  Faith  is  the  condition  of 
THE  exercise  OF  God's  POWER  UPON  US — a  Condition,  let  it  ever  be  borne  in  mind,  of 
God's  own  making,  and  springing  wholly  out  of  God's  own  wisdom  and  love  to  us. 
For,  I  ask.  What  is  faith  ?  and  I  reply  that,  speaking  generally,  faith  is  sympathy 
with  God — it  is  the  receptive  attitude  of  the  soul — it  is  the  laying  open  of  the  whole 
being  to  the  influence  of  God.  If  I  would  keep  the  tender  flower  from  the  frost, 
I  must  oover  it  up  and  wrap  it  round  to  shut  out  the  icy  touch  that  would  freezs 


TO.]  ST.  LVKE.  667 

np  its  life.  Bat  would  I  quicken  it  with  the  sun  I  must  take  avsj  all  barriers  and 
let  its  blessed  rays  stream  in.  Unbelief  covers  up  and  closes  the  soul :  faith  opens 
it  to  the  sunshine.  II.  Faith  is  the  measure  of  God's  gifts  to  us.  The  gifts  are 
proportioned  to  our  fitness  and  our  power  to  receive  them.  There  are  partial  gifts 
ior  partial  faith ;  fuller  gifts  for  fuller  faith.  To  recur  to  my  former  illustration, 
the  measure  in  which  the  sun  streams  into  a  chamber  depends  on  the  degree  in 
which  all  impediments  are  removed  from  its  entrance.  The  limit  is  not  in  the 
glorious  orb,  but  in  tbat  which  receives  it.  It  will  enter  wherever  it  can,  though 
it  be  but  through  a  broken  link.  Throw  wide  open  the  broad  shutters,  and  how  it 
will  stream  in,  till  every  object  becomes  beautiful  in  its  rays!  If  we  would  have 
more  faith,  we  must  cultivate  it ;  and  I  will  tell  you  how.  1.  There  must  be  con- 
Bcioua  desire  in  your  minds  for  more  faith — not  a  general  wish  for  more  grace  in  a 
vague  and  unmeaning  way,  but  a  deep  sense  of  your  need  of  a  fuller  trust  in  God  and 
an  earnest  desire  for  it.  2.  Try  to  exercise  faith.  The  gift,  indeed,  is  all  of  God  ; 
but  He  works  through  the  human  effort.  Not  the  listless  idle  soul,  that  folds  its 
hands  and  takes  its  ease  in  Zion,  will  ever  get  close  to  God,  but  the  soul  that 
presses  on  and  up,  and,  in  our  Lord's  vivid  language,  "  takes  heaven  by  violence." 
■§.  To  assist  you  in  this  effort,  endeavour  to  watch  and  study  the  dealings  of  God 
with  you,  Uke  one  who  expects  to  see  God  everywhere.  Be  not  like  the  man  who 
saunters  along  the  road,  not  caring  or  thinking  whom  he  shall  meet ;  but  like  one 
who  is  looking  out  for  a  friend,  and  watches  ou  every  side  to  see  him.  Think  of 
God  as  a  real  being,  and  both  in  the  answers  to  your  prayers  and  in  the  details  of 
your  life,  try  to  trace  His  providence.  4.  Let  us  dwell  much  upon  the  promises  ; 
let  us  live  in  them  and  on  them,  making  them  the  habitual  atmosphere  of  our 
religious  life.  (E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  centurion  of  Gafernaum  : — I.  There  are 
three  aspects  in  which  this  "  centurion  of  Capernaum  "  commands  our  attention ; 
ti8  a  MAN,  as  an  official,  and  as  a  proselyte.  His  attraction  is  thus  per-onal, 
POLITICAL,  and  RELIGIOUS.  1.  The  personal  interest  that  attaches  to  him.  2.  His 
political  interest,  or  official  signiticance.  As  an  officer  of  Rome,  the  representative 
of  Roman  power  at  a  Jewish  Court,  he  draws  our  notice  to  himself.  The  Jew  is 
the  world's  representative  Religionist;  the  Greek  its  representative  Thinker;  but 
the  Roman  its  representative  Ruler.  He  is  the  typical  warrior  and  administrator. 
Her  own  greatest  poet  put  into  the  prophetic  mouth  of  Anchises  in  the  netlier  world 
this  description  of  her  mission : — "  Others,  I  grant,  shall  with  more  delicacy  mould 
the  breathing  brass ;  from  marble  draw  the  features  to  the  life ;  describe  with  the 
rod  the  courses  of  the  rising  stars.  To  rule  the  nitions  with  imperial  sway,  be 
your  care,  0  Romans ;  these  shall  be  thine  arts — to  impose  terms  of  peace,  to  spare 
the  humble,  and  to  crush  the  proud."  When  the  Word  of  God  became  Incarnate 
He  entered  into  a  world  politically  prepared  for  His  Advent  after  a  fashion  not  less 
perfect  for  the  purpose  designed  than  strange  because  of  the  means  by  which  it  had 
ieen  wrought.  Of  this  preparation  Rome  was  the  instrument ;  and  of  Rome  her 
officer  at  Capernaum  is  a  representative.  Is  there  not,  then,  about  him,  as  an 
official,  a  deep  political  significance  and  interest  ?  3.  His  interest  as  a  Proselyte, 
This  term,  "  Proselyte,"  leads  me  to  call  attention  to  a  function  of  the  Jewish 
Prophets  in  Messianic  preparation,  not  always  adequately  measured  by  us  in  our 
estimate  of  them  as  divinely  ordained  to  "  make  ready  a  people  prepared  for  the 
Lord."  Joel  thrills  him;  Jeremiah  melts  him;  Ezekiel  elevates  him;  Isaiah 
entrances  him.  The  Greek  Philosophy,  which  formed  the  polite  study  of  every 
educated  Roman,  had  taught  him  to  look  beneath  the  surface  and  to  gather  the 
truths  unseen  by  the  vulgar  eye,  to  see  substance  under  shadow,  reality  under  form, 
and  the  truth  typified  under  the  typifying  symbol.  He  is  thus  prepared  to  pierce 
beneath  the  rites  and  sacrifices  to  that  to  which  they  pointed  and  which  they 
forecasted.  II.  His  action,  in  circumstances  which  to  many  men  in  his  station 
would  have  been  trivial,  reveals  a  new  beauty  in  his  character,  and  demands  from 
us  a  new  admiration.  His  servant — "  dear  to  him  "  in  a  personal  way,  as  one 
bound  to  him  by  personal  links,  and  not  merely,  as  were  his  soldiers,  by  official 
relations — "  was  sick  and  ready  to  die."  The  manifestation  of  a  noble  nature 
was  grateful  to  the  Son  of  Man.  His  Divine  Humanity  rejoiced  as  the  flower 
of  faith  blossomed  in  the  hearts  of  those  He  loved.  (G.  M.  Grout,  B.D.)  Tlie 
centurion;  or,  an  exhortation  to  the  virtuotis : — This  centurion  certainly  had  a 
high  reputation.  Two  features  of  character  blend  in  him  which  do  not  often  meet  in 
Buoh  graceful  harmony.  He  won  the  high  opinion  of  others,  and  yet  he  held  a  low 
estimation  of  himself.  1.  To  begin,  then,  here  is  a  high  chabacteb;  let  us 
thoroughly  appreciate  it,  aiid  give  it  a  full  measure  of  commendation.    This 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  \cna.  vu, 

eentorion  must  have  been  a  man  of  sterling  worth.  He  was  not  merely  quiet  and 
inoffensive  like  some  men  who  are  as  insipid  as  they  are  harmless.  It  would 
appear,  too,  that  his  private  temperament,  as  well  as  his  public  spirit,  contributed 
to  the  estimation  in  which  he  was  held.  Next  to  this,  you  will  observe  hia 
generosity.  It  is  not  by  occasional  deeds  of  showy  lustre,  but  by  the  habitual 
practice  of  comely  virtues,  that  a  worthy  character  is  built  up.  A  thousand 
kindnesses  may  be  nestling  beneath  the  soU,  like  the  many-fibred  root  of  a  gigantic 
tree,  when  it  is  said,  "  He  loveth  our  nation";  and  then  the  conspicuous  fruit  appeara 
in  its  season — "  He  hath  built  us  a  synagogue."  But,  remember,  and  here  I  close  this 
point,  however  good  your  character,  or  however  excellent  your  repute,  not  one  word 
of  this  is  ever  to  be  mentioned  before  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.  II.  Secondly, 
in  the  centurion  we  see  coupled  with  this  high  and  noble  repute,  deep  humiliation 
OF  80UL — "  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof."  Humility, 
then,  it  appears,  may  exist  in  any  condition.  There  are  some  men  who  are  to© 
mean  to  be  humble.  They  are  too  crouching,  crawling,  sneakish,  and  abject  to  be 
humble.  It  certainly  is  not  for  the  least  vermin  that  creep  the  earth  to  talk  about 
humility.  But  a  man  to  be  humble,  needs  to  have  a  soul;  to  stoop,  you  must  have 
some  elevation  to  stoop  from ;  you  must  have  some  real  excellence  within  you  before 
you  can  really  understand  what  it  is  to  renounce  merit.  We  have  heard  of  a 
certain  monk,  who,  professing  to  be  humble,  said  "he  had  broken  all  God's  com- 
mandments;  he  was  the  greatest  sinner  in  the  world;  he  was  as  bad  as  Judas." 
Somebody  said,  "  Why  tell  us  that?  we  have  all  of  us  thought  that  a  long  time  I'* 
Straightway  the  holy  man  grew  red  in  the  face,  and  smote  the  accuser,  and  asked 
him  what  he  iad  ever  done  to  deserve  such  a  speech.  III.  The  main  thing  I  am 
aiming  at,  because,  after  all,  the  most  practical,  lies  in  my  third  point.  However  deep 
our  humility,  however  conscious  we  may  be  of  our  own  undeservingness,  we  should 
NEVEB  DIMINISH  OUR  FAITH  IN  GoD.  Observe  the  confession — "I  am  not  worthy  that 
Thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof."  What  then  will  be  the  inference? — "  I  fear, 
therefore,  my  servant  will  not  be  healed"?  No,  no ;  but — "  Say  in  a  word,  and  my 
servant  shall  be  healed."  It  is  all  a  mistake  that  great  faith  implies  pride.  Be- 
loved, the  greater  faith,  the  deeper  humility.  The  more  the  glories  of  God  strike 
50U?  eyes,  the  humbler  you  will  lie  in  conscious  abasement,  but  yet  the  higher  you 
will  rise  in  importunate  prayer.  But  now  just  imagine  what  your  own  case  is,  and 
the  case  of  others,  and  let  us  apply  this  principle  to  it :  we  are  utterly  unworthy  to 
obtain  the  temporal  or  spiritual  mercy  which,  it  may  be,  we  are  now  seeking  :  we 
may  feel  this,  but  in  asking  anything  for  ourselves,  we  must  still  ask  in  faith  in  God, 
in  His  promise,  and  in  His  grace ;  and  we  shall  prevail.  Whatever  thy  desire  may 
be,  only  believe,  and  it  shall  be  granted  unto  thee  if  it  be  a  desire  in  accordance 
with  His  will,  and  in  accordance  with  the  promises  of  His  Word ;  or  else  God'a 
Word  is  not  true.  Be  humble  about  it,  but  do  not  be  doubtful  about  it.  (C.  U. 
Spurgeon.)  The  centurion'' s  faith  and  humility  : — The  greatest  light  may  enter 
into  the  darkest  places.  We  may  find  the  choicest  flowers  blooming  where  we 
least  expected  them.  Here  was  a  Gentile,  a  Eoman,  a  soldier — a  soldier  clothed 
with  absolute  power— and  yet  a  tender  master,  a  considerate  citizen,  a  lover  of  Godl 
The  best  of  pearls  have  been  found  in  the  darkest  caves  of  ocean.  Let  no  man 
think  that  because  of  bis  position  in  society  he  cannot  excel  in  virtue.  It  is  not 
the  place  which  is  to  blame,  but  the  man.     I.  The  humility  or  the  centurion 

WAS  NOT  AT  ALL  INJURIOUS  TO  THE  STRENGTH  OF    HIS  FAITH.       YoU  may  haVC  UOticed  ill 

the  biography  of  some  eminent  men  how  badly  they  speak  of  themselves.  Southey, 
in  hia  "  Life  of  Bunyan,"  seems  at  a  diiBculty  to  understand  how  Bunyan  could 
have  used  such  depreciating  language  concerniug  his  own  character.  For  it  is  true, 
according  to  all  we  know  of  his  biof^raphy,  that  he  was  not,  except  in  the  case  of 
profane  swearing,  at  all  so  bad  as  the  most  of  tbe  villagers.  Indeed,  there  were 
some  virtues  in  the  man  which  were  worthy  of  all  commendation.  Southey 
attributes  it  to  a  morbid  state  of  mind,  but  we  ratber  ascribe  it  to  a  return  of 
spiritual  health.  Had  the  excellent  poet  seen  himself  in  the  same  heavenly  light 
as  that  in  which  Bunyan  saw  himself,  he  would  have  discovered  that  Bunyan  did 
not  exaggerate,  but  was  simply  stating  as  far  as  he  could  a  truth  which  utterly  sur- 
passed his  powers  of  utterance.  The  great  light  which  shone  around  Saul  of 
Tarsus  was  the  outward  type  of  that  inner  light  above  the  brightness  of  the  sua 
which  flashes  into  a  regenerate  soul,  and  reveals  the  horrible  character  cf  the  sin 
which  dwells  within.  Believe  me,  when  you  hear  Christians  making  abject  con- 
fessions, it  is  not  that  they  are  worse  than  others,  but  that  they  see  themselves  in 
m  dearer  light  than  others;  and  this  centurion's  uawoithiness  was  not  bocauM 


«HAr.  rn.]  8T.  LUKE,  669 

he  had  been  more  vicious  than  other  men — on  the  contrary,  he  had  evidently  been 
much  more  virtuous  than  the  common  run  of  mankind — but  because  he  saw  what 
others  did  not  see,  and  felt  what  others  had  not  felt.  Deep  as  was  this  man's  con- 
tritiou,  overwhelming  as  was  his  sense  of  utter  worthlessness,  he  did  not  doubt  for 
a  moment  either  the  power  or  the  willingness  of  Christ.  II.  I  shall  want  you  for  a 
moment  to  attend  while  we  shift  the  text  to  the  other  quarter.  The  centubion'b  obeat 
FAITH  WAS  NOT  AT  ALL  HOSTILE  TO  HIS  HUMILITY.  His  faith  was  extraordinary.  It  ought 
not  to  be  extraordinary.  We  ought  all  of  us  to  believe  as  well  in  Christ  as  this  soldier 
did.  In  his  heart  he  enthroned  the  Lord  Jesus  as  a  Captain  over  all  the  forces  of  the 
world,  as  the  generalissimo  of  heaven  and  earth;  as,  in  fact,  the  Caesar,  the  imperial 
Governor  of  all  the  forces  of  the  universe.  'Twas  graciously  thought,  'twas 
poetically  embodied,  'twas  nobly  spoken,  'twas  gloriously  believed  ;  but  it  was  the 
truth  and  nothing  more  than  the  truth,  for  universal  dominion  is  really  in  the 
power  of  Jesus  to-day.  Here  is  one  point  to  which  I  recall  you  ;  this  man's  faith 
did  not  for  a  moment  interfere  with  his  thorough  personal  humiliation.  Because 
Christ  was  so  great,  he  felt  himself  to  be  unworthy  either  to  meet  Him  or  entertain 
Him.  The  application  shall  be  to  three  sorts  of  people.  1.  First,  we  speak  to 
distressed  miuds  deeply  conscious  of  their  unworthiness.  You  feel  that  you  cannot 
repent,  but  cannot  Jesus  make  thee  repent  by  His  Spirit  ?  Do  you  hesitate  about 
that  question?  S»e  the  world  a  few  months  ago  hard  bound  with  frost,  but  how 
daffodil,  and  crocus,  and  snowdrop,  have  come  up  above  that  once  frozen  soil,  how 
snow  and  ice  have  gone,  and  the  genial  sun  shines  out  ?  God  does  it  readily,  with 
the  soft  breath  of  the  south  wind  and  the  kind  sunbeams,  and  he  can  do  the  same 
in  the  spiritual  world  for  thee.  But,  perhaps,  it  is  some  bad  habit  which  gives  you 
trouble.  You  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  Ah  I  I  know  your  dreads  and  despairs;  but,  man, 
I  ask  thee,  cannot  Jesus  deliver  ?  He  whose  every  act  is  wonderful,  can  surely  do 
what  He  will  within  this  Uttle  world  of  thy  soul,  since  in  the  great  world  outiside 
He  rules  as  He  pleases.  Believe  in  His  power,  aud  ask  Him  to  prove  it.  He  haa 
but  to  say  in  a  word,  and  this  matter  of  present  distress  shall  be  taken  away.  2.  A 
second  application  of  our  subject  shall  be  made  to  the  patient  workers  who  are  ready 
to  taint.  The  last  application  I  shall  make  is  the  same  as  the  second,  only  on  a 
•wider  scale.  3.  There  are  many  who  are  like  watchers  who  have  grown  weary.  When 
He  saith,  "Do"  it  shall  be  done,  and  His  name  shall  be  praised.  0  for  more  faith  and 
more  self-abasement.  (Ibid.)  Motives  of  humility  : — I.  The  fbuits  of  humility. 
1.  Humility  keeps  na  from  many  sins.  2.  Humility  preserves  the  other  virtues.  3. 
Humility  attracts  Divine  grace  (James  iv.  6).  4.  Humility  iuflames  the  heart  with 
Divine  charity.  5.  Humility  exalts  us  to  the  height  of  heaven  (Luke  i.  52,  xviii. 
14;  1  Peter  v.  6).  II.  The  teaching  and  example  of  Jesus  Cheist.  Jesus  haa 
enjoined  on  us  this  duty — 1.  By  words  (Matt.  xi.  29).  2.  By  example.  (1)  In  Hia 
birth.  (2)  In  His  circumcision.  (3)  In  washing  the  disciples'  feet.  (4)  In  Hia 
death  on  the  cross.  III.  Oub  own  miseby.  1.  We  find  motives  in  the  outer  world. 
(1)  If  you  look  at  the  earth,  you  behold  your  grave.  (2)  Beneath  the  earth,  you 
find  hell.  (3)  In  heaven  is  God,  and  the  gate  of  heaven  is  low.  2.  Motives  within 
ourselves.  (1)  Concerning  our  body.  (2)-  Concerning  our  soul.  (Laaelve.)  Of 
humility  : — He  that  would  build  lastingly  must  lay  his  foundation  low.  The  proud 
man,  like  the  early  shoots  of  a  new-felled  coppice,  thrusts  out  full  of  sap,  green 
in  leaves,  and  fresh  in  colour ;  but  bruises  and  breaks  with  every  wind,  is  nipped 
with  every  little  cold,  and  being  top-heavy,  is  wholly  unfit  for  use.  Whereas  the 
humble  man  retains  it  in  the  root,  can  abide  the  winter's  killing  blast,  the  ruffling 
concussions  of  the  wind,  and  can  endure  far  more  than  that  which  appears  so 
flourishing.  Like  the  pyramid,  he  has  a  large  foundation,  whereby  his  height  may 
be  more  eminent ;  and  the  higher  he  is,  the  less  does  he  draw  at  the  top  ;  as  if  the 
nearer  heaven,  the  smaller  he  must  appear.  And  indeed,  the  nigher  man  ap- 
proaches to  celestials,  and  the  more  he  considers  God,  the  more  he  sees  to  make 
himself  vile  in  his  own  esteem.  He  who  values  himself  least  shaU  by  others  be 
prized  most.  Nature  swells  when  she  meets  a  check ;  but  submission  in  us  to 
others  begets  submission  in  others  to  us.  Give  me  the  man  that  is  humble  out  of 
judgment,  and  I  shall  find  him  full  of  parts.  Charles  V.  appears  as  great  in  hold- 
ing  the  candle  to  his  departing  visitors,  as  when  he  was  surrounded  by  his  victorious 
officers.  Moses,  who  was  the  first  and  greatest  divine,  statesman,  historian, 
philosopher,  and  poet ;  who  as  a  valiant  general  led  Israel  out  of  Egypt ;  who  waa 
renowned  for  his  miracles,  and  could  roll  up  the  waves  to  pass  his  men,  and  tumble 
them  down  again  upon  his  enemies  ;  who  was  a  type  of  Christ,  and  styled  a  friend 
o(  God ;  was  nevertheless  meek  above  all  that  were  upon  the  face  of  the  earth : 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chi».  th. 

and  lest  our  proud  dust  should  think  it  a  disparagement  to  be  humble,  we  ar« 
assured  by  our  Saviour  Himself,  that  to  be  so  will  be  rest  to  our  souls.    No  man 
ever  lost  the  esteem  of  a  wise  man  by  stooping  to  an  honest  lowness  when  there 
was  occasion  for  it.  I  have  known  a  great  duke  to  fetch  in  wood  to  his  inferior's  fire; 
and  a  general  of  nations  descend  to  a  footman's  ofiBce  in  lifting  op  the  boot  of  a 
coach ;  yet  neither  thought  it  a  degradation  to  their  dignity.      {Owen  FelUhfim.) 
A  full  sail : — The  full  sail  oversets  the  vessel,  which  drawn  in,  may  make  the 
voyage  prosperous.    {Ibid.)         To  children: — If  I  had  seen  this  centurion  only 
when  he  was  dressed  for  battle  I  should  not  have  thought  of  him  as  gentle.    I 
should  have  seen  him  carrying  a  sword  to  kill  men  with,  and  a  shield  to  defend 
himself  from  being  killed  by  others.     And  as  he  had  other  soldiers  under  him,  I 
might  have  heard  him  speaking  to  them  in  a  loud  commanding  way,  and  telling 
them  to  do  hard  and  cruel  things.    But,  as  we  see  him  in  the  Gospels,  his  sword  and 
shield  are  hanging  on  the  wall,  and  he  is  sitting  beside  a  little  bed  in  his  room  in  the 
•soldiers'  barracks.     After  one  of  his  dreadful  battles  he  had  got  for  his  share  of  the 
spoil  a  little  boy  who  had  been  taken  captive — a  poor  little  boy,  torn  away  from 
father  and  mother,  and  forced  to  be  a  slave.    He  was  the  slave  of  this  soldier ;  he 
cooked  his  food,  he  tidied  his  room,  he  polished  his  armour,  he  went  his  errands. 
Then  the  rough  soldier  was  as  tender  as  a  mother  could  be.    He  sat  by  his  bed  ;  he 
watched  over  him  day  and  night.     One  day,  as  the  big  soldier  was  sitting  by  the 
little  bed,  somebody  came  in  and  said,  "  A  great  prophet  has  come  to  the  town. 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  has  come."      "  Jesus  of   Nazareth  ?  "  the  soldier  said ;  "  the 
Healer  of  sickness?     Oh  that  He  would  heal  my  boy!"    But  then  this  thought 
came  into  his  mind,  "  I  am  a  soldier  of  the  nation  that  is  ill-treating  the  Jews.    I 
am  not  worthy  that  a  Jew  so  good  as  He  should  do  anything  for  me."    Then  other 
thoughts  came,  and  in  his  great  love  for  the  boy,  and  knowing  that  Jesus  could 
heal  him,  he  at  last  ventured  to  send  this  humble  message :  "  Oh,  my  Lord,  my 
servant  is  near  to  die,  and  Thou  art  able  to  save  from  dying.     I  am  not  worthy  that 
Thou  shouldest  visit  my  house.    But  only  speak  the  word,  and  he  shall  live."   Now 
when  Jesus  received  that  message,  a  great  joy  came  into  His  heart ;  and  He  said  to 
health,  "  Go  to  that  soldier's  little  servant,  and  make  him  well,  for  I  have  not 
found  a  heart  so  gentle  as  his  master's — no,  not  in  all  Israel."    And  He  had  no 
sooner  spoken,  out  on  the  street,  than  the  thing  He  commanded  was  done.    Health 
came  back  to  the  sick  boy  in  the  soldier's  house.    And  the  gentle  heart  of  the 
master  swelled  up  in  thankful  joy,  as  he  stooped  down  and  kissed  the  child  whom 
JesuB  had  made  well  again.     {A.  Macleod,  D.D.)        Cues  to  character  .-—There  are 
three  separate  spectators  of  every  man's  life — himself,  his  neighbours,  and  his  God. 
Let  us  consider  concerning  this  man — I.  What  his  neiqhboxibs  thought  of  him — 
that  he  was  worthy.     1.  They  formed  their  opinion  of  his  character  from  his  eon- 
duct — "  He  loveth,"  &c.     They  judged  of  his  worth,  not  by  his  words  but  by  his 
works.      2.  Their  estimate  of  his  character  was  singularly  just.      II.  What  hb 
THotJOHT  or  HIMSELF — "  I  am  not  worthy."    Doubtless  this  feeling  of  unworthiness 
which  prompted  him  to  procure  the  services  of  the  Jewish  elders,  instead  of  going 
direct  to  Christ  himself.     1.  A  truly  good  man  has  a  higher  standard  of  moral 
excellence  than  other  men.    2.  A  truly  good  man  is  conscious  of  numerous  imper- 
fections which  other  men  do  not  perceive.    III.  What  the  Savioub  thought  of 
HIM — "  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith,"  &c.    1.  Christ  estimates  a  man's  character 
according  to  the  amount  of  bis  faith.    2,  All  true  faith  prompts  to  corresponding 
activity  in  doing  good.     Morality  without  faith  is  heathenism,  and  faith  without 
morality  is  antinomianism.     (IF.  Kirkman.)        The  threefold  influence  of  faith: — 
I.  The  influence  or  faith  upon  societt — "  He  is  worthy."     1.  Faith  influencing 
society  through  the  lowest  natural  means.    Stones  and  mortar.     "  He  hath  built  ua 
a  synagogue."    2.  Faith  influencing  society  through  the  highest  human  means. 
Philanthropy.    ♦'  He  loveth  our  nation."    3.  Faith  continuing  to  influence  society 
independently  of  the  means  by  which  it  manifested  itself.     Every  heart  says  till 
this  day,  "He  is  worthy."    II.  The  influence  of  faith  upon  the  man  himself. 
1.  It  gives  man  a  right  estimate  of  himself — '♦  I  am  not  worthy."    2.  It  givts  him 
the  right  estimate  of  what  he  has — "  Under  my  roof."     3.  It  gives  man  right  ideas 
of  God — "  Speak  the  word  only."      He  believed  (a)  that  Christ  has  authority  to 
speak  ;  {b)  in  His  willingness  to  speak ;  (c)  in  His  power  to  accomplish — "  And  my 
servant  shall  be  healed."    4.  It  gives  to  the  soul  the  right  idea  of  duty.     Loving  the 
nation  and  caring  for  the  welfare  of  his  domestics.    5.  It  gives  to  the  soul  the  right 
religions  impulse — "  He  hath  built  us  a  synagogue."     6.  It  converts  the  soul  into  a 
most  Christ-like  aspect.  Disinterestedness  pervades  all  the  centurion's  acts.   AU  tot 


mir.  yn.l  8T.  LUKE.  «7I 

others.  HI.  The  infuenck  or  faith  upon  the  Saviour — * '  I  have  not  found  so  great 
faith,"  (fee.  1.  The  uniqueness  of  the  faith.  It  took  the  Saviour  by  surprise.  2.  The 
clear  conception  which  his  faith  had  of  the  person  of  the  Saviour.  3.  The  estimate 
which  his  faith  had  formed  of  the  Saviour's  feelings.  Believed  there  were  sympathy 
and  tenderness  in  the  Saviour's  heart.  4.  The  estimate  which  he  had  formed  of 
the  resources  at  the  Saviour's  command.  5.  His  implicit  confidence  in  the  Saviour 
in  His  absence.  6.  The  Saviour's  unreserved  compliance  with  the  centurion's 
request,  and  the  desired  blessing  bestowed.  {W.  A.  Edwards.)  The  lessons  of 
the  narrative.- — 1.  The  true  Church  in  the  world  in  all  ages  is  wider  than  the  visible 
€hurch.  2.  There  are  in  all  ages  lost  characters  within  the  pale  of  the  visible 
Church.  "  They  are  not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel."  3.  True  piety  always 
insures  membership  of  the  invisible  Church.  4.  We  are  led  into  circumstances  at 
times  in  which  our  religious  sympathies  ought  to  transcend  all  the  narrow  sectional 
lines  of  our  creeds.  5.  True  faith  presents  itself  to  Christ  and  the  world  in  very 
different  aspects.  6.  True  faith  never  fails  to  enlist  Christ's  sympathy  and  help. 
7.  Devotion  to  the  welfare  of  others  is  a  safe  path  to  personal  happiness  and 
heaven's  approval.  (Ibid.)  Another  treatment: — 1.  Truth  may  prosper  when 
the  Church  is  not  aware  of  it.  2.  Truth  prospers  at  times  beyond  the  expectation 
of  the  Church.  3.  Truth  prospers  often  where  we  least  expect  it.  4.  Contact  with 
Christ  reveals  the  true  condition  of  the  soul:  (a)  Faith  in  the  heart  of  the  centurion; 
(b)  Unbelief  in  that  of  the  Jews.  5.  The  noble  influence  of  religion,  conquering 
the  bigotry  of  the  Jew,  and  inspiring  the  heart  of  a  Gentile  to  build  synagogues  to 
the  service  of  the  living  God.  6.  Privileges  enhance  responsibility,  and  neglect  of 
them  involves  the  saddest  consequences.  7.  Man's  work  is  ev^r  in  proportion  to  his 
faith.  8.  Man's  influence  upon  society  is  ever  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  his 
faith.  9.  Man's  influence  with  Heaven  is  ever  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  his 
faith.  (Ibid.)  A  soldier's  training : — This  centurion  was  a  Eoman,  a  captain  in 
the  army,  who  had  risen  from  the  ranks  by  good  conduct.  Before  he  got  his  vine- 
etock,  which  was  the  mark  of  his  authority  over  a  hundred  men,  he  had,  no  doubt, 
marched  many  a  weary  mile  under  a  heavy  load,  and  fought,  probably,  many  a 
bloody  battle  in  foreign  parts.  That  had  been  his  education — discipline  and  hard 
work.  And  because  he  had  learned  to  obey,  he  was  fit  to  rule.  He  was  helping  now 
to  keep  in  order  those  treacherous,  unruly  Jews,  and  their  worthless  puppet- 
kings  like  Herod  ;  much  as  our  soldiers  in  India  are  keeping  in  order  the  Hindoos, 
and  their  worthless  puppet-kings.  This  was  the  great  and  true  thought  which  had 
filled  this  good  man's  mind — duty,  order,  and  obedience.  The  message  which  he  sent 
to  Jesus  means  this  :  "  There  is  a  word  of  command  among  us  soldiers.  Has  God 
no  word  of  command  likewise  ?  The  word  of  my  superiors  is  enough  for  me.  I  say 
to  those  under  me,  *  Go,'  and  they  go.  And  if  I  can  work  by  a  word,  cannot  this 
Jesus  work  by  a  word  likewise  ?  "  By  some  such  thoughts  as  these,  I  suppose,  had 
this  good  soldier  gained  his  great  faith  ;  his  faith  that  all  God's  creatures  were  in  a 
divine  and  wonderful  order  obedient  to  the  will  of  God  who  made  them  ;  and  that 
Jesus  Christ  was  God's  viceroy  and  lieutenant  (I  speak  so,  because  I  suppose  that  is 
what  he,  as  a  soldier,  would  have  thought),  to  carry  out  God's  commands  on  earth. 
This  is  the  character  which  makes  a  good  soldier,  and  a  good  Christian  likewise. 
{Charles  Kingsley.)  Paradoxes  in  the  character  of  the  centurion  : — He  was — 1. 
A  soldier  accustomed  to  scenes  of  bloodshed,  yet  preserving,  amid  all  the  hardening 
tendencies  of  his  profession,  a  tender  heart.  2.  A  slave-owner,  yet  solicitous  for 
the  welfare  of  his  slave.  8.  A  representative  of  the  usurping  power,  yet  one  who 
had  secured  the  respect  and  affection  of  the  leaders  of  the  subjugated  people  among 
whom  he  lived.  4.  A  proselyte  to  the  religion  of  Israel,  yet  more  truly  religious 
than  the  people  whose  religion  he  had  adopted.  5.  A  Pagan  by  birth,  a  Jew  by 
conversion,  a  Christian  by  faith.  "  The  first  heathen  man  of  whom  we  read,  that 
he  acknowledged  Christ."  Learn  that  a  true  religious  faith  is  able  to  overcome  in 
the  man  who  possesses  it  the  untoward  influences  of  (a)  birth ;  (b)  training :  (c) 
calling;  (d)  circumstances.  (J.  R.  Bailey.)  Faith  of  the  centurion : — I.  The  faith 
WHICH  WAS  COMMENDED.  1.  First  evidcoce  of  its  existence — His  tenderness  to  hia 
servants.  Of  course  this  good  act  might  have  existed  separate  from  religion.  But 
we  are  forbidden  to  view  it  so,  when  we  remember  that  he  was  a  proselyte.  2. 
Second  proof  :  His  humility.  3.  Third  :  His  belief  in  an  invisible  living  will.  II. 
The  causes  of  Chbist'b  astonishment.  1.  The  centurion  was  a  Gentile,  and 
therefore  unlikely  to  know  revealed  truth.  2.  A  soldier,  and  therefore  exposed  to 
a  recklessness,  and  idleness,  and  sensuality,  which  are  the  temptations  of  that  pro- 
fession.   Bat  he  turned  his  loss  to  glorious  gain.     HI.  The  Savioub's  comuenz 


672  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  th. 

CONTAIKED  THE  ADVANTAGE  OF  DISADVANTAGES,  AND  THE  DISADVANTAGE  OF  ADVANTAGES. 

The  former,  "  Many  shall  come  from  the  east  and  the  west,"  &e.  The  latter, 
"  The  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  cast  into  outer  darkness"  (Matt.  viii.  11-12). 
IV.  This  incident  testifies  to  the  perfect  humanity  of  Christ.  The  Saviour 
marvelled.  It  was  a  real  genuine  wonder.  (F,  W.  Robertson.)  I.  This  faith  in 
its  awakening  in  the  man's  life.  II.  This  faith  in  its  expression  in  thb  man's 
LIFE.      (J.  Ogrnore  Davies.)  Marvellous   faith : — The  faith   of  the  centarioD 

reveals  itself.  I.  As  a  power  of  conceiving  great  thoughts.  His  idea  is,  that  just 
as  the  hundred  men  under  his  command  are  at  his  beck  to  come  and  go,  and  do  as 
he  pleases,  so  all  the  powers  of  nature  are  ready  to  do  the  bidding  of  Christ.  Was 
it  not  a  great  original  idea  ?  Observe,  it  was  an  idea,  the  credit  of  which  belonged 
to  the  centurion's  faith.  To  conceive  it  required  more  than  a  clever  brain,  even  the 
daring  spirit  of  which  faith  alone  is  capable.  Unbelief  cannot  entertain  such 
grand  ideas  of  Divine  power.  II.  As  a  power  of  dwarfing  into  insignificance 
MOUNTAINS  OF  DIFFICULTY.  Weak  faith  makes  difficulties,  but  strong  faith 
annihilates  them.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Masters  and  servants: — The  centurion 
was  (1)  a  man  of  faith.  (2)  He  was  also  a  man  of  liberality.  (2)  His  charity 
began  at  home.  There  are  many  faults  noticeable  in  rulers  of  families.  1. 
Injustice  in  the  assignment  of  duties.  2.  Unreasonableness  in  the  expectation  at 
perfection.  3,  Negligence  in  the  consideration  of  religious  interests.  {Dean  Vaughan.) 
He  lovcth  our  nation : — I.  The  principle  on  which  the  centurion  acted.  II. 
The  ACTION  itself.  "He  hath  built  us,"  &o.  We  estimate  love  by  the  service  that 
it  renders,  and  the  cost  that  service  occasions.  (J.  C.  Galloway.)  The  candour 
and  liberality  of  the  centurion  recommended : — I.  The  superiority  to  prejudicb 
which  his  love  for  the  Jewish  nation  implies.  II.  The  solid  grounds  on  which 
HIS  attachment  to  the  Jewish  nation  rested.  It  was  such  an  attachment  as  it 
was  next  to  impossible  for  a  good  man  not  to  feel.  To  love  the  Jewish  nation  is 
Btill  a  natural  dictate  of  piety.  III.  Tub  manner  in  which  his  attachments  to 
THE  people  op  God  WAS  EVINCED.  It  was  Hot  an  empty  profession,  productive  of 
no  fruit.  IV.  The  highly  praiseworthy  and  exemplary  character  of  hib 
conduct.  To  assist  in  the  erection  of  places  of  worship,  providing  it  proceeds  from 
right  motives,  is  unquestionably  an  acceptable  service  to  the  Most  High.  (2i.  Hall, 
M.A.)  Christ  marvi  lling  : — I  do  not  know  that  we  ever  feel  the  immense  interval 
between  ourselves  and  the  Son  of  Man  more  keenly  than  when  we  compare  that 
which  astonishes  us  with  that  which  astonishes  Him.  To  us,  as  a  rule,  the  word 
"miracles"  denotes  mere  physical  wonders;  and  these  are  so  wonderful  to  us  as 
to  be  well-nigh  incredible.  But  in  Him  they  awake  no  astonishment.  He  never 
speaks  of  them  with  the  faintest  accent  of  surprise.  He  set  so  little  store  by  them 
that  He  often  seemed  reluctant  to  work  them,  and  openly  expressed  His  wish  that 
those  on  or  for  whom  they  had  been  wrought  would  tell  no  man  of  them.  What 
does  astonish  Him  is  not  these  outward  wonders  so  surprising  to  us,  but  that 
inward  wonder,  the  mystery  of  man'a  soul,  the  miraculous  power  which  we  often 
exercise  without  a  tbought  of  surprise,  the  power  of  opening  and  shutting  that  door 
or  window  of  the  soul  which  looks  heavenward,  and  through  which  alone  the 
glories  of  the  spiritual  world  can  stream  in  upon  us.  Only  twice  are  we  told  that 
He  marvelled  to  whom  all  the  secrets  of  Nature  and  Life  lay  open  ;  once  at  the  un- 
belief of  men,  and  once  at  their  faith.  When  He  came  to  His  own,  and  they 
received  Him  not.  He  was  driven  from  His  wonted  calm  by  an  immeasurable 
surprise  •.  He  marvelled  at  their  unbelief  (Mark  vi.  6) ;  and,  again,  when  He 
came  to  those  to  whom  He  was  a  Stranger,  and  they  took  Him  in.  He  was 
beyond  all  measure  astonished ;  He  marvelled  at  tbeir  prompt  and  vigorous 
faith.  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Faith  and  reason : — We  are  told  that  this  man's  faith 
excited  the  wonder  of  the  Son  of  God,  and,  therefore,  everything  that  belongs  to 
that  faith  must  be  interesting  to  us.  1.  Already,  then,  this  man  was  recognized 
for  his  devotedness  of  character.  2.  Since  our  Lord  knew  that  the  character  of  this 
centurion  was  that  of  a  devout,  unselfish  believer  in  God,  we  can  easily  understand 
that  His  expectations  must  have  been  large.  3.  And  yet  we  are  told  that  His 
expectations  were  exceeded.  Expecting  much.  He  found  more.  4.  Some  people 
have  thought  that  the  humility  of  this  centurion  was  so  extreme  as  to  be  exagger- 
ated, and  even  unnatural.  Yet  remember  (1)  that  he  had  been  taught  that  the 
position  of  a  Gentile  was  that  of  a  profane  and  unclean  person  ;  (2)  that  his 
humility  was  founded,  doubtless,  upon  moral  as  well  as  ceremonial  reasons.  He 
realized  the  greatness  of  tbe  Lord  Jesus.  5.  How  did  he  reason  with  himself?  In 
a  way  which  shows  that  tbe  basis  of  true  faith  is  always  humility.     {Bishop  Moor- 


«HA?.  vn.]  8T.  LUKE.  678 

hoTJue.)  The  centurion's  faith  .'—Faith  and  humility,   my  brethren,  may  b« 

described  as  two  sister  virtues,  so  closely  are  they  connected  together,  that  the  one 
cannot  flourish  without  the  other.  We  are  taught  that  we  may  possibly  have 
something  like  a  vague  hope  that,  through  God's  mercy,  our  sin  may,  ultimately, 
be  forgiven,  and  our  souls  rescued  from  ruin  :  but  for  a  man  to  say  that  he  knows 
Ihat  salvation  is  his,  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  acceptance,  that  the  blood  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  has  been  applied  to  his  soul,  and  that  now  he  is  the  child  of  God,  is 
presumption,  and  that  no  real,  humble-minded  Christian  will  speak  in  this  way. 
Thus  we  find,  that  while,  on  the  one  hand,  faith  is,  by  one  class  of  persons  repre- 
sented  as  presumption,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  exaggerated  into  presumption  just 
because  people  fail  to  exercise  the  virtue  of  humility.  Tdere  is  no  humility  in  my 
doubting  the  Word  of  God.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life." 
Let  us  take  the  narrative  as  it  stands,  and  learn  a  few  practical  lessons  from  it.  I. 
The  first  thing  I  notice  about  this  centurion  is,  that  although  he  was  a  man  in  a 
considerable  social  position,  he  was  altooetheb  kree  from  that  petty  form  of 

CONVENTIONAL  PRIDE,  WHICH   IS  IN  TOO  MANY  INSTANCES  THE  CURSE  OF  MODERN  SOCIETY. 

Here  is  a  very  practical  lesson  with  respect  to  humility.  My  friends,  I  do  not 
believe  much  in  the  humility  of  man  towards  his  God  where  his  conduct  ia 
characterized  by  pride  towards  his  fellow  men.  Yet,  again,  the  centurion  was  free 
from  that  miserable  form  of  pride  which  exhibits  itself  in  national  prejudice.  The 
man  that  really  wants  to  get  a  blessing  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must  be  content 
to  take  the  lowest  place,  to  think  everybody  better  than  himself,  to  see  himself  as 
God  sees  him,  and  to  be  willing  to  accept  from  any  man  whatever  reasonable  help 
that  man  seems  likely  to  offer  to  him.  II.  Well,  listen  to  the  words  op  commendation 
OF  THE  Master.  "  When  Jesus  heard  it,  He  marvelled,  and  said  to  them  that 
followed.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  I  have  not  found  so  great  faith :  no,  not  in  Israel." 
I  want  to  ask  you,  before  concluding  my  sermon  this  morning.  Are  you  prepared 
to  receive  a  blessing,  dear  friends,  on  those  terms  ?  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  were 
to  stand  in  this  pulpit,  looking  every  one  of  you  in  the  face,  and  were  to  say,  "  Go 
thy  way  ;  as  thou  hast  believed,  so  be  it  unto  thee,"  would  you  reply  by  a  fervent 
exclamation  of  grateful  joy  ?  Should  we  be  able  to  say  so  ?  or  should  we  not,  in 
common  honesty,  have  to  look  up,  and  say,  "  Not  so.  Lord ;  I  have  not  believed,  or 
trusted  my  case  into  Thy  hand;  on  the  contrary,  I  feel  in  my  own  heart,  that  I  have 
been  constantly  taking  it  out  of  Thy  hand,  and  transferring  it  from  Thee  to  myself  ?  I 
have  had  my  own  feelings  and  thoughts;  I  have  been  reasoning  about  possibilities; 
and,  so  far  as  I  have  been  taking  it  out  of  Thy  hand, I  cannot  claim  Thy  bUssing." 
Oh,  dear  friends,  remember  that  God  cannot  alter  His  conditions.  They  are  fixed  in 
the  very  nature  of  things.    {W.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)      The  centurion  at  Caj)ernai<m : — 

I.    His  PIETY  WAS  MARKED  BY  ZEAL  AND  LIBERALITY  .       The  trUB  SeCrct  Of   this  S(  ddlcr's 

"  love  "  for  the  Jewish  "  nation  "  is  thus  explained.  It  was  a  "  love  "  founded 
npon  religion,  and  it  expressed  itself  in  religious  acts.  The  conversion  of  this 
Boman  soldier  gives  an  interesting  and  instructive  view  of  the  power  of  Divine 
truth.  In  scarcely  any  period  of  its  history  was  there  a  more  sad  declension  of 
genuine  piety  in  the  Jewish  Church,  than  in  the  age  to  which  the  text  refers. 
Scepticism,  formality,  hypocrisy,  and  sin,  seemed  to  pervade  all  ranks.  Yet, 
amidst  all  this  degeneracy,  the  truth  remained  embodied  in  the  sacred  Scriptures, 
the  purity  of  which  was  most  sedulously  guarded ;  and  by  means  of  that  truth, 
however  it  might  be  dishonoured  by  its  professors,  this  heathen  soldier  was 
effectually  "turned  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto 
God."  How  wonderful  are  the  dispensations  of  Providence  I  The  Roman  army 
conquered  the  Jews  in  battle,  and  rendered  their  nation  tributary ;  but  the 
Jews,  in  their  turn,  armed  with  the  power  of  revealed  truth,  effected  a  greater 
victory.  They  overcame  the  understandings  and  the  hearts  of  many  of  their 
conquerors,  and  laid  the  hardy  soldiers  of  heathen  Bome  prostrate  in  prayer 
before  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  In  connection  with  this 
part  of  our  subject  I  wish  particularly  to  invite  your  attention  to  the  liberal  and 
generous  character  of  true  religion.  A  good  man  cannot  live  to  himself.  His 
property,  his  influence,  his  person,  are  freely  placed  upon  God's  altar,  and  offered 
in  sacrifice  to  the  Lord  of  all.  But  the  piety  of  the  centurion  mentioned  in 
our  text  was  not  only  characterized  by  zeal  and  liberality ;  it  was  equally  marked — 
n.  By  kindness  and  humanity.  He  had  a  "servant  that  was  dear  to  him"; 
and  when  that  servant  "  was  sick,  and  ready  to  die,"  the  tenderest  sympathies  of 
the  master  were  awakened.  We  are  here  reminded  of  that  diversity  of  rank  which 
has  prevailed  in  the  world  from  the  earliest  ages.  While  poverty  remains,  serv'^ude 

43 


674  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  tii. 

mnst  also  continue.  This  diversity  of  rank,  in  consequence  o£  the  depravity  ol 
human  nature,  has  often  given  birth  to  feelings  and  acts  alike  dishonourable  to 
God  and  man.  True  religion  effectually  corrects  all  these  evils.  It  produces  a 
spirit  of  justice,  equity,  and  love;  and  it  inspires  the  mind  with  the  fear  of 
God,  and  a  supreme  regard  for  His  authority.  It  renders  the  rich  man  the 
guardian  and  benefactor  of  the  poor ;  and  it  makes  the  poor  cheerful,  contented, 
and  honest.  And  let  no  one  suppose  that  this  spiritual  equality  and  affection 
is  subversive  of  order  and  of  just  authority.  The  most  perfect  of  all  government 
is  the  government  of  holy  love.  This  remark  will  apply  both  to  families  and 
the  Church.  His  piety  and  kindness,  so  far  from  impairing  his  authority,  seem 
to  have  even  increased  it ;  and  the  probability  is,  that  a  master  more  respected, 
or  an  ofiScer  more  efficient,  did  not  then  exist.  The  obedience  which  he  received 
was  remarkable  for  its  promptitude  and  cheerfulness ;  so  far  was  his  pious  kind- 
ness from  rendering  his  domestic  servants  insolent,  or  his  ioldiers  careless  and 
remiss.  III.  The  centurion's  deep  and  unaffected  humilitt.  Humility  eonsista 
in  lowliness  of  mind.  It  is  a  disposition  which  becomes  creatures  of  even  the 
highest  order.  Angels  never  affect  independence.  Humility  especially  becomes 
fallen  man.  Humility  so  profound  as  this  is  rarely  met  with,  and  argues  an  extra- 
ordinary degree  of  self-knowledge.  The  centurion  was  now  converted  from  the 
error  of  his  way ;  but  his  conversion  was  effected  by  the  grace  of  God,  and 
therefore  conferred  upon  him  no  proper  merit,  or  worthiness,  before  the  Lord. 
It  was  not  self-righteous  pride,  but  the  want  of  better  knowledge,  that  led  him, 
under  the  mingled  influence  of  shame  and  fear,  to  shun  the  presence  of  his 
Saviour.  Increasing  light  would  discover  to  him  that  his  own  unworthiness 
constituted  the  grand  reason  why  he  should  come  to  Christ,  and  entrust  all  hia 
concerns  with  Him.  The  simplicity  and  ingenuousness  with  which  the  centurion 
had  already  received  the  truth  would  prepare  him  for  those  further  discoveries 
of  the  Divine  mind  and  plan  which  the  doctrine  of  Christ  and  His  apostles  waa 
about  to  present  to  the  world.  The  spiritual  benefits  resulting  from  humility  are 
numerous  and  great.  This  temper  is  especially  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  The  piety  of  the  centurion  was  particularly  marked — IV.  By  strong  faith. 
The  faith  of  the  centurion  was  not  a  blind  and  presumptuous  confidence.  1.  The 
subjects  which  I  have  brought  before  you  on  this  occasion,  I  fear  suggest  to  many 
of  us  matter  of  shame  and  humiliation  before  God.  What  an  example  of 
practical  godliness  have  we  in  this  centurion  I  and  yet  how  great  were  the 
disadvantages  under  which  he  laboured  1  2.  But  there  is  another  view  to  b» 
taken  of  this  subject;  and  it  is  one  which  is  full  of  encouragement.  The 
argument  which  we  have  just  urged  may  be  changed,  and  proposed  thus :  If  this 
heathen  soldier,  in  whose  mind  there  was  so  much  error  and  prejudice  to  be  over- 
eome,  and  whose  means  of  instruction  and  spiritual  improvement  were  so  vastly 
inferior  to  those  which  we  enjoy,  attained  to  all  this  religious  eminence ;  what  may 
not  we  attain  to,  with  all  our  helps  and  advantages?  (T.  Jackson.)  The 
centurion's  faith : — Now,  that  we  may  profit  by  this  example,  let  us  consider  these 
three  things — 1.  What  was  his  faith,  and  wherein  the  greatness  of  it  lay.  2.  How 
this  faith  was  bred  and  begotten  in  him.  3.  The  effects  and  fruits  of  it,  or  how  it 
discovered  itself.  I.  The  nature  of  his  vaith.  It  waa  »  firm  persuasion  that  all 
power  and  authority  was  eminently  in  Christ,  and  that  He  could  do  what  Ha 
pleased.  1.  You  must  distinguish  of  the  times.  In  that  age  there  was  no  human 
reason  to  believe  this  truth.  Antiquity  was  against  it,  and  therefore,  when  Paul 
preached  Jesus,  they  said,  "  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth  of  strange  gods  "  (Acts 
xvii.  18).  Authority  was  against  it :  "  Which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 
knew,  for  had  they  known  it  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory"  (1 
Cor.  ii.  8).  The  universal  consent  of  the  habitable  world  was  against  it ;  only  a 
small  handful  of  contemptible  people  owned  Him  :  "  Fear  not,  little  flock  "  (Luka 
xii.  32).  At  that  time  it  was  the  critical  point,  the  hated  truth,  that  the  carpenter's 
Son  should  be  owned  as  the  Son  of  God.  Those  bleak  winds  that  blow  in  our  backs, 
and  thrust  us  onward  to  believe,  blew  in  their  faces,  and  drove  them  from  it ;  those 
very  reasons  which  move  us  to  own  Christ  moved  them  to  reject  Him.  For  many 
ages  the  name  of  Christ  hath  been  in  request  and  honour,  but  then  it  was  a  despised 
way.  At  His  first  appearance  a  certain  persuasion,  impressed  upon  the  soul  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  of  the  Divine  power  and  all-sufficiency  of  Christ,  so  as  to  repair  to 
Him  for  help,  was  faith  and  great  faith  ;  when  the  veil  of  His  human  nature  and 
infirmities  did  not  keep  the  eye  of  faith  from  seeing  Him  to  have  a  Divine  power, 
though  they  could  not  unriddle  all  the  mysteries  about  Hib  Person  and  office,  thi« 


CHAP.  vii.J  8T.  LUKE,  67£ 

was  aooepted  for  saving  faith.  2.  The  speoulative  belief  of  this  truth  was  noi 
sufficient  then,  no  more  than  it  is  now,  bat  the  practical  improvement.  Grant  that 
truth,  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  Qod,  and  other  things  will  follow,  as  that  we  must 
obey  His  laws,  and  depend  upon  His  promises,  and  make  use  of  His  power,  and 
trust  ourselves  in  His  hands  ;  otherwise  the  bare  acknowledgment  was  not  sufficient. 
II.  How  WAS  THIS  PAiTH  WROUGHT  AND  BBED  IN  HIM  ?  I  aoswer — The  groundwork 
was  laid  in  his  knowledge  of  the  omnipoteacy  and  power  of  God,  and  his  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  though  he  were  not  a  professed  Jew. 
This  prepared  for  his  faith  in  Christ ;  the  report  or  hearing  was  the  ground  of  faith : 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  "  (Isa.  liii.  1.)  He  had  heard  by  fame  of  His 
excellent  doctrine:  "That  He  taught  as  one  having  authority,  and  not  as  the 
scribes"  (Matt,  vii.  29).  And  he  had  heard  the  rumour  of  His  miracles,  more 
particularly  the  late  instance  of  curing  the  leper,  which  was  notorious  and  public  ; 
for  Christ  biddeth  him  "  show  himself  to  the  priests  "  (Matt.  viii.  4) ;  and  also  the 
miracle  in  recovering  the  ruler's  son,  an  instance  near,  which  was  done  in  time 
before  this:  "And  there  was  a  certain  nobleman,  whose  son  was  sick  at  Capernaum; 
and  he  heard  that  Jesus  was  come  out  of  Judaaa  into  Galilee,  and  he  went  unto  Him, 
and  besought  Him  that  He  would  come  down  and  heal  his  son,  for  he  was  at  the 
point  of  death "  (John  iv.  46,  47).  By  all  which  he  was  moved  to  ascribe  the 
omnipotency  of  God,  which  he  knew  before,  to  Jesus  Christ.  Thus  the  Spirit  of 
God  blessed  the  knowledge  of  this  centurion,  and  the  rumours  that  were  brought  to 
him  of  Christ's  doctrine  and  miracles.  III.  The  effects  or  fruits  of  it,  or  how 
IT  discovered  itself.  1.  In  that  he  applieth  himself  to  Christ.  They  that  believe 
in  Christ  will  come  to  Him,  and  put  Him  upon  work,  whilst  others  prize  His  name 
but  neglect  His  office.  A  gracious  heart  will  find  occasions  and  opportunities  of 
acquaintance  with  Christ,  if  not  for  themselves  yet  for  others ;  for  when  they  have 
heard  of  Him,  they  cannot  keep  from  Him.  2.  That  He  accounteth  misery  an 
object  proper  enough  for  mercy  to  work  upon.  The  centurion  came  to  Him,  saying, 
*'  Lord,  my  servant  lieth  at  home  sick  of  the  palsy,  grievously  tormented  "  (verse  6), 
that  is,  grievously  affected  with  the  disease.  Alas  !  what  can  we  bring  to  Christ 
but  sins  and  sicknesses?  3.  When  Christ  offereth  to  come  and  heal  him,  "  I  will 
come  and  heal  him"  (verse  7),  (which  was  the  great  condescension  of  the  Son  of 
God  to  a  poor  servant),  see  how  the  centurion  taketh  it,  "  He  answered,  and  said. 
Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof  "  (verse  8). 
Humility  is  a  fruit  of  faith.  Why  are  true  and  sound  believers  so  ready  to  profess 
their  unworthiness  ?  They  have  a  deeper  sense  of  God's  majesty  and  greatness  than 
others  have,  and  also  a  more  broken-hearted  sense  of  their  own  vileness  by  reason 
of  sin.  They  have  a  more  affective  light  and  sight  of  things ;  God  is  another  thing 
to  them  than  before,  so  is  sin  and  self.  4.  He  is  content  with  Christ's  word  without 
His  bodily  presence  :  "  Speak  but  the  word,  and  my  servant  shall  be  healed."  God's 
word  is  enough  to  a  believer.  5.  Here  is  Christ's  power  and  dominion  over  all 
events,  and  events  that  concern  us  and  ours,  fully  acknowledged,  and  that  is  a 
great  point  gained :  "  He  is  Lord  both  of  th«  dead  and  living "  (Rom.  xiv.  9). 
Health  and  sickness  are  at  His  command.  "  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness  ; 
I  make  peace,  and  create  evil;  I,  the  Lord,  do  all  these  things  "  (Isa.  xlv.  7).  6. 
He  reasoneth  from  the  strict  discipline  observed  in  the  Roman  armies,  where  there 
was  no  disputing  of  commands  or  questioning  why  and  wherefore :  "  I  am  a  man 
under  authority,  having  soldiers  under  me  ;  and  I  say  to  this  man.  Go,  and  he  goeth." 
Reasoning  for  God  and  His  promises  is  a  great  advantage.  We  are  naturally  acute 
in  reasoning  against  faith,  but  when  the  understanding  is  quick  and  ready  to  invent 
arguments  to  encourage  faith,  it  is  a  good  sign.  Use.  Go  you  and  do  likewise. 
From  the  example  ol  the  centurion  let  me  encourage  you — (1)  To  readiness  of 
believing  (James  iii.  17).  (2)  To  represent  our  necessity  to  Christ,  and  refer  the 
event  to  Him,  to  commit  and  submit  all  to  Him.  (3)  To  be  humble.  In  all  our 
commerce  with  Christ,  faith  must  produce  a  real  humility.  Faith  is  most  high 
when  the  heart  is  most  low  (Luke  xviii.  11-14).  (4)  To  meditate  often  on  the 
sovereign  dominion  of  Christ,  and  His  power  over  all  things  that  fall  out  in  the 
world.  (T.  MaiUon.)  Sickness  the  iervant  of  the  Saviour: — I.  Let  us  look  at 
TUB  PROOFS  OF  THE  STATEMENT.  1.  In  Christ's  world-wido  love  we  have  the  proof 
of  it.  Christ's  love  to  men  is  the  assurance  that  He  reserves  to  Himself  the  entire 
control  of  whatever  makes  them  suffer.  2.  Then  the  fact  that  suffering  is  the 
servant  of  the  Saviour  is  shown  in  Christ's  universal  sovereignty.  He  is  "  Lord  of 
all  "  ;  "  all  authority  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  earth."  He  is  therefore  Lord 
of  Providence.  3.  And  we  may  add  that  in  His  miraculous  works  we  have  a  tokem  of 


67«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  tb, 

thii.  When  He  stood  before  sickness  on  earth  He  could  do  with  it  what  He  liked, 
it  recognized  His  voice  and  bowed  submissive  to  His  Word.  II.  If  then,  this  sug- 
gestion of  the  centurion  is  an  established  Scripture  truth,  let  us  pass  on  to  see  what 
IT  INVOLVES  WITH  BEOARD  TO  SICKNESS.  Our  Loid  Is  to  sickuess  what  the  Boman 
captain  was  to  the  soldiers  under  him.  1.  Then  we  may  say  that  sickness  only 
comes  at  His  biiiding.  Compact,  motionless  in  their  ranks,  stand  all  possible  pains 
and  sicknesses  before  Him,  until  He  singles  one  out  and  bids  it  hasten  here  or 
there.  2.  And  this  truth  implies  also  that  sickness  is  restrained  by  His  will.  Like 
the  centurion  to  his  servant,  so  says  Christ  to  sickness,  "  Do  this,"  and  it  doeth  it. 
It  can  only  do  what  Christ  permits.  3.  And  if  sickness  is  Christ's  servant,  then 
sickness  is  sent  to  do  His  work.  His  servant  1  Then  it  has  some  message  to  bring, 
some  gift  to  leave  behind,  some  mission  to  fulfil  for  its  Master ;  there  is  a  distinct 
purpose  in  it.  And  the  sooner  that  purpose  is  fulfilled  by  our  discovery  and 
acceptance  of  it  the  sooner  wiU  the  sickness  be  withdrawn.  That  invests  sickness 
with  great  solemnity.  IH.  These  are  three  closinq  lessons.  1.  This  should 
teach  us  the  sacred  blessedness  of  sickness.  2.  And  this  should  call  us 
to  reverential  service  for  the  sick.  3.  And  this  should  show  us  the  possi- 
bility of  redemption  to  those  who  are  sick.  (C  New.)  An  endeared  servant : — "  She 
was  a  special  Providence  to  me,"  wrote  the  late  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  concerning  hii 
father's  housekeeper,  Maria  Millas.  He  explains  his  meaning  by  stating  that  this 
good  woman  had  almost  the  entire  care  of  him  until  he  was  seven  years  old,  when 
she  died.  Tet  such  was  the  impression  she  made  upon  him  in  those  few  years,  that 
towards  the  close  of  his  truly  noble  life  this  good  man  said  :  "I  must  trace,  under 
God,  very  much,  perhaps  all,  of  the  duties  of  my  later  life  to  her  precepts  and  her 
prayers."  What  a  striking  testimony  is  this  confession  to  the  fidelity  of  an  obscure 
Christian  woman  1  And  what  a  grand  result  it  wrought  1  Lord  Shaftesbury's 
nobility  of  birth,  represented  by  his  earl's  coronet,  when  placed  beside  the  moral 
grandeur  of  his  character,  was  but  as  a  glowworm  to  a  star.  Through  his  long  life  his 
supreme  devotion  to  works  of  benevolence  gave  him  an  undisputed  right  to  say— 

**  Write  me  as  one  that  loves  his  fellow-men." 

His  deeds  gave  light,  hope,  comfort,  and  elevation  to  many  thousands  who  were 
bom  heirs  to  an  inheritance  of  poverty  and  woe.  And  those  deeds  were  the 
precious  fruit  of  the  influence  of  a  servant  in  his  father's  household.  Importance 
of  servants  in  a  household  : — A  worldly  man  began  to  taunt  a  celebrated  preacher, 
and,  among  other  things,  told  him  it  was  true  his  congregation  was  large,  but  it  was 
chiefly  made  up  of  servants  and  low  people.  "  I  know  it  is,"  said  the  sagacious 
divine.  "  My  Church  is  composed  of  such  converts  as  Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles 
gained ;  and  as  for  servants,  I  had  rather  be  instrumental  in  converting  them  than 
their  employers."  "Why  so  ?  "  inquired  the  man.  "  Because,"  observed  the  minis- 
ter, "  they  have  the  care  of  all  the  children."  {Baxendale.)  Humility  always 
seasonable : — I  think  it  was  Bernard,  or  one  of  the  preachers  of  the  Middle  Ages, 
who  said,  "  There  is  one  thing  to  be  said  for  humility,  that  it  never  can  by  any 
possibility  do  one  harm."  For  if  a  man  goes  through  a  door,  and  he  has  the  habit  of 
stooping  his  head,  it  may  be  the  door  is  so  high  there  is  no  need  for  stooping,  but 
the  stooping  is  no  injury  to  him  ;  whereas  if  the  door  should  happen  to  be  a  low 
one,  and  he  has  the  habit  of  holding  up  his  head,  he  may  come  into  sharp  contact 
with  the  top  of  the  door.  True  humility  is  a  flower  which  will  adorn  any  garden. 
This  is  a  sauce  with  which  you  may  season  every  dish  of  life,  and  you  will  find  an 
improvement  in  every  case.  Whether  it  be  prayer  or  praise,  whether  it  be  work  or 
suffering,  the  salt  of  humility  cannot  be  used  in  excess.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Humility  does  not  lessen  dignity  : — A  person  of  great  sanctity  once  paid  a  visit  to 
the  Caliph  Haroun.  The  Caliph  rose  to  receive  him,  and  with  every  mark  of  rever- 
«nce  conducted  him  to  his  own  seat ;  and  when  he  took  his  leave  the  Caliph  rose 
again,  and  accompanied  him  a  little  way.  Some  of  the  nobles  afterwards  observed 
that  such  condescension  would  lessen  his  dignity,  and  diminish  the  awe  that  belongs 
to  a  prince.  The  Caliph  replied,  "  The  dignity  that  is  lessened  by  humility  is  not 
worth  maintaining ;  and  the  awe  that  is  diminished  by  paying  reverence  to  piety 
should  be  got  rid  of  as  soon  as  possible."  Military  obedience  : — The  story  is  told 
of  a  young  general  in  the  ninth  century  who,  with  five  hundred  men,  came  against 
a  king  with  twenty  thousand.  The  king  sent  word  that  it  was  the  height  of  folly 
in  so  small  an  army  to  resist  his  legions.  In  reply  the  general  called  one  of  his 
men  and  said,  "  Take  that  sword  and  drive  it  to  yoor  heart."    The  man  did  so,  an4 


.  Tii.J  ST.  LUKE.  m 

fell  dead.  To  another  he  said,  "  Leap  into  yon  chasm,"  and  the  man  instantly 
obeyed.  "  Go,"  lie  said  to  the  messenger,  '*  and  tell  your  king  we  have  five  hundred 
each  men.  We  will  die,  but  never  surrender."  The  messenger  returned  with  his 
message — a  message  that  struck  terror  into  the  heart  of  the  whole  army  of  the  king. 
(Baxendale.)  Ready  to  obey  : — The  Duke  of  Wellington  was  an  eminently  magna- 
nimous man,  bribes  could  not  buy  him,  threats  could  not  annoy  him.  When  a 
lower  place  was  offered  him,  he  said,  "  Give  me  your  orders,  and  you  shall  be 
obeyed."  Great  faith: — The  discovery  of  the  New  World,  as  the  continent  of 

America  and  its  islands  are  called,  was  not,  like  many  discoveries,  an  accident ;  it 
was  the  reward  of  faith — the  reward  of  Christopher  Columbus's  faith.  He  found 
fruits  on  the  shores  of  Western  Europe,  cast  up  by  the  Atlantic  waves,  and  brought 
there,  as  we  now  know,  by  the  Gulf  Stream,  perfectly  diverse  from  any  that  the 
temperate,  fiery,  or  frozen  zones  of  the  Old  World  produced.  So  one  day,  let  me 
say,  strolling  by  the  sea-shore,  he  saw  a  nut.  He  takes  it  in  his  hand,  and  looks  at 
it ;  he  takes  it  into  his  capacious  mind,  and  out  of  that  little  seed  springs  his  faith  in 
another  world  beyond  that  watery  horizon,  where,  as  he  believed,  and  events  proved, 
the  sea  had  pearls,  and  the  veins  of  the  earth  were  filled  with  silver,  and  the  rivers 
that  flowed  through  spicy  groves  ran  over  sands  of  gold.  They  thought  him  mad  to 
leave  his  sweet  bays,  and  his  land,  and  his  pleasant  home,  to  launch  on  a  sea  which 
keel  had  never  ploughed,  in  search  of  a  land  man  had  never  seen.  I  tell  that  infidel 
that  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed  ;  I  can  give  a  reason  for  the  faith  that  is  in 
me ;  and  so  he  could.  And  so  he  launched  his  bark  on  the  deep,  and  with  strange 
stars  above  him  and  strange  seas  around  him,  storms  without  and  mutinies  within, 
no  man  of  all  the  crew  hoping  but  himself,  with  a  courage  nothing  could  daunt, 
and  a  perseverance  nothing  could  exhaust,  that  remarkable  man  stood  by  the  helm, 
and  kept  the  prow  of  his  bark  onward  and  westward  till  lights  gleamed  on  San 
Salvador's  shore,  and  as  the  day  broke,  the  joyful  cry  "  Land  1  "  rang  from  the 
mast-head ;  and  faith  was  crowned  with  success,  and  patience  had  her  perfect  work. 
Now  I  look  on  that  man,  and  the  world  has  looked  on  him,  as  one  of  the  finest 
t.ypes  of  a  believer  ;  but  I  cannot  read  his  story  without  feeling  that  it  puts  our  faith 
to  the  blush,  and,  as  it  were,  hearing  the  echo  from  heaven  of  that  voice  that  said, 
•'  I  have  not  found  such  great  faith ;  no,  not  in  Israel."  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  For 
he  loveth  our  nation,  and  hath  built  us  a  synagogue. — The  usefulness  of  good  men : — 
I.  Let  us  consider  what  it  is  to  seek  the  generai  good  of  society.  1.  That 
to  seek  the  general  good  of  society,  men  must  sincerely  desire  that  good  as  an 
ultimate  object.  The  worst  member  of  society  may  desire  the  general  good  of 
society,  when  he  apprehends  it  will  have  a  favourable  aspect  upon  himself ;  and  he 
may  seek  the  general  good  in  that  view  of  it.  2.  Men's  seeking  the  general  good  of 
society,  implies  their  seeking  that  good  in  preference  to  their  own.  3.  That  men's 
seeking  the  general  good  of  society  farther  implies  their  actually  using  all  the 
proper  means  in  their  power  to  promote  it.  H.  That  it  becomes  all  men  to  seek 
the  general  good  of  society.  This  will  appear  from  a  variety  of  considerations. 
1.  Men  were  formed  for  society.  It  is  one  impoitant  end  for  which  they  were 
created  rational  beings.  No  man  was  made  solely  for  himself;  and  no  man  ia 
capable  of  living  in  the  world  totally  independent  of  society.  2.  It  becomes  men  to 
seek  the  general  good  of  society,  because  this  is  the  great  and  valuable  end  of  entering 
into  society.  Every  body  of  men,  which  deserves  the  name  of  society,  unite  to- 
gether for  some  valuable  and  desirable  purpose.  3.  It  becomes  men  to  seek  the 
general  good  of  society,  by  obeying  the  general  laws  of  society.  Societies  are  not 
formed  by  mere  accident.  4.  Every  society  needs  the  assistance  or  co-operation  of 
all  its  members,  to  promote  its  general  prosperity  and  happiness.  6.  It  becomes  all 
men  to  seek  the  general  good  of  society,  in  return  for  the  benefits  they  receive  from 
it.  6.  There  is  something  so  amiable  and  beautiful  in  seeking  the  general  good, 
that  it  commands  universal  approbation  and  esteem.  For  this  the  Eomau  centurion 
was  so  highly  esteemed  and  applauded  by  the  Jewish  nation.  7.  It  becomes  all  men 
to  obey  the  will  of  their  Creator  ;  and  it  is  expressly  His  will  that  they  should  seek 
the  general  good.  He  says  to  every  man,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy- 
self." The  apostle  requires  the  same  things  under  different  forms  of  expression. 
"By  love  serve  one  another."  Improvement:  1.  If  it  becomes  men  to  seek  th« 
general  good  of  society,  then  it  becomes  them  to  be  truly  religious.  There  ia  m 
natural,  and  even  necessary  connection  between  their  being  religious,  and  being 
good  members  of  society.  2.  In  the  view  of  this  subject,  parents  may  learn  how 
much  it  becomes  and  concerns  them  to  educate  their  children  in  the  best  manner  to 
quaUfy  them  to  promote  not  only  their  own  good,  but  the  general  good  of  society. 


67*  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tir, 

3.  It  appears,  in  view  of  this  discourse,  that  all  men  are  morally  bound  to  pro- 
mote the  general  good  of  society,  in  proportion  to  the  various  abilities  they  possess. 
Knowledge  gives  men  ability  to  promote  their  own  good,  and  the  general  good. 
Wealth  gives  men  ability  to  do  good.  Men  in  authority  have  peculiar  ability  to 
promote  the  general  good  of  society.  4.  Since  it  becomes  all  men  to  promote  the 
general  good  of  society,  it  is  unbecoming  men  to  pursue  any  courses  which  are  either 
directly  or  indirectly  injurious  to  the  public  good.  Not  only  idlers,  but  all  profane 
swearers,  Sabbath-breakers,  neglecters  and  despisers  of  all  religion,  act  a  part  highly 
detrimental  to  human  society.  5.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said,  that  those 
who  are  truly  pious  are  the  best  men  in  the  world.  They  are  the  only  men  who 
have  true  love  to  God  and  man.  6.  We  learn  the  goodness  of  God  in  prolonging 
the  lives  of  His  pious  and  faithful  servants.  He  is  good  to  His  cordial  friends  in 
carrying  them  in  His  arms,  and  guiding  and  guarding  their  lives,  even  to  old  age.  He 
has  promised  this  as  a  mark  of  His  favour  to  the  godly  man.  {N.  Emmons,  D.V.) 
The  centurion's  love  for  God's  house  ;  an  example  of  Christian  duty  : — I.  The  power- 

JUL   FAITH    DISPLAVED    BY   THIS    CENTURION.       II.    ThI3  CENTDRION's  EXAMPLE  OF  GREAT 

LOVK  FOR  THE  PUBLIC  WORSHIP  OF  GoD.  We  here  find  his  true  piety  shown  in  his 
liberality  in  building  a  house  of  God  for  public  worship.  When  he  knew  Divine 
truth,  he  loved  the  people  among  whom  it  shone,  and  he  then  erected  a  synagogue 
for  God's  honour.     III.  Is  it  not,  therefore,  our  plain  duty  as  Christians  to 

SUPPORT  PUBLIC  worship  IN  THE  ChURCH  OP  GoD  AMONG  US  ?  IV.  ThB  WANTS  OF  THB 
PEOPLE,  WITH  THE  WISHES  OF  OUB  ChUBCH  BuILDINQ  SOCIETIES,  SHOULD  WARMLY  EXCITB 

OUR  Christian  LIBERALITY.  {J.  G,  Angley,  M.A.)  Religion  essentially  included  in 
the  love  of  our  country : — These  remarks  may  be  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  general 
principle.  We  will  now  attend  to  its  operations.  1.  If  we  love  our  country,  we 
shall  be  affected  with  her  dangers  and  calamities.  *'  If  I  forget  thee,  O  Jerusalem," 
says  the  Psalmist ;  "  let  my  right  hand  forget  her  cunning."  2.  This  principle  will 
restrain  us  from  injuring,  and  prompt  us  to  serve  our  country.  "Love  works  no 
ill."  "  By  love  we  serve  one  another."  3.  A  lover  of  his  country  has  an  affection 
for  the  Church  of  God,  and  a  concern  to  promote  its  credit  and  interest.  4.  Love 
to  our  country  will  express  itself  in  prayers  for  her  prosperity.  "  Pray  for  the  peace 
of  Jerusalem,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  they  prosper  that  love  thee."  I  have  illustrated 
the  nature  and  operations  of  love  to  our  country.  I  now  ask  your  attention  to  some 
reflections  which  result  from  the  subject.  1.  True  patriotism  is  a  nobler  attainment 
than  some  seem  to  imagine.  It  includes  compassion  for  the  unhappy,  hatred  of  sin,, 
love  of  virtue,  disinterestedness,  self-denial,  industry,  prudence,  piety  and  devotion  ; 
yea,  everything  that  is  excellent  and  amiable.  2.  There  is  a  great  difference 
between  talking  warmly  in  our  country's  favour,  and  really  loving  it.  A  man  may 
say  much  in  the  praise  of  his  country,  its  constitution,  trade,  soil,  and  climate,  and 
give  it  the  preference  to  all  other  countries ;  he  may  plead  for  its  rights  with  great 
earnestness,  and  do  much  to  support  its  credit  and  respectability ;  and  yet  not  be  a 
real  lover  of  it— not  have  any  pure  benevolence,  any  piety  to  God,  or  regard  to  virtue  ; 
hut  be  influenced  wholly  by  ambition  and  avarice.  3.  It  appears  from  our  subject, 
that  a  people  who  enjoy,  who  profess  to  believe.  Divine  revelation,  ought  to  make 
some  stated  provision  for  maintaining  and  preserving  the  social  worship  of  the 
Deity.  This  is  a  plain  dictate  of  reason,  as  well  as  Scripture.  4.  If  we  ought  ta 
regard  the  interest  of  our  country  at  large,  we  ought,  for  the  same  reasons,  to  con- 
Bult  the  peace  and  happiness  of  the  smaller  societies  of  which  we  are  members.  6. 
We  see  how  careful  we  should  be,  that  no  selfish  or  unworthy  motive  influenoe  oiur 
social  or  reUgious  conduct.    (J.  Lathrop,  D.D.) 

Vers.  11-17.  And  It  came  to  pass  the  day  after  that  He  went  Into  a  city  called 
Kain. — The  funeral  of  a  youth : — The  miracle  requires  a  few  remarks  and  a  few 
REFLECTIONS.  I.  The  first  thing  we  behold  is  a  funeral  procession.  But  let  us 
draw  near,  and  contemplate  this  funeral  solemnity.  It  was  the  funeral  of  a  young 
man.  We  are  not  informed  whether  he  died  by  disease  or  accident,  slowly  or 
suddenly ;  but  he  was  carried  off  in  the  prime  of  life.  He  was  the  "  only  son  of 
his  mother."  There  is  an  ocean  of  love  in  the  hearts  of  parents  towards  their 
children.  But  what  closes  the  melancholy  tale  of  this  woman  is — that  she  was  a 
widow  I  A  widow  is  always  an  affecting  character,  and  she  is  liable  to  injustice  and 
oppression  from  those  fiends  who  take  advantage  of  weakness  and  distress  ;  as  she 
is  deprived  of  the  companion  of  her  journey,  and  compelled  to  travel  alone ;  as  he* 
anxieties  are  doubled,  and  there  is  none  to  share  them  with  her.  II.  Observe  O0B 
Lord  and  Batioub.   First,  He  knew  all  the  particulars  of  the  case.     Those  who  were 


CBAf.  TnO  ST.  LUKE.  •79 

with  Him  eonld  only  see,  as  they  were  passing  by,  a  funeral — but  He  knew  the 
corpse  stretched  upon  the  bier ;  He  knew  that  it  was  a  young  man  ;  that  it  was  the 
only  son  of  his  mother ;  and  that  she  was  a  widow  !  Secondly,  He  did  not  wait 
to  be  implored.  "  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  Me  not."  Sometimes,  before 
we  call  He  answers  :  such  a  very  present  help  is  He  in  trouble.  Thirdly,  When 
He  saw  her.  He  had  "  compassion  on  her."  By  nothing  was  our  Saviour  more  dis- 
tinguished than  by  pity  and  tenderness.  Fourthly,  He  "  said  unto  her,  Weep  not." 
How  unavaiUng,  not  to  say  impertinent,  would  this  have  been  from  any  other  lips  I 
Fifthly,  Jesus,  without  any  ostentatious  ceremony,  "  went  and  touched  the  bier — 
and  they  that  bare  it  stood  still  "  ;  all  amazement  and  expectation!  Every  eye  ia 
fixed  upon  Him.  Finally,  observe  the  application,  the  delicacy — what  shall  I  call 
it  ? — of  the  miracle;  and  "He  delivered  him  to  his  mother  1  "  HI.  Let  us  conclude 
by  three  genebai  reflections.  I.  What  a  valk  of  teaks  is  this  world  1  How  various 
and  numerous  are  the  evils  to  which  human  life  is  exposed  1  "  Man  that  is  born 
of  a  woman  is  of  few  days  and  full  of  trouble  !  "  II.  Let  the  afflicted  remembeb 
THAT  THEY  ABB  NOT  LEFT  WITHOUT  RESOURCE.  Let  them  learn  where  to  flee  in  the 
day  of  trouble.  It  is  to  the  Friend  of  sirmers.  III.  What  think  you  of  Christ  ? 
Does  not  His  character  combine  every  excellency  and  attraction?  (W.  Jay.) 
Young  man,  arise : — I.  I  notice  first  that  this  young  man  is  followed  by  a  broken- 
hearted MOTHER,  A  poor  SORROWFUL  CREATURE.  He  was  her  only  son,  and  she  was 
a  widow.  Do  you  know  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  one  often  sees  the  same  sort 
of  thing  now.  How  many  a  young  man  there  is  who  is  being  borne  along  towards 
that  fearful  interment  to  which  I  have  already  referred,  who  is  followed,  as  it  were,. 
by  the  tears  and  expostulations — I  may  say  the  anguish,  the  heart-breaking  anguish 
— of  one  who  loves  him  as  her  own  soul,  and  who  would  readily  offer  a  thousand 
times  over  her  own  life,  if  only  his  soul  might  be  saved.  Young  man,  there  are  a 
good  many  fellows  who  think  it  a  manly  thing  to  slight  a  mother's  love,  to  go  far 
to  break  a  mother's  heart.  Believe  me,  there  is  scarcely  a  more  unmanly  sin 
possible  for  anybody  to  commit.  Amongst  the  saddest  incidents  in  my  experience 
as  a  mission  preacher  are  cases  of  this  character,  where  I  am  addressed  by 
mournful-looking  women,  who  come  to  me  with  a  terrible  burden  on  their  hearts. 
I  ask  what  it  is.  It  is  not  about  themselves.  No  1  no  !  so  far  as  they  themselves 
are  concerned,  they  have  a  good  hope  through  grace.  "  Well,  what  is  the  matter  ?  " 
"  Oh,  it  is  my  boy,"  says  the  poor  stricken  creature,  "  my  boy."  How  many  are- 
ready  to  say,  as  David  said  about  Absalom,  "  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee." 
Some  little  time  ago,  I  had  a  conversation  after  one  of  my  services  with  a  minister 
of  the  gospel,  in  the  North  of  England,  who  said  to  me,  '  *  I  want  to  tell  you  about 
my  son,  who  is  just  going  to  offer  himself  for  the  Christian  ministry.  He  had  a 
remarkable  conversion,  and  I  should  like  to  tell  you  about  it.  Two  years  ago  my 
dear  wife  died,  and  as  she  was  dying,  she  called  her  children  around  her.  As  they 
approached  her  bed  one  by  one,  she  stretched  out  her  hand  and  took  theirs  in  hers, 
and  very  solemnly,  for  she  was  on  the  brink  of  eternity,  she  said  to  them,  *  I 
charge  ye  before  God,  meet  me  at  God's  right  hand.'  Wnen  it  came  to  the  turn 
of  my  eldest  son,  I  saw  that  she  was  greatly  moved,  for  up  to  that  time  he  had 
shown  no  disposition  to  give  his  heart  to  God.  She  grasped  his  hand  in  hers  and 
said,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  •  My  boy,  ere  I  die,  I  want  you  to  make  me  a  promise  ; 
I  want  you  solenanly  to  promise  me  that  you  will  seek  for  the  salvation  of  your 
BOuL'  He  hesitated,  and  stood  silent  for  a  few  moments,  hanging  down  his 
head.  When  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  he  met  his  mother's  gaze.  That  deep,  tender, 
earnest  gaze  eeemed  to  plead  with  his  inmost  heart.  •  I  charge  you,'  she  taid, 
'meet  me  at  God's  right  hand.'  'Mother,'  he  said,  «I  will;  I  will.'  Her  face 
brightened  up  ;  a  heavenly  smile  stole  over  her  features.;  she  lifted  up  her  hands 
and  said,  *  Thank  God,  I  am  ready  to  go  now.'  Well,  she  died.  My  son  remem- 
bered his  promise.  He  began  to  read  his  Bible  and  to  pray,  and  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  send  him  a  very  deep  conviction  of  sin.  He  became  intensely  wretched. 
Weeks  passed  away.  Still  he  could  get  no  comfort.  Weeks  became  months.  He 
could  not  shake  the  subject  from  his  mind.  The  weight  of  his  sin  was  continually 
resting  upon  his  soul,  and  seemed  almost  to  drive  him  wild,  tiU  on  one  occasion  he 
found  himself  in  such  a  state  of  frenzied  agony,  that  he  felt  '  I  really  qan  stand 
this  no  longer,"  and  suddenly  grasping  his  hat,  he  dashed  out  with  a  determination 
to  drown  his  sorrows  in  drink  at  the  nearest  gin-house.  Down  the  street  he  went, 
and  up  to  the  door  of  the  public-house.  Just  as  he  stood  at  the  door  and  was 
stretching  out  his  hand  to  open  it,  it  seemed  to  him  as  though  hia  mother  stood 
before  him.    There  was  the  same  look  upoc  her  countenance  that  it  wore  when  ehm 


680  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  wtx. 

took  leave  of  him  on  her  dying  bed,  and  he  seemed  to  see  those  tears  glistening  in 
her  eyes.  It  was  no  vision,  but  the  thing  was  so  powerfully  brought  before  hia 
imagination,  that  it  was  like  a  vision,  and  he  seemed  to  hear  her  saying,  '  My  son, 

four  promise  1 '  'I  turned,'  he  said,  '  and  fled  from  the  public-house  as  though 
were  pursued :  I  dashed  into  my  own  room.  *  Great  God  1 '  I  cried,  •  Thou 
faast  saved  me  by  my  mother's  prayer ;  Thou  hast  saved  me  from  the  depths  of  hell  I 
There  and  then  I  cast  myself  in  utter  weariness  and  helplessness  and  self-despair 
at  Jesus'  feet,  and  there  and  then  the  pardoning  love  of  Christ  reached  my  heart.'  " 
II.  Well,  there  was  something  more  that  the  eye  of  Christ  rested  upon  besides  this 
poor  broken-hearted  woman  to  whom  He  said,  "  Weep  not."  There  week  thb 
BBAREBS.  Now  this  also,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  wonderfuUy  true  to  life.  Wherever 
I  go  I  find  that  young  men  are  mostly  under  the  influence  of  bearers.  I  know 
what  your  strong  points  are,  young  men,  yes,  and  I  know  your  weak  points  too. 
You  are  wonderfully  gregarious  animals.  One  man  goes  in  one  particular  direction, 
and  the  rest  must  follow  if  he  happens  to  be  a  leader.  There  is  a  strange  fatuous 
influence  which  man  exercises  over  his  fellow-man.  Ah,  my  brother,  how  many  a 
man  is  as  it  were  held  spell-bound  by  the  influence  of  false  friendship.  Get  him 
away  from  his  friends  and  you  can  do  something  with  him ;  but  so  long  as  he  is  in 
their  society  he  is  a  helpless  slave  to  adverse  influences.  Yes,  I  may  be  speaking 
to  some  to-night  who,  although  only  young,  are  already  saying,  •'  I  have  gone  too 
far ;  the  chains  are  bound  too  tightly  round  me."  I  tell  you  no,  in  God's  name, 
No  I  One  touch  of  almighty  power  from  the  finger  of  Christ,  and  those  chains 
shall  break  ;  one  glance  from  those  eyes  so  full  of  beneficence,  and  the  shadows  of 
death  shall  flee  away.  I  remember,  some  time  ago,  hearing  a  remarkable 
circumstance  related  by  a  public  speaker  to  whom  I  was  listening.  It  happened 
that  a  ship  was  being  towed  across  the  Niagara  Eiver,  in  America,  some  little 
distance  above  the  well-known  falls.  Just  as  she  got  into  the  middle  of  the  stream 
the  hawser  parted,  and  the  unfortunate  ship  began  to  drift  down  the  river  stern 
foremost.  Efiorts  were  made  to  save  her  from  impending  ruin,  but  every  effort 
failed,  and  the  unfortunate  ship  kept  drifting  farther  and  farther  down  the  stream 
towards  the  terrible  abyss  below.  The  news  of  the  disaster  spread  along  the  banks 
of  the  river,  and  in  a  very  short  time  there  were  hundreds  of  people,  and  they  soon 
swelled  to  thousands,  looking  on  in  breathless  anxiety  to  see  what  was  to  become  of 
this  unfortunate  ship  and  crew.  There  is  a  point  that  stretches  into  the  river 
which  bears  the  name  of  Past  Redemption  Point,  and  it  is  believed  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood that  nothing  that  passes  that  point  can  escape  destruction.  The  current 
there  becomes  so  strong,  the  influence  so  fatal,  that  whatever  goes  by  Past  Redemp- 
tion Point  is  inevitably  lost.  The  excited  multitude  upon  the  banks  of  the  river 
watched  the  helpless  ship  drifting  down  farther  and  farther  till  she  was  within  a 
few  hundred  yards  of  the  fatal  point.  One  effort  after  another  was  made,  one  effort 
after  another  failed ;  still  she  drifted.  Only  a  few  moments,  and  she  passed  the 
point.  There  was  a  kind  of  sigh  of  horror  from  the  vast  multitude  as  they  saw  her 
swing  round,  for  they  knew  she  was  lost.  But  just  as  she  rounded  the  point  the 
captain  felt  a  strong  breeze  smite  upon  his  cheek.  Quick  as  thought  he  shouted  at 
the  top  of  his  voice,  "  All  sails  $et  I  "  and  in  almost  less  time  than  it  takes  me  to 
tell  it  every  stitch  of  canvas  on  board  the  ship  was  stretched  to  catch  the  favouring 
gale.  A  cheer  broke  from  the  multitude  on  the  shore  as  they  witnessed  this  last 
effort  for  salvation.  But  would  it  succeed  ?  The  ship  was  still  drifting,  though 
the  wind  was  blowing  against  it,  and  she  was  still  moving  downwards,  stem  fore- 
most, though  the  wind  was  bellying  out  all  her  sails.  It  was  a  battle  between  the 
wind  and  the  current.  With  breathless  anxiety  they  watched  the  result.  She 
slacks  I  Another  moment — they  scarcely  dare  whisper  it — she  stands !  Yes,  that 
terrible  downward  course  was  actually  stopped.  There  she  was,  still  as  a  log  upon 
the  water.  Another  moment,  and  inch  by  inch  she  began  to  forge  her  way  up  the 
stream  until  the  motion  was  perceptible  to  those  on  shore,  and  one  great  shout  of 
victory  burst  forth  from  a  thousand  voices :  •'  Thank  God,  she  is  saved  I  Thank 
God,  she  is  saved !  "  In  a  few  moments  more,  with  considerable  headway  upon 
her,  she  swept  right  up  the  stream,  by  Past  Ri'demiHion  Point,  right  into  the  still 
water,  saved  from  what  appeared  to  be  inevitable  destruction,  just  because,  in  the 
very  moment  of  moments,  she  caught  the  favouring  breeze.  Young  man,  in  that 
ship  behold  a  picture  of  yourself.  Therfi  is  many  a  young  man  who,  like  that  ship, 
has  been  drifting.  You  know  it ;  ah )  and  your  friends  know  it ;  your  mother, 
praying  for  you  to-night,  knows  it ;  your  Christian  friend  that  brought  you  here 
BBOWS  it.    'Son  are  dbnfting,  drifting,  and  yon  know  what  the  end  must  be.    It  ma^r 


«■!».  m.]  ST.  LUKE.  68B 

lie  far  on  in  your  life's  voyage,  or  it  may  be  very  near  at  hand,  but  before  you  Her 
the  terrible  fall,  and  the  abyss  and  depth  of  doom.  If  you  say,  "  How  shall  I 
arise?  "  I  reply,  there  is  only  one  way  of  arising.  Fix  your  gaze  to-night  upon 
HLm  who  is  the  Resurrection  and  Wie  Life.  When  I  was  a  youug  man  of  eighteen, 
I  was  preaching  in  the  open  air  in  the  streets  of  Inverness,  when  there  happened 
to  pass  by  a  young  medical  student — I  think,  from  Glasgow  University.  He  was 
like  many  of  you,  and  had  been  living  an  aimless,  self-pleasing  sort  of  life.  As  h» 
passed  by  in  the  crowd  he  heard  a  young  man's  voice,  and  caught  the  words  of 
Christ,  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise. "  The  message  went  home  like  aa 
arrow  to  the  man's  heart ;  he  got  away  into  his  own  chamber,  and  there  he  cast 
himself  by  his  bedside  and  exclaimed,  "  0  God,  that  is  what  I  want.  Up  to  this 
moment  my  life  has  been  a  wasted  life ;  I  have  nothing  to  show  for  it ;  I  have  lived 
for  myself ;  I  have  lived  in  vain.  I  see  it  all  now.  There  is  one  power,  and  only 
one,  that  can  raise  me  up  and  make  me  really  what  I  ought  to  be."  There  and 
then  he  gave  himself  to  Christ,  and  he  went  forth  from  that  room  a  new  man.  He 
had  just  received  a  commission  as  a  surgeon  in  the  army,  and  soon  afterwards  he- 
went  to  India,  where,  for  five  or  six  years,  he  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light. 
Many  a  poor  heathen  native  heard  the  truth  of  the  gospel  first  from  his  lips  ? 
many  a  godless  English  soldier  was  led  to  the  Cross  of  Christ  by  that  young  man'* 
influence ;  many  a  brother  officer  first  heard  from  him  the  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy,  or,  at  any  rate,  first  had  them  pressed  home  upon  hia  mind.  After  five  or  six 
years'  service,  the  Lord  called  him  home.  I  never  met  him,  never  shook  his  hand. 
I  hope  to  meet  him  up  yonder,  some  day.  {W.  Hay  Aitken.)  Sixteenth  Sunday 
after  Trinity  : — I.  What  are  we  hebe  certified  concerning  Jesus  Christ  ?  1. 
This  miracle  attests  that  He  was  an  authorized  messenger  of  God.  This  was  the 
direct  and  immediate  conviction  that  it  wrought  upon  those  who  witnessed  it. 
"There  came  great  fear  upon  all;  and  they  glorified  God,  saying,  That  a  great 
prophet  is  risen  up  among  us,  and.  That  God  hath  visited  His  people."  Nor  were 
they  mistaken  in  their  conclusion  from  the  premises.  No  one  can  recall  the  dead 
but  by  the  great  power  of  God.  Only  He  who  originally  gave  life  can  restore  it 
after  it  is  gone.  2.  The  same  forcibly  attests  the  compassionate  sympathy  of 
Jesus  for  human  sorrow,  3.  And  He  is  as  mighty  as  He  is  good — as  able  to  help  as 
He  is  ready  to  pity.  It  is  no  easy  thing  to  console  and  heal  a  broken  heart.  But 
Jesus  not  only  relieved  it,  but  entirely  removed  it.  In  a  mere  moment  of  time  He 
dislodged  it,  and  set  a  light  in  that  darkened  mother's  soul,  brighter  than  had  ever 
shone  there  before.  This  miracle  accordingly  shows  Him  possessed  of  redeeming 
power,  as  well  as  sympathy.  II.  What  is  pictured  to  us  in  this  miracle  of  thb 
WORKINGS  OF  GRACE  ?  1.  Jcsus  found  this  youHg  man  dead,  and  being  borne  to  buriaL 
And  herein  is  shown  the  sad  and  hopeless  condition  of  every  one  apart  from  Christ's 
gracious  interposition  for  our  rescue.  The  help  of  man  in  such  a  case  is  utterly 
powerless.  If  it  were  a  case  of  mere  physical  disorder,  the  great  storehouses  of 
nature  might  perhaps  furnish  a  remedy.  If  it  were  a  case  of  mere  functional' 
lethargy  or  error,  some  stimulant  or  alterative  might  chance  to  be  found  out  by  the 
physician  to  correct  the  ailment.  Or  if  it  were  a  case  of  mere  mental  aberration^ 
science  and  a  better  philosophy  might  serve  to  set  the  matter  riyht.  But  the  casfr 
is  one  of  death;  and  no  power  of  man  has  ever  been  able  to  bring  the  dead  to  life 
again.  2.  "  He  came."  There  was  no  going  or  bearing  of  the  dead  man  to  Christ  ;. 
but  a  coming  of  Jesus  to  him.  The  first  approaches  of  grace  and  salvation  are  all 
from  the  side  of  a  Divine  movement  toward  us.  From  first  to  last,  He  is  ever  the 
coming  One,  who  comes  to  us,  approaches  us,  and  brings  to  us  whatever  of  salvation 
is  ever  experienced.  "Lot  I  come  1  "  3.  "And  touched  the  bier."  Not  without- 
veritable  contact  with  the  polluted  things  of  earth  could  spiritual  quickening  be 
imparted  to  its  fallen  inhabitants.  4.  Yet  it  was  by  the  Word  that  the  resuscita- 
tion was  imparted.  *•  He  said.  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise."  All  the- 
potency  of  creatorship  and  resurrection  resides  in  it,  and  goes  forth  through  it. 
People  often  have  a  very  poor  appreciation  of  the  Word.  They  care  not  to  hear  it. . 
Many  only  despise  it.  Christ's  words  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life.  5.  When 
Christ's  word  of  command  reached  the  consciousness  of  this  dead  man,  it  then 
devolved  upon  him  to  obey  it.  Human  agency  and  volition  must,  after  all,  co- 
operate with  Divine  grace.  III.  What,  now,  as  to  the  prophecies  and  fore- 
pledges  CONTAINED  IN  THIS  MIRACLE  ?  1.  It  was  a  raising  of  a  dead  man  to  life,  and« 
BO  an  exhibition  of  resurrection  power.  To  raise  one  requires  the  power  of  God ;  ta- 
raise  all  requires  no  more.  He  has  raised  the  dead,  and  He  can  raise  all.  2.  It  was  the- 
making  glad  of  a  very  sorrowing  heart  and  a  very  desolate  home.  (J.  A.  8eu$,  D.D.}c 


«8t  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [0HA».  TH, 

Jesus  and  the  widow  of  Nain: — I.  Sobbow.  II.  Sympathy,  III.  Succodb. 
(U.  V.  Pryce,  M.A.,  LL.B.)  Weep  not: — What,  then,  is  the  comfort  which  even 
now  the  gospel  of  our  Saviour  mingles  with  the  mourning  of  His  people  ?  What 
advantage  has  the  Christian  under  bereavement,  and  wherein  does  he  sorrow  not  as 
others  ?  I.  In  the  first  place,  The  gospel  has  bntibelt  changed  the  chabacteb  o» 
DEATH  TO  the  depabted  THEMSELVES.  Thank  God,  the  Christian's  is  a  stingless 
death.  Since  the  guilt  of  those  we  mourn  was  cleansed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and 
their  pardon  sealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  death  did  not  come  to  them  as  an  ofaeer  of 
justice,  but  as  an  angel  of  peace.  He  came  to  loose  the  prison-bands  of  clay  and 
set  them  free  to  go  home  to  their  Father's  house.  O  selfish  heart,  bear  silently  thy 
burden  and  rejoice  in  secret  at  the  lost  one's  joy.  Why  should  I  not?  Love  is 
more  gladdened  by  another's  gladness  than  grieved  for  its  own  trouble.  God  did 
two  kindnesses  at  one  stroke  when  He  bereft  you  of  your  beloved :  one  kindness  to 
him ;  another  kindness  to  you.  To  him,  the  perfecting  of  character  and  bestowal 
of  bliss ;  to  you,  ripening  of  character  and  preparation  for  bliss.  II.  As  Christ 
Reaches  us  to  expect  a  "  better  resurrection  "  for  our  dead,  so  also  for  ourselves  to 
look  for  better  reunion.  Not  by  their  coming  back  to  be  for  a  httle  while  longer 
with  us,  is  the  craving  heart  to  be  appeased,  but  by  our  going  to  be  for  ever  with 
them.  This  is  best.  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.)  The  miracle  at  the  gate  of  Nain : — I.  I 
learn  two  or  three  things  from  this  subject ;  and  first,  that  Christ  was  a  man.  You 
see  how  that  sorrow  played  upon  all  the  chords  of  His  heart.  II.  But  I  must  also 
draw  from  this  subject  that  He  was  God.  If  Christ  had  been  a  mere  mortal,  would 
He  have  had  a  right  to  come  in  upon  such  a  procession?  Would  He  have 
succeeded  in  His  interrupiion  ?  III.  Again,  I  learn  from  this  subject  that  Christ 
was  A  SYiviPATHiSEB.  IV.  I  leam  again  from  all  this  that  Christ  is  the  masteb 
OF  THE  GRAVE.  Just  outside  the  gate  of  the  city  Death  and  Christ  measured 
lances,  and  when  the  young  man  rose.  Death  dropped.  (Dr.  Talmage.) 
Young  man,  is  this  for  you  1 — I.  I  shall  ask  you  first,  dear  friends,  to  reflect  that  ths 

8PIEITOALLY   DEAD   CAUSE    GREAT   GBIEF    TO   THEIB   GRACIOUS  FRIENDS.       If   an  UUgolly 

man  is  favoured  to  have  Christian  relatives,  he  causes  them  much  anxiety.  Many 
joung  persons  who  are  in  some  respects  amiable  and  hopeful,  nevertheless,  being 
spiritually  dead,  are  causing  great  sorrow  to  those  who  love  them  best.  1.  The 
,  cause  of  grief  lies  here:  we  mo  am  that  they  should  be  in  such  a  case.  In  the 
story  before  us  the  mother  wept  because  her  son  was  dead ;  and  we  sorrow 
because  our  young  friends  are  spiritually  dead.  2.  We  also  mourn  because  we  lose 
the  help  and  comfort  which  they  ought  to  bring  us.  She  must  have  regarded  him 
as  the  staff  of  her  age,  and  the  comfort  of  her  loneliness.  With  regard  to  you  that 
are  dead  in  sin,  we  feel  that  we  miss  the  aid  and  comfort  which  we  ought  to  receive 
from  you  in  our  service  of  the  living  God.  3.  A  further  grief  is  that  we  can  have 
no  fellowship  with  them.  The  mother  at  Nain  could  have  no  communion  with  her 
dear  son  now  that  he  was  dead,  for  the  dead  know  not  anything.  Alas  !  in  many 
a  household  the  mother  cannot  liave  communion  with  her  own  son  or  daughter  on 
that  point  which  is  most  vital  and  enduring,  because  they  are  spiritually  dead,  while 
she  has  been  quickened  into  newness  of  life  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Moreover, 
spiritual  death  soon  produces  manifest  causes  for  sorrow.  5.  We  also  mourn  be- 
cause of  the  future  of  men  dead  in  sin.  II.  Now  let  me  cheer  you  while  I  introluca 
the  second  head  of  my  discourse,  which  is  this  :  foe  such  grief  there  is  only  one 
HELPEB :  BUT  THERE  IS  A  HELPER.  This  youug  mau  is  taken  out  to  be  buried  ;  but 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  met  the  funeral  procession.  Carefully  note  the  "  coinci- 
dences," as  sceptics  call  them,  but  as  we  call  them  "  providences  "  of  Scripture. 
He  meets  the  dead  man  before  the  place  of  sepuliure  is  reached.  A  little  later 
and  he  would  have  been  buried ;  a  little  earlier  and  he  would  have  been  at  home 
iying  in  the  darkened  room,  and  no  one  might  have  called  the  Lord's  attention  to 
him.  The  Lord  knows  how  to  arrange  all  things ;  his  forecasts  are  true  to  the  tick 
of  the  clock.  III.  That  hush  was  not  long,  for  speedily  the  Great  Quickener 
entered  upon  his  gracious  work.  This  is  our  third  point :  jesus  is  able  to  work 
THE  MIRACLE  OF  LIFE-GIVING.  Jcsus  Christ  has  life  in  Himself,  and  He  quickeneth 
whom  He  will  (John  v.  21).  He  could  derive  no  aid  from  that  lifeless  form.  The 
spectators  were  sure  that  he  was  dead,  for  they  were  carrying  him  out  to  bury  him. 
jEven  so,  you,  O  sinner,  cannot  save  yourself,  neither  can  auy  of  os,  or  all  of  us, 
gave  you.  Your  help  must  come  from  above,  2.  While  the  bier  stood  still,  Jesus 
:Bpoke  to  the  dead  young  man,  spoke  to  him  personally  :  '*  Young  man,  I  say  unto 
thee.  Arise,"  Lord  Jesus,  art  Thou  not  here  ?  What  is  wanted  is  Thy  personal 
.mU.    Speak,  Lord,  we  beseech  Thee !    3.  "  Young  man,"  said  He,  "  arise '  ;  and 


.  Tn.]  ST.  LVKS.  689 

He  spake  as  if  the  man  had  been  alive.  This  is  the  gospel  way.  Our  faith  enables 
ns  in  God's  name  to  command  dead  men  to  live,  and  they  do  live.  4.  But  the 
Saviour,  you  observe,  spoke  with  His  own  authority — "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee, 
Arise."  Neither  Elijah  nor  Elisha  could  thus  have  spoken ;  but  He  who  spoke  thus 
was  very  God  of  very  God.  5.  The  miracle  was  wrought  straightway  :  for  this 
young  man,  to  the  astonishment  of  all  about  him,  sat  up.  It  did  not  take  a  month, 
nor  a  week,  nor  an  hour,  nay,  not  even  five  minutes.  IV.  Our  time  has  gone,  and 
although  we  have  a  wide  subject  we  may  not  linger.  I  must  close  by  noticing  that 
THIS  WILL  PRODUCE  VERY  GREAT  RESULTS.  To  give  life  to  the  dead  is  no  little  matter. 
1.  The  great  result  was  manifest,  first,  in  the  young  man.  2.  A  new  life  also  had 
begun  in  reference  to  his  mother.  What  a  great  result  for  her  was  the  raising  of 
her  dead  son  1  3.  What  was  the  next  result?  Well,  all  the  neighbours  feared  and 
glorified  God.  These  prodigies  of  power  in  the  moral  world  are  quite  as  remarkable 
as  prodigies  in  the  material  world.  We  want  conversion,  so  practical,  so  real,  so 
Divine,  that  those  who  doubt  will  not  be  able  to  doubt,  because  they  see  in  them  the 
hand  of  God.  4.  Finally,  note  that  it  not  only  surprised  the  neighbours  and  im- 
pressed them,  but  the  rumour  of  it  went  everywhere.  Who  can  tell  ?  If  a  convert 
is  made  this  morning,  the  result  of  that  conversion  may  be  felt  for  thousands  of 
years,  if  the  world  stands  so  long ;  aye,  it  shall  be  felt  when  a  thousand  thousand 
years  have  passed  away,  even  throughout  eternity.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
widow  and  her  dead  son : — 1.  The  mystery  of  God's  providence  is  encircling  our 
daily  lives.  God  had  planned  that  meeting  from  eternity.  Nothing  happens  by 
chance.  Every  event  in  the  dullest  day  has  a  purpose.  2.  And  a  further  considera- 
tion must  of  course  be  our  dear  Lord's  tender  sympathy  with  mourners,  and  His 
hatred  of  our  last  enemy,  death.  {T.  B.  Dover,  M.  A.)  The  widow  of  Nain: — 
Such  were  the  works  of  our  Saviour's  earthly  ministry  ;  and  it  is  of  no  little  mo- 
ment that  we  enter  fully  into  their  significance.  By  them,  then  (1),  He  manifested 
forth  His  glory ;  they  were  the  countersigns  and  credentials  of  His  mission.  By 
them  (2),  again.  He  showed  the  infinite  compassion  wherewith  His  heart  was  full. 
By  them  (3)  He  lightened  the  burden  of  human  suffering.  Further  (4),  they  are 
the  abiding  witness  to  the  Church  of  the  truth  of  His  Divinity.  These  mighty 
works  bring  before  us  the  true  glory  of  our  redeemed  state.  They  show  us,  in  the 
person  of  our  Lord,  for  what  each  one  of  us  is  training  who  of  His  mercy  have 
been  baptized  into  Him,  and  are  daily  seeking  to  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things. 
They  show  us  why  and  how  we  should  strive  after  a  closer  union  with  Him  ;  that 
we,  too,  may  triumph  with  Him  over  these  rebellious  powers,  under  which  our  raee 
has  so  long  groaned.  For  He  is  the  healer  of  our  spirits  as  He  is  of  our  bodies. 
Here,  too.  His  words  are  "spirit  and  are  life  ";  for  with  them  goeth  forth  the 
mighty  Spirit  of  life.  He  meets  us  bearing  forth  our  dead  hopes  through  the  city's 
gate ;  He  meets  us  when  our  hearts  are  faint  and  weary  ;  when  we  feel  the  empti- 
ness of  all  with  which  this  world  has  sought  to  cheat  our  earnest  longings  for  the 
great,  the  real,  and  the  true.  He  stands  beside  the  bier.  He  bids  us  weep  no  more. 
He  stops  our  mourning  steps ;  the  dead  hear  Him  ;  hopes  of  youth,  aspirations  of 
heart,  dreams  of  purity,  of  reality,  of  high  service,  with  which  once  our  spirits 
kept  glad  company,  but  which  had  withered,  and  sunk,  and  died,  as  the  hot  and 
scorching  sun  of  common  life  arose  upon  us— these  revive;  they  sit  up;  they 
begin  to  speak  ;  they  find  a  voice  ;  they  turn  to  Him  ;  and  He  gives  them  back  to 
urf,  and  bids  us  cheritjh  them  for  Him.  On  Him,  then,  may  our  affections  fix.  On 
Him,  the  Healer,  the  Restorer  of  humanity,  may  our  hearts  learn  to  lean  the  secret 
burden  of  their  being.  1.  If  earthly  trouble  is  upon  us,  let  us  fly  to  Him  ;  let  us 
beware  of  all  thote  who  would  cheer  us  without  Him ;  let  us  be  always  sure  that 
the  poison  of  the  asp  is  hidden  under  their  softest  and  most  enticing  words.  2.  Or, 
is  it  the  heavier  burden  of  spiritual  trouble  under  which  we  groan  7  Let  us  see 
here  that  His  purpose  is  the  same.  For  why  does  God  suffer  this  to  harass  often- 
times His  faithful  servants,  but  to  teach  them  to  lean  more  simply  upon  Him  ? 
{Bishop  Samuel  Wilberforce.)  Young  man.  Arise  ! — There  is  something  specially 
touching  and  impressive  in  a  village  funeral.  In  a  small  population  every  family 
is  known  ;  and  death,  when  it  enters,  thrcws  a  general  sadness  and  gloom  around. 
There  were  several  things  thai  combined  to  make  this  funeral  peculiarly  affecting. 
1.  Baise  up  for  a  moment  the  sheet  that  is  spread  over  the  corpse  (for  the  coffin  ia 
borne  on  an  open  bier),  and  look  on  that  pale  countenance — it  is  the  face  of  a  young 
man.  Perhaps  it  was  consumption  tnai  laid  its  withering  hand  upon  him,  or  fever 
may  iiave  snapped  the  thread  of  life ;  but  there  he  is,  cold,  motionless,  and  still. 
1  think  death  never  seems  so  utterly  cruel,  as  when  it  oats  one  off  in  the  bloom  of 


MM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  ▼» 

opening  manhood.  And  yet,  mysterious  as  is  the  event,  and  deeply  affecting,  it  ia 
no  ancommon  one.  It  occars  every  week  in  London.  Even  in  this  church  I  have 
seen  some  of  the  most  bright  and  promising  lives  suddenly  brought  to  a  close. 
Tour  youthful  strength  gives  you  no  guarantee  that  death  is  far  away.  Nobody 
steps  out  of  the  world  when  he  expects  to  do  so.  Though  for  twenty  years  you 
have  never  had  an  ache  or  a  pain,  yoa  can  make  no  safe  calculation  about  the 
future.  A  fine,  amiable,  robust  fellow  of  twenty,  who  used  to  worship  here,  was 
sitting  in  his  ofiice  one  day,  when  a  fellow-clerk  came  up  merrily,  and  slapping  him 
upon  the  back,  said,  "  Well,  how  are  you  this  morning  ?  "  That  good-humoured 
blow  injured  the  spine,  and  after  some  weeks  of  almost  total  paralysis,  the  young 
man  was  borne  to  his  last  resting-place.  2.  There  is  another  thing  that  adds  much 
to  the  impressiveness  of  this  funeral :  the  young  man  is  an  only  son.  Well,  I 
imagine  that,  let  a  family  circle  be  ever  so  large,  the  parents  feel  there  is  not  one 
of  them  that  can  be  spared.  Every  one  is  dear,  every  one  is  precious.  A  rich  and 
benevolent  gentleman,  who  had  no  children  of  his  own,  was  entering  a  steamboat 
one  day,  when  he  noticed  a  poor  man  with  a  group  of  little  ones  around  him,  all  in 
a  state  of  pitiful  destitution.  Stepping  up  to  him,  he  proposed  to  take  one  of  the 
children,  and  adopt  it  as  his  own.  "  I  think,"  said  he,  "  it  will  be  a  great  relief  to 
you."  "A  what!"  exclaimed  the  other.  "A  relief  to  you,  I  said."  •'Such  a 
relief  to  me,  sir,"  rejoined  the  poor  man,  "  as  to  have  my  right  arm  cut  off ;  it  may 
be  necessary,  but  only  a  parent  can  know  the  trial."  But,  an  only  son,  in  whom 
all  the  hopes  and  the  joys  of  the  parents  centre:  ah  !  it  is  long  since  the  extreme 
bitterness  of  such  a  bereavement  passed  into  a  proverb  (Zech.  xii,  10).  3.  I  have 
not  yet  finished  the  picture.  You  will  not  wonder  that  this  funeral  created  excep- 
tional sympathy,  and  that  "  much  people  "  of  Nain  joined  the  procession,  when  I 
remind  you  that  this  young  man's  mother  was  a  widow.  The  light  of  her  dwelling 
was  now  put  out ;  the  comfort  and  support  of  her  advancing  years  taken  away.  No 
doubt  he  had  been  a  good  son,  or  his  death  would  not  have  created  so  profound  a 
feeling  in  the  place.  4.  With  Dr.  Trench,  I  believe  that  this  majestic  voice  wa« 
something  more  than  a  summons  back  to  this  mortal  life — that  it  included  also  an 
awakening  of  the  young  man  to  a  higher  and  a  spiritual  life ;  with  nothing  short 
of  which  would  the  Saviour  have  ''delivered  him  to  his  mother."  He  gave  him 
back  to  her  who  bare  him,  not  merely  to  be  for  a  few  years  longer  her  earthly  com- 
panion, but,  as  now  a  saved  and  regenerate  man,  to  be  to  her  a  joy  both  for  time 
and  for  eternity.  (1)  Arise  from  the  death  of  unbelief.  Conversion  is  a  passing  from 
death  unto  life.  When  you  become  a  saved  man,  it  is  as  though  a  corpse  were 
quickened  into  life.  (2)  Arise  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  You  cannot  afford  to  be 
lost.  The  interests  at  stake  are  too  tremendous  to  be  imperilled  by  delay.  Won't 
you  yield,  and  say,  "Yes,  Lord,  at  Thy  bidding  I  arise,  to  live  from  this  day  for 
Thee  "?  But  some  young  man  will  say,  "  I  feel  the  force  of  all  you  say ;  I  know  I 
ought  to  be  a  Christian,  and  shall  never  be  happy  till  I  am  one  ;  but  it  is  no  use 
trying ;  sin  has  got  the  upper  hand  of  me,  and  when  certain  temptations  meet  me, 
I  fall,  and  must  fall,  and  will  fall."  I  remember  of  a  young  man  talking  to  me  in 
that  style,  and  saying,  "  I  believe  the  gospel  to  be  true  :  that  Christ  is  an  omnipo- 
tent  Saviour,  I  have  not  a  doubt.  I  can  fully  trust  Him,  so  far  as  that  is  concerned; 
and  yet  I  dare  not  profess  Him,  because  I  know  that  a  particular  sin  has  complete 
mastery  over  me,  and  I  am  not  going  to  be  a  hypocrite."  But  I  took  him  by 
the  buttonhole,  and  said,  ''Let  me  read  a  verse  to  70U,"  and  then  I  turned  to 
John  i.  12 — "As  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God  " ;  and  I  showed  him  that,  when  one  accepts  Christ,  he  accepts  Him, 
not  merely  as  a  Saviour  from  guilt  and  from  hell,  but  as  a  Saviour  from  lust,  and 
from  vile  passions,  and  from  evil  thoughts  ;  and  that  He  must  be  trusted  for  this 
jnst  as  for  the  other.  (3)  Arise  from  the  apathy  of  indolence.  The  great  mass  of 
nominal  Christians  are  asleep.  The  only  thing  they  want  religion  for  is  its  comfort 
it  gives  them  a  pillow  to  lay  their  heads  on.  Is  that  the  purpose  for  which  you 
have  enhsted  ?  When  the  stem  Scottish  chief  was  walking  round  his  encampment 
one  night,  he  saw  his  own  son  lying  on  a  pillow  of  snow  which  he  had  carefully 
gathered  and  packed  together  before  he  lay  down  ;  the  father  kicked  the  pillow  from 
under  his  son's  head  and  said, "  Come,  I  will  have  no  effeminacy  here.  I  want  robust 
men  in  my  army."  Oh,  how  many  in  Christ's  army  are  fast  asleep,  not  on  a  bolster 
of  snow,  but  on  a  pillow  of  down.  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise."  Arise  from 
the  slumber  of  lethargy  and  come  and  grapple  with  the  foe.  (J.  Thain  Davidson.  P.D.J 
The  raising  of  the  tcidow's  son : — Some  places  have  been  made  famous  by  a  single 
incident.    Nain  is  the  village  of  the  widow's  son  whom  Jesus  raised  from  the  dead. 


•sir.  TO.]  ST.  LUKE.  685 

By  no  other  «vent  is  Nain  known.  For  a  moment  the  light  of  heaven  fell  upon  it, 
and  haloed  it  with  a  glory  which  has  attracted  the  eyes  of  all  the  Christian  ages, 
and  then  it  disappeared  into  its  former  obscurity.  The  site  of  the  ancient  village 
is  well  authenticated  ;  it  is  occupied  by  the  modem  Nein,  a  squalid,  miserable  col- 
lection of  huts,  situated  on  the  north-western  edge  of  Jebel  el  Duhy,  or  the  "  Little 
Hermon,"  where  the  hill  slopes  down  into  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  Our  Lord  came 
to  Nain  on  His  way  south  to  keep  the  Passover.  The  day  before  He  had  healed  the 
centurion's  servant  at  Capernaum ;  and  now,  after  having  walked  eighteen  miles 
since  the  cool  hours  of  early  morning.  He  toiled  slowly  in  the  afternoon  up  the 
steep  slope  leading  to  the  village.  He  was  tired  and  footsore.  But  there  was  work 
for  the  Father  awaiting  Him,  in  the  doing  of  which  He  would  find  His  meat  and 
drink.  They  were  carrying  a  dead  man  to  his  burial  on  the  east  side  of  the  village, 
where  the  rough  rock  was  full  of  sepulchral  caves.  1.  It  would  be  difiBcult  to  make 
the  picture  of  desolation  more  complete  than  the  evangelist  has  done  by  a  few 
simple  words.  Notice  that  the  three  recorded  miracles  of  restoration  from  the 
dead  were  performed  upon  young  persons.  2.  We  are  apt  to  look  upon  the  fact  of 
Jesus  meeting  the  funeral  procession  at  the  precise  moment  when  it  was  issuing 
out  of  the  gate  of  the  city  as  a  mere  chance  or  fortunate  coincidence.  But  nothing 
really  occurs  by  chance ;  there  is  no  such  divinity  in  the  universe.  3.  "  And  when 
the  Lord  saw  her  He  had  compassion  on  her."  It  is  not  said  that  the  bereaved 
mother  addressed  Jesus.  But  He  knew  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  Never 
was  there  a  human  heart  so  feeling  as  His.  The  very  word  employed  in  our 
version  to  express  His  sympathy  denotes  His  exquisite  tenderness.  It  signifies  the 
unutterable  pity  which  a  mother  has  for  her  offspring.  Jesus  Himself  was,  strictly 
speaking,  the  only  son  of  His  mother  ;  and,  as  Joseph  was  in  all  probability  dead 
by  this  time,  she,  too,  was  a  widow,  worn  down  by  the  duties  amd  cares  of  a  humble 
home.  We  cannot  wonder,  then,  that  the  woman  who  came  before  Him  in  agoniz- 
ing circumstances,  similar  to  those  in  which  He  would  soon  have  to  leave  His  own 
mother,  drew  from  His  heart  a  peculiar  compassion,  and  induced  Him,  unsolicited, 
to  perform  for  her  one  of  His  rarest  and  supremest  acts  of  mercy.  4.  "  And  said 
unto  her.  Weep  not."  This  "  weep  not "  different  from  that  addressed  to  the 
hired  mourners  of  Jairus's  household.  There  it  was  uttered  in  indignation,  for  the 
purpose  of  restoring  quiet ;  here  it  is  said  in  deepest  sympathy,  for  the  purpose  of 
cheering  and  soothing.  How  often  do  these  words  proceed  from  the  lips  of  earthly 
comforters !  No  argument  here  for  stoicism  under  sorrow.  No  one  need  be  ashamed 
of  tears,  since  our  Saviour's  eyes  were  filled  with  them.  The  very  existence  of 
tears  shows  that  God  has  designed  them  and  has  a  use  for  them.  When  Christ 
then,  says,  "  Weep  not,"  He  does  not  mean  to  forbid  tears,  or  to  make  us  ashamed 
of  them;  lout  to  give  us  a  reason,  a  sufficient  cause  for  drying  our  tears.  5.  "He 
came  and  touched  the  bier."  Not  necessary  for  Him  to  do  this,  so  far  as  the 
exercise  of  His  Divine  power  was  concerned.  But  there  was  deep  significance  in 
what  He  did.  He  violated  the  letter  of  the  law  that  He  might  keep  its  spirit.  6. 
•*  And  they  that  bare  him  stood  still."  They  were  struck  by  a  sudden  conscious- 
ness that  they  were  in  the  presence  of  One  who  had  a  right  to  stop  them  even  in 
their  progress  to  the  tomb  ;  and  they  waited  silently  and  reverently  for  what  He 
might  say  or  do.  What  a  scene  for  the  genius  of  a  great  painter  does  the  imagina- 
tion picture  at  this  sublime  expectant  moment,  when  the  power  of  God  is  about  to 
be  visibly  displayed.  The  mother  bowed  down  with  grief,  and  yet  lifting  up  to  the 
face  of  Jesus  eager  eyes,  in  which  a  new-born  hope  struggles  with  the  tears  of 
despair ;  the  bearers  of  the  bier  standing  still  with  looks  of  awe  and  astonishment ;  the 
motley  groups  of  the  funeral  procession,  and  the  multitude  who  followed  Jesus  in 
their  picturesque  Oriental  dresses,  turning  to  one  another  as  if  asking  the  meaning 
of  this  strange  proceeding ;  the  calm,  holy  form  of  Jesus  touching  the  bier,  and  the 
last  red  level  rays  of  the  sun  setting  behind  the  green  hills  on  the  western  horizon, 
haloing  with  a  sacred  glow  the  head  of  the  Bedeemer,  and  the  s^irouded  figure  that 
lies  motionless  and  unconscious  on  the  bier,  speaking  touchiugly  of  that  son  that 
shall  no  more  go  down  1  7.  The  stillness  is  broken  by  words  such  as  human  ears 
had  never  heard  before — "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  Arise."  How  suggestive  of 
omnipotence  is  that  "  I."  8.  "  And  he  that  was  dead  sat  up  and  began  to  speak." 
What  did  he  speak  about  ?  His  lips  were  sealed  upon  those  things  which  it  is  not 
lawful  for  a  man  to  utter.  Our  Lord  Himself,  after  His  resurrection,  said  not  a 
single  word  regarding  what  He  had  seen  and  heard  during  the  three  days  when  His 
body  was  in  Joseph's  tomb  and  His  soul  in  Hades.  How  opposed  is  all  this  to  the 
w-called  revelations  of  spirits,  given  to  those  who  call  themselves  spiritoalistfl. 


•86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbap.  vn. 


9.  *•  And  He  delivered  him  to  his  mother."  Who  can  describe  the  unutterable  glad- 
ness of  that  restoration  ?  The  revulsion  of  feeling  must  have  been  painful  in  its 
very  intensity.  But  the  evangelist  has  left  s  veil  over  it,  for  there  are  feelings 
with  which  a  stranger  may  not  intermeddle.  Truly  the  promise  was  literally  ful- 
filled to  her,  "  Weepiug  may  endure  for  the  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." 

10.  Upon  the  spectators  the  effect  of  the  wonderful  miracle  was  overwhelming.  A 
great  fear  fell  upon  them,  that  strange  instinctive  fear  produced  by  sudden  contact 
with  the  invisible  world,  which  we  feel  even  in  the  presence  of  our  beloved  dead,  on 
account  of  the  awful  mystery  in  which  they  are  shrouded.  They  glorified  God  that 
the  long  period  during  which  there  had  been  no  prophet,  no  supernatural  sign,  no 
communication  between  heaven  and  earth,  nothing  but  the  continuous  motion  of 
the  wheels  of  providence  along  the  same  beaten  track,  and  the  uniform  action  of 
the  dull  unchanging  signals  of  nature  that  carried  the  general  despatches  of  the 
universe,  had  come  to  an  end  at  last.  They  had  open  vision  once  more,  and  a  sense 
of  the  nearness  of  heaven.  But  far  short  were  their  impressions  and  conceptions, 
however  vivid  at  the  moment,  of  the  glorious  truth.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.) 
The  story  of  Nain : — I.  The  words  of  Cheist's  consolation  weee  simple,  a3 
ALL  CONSOLATION  OUGHT  TO  BE.  Too  much  talking  spoils  comfort.  Give  few 
words,  but  let  them  be  crowded  with  the  infinite  of  feeling.  II.  Christ  put 
THIS  compassion  OF  His  AT  ONCE  INTO  ACTION.  No  soouer  had  the  feelings  of  pity 
arisen  within  Him  than  He  came  forward  and  touched  the  bier,  did  what  He  could 
to  help  the  woman.  That  is  a  deep  lesson  to  us,  though  a  commonplace  one.  What 
an  absurd  self-deception  it  is  to  call  ourselves  Christians  if  we  never,  like  Christ,  come 
forward  and  touch  tbe  bier.  IH.  The  consciousness  of  Divine  power  in  the  mind 
or  Christ.  Contrast  His  consciousness  of  Divine  power  with  His  lovely,  sad,  and 
hidden  life.  IV.  It  was  always  fob  profound  moral  and  spiritual  ends  that 
Chbist  used  the  power  He  was  conscious  of  possessing.  V.  The  spibituaii 
lessons  to  be  drawn  from  the  mibacle.  1.  Often  in  the  midst  of  death  that  wa 
meet  the  true  life.  2.  Every  miracle  has  a  two-fold  object,  to  meet  some  physical 
want  or  distress,  and  to  point  to  Christ  Himself  as  the  one  alone  who  could  relieve 
the  higher  wants  of  the  spirit  of  man.  It  is  with  us  spiritually  as  it  was  with  the 
widows  son.  Upon  the  path  of  life  comes  Christ,  and  touches  the  bier,  and  that 
which  was  dead  arises.  (Stopford  Brooke,  M.A.)  Tlie  widow's^  son  of  Nain: — 
This  miracle  has  much  in  common  with  Christ's  other  two  miracles  of  raising 
from  the  dead.  The  same  calm  authority,  the  same  Divine  self-confidence  is 
evident  in  them  all.  I.  Christ's  impulse  of  compassion.  We  are  not  satisfied 
with  our  knowledge  of  any  man  until  we  have  seen  something  of  his  inifjulses. 
1.  See  how  this  illustrates  the  greatness  of  Christ.  His  air  was  not  distraught. 
His  sympathies  were  as  prompt,  His  considerateness  as  fuU  and  tender,  as 
though  not  a  care  was  on  His  spirit.  2.  Bemember,  too,  how  Christ  subordinated 
family  affection  to  tbe  call  of  the  gospel.  How  hard  and  irresponsive,  how  cold 
and  unsympathetic,  are  men  who  have  sacriiiced  affection  to  obedience.  3.  This 
gives  us  a  view  of  God  which  we  sorely  need.  Nature  reveals  one  whom  the  strong 
may  adore;  a  God  for  the  happy.  Christ  reveals  God  as  coming  down  to  us  in 
compassion  and  tender  personal  sympathy.  II.  The  simplicity  of  Christ's  com- 
passion. For  simple  unmingled  grief,  simple  unmingled  comfort  is  the  only  balm- 
He  could  afford  often  to  dispense  with  speech,  because  His  life  was  unmistakably  a 
witness  for  God.  Simplicity  is  the  great  want  of  modern  Christian  life.  If  it  were 
deeper  it  would  be  less  fussy.  (A.  Machennal,  D.D.)  The  widow  of  Nain: — I. 
The  bereaved  motheb.  Painter,  as  well  M  physician,  we  can  believe  St.  Luke  to 
have  been.  Desolation  was  never  more  graphically  and  pathetically  summed  up 
than  in  the  words,  "  The  only  son,"  &o.  Then,  too,  it  is  hard  for  the  young  and 
strong  to  leave  the  world.  Cut  off  prematurely,  sayest  thou  ?  What  if  it  be  that 
the  corn  of  wheat  must  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  and  thus  bear  much  fruit. 
Bereaved  mother,  a  word  to  thee  1  If  thy  son  is  dear  to  thee,  think  him  as  much 
30  to  thy  Saviour.  II.  Our  Loed'b  attitude  on  this  occasion.  1.  In  the  associa- 
tions of  the  miracle  there  is  much  of  deepest  interest:  (a)  Our  Lord's  power  to 
grapple  with  sudden  emergencies,  (b)  His  sensitive  compassion,  (c)  The  paucity 
of  His  words.  2.  The  miracle  itself :  All  its  details  are  commonplace,  entirely 
divested  of  any  clothing  of  the  would-be  wonderful,  (a)  In  the  mercy  there  were 
the  elements  of  fresh  trials.  Again  there  were  all  the  anxieties  to  undergo,  all 
the  battle  again  to  fight,  the  prospect  again  of  severance.  (6)  Why  are  miracles 
of  resurrection  no  longer  possible?  Because  there  is  no  longer  the  same  end  to  b« 
•erved.     (c)  Such  miracle  typical.    Death  a  type  of   sin.     Renewal  of  humau 


«SM*.  vir.]  ST.  LUKE.  €8T 

nature  a  resurrection  with  Christ.  III.  The  people  who  accompanied  the  houbneb. 
1.  Gratifying  as  their  sympathy  would  be,  the  very  crowds  would  cause  her  to  feel 
more  solitary.  2.  In  the  feelings  excited  by  the  performance  of  the  miracle,  wa 
trace  no  thought  for  those  of  the  mother.  We  find  only  superstitious  fear,  which, 
in  its  turn,  gives  place  to  wild  enthusiasm.  The  words  of  the  people  seem  to 
denote  that  the  miracle  recalled  those  of  Elijah  and  Elisha,  and  the  prophet's 
vision  (Ezek.  xxxvii).  They  indulged  in  sentimental  Messianic  dreams ;  they  built 
themselves  up  afresh  in  national  pride ;  they  gave  themselves  over  to  self-important 
babbling.  We  have  only  here  a  fresh  illustration  of  that  false  spirit  to  which  it 
was  our  Lord's  sad  destiny  to  minister.  With  all  their  enthusiasm  He  knew  that 
there  was  no  real  hfe,  no  deep  apprehension  of  the  character  of  the  truths  He  had 
oome  to  teach,  (W.  J.  Gordon.)  Gospel  for  the  Sixteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity  : — 
I.  Some  mibacles  op  this  kind  were  needed,  in  obdeb  to  give  a  full  view  of  tiie 
WORK  and  power  OF  Chbist.     II.  Of  this  most  striking  class  of  miracles  only  thrkk 

ABB  BEOOBDED,  AND    WE  MOST  SUPPOSE    ONLY    THREE    WERE   WEOUGHT.       For  this    inflC- 

quency  there  may  have  been  many  reasons.  1.  A  desire  to  make  the  miracle 
more  striking  by  its  isolation.  2.  The  mibelief  of  the  people.  Christ  is  never 
asked  to  raise  the  dead.  Even  Martha  just  hints  and  no  more,  that  God  will 
grant  whatever  He  asks.  III.  There  is  a  gradation  in  the  mikacles,  leading 
OP,  AS  IT  WEBB,  TO  A  CLIMAX.  Just  dead ;  twenty-four  hours  dead ;  four  days 
dead.  In  all  cases,  the  fact  of  the  death  well-ascertained,  and  abundance  of 
witnesses  secured.  What  must  be  the  feelings  of  a  man  between  one  death  and 
another?  IV,  A  mibacle  produces  its  effect  according  to  the  state  of  mind  op 
THOSE  who  witness  IT,  It  docs  not  necessarily  carry  conviction.  Here  a  fear 
comes  on  all,  and  they  glorify  God.  In  the  second  miracle  they  are  astonished 
with  a  great  astonishment.  At  the  crowning  miracle,  the  hatred  against  Jesus 
having  become  more  intense,  some  went  their  way  to  the  Pharisees  and  re- 
ported what  Jesus  had  done.  (G,  Calthrop,  M.A.)  The  miracle  of  Nain  : — 
How  splendid  the  career  of  Jesus  i  Observe  here — I.  What  the  Kedemer 
beheld,  II,  What  Christ  felt — "Compassion."  His  eye  affected  His  heart, 
1.  Agreeable  to  His  nature.  2.  Agreeable  to  all  His  works.  Ill,  What  Christ 
SAID — "Weep  not,"  Was  it  not  a  very  harsh  and  unreasonable  demand? 
1,  Might  she  not  haye  reminded  Him  that  to  weep  was  in  accordance  with 
the  feelings  of  our  nature?  2,  Have  not  the  best  of  men  wept?  3,  This  waa 
an  extremely  afflictive  case.  Still  He  insists  that  she  must  weep  not.  We  shall 
soon  perceive  the  reason :  He  was  about  to  remove  the  cause  of  sorrow.  IV.  What 
the  Eedeemer  did.  1.  He  touched  the  bier.  Arrested  it  in  its  course ;  bearers 
felt  it  impossible  to  advance ;  finger  of  God  waa  upon  it.  Hence  they  stood  still — 
astonished,  amazed.  2.  He  commanded  the  corpse  to  arise.  Although  dead,  he 
heard  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  lived.  His  spirit  heard  it  io  Hades— the 
invisible  state,  and  came  back.  3.  He  delivered  him  to  his  mother.  Christ  might 
have  insisted  on  the  consecration  of  himself  to  His  service,  as  a  disciple,  evangelist, 
or  apostle.  Compassion  commenced,  and  compassion  gave  the  iinishing  stroke  to 
this  splendid  and  Divine  scene.  4.  The  people  glorified  God,  The  glory  of  God 
was  the  grand  object  and  end  of  Christ's  undertakings.  Application :  See  in  this 
young  man — 1.  A  striking  picture  of  the  natural  state  of  man.  2.  Learn  the  ouly 
means  of  restoration.  3.  God  is  greatly  glorified  in  the  salvation  of  sinners. 
{J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christian  attendance  at  a  funeral : — What  are  the  sentiments 
with  which  we  attend  a  funeral  ?  I,  Our  conduct  in  relation  to  the  deceased 
AND  HI8  30BVIVINQ  FAMILY,  1,  Let  US  attend  the  funeral  not  merely  for  the  sake 
of  politeness,  but  out  of  Christian  charity,  (1)  Such  attendance  is  in  conformity 
with  human  nature,  (2)  It  is  beneficial  to  ourselves,  reminding  us  that  we  are 
brethren,  children  of  the  same  heavenly  Father,  2.  Let  us  succour  the  deceased, 
by  remembering  him  in  our  prayers,  &c.  3,  Let  us  console  the  family  of  the  deceased. 
(1)  Let  us  weep  with  them  that  weep.  Compassion  is  like  balsam.  (2)  Let  us 
speak  comfort  to  the  grief- stricken  family.  Kemind  them  of  the  dispositions  of 
Divine  Providence,  of  immortality,  and  future  reunion.  (3)  Let  us  perform  con- 
soling works.  II.  Our  conduct  with  regard  to  ourselves.  A  funeral  is  a  warning 
to  us.  1.  Look  at  the  corpse.  (1)  What  has  it  been?  What  we  are:  full  of  life 
and  health,  full  of  hopes,  prospects,  and  plans  for  the  future.  Was  this  person 
young  or  old,  rich  or  poor,  beautiful  or  deformed,  learned  or  illiterate  ?  It  does 
not  matter.  No  one  is  secured  against  death.  The  only  important  question  is 
this:  Was  the  dead  person  virtuous  or  wicked  ?  (2)  What  is  it  now?  What  w« 
all  shall  be :  a  hideous  corpse,  deprived  of  life  and  beauty,  deprived  of  all  advaii> 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0R.  [Oil*.  TO, 

tagea  of  mind,  form,  and  earthly  conditionB.  Only  one  thing  has  been  spared  by 
death :  the  good  and  evU  deeds  done  in  life.  (3)  How  has  it  come  to  this  state  f 
In  the  same  way  as  that  by  which  we  must  pass — death.  Has  death  come  unex- 
I>ected,  or  after  an  early  warning  ?  When  and  where  ?  (4)  What  will  it  be  ?  Like 
every  one  of  us,  a  prey  to  vermin,  an  inhabitant  of  the  grave.  So  passes  the  glory 
of  the  world.  But,  at  the  same  time,  it  is  the  seed  of  a  future  body — either  glorious 
or  ignominious.  2.  Let  ns  turn  our  eyes  to  Jesus,  the  Life-giver.  (Tschupik.) 
A  bereaved  mother : — The  mother  of  poor  Touda,  who  heard  that  I  wished  to  see 
him  once  more,  led  me  to  the  house  where  the  body  was  laid.  _  The  narrow  space 
of  the  room  was  crowded ;  about  two  hundred  women  were  sitting  and  standing 
around,  singing  mourning  songs  to  doleful  and  monotonous  airs.  As  I  stood 
looking,  filled  with  solemn  thoughts,  in  spite  of,  or  rather  because  of,  perhaps,  the 
somewhat  ludicrous  contrasts  about  me,  the  mother  of  Touda  approached.  She 
threw  herself  at  the  foot  of  her  dead  son,  and  begged  him  to  speak  to  her  once 
more.  And  then,  when  the  corpse  did  not  answer,  she  uttered  a  shriek,  so  long, 
BO  piercing,  such  a  wail  of  love  and  grief,  that  tears  came  into  my  eyes.  Poor 
African  mother  1  she  was  literally  as  one  sorrowing  without  hope ;  for  these  poor 
people  count  on  nothing  beyond  the  present  life.  For  them  there  is  no  hope  beyond 
the  grave.  "  All  is  done,"  they  say,  with  an  inexpressible  sadness  of  conviction 
that  sometimes  gave  me  a  heartache.  As  I  left  the  hut,  thinking  these  things,  the 
waihng  recommenced.  It  would  be  kept  up  by  the  women,  who  are  the  official 
mourners  on  these  occasions,  till  the  corpse  was  buried.  {Du  Chaillu.)  The 
voice  of  a  funeral : — Every  funeral  is  God's  repetition  of  His  anathema  against  sin. 
When  our  friends  are  carried  to  the  silent  sepulchre  the  Lord  of  all  does  in  fact 
say  to  us,  "  See  what  a  bitter  thing  sin  is ;  it  takes  the  light  from  the  eye  and  the 
music  from  the  ear ;  it  silences  the  voice  of  song,  and  palsies  the  hand  of  skill ; 
it  quenches  the  fire  of  love  upon  the  heart's  altar,  and  removes  the  light  of  under- 
standing from  the  brain's  judgment  seat,  and  gives  over  the  creature  once  so  lovely 
and  beloved  to  become  a  putrid  mass,  a  horror  and  a  loathing,  so  that  affection 
itself  cries  out,  •  Bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight.' "  Thus  every  gravestone  and 
every  green  hillock  in  the  cemetery  may  be  regarded  as  the  still  small  voice  of  God 
solemnly  condemning  sin.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  visible  sermon: — Archbishop 
Leighton,  returning  home  one  morning,  was  asked  by  his  sister,  •*  Have  you  been 
hearing  a  sermon  ?  "  •'  I've  met  a  sermon,"  was  the  answer.  The  sermon  he  had 
met  was  a  corpse  on  its  way  to  the  grave.  The  preacher  was  Death.  Greatest  of 
street-preachers ! — nor  laws  nor  penalties  can  silence.  No  tramp  of  horses,  nor 
rattling  of  carriages,  nor  rush  and  din  of  crowded  streets  can  drown  his  voice.  In 
heathen,  pagan,  and  Protestant  countries,  in  monarchies  and  free  states,  in  town 
and  country,  the  solemn  pomp  of  discourse  is  going  on.  In  some  countries  a  man 
is  imprisoned  for  even  dropping  a  tract.  But  what  prison  will  hold  this  awful 
preacher?  What  chains  will  bind  him  ?  He  lifts  up  his  voice  in  the  very  presence 
of  tyrants,  and  laughs  at  their  threats.  He  walks  unobstructed  through  the  midst 
of  their  guards,  and  delivers  the  messages  which  trouble  their  security  and  embitter 
their  pleasures.  If  we  do  not  meet  his  sermons,  still  we  cannot  escape  them.  He 
comes  to  our  abode,  and,  taking  the  dearest  object  of  our  love  as  his  text,  what 
sermons  does  he  deliver  to  us  1  His  oft-repeated  sermons  still  enforce  tbe  same 
doctrine,  still  press  upon  us  the  same  exhortation,  "  Surely,  every  man  walketh  in 
a  vain  show.  Surely  they  are  disquieted  in  vain."  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing 
city."  Power  of  sympathy : — Happy  is  the  man  who  has  that  in  his  soul  which 
acts  upon  the  dejected  as  April  airs  upon  violet  roots.  Gifts  from  the  hand  are 
silver  and  gold ;  but  the  heart  gives  that  which  neither  silver  nor  gold  can  buy. 
To  be  full  of  goodness,  full  of  cheerfulness,  full  of  sympathy,  full  of  helpful  hope, 
causes  a  man  to  carry  blessings  of  which  he  is  himself  as  unconscious  as  a  lamp 
of  its  own  shining.  Such  a  one  moves  on  human  life  as  stars  move  on  dark  seas 
to  bewildered  mariners ;  as  the  sun  wheels,  bringing  all  the  seasons  with  him  from 
the  south.  {H.  W.  Beeeher.)  Silent  sympathy : — Bishop  Myrel  had  the  art  of 
sitting  down,  and  holding  his  tongue  for  hours,  by  the  side  of  a  man  who  had  lost 
the  wife  he  loved,  or  of  a  mother  bereaved  of  her  child.  (Victor  Hugo.)  The 
compassion  of  mankind  a  sign  of  the  compassion  of  mankind's  Head  and  Lord : — 
Contrast  between  the  two  compassions  of  which  the  bereaved  mother  was  the 
object.  Helpless  compassion  of  multitude ;  mighty  compassion  of  Christ.  I.  The 
Father  sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  adopt  and  justify  these  common  and  daily 
human  compassions,  and  to  reveal  what  had  all  along  been  implied  though  hidden 
in  them.    IL  Jesus  Christ  shared  in  the  compassion  of  the  Jewish  mourners,  and 


CBiP.  Tn.]  ST  LUKE.  689 

ehares  now  in  such  compassion  everywhere  becanse  He  is  the  Son  of  Man.  III. 
The  text,  however,  reminds  us  that  He  who  comes  to  meet  the  funerals  of  our  kind 
And  unites  His  compassion  with  our  compassion,  is  more  even  than  the  Son  of 
Man,  the  Head  of  our  race.  "  And  when  the  Lord  saw  her."  The  Son  of  Man, 
who  is  the  Lord,  has  compassion  with  humanity  in  its  troubles.  (T.  Hancock.) 
The  power  of  Christ's  voice  : — Only  three  such  reprieves  recorded  in  the  Gospels. 
Not  fewer,  that  there  might  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact ;  not  more,  that  the  fact 
might  not  be  too  common.  1.  All  whom  our  Lord  called  back  to  life  were  com- 
paratively young.  It  was  death  as  a  blight  that  He  checked  and  restrained.  2. 
In  all  three  cases  it  was  kindness  to  the  living  which  chiefly  moved  Christ  to  raise 
the  dead.  In  each  act  we  see  Jesus  in  a  higher  character  than  a  worker  of  miracles ; 
it  showed  Him  as  the  binder  of  broken  hearts.  3.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is 
the  result  of  the  Divine  power  of  Christ.  In  the  most  stupendous  of  all  His  works 
of  power  He  put  away  secondary  means ;  the  creative  command  went  direct  from 
the  creative  voice  to  the  matter  and  the  spirit  which  were  bound  to  obey  that  voice. 
The  mode  of  working  is  majestic,  Divine.  4,  The  three  risings  which  took  place 
at  the  command  of  Christ  were  preludes  and  f  oreshadowings  of  His  own.  But  they 
did  but  imperfectly  resemble  that  one  complete  resurrection.  Christ  rose  at  no 
word  of  command,  but  because  He  had  life  in  Himself.  5.  Taking  our  stand  upon 
the  truth  that  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  we  may  see  in  these  revivals  the 
foreshadowings  of  that  universal  revival,  when  all  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
the  Son  of  God  and  live.  If  you  do  not  hear  and  obey  the  gentle,  persuasive,  loving 
voice  of  Christ  now,  it  will  be  ill  with  you  when  that  great  voice  sounds  which  will 
call  all  of  us  from  our  graves,  and  which  we  shall  then  be  compelled  to  hear  and 
obey.  (The  late  Dean  of  Ehj.)  Visit  to  Nain : — We  crossed  Hermon,  and  found 
ourselves  in  a  small  decayed  village  on  the  edge  of  another  bay  of  Esdraelon,  which 
runs  between  the  hills  of  Galilee  and  Hermon  to  the  north.  It  was  Nain.  It  is 
poor,  confused  and  filthy,  like  every  village  in  Palestine,  but  its  situation  is  very 
fine,  as  commanding  a  good  view  of  the  plain,  with  the  opposite  hills,  and  especially 
of  Tabor,  that  rises  like  a  noble  wooded  island  at  the  head  of  the  green  bay.  And 
Nain,  in  the  light  of  the  Gospel-history,  is  another  of  those  fountains  of  living 
water  opened  up  by  the  Divine  Saviour,  which  have  flowed  through  all  lands  to 
refresh  the  thirsty.  How  many  widows,  for  eighteen  centuries,  have  been  com- 
forted ;  how  many  broken  hearts  soothed  and  healed  ;  by  the  story  of  Nain — by  the 
unsought  and  unexpected  sympathy  of  Jesus,  and  by  His  power  and  majesty !  What 
has  Nineveh  or  Babylon  been  to  the  world  in  comparison  with  Nain  ?  And  this  is 
the  wonder  constantly  suggested  by  the  insignificant  villages  of  Palestine,  that  their 
names  have  become  parts,  as  it  were,  of  the  deepest  experiences  of  th«  noblest 
persons  of  every  land  and  every  age.     {Norman  Macleod,  D.D.) 

THE  WIDOW  OP  NAIN. 

Forth  from  the  city  gate  the  pitying  crowd 
.  Followed  the  stricken  mourner.     They  came  near 
The  place  of  barial,  and,  with  straining  hands, 
Closer  upon  her  breast  she  clasped  the  pall, 
And  with  a  gasping  sob,  quick  as  a  child's, 
And  an  inquiring  wildness  flashing  through 
The  thin  grey  lashes  of  her  fevered  eyes, 
She  came  whsre  Jesus  stood  beside  the  way. 
He  looked  upon  her,  and  His  heart  was  moved. 
**  Weep  not !  "  He  said ;  and  as  they  stayed  the  bier* 
And  at  His  bidding  laid  it  at  His  feet, 
He  gently  drew  the  pall  from  out  her  grasp. 
And  laid  it  back  in  silence  from  the  dead. 
With  troubled  wonder  the  mute  throng  drew  near» 
And  gazed  on  His  calm  looks.     A  minute's  space 
He  stood  and  pray'd.    Then  taking  the  cold  hand. 
He  said,  ♦•  Arise  1 "    And  instantly  the  breast 
Heaved  in  its  cerements,  and  a  sudden  flash 
Ban  through  the  lines  of  the  divided  lips. 
And  with  a  murmur  of  his  mother's  name, 
He  trembled  and  sat  upright  in  his  shioud. 
And  while  the  mourner  hung  upon  his  neck, 
Jesus  went  calmly  on  His  way  to  Nain.  {If.  P.  ITiZHs.) 

U 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  nt 

Vers.  19-22.  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come,  or  look  we  for  another  1 — John's 
doubting  message  to  Jesxis: — 1.  Much  discussion  has  taken  place  concerning  John'i 
doubt,  whether  it  was  real  or  affected  ;  and  if  real,  what  was  its  cause?  We  believe 
there  was  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  Baptist — serious  doubt — arising  out  of  no 
personal  or  petty  source,  but  caused  by  the  way  in  which  the  Messianic  career  of 
Jesus  was  developing  itself.  2,  This  doubt  was  not  in  regard  to  the  identity  of 
the  worker  of  the  works  reported  to  John  with  Jesus,  but  in  regard  to  the  nature 
of  the  works  viewed  as  Messianic.  But  why  should  John  stumble  at  those  works, 
so  full  of  the  spirit  of  love  and  mercy  ?  Just  because  they  were  works  of  mercy. 
These  were  not  the  sort  of  works  he  had  expected  Messiah  to  busy  Himself  with  ; 
at  all  events,  so  exclusively.  Ci  Jonah's  zeal  for  righteousness.  3.  The  reply 
sent  back  by  Jesus  to  John  amounted  to  this,  that  the  sure  marks  that  He  was  the 
coming  One,  the  Christ,  were  just  the  very  works  which  had  awakened  John's  sur- 
prise. 4.  Having  recounted  rapidly  His  migbty  works,  Jesus  appended  the  re- 
flection, "  And  blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in  Me."  We  are  not 
to  find  in  the  words  traces  either  of  harshness  towards  John  or  of  wounded  feeling 
in  the  speaker.  The  tone  of  compassion  rather  than  of  severity  is  audible  in  the 
utterance.  Jesus  felt  keenly  how  much  John  missed  by  being  in  such  a  state  of 
mind  that  that  in  His  own  work  which  was  most  godlike  was  a  stumbling-block  to 
him.  Translated  into  positive  fonn  the  reflection  meaus,  "Blessed  are  they  to 
whom  the  mercy  and  the  grace  of  which  I  am  full,  and  whereof  My  ministry  is  the 
manifestation  and  outflow,  are  no  stumbling-block,  but  rather  worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion." (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  The  test  of  Christianity: — 1.  Jesus  deliberately 
declined  to  rest  His  claims  upon  any  other  grounds  than  the  testimony  of  Hia 
Father,  a  testimony  which  shone  in  the  truth  of  His  words,  and  in  the  heavenly 
character  of  His  mission.  2.  If  the  Master  Himself  is  willing,  nay  demands,  to 
be  judged  by  results,  manifestly  organizations  and  churches  that  claim  to  be  called 
by  His  name  must  not  shrink  from  the  same  test.  3.  The  only  proof  of  your  being 
in  contact  with  the  living  Saviour,  the  only  proof  that  you  rightly  apprehend  and 
sincerely  embrace  Him,  is  the  result  in  your  own  hearts  and  conduct.  No  religion 
is  worth  anything  that  is  not  a  power.  {E.  W,  Shalders,  B.A.)  Looking  for 
another  Christ : — There  are  times  when,  through  the  disappointments  and  failures 
of  our  personal  religious  lives,  it  may  be  necessary  to  look  for  another  Christ  than 
the  Christ  we  have  already  known.  1.  There  are  some  who  have  been  restless  for 
months,  perhaps  for  years,  about  their  sin.  They  have  appealed  to  Christ  again 
and  again,  and  the  peace  of  Christ  has  not  come  to  them.  They  are  tempted  to 
put  this  question.  Christ  may  reply  by  pointing  them  to  the  great  triumphs  of 
His  mercy  by  which  they  are  surrounded.  Go  to  Christ  with  all  your  trouble,  and 
with  a  clear  and  vivid  remembrance  of  His  death,  aud  you  cannot  put  this  ques- 
tion. 2.  There  are  some  who  feel  that  their  Christian  life  has  not  had  the  power 
and  brightness  they  hoped  for.  This,  also,  often  arises  from  a  defective  knowledge 
of  Christ.  Perhaps  you  have  forgotten  that  He  is  not  only  a  Saviour,  but  s  Prince, 
and  that  you  must  accept  His  law  as  the  rule  of  your  life,  aud  strive  to  get  His 
will  done  on  earth  as  the  will  of  God  is  done  in  heaven.  3.  This  question  may  be 
suggested  by  the  general  condition  and  history  of  the  world.  A  large  part  of  the 
world  is  still  unsaved :  the  misery  Jesus  came  to  console  still  largely  unconsoled. 
Do  you  look  for  another  Christ  ?  Can  the  contents  of  His  revelation  be  anyhow 
enriched?  Can  there  be  more  careful  warnings,  more  glorious  promises,  more 
compassion,  more  gentleness  and  beauty,  than  there  are  in  Hitn  and  His  gospel? 
4.  We  do  not  look  for  the  coming  of  another  Christ,  but  the  Christ  whom  we  know 
will  come  in  another  form,  to  complete  in  power  and  majesty  the  work  which  He 
began  in  weakness  and  in  shame.  (R.  W.  Dale,  D.D.)  The  ansicer  of  Jestu  to 
John : — It  seems  to  me  that  here  the  Lord  prescribes  to  His  Church  the  answer  she 
should  give  in  all  days  when  men  rise  up  and  question  whether  He  comes  from  God^ 
when  men  rise  up  to  say  to  His  Church,  "  Are  you  the  kingdom  of  God?  are  yon 
the  Divine  society  established  upon  earth  to  be  the  home  of  the  new  life,  and  the 
source  i)f  a  wide-spreading  influence  ?  Are  you  the  city  set  upon  a  hill  that  cannot 
be  hid  ?"  When  such  questions  are  asked,  the  Church  must  be  ready,  not  merely  to 
give  proofs  of  her  ancient  origin,  her  orthodox  title-deeds  drawn  from  the  dusty 
safes  of  her  theology,  but  she  must  be  able  to  say,  "  Look  at  my  life,  my  work. 
See  what  I  am  doing  for  the  poor,  the  destitute,  the  oppressed,  and  judge  me  as 
you  find  me."  Can  the  Church  of  God,  in  these  days,  bear  such  an  appeal  as  that? 
Can  she  say,  "Look  at  the  asylums  I  have  founded  and  support  for  the  poor,  the 
Iaqm,  the  hsdt,  and  the  blind  1     Look  at  my  children  giving  devoted  labour  in  the 


CHAP,  vii.]  ST.  LUKE.  801 

lowest  dens  of  your  cities ;  at  my  sons  faithfully  striving  for  the  truth  in  the  halls 
of  your  legislature ;  and  see  in  juster  laws  and  a  purer  life,  and  a  more  brotherly 
relation  between  man  and  man,  proofs  of  the  power  of  my  spirit,  and  of  the  truth 
of  my  labours"  ?  She  must  answer  so,  and  so  must  you  and  I,  when  challenged 
to  prove  that  we  are  of  God.  We  hear  a  great  deal  m  these  days  about  answers  to 
the  infidel,  about  arguments  philosophical,  historical,  and  scientific,  which  shall 
have  the  power,  in  the  hands  of  skilful  men,  of  silencing  the  antagonist.  But  a 
better  argument  and  a  mightier  that  any  of  these,  an  argument  that  never  fails,  is 
that  derived  from  the  fruits  and  results  of  religion  in  ihe  life.  The  man  who  reads 
your  history  with  criticism,  and  meets  your  argument  with  argument,  will  bare  his 
head  and  bow  his  neck  before  the  spectacle  of  a  holy  and  devoted  life.  That  he 
sees  is  true,  whatever  else  be  false  ;  that  is  of  God,  whatever  becomes  of  books  and 
institutions.  {Bishop  Moorhouse.)  The  message  of  John  the  Baptist : — I.  The 
MESSAGE.  What  did  it  mean  ?  1.  To  convince  his  disciples  ?  Not  suited  to  do 
it ;  suggesting  doubtfulness  in  their  master ;  impairing  previous  witness.  2.  To 
reassure  himself  ?  At  variance  with  (1)  his  character,  testimony.  Divine  assurance. 
(2)  Words  of  the  Lord  (ver.  24),  aimed  to  prevent  the  supposition.  (3)  The  occa- 
sion— "  When  he  had  heard  the  works  of  Christ  " — the  last  work  being  the 
raising  of  the  dead.  3.  Message  not  of  uncertainty,  but  of  impatience.  Things  do 
not  go  as  the  Baptist  expected.  The  world  left  in  doubt.  Opinion  taking  wrong 
turn  for  want  of  distinct  assertion.  Works  of  Christ,  but  no  proclamation  of 
Christ.  It  ought  to  be  made.  The  time  is  come.  He  the  proper  person  to  obtain  it. 
He  will  demand  it  in  the  interests  of  all.  II.  The  reply.  1.  Answer.  (1)  To 
what  was  said.  The  facts  are  sufficient  answer.  (2)  To  what  was  meant.  The 
method  will  not  be  changed.  The  Lord  must  choose  His  own  course.  Men  must 
see  and  judge.  Facts  first,  then  assertions.  2.  Warning.  There  is  danger  in  this 
disposition — danger  of  questioning  God's  methods;  restlessness,  dissatisfaction, 
diminution  of  attachment,  failure  of  faith.  {Canon  T.  D.  Bernard.)  Moral 
evidence  of  Christianity  superior  to  miracles : — 1.  It  is  evident  John  did  not  olearly 
apprehend  the  spirituality  of  the  kingdom  Christ  was  to  introduce.  Like  the 
apostles,  he  expected  the  kingdom  of  God  would  come  with  observation,  instead  of 
its  being  of  a  slow,  quiet,  spiritual  growth.  He  looked  for  something  more  visible. 
There  were  the  remains  of  the  old  dispensation  mixed  up  with  his  ideas  of  its 
nature  ;  too  much  of  the  Old  Testament  theocracy.  2.  The  remarkable  manner  in 
•which  the  idea  of  the  coming  of  Christ  had  taken  possession  of  the  minds  of  men 
at  the  time  John  sent  his  disciples  to  inquire  respecting  it.  The  familiar  designa- 
tion of  the  Messiah  was  "  the  Comer."  "  Him  that  is  to  come  "  is  but  the  common 
version  of  the  world's  designation  of  the  Messiah.  The  Comer,  as  if  with  Him 
came  everything  else  desirable.  The  coming  of  all  future  good  depended  upon  His 
coming.  3.  I  might  notice  the  world's  slowness  in  recognizing  Christ  as  the 
Messiah,  and  the  circumstances  which  occasioned  that  slowness  to  admit  His  claim. 
4.  He  proceeded  to  enforce  His  claim  by  evidence  corresponding  with  His  character, 
and  their  necessities,  and  by  evidence  alone,  the  result  of  which  He  is  prepared 
to  wait  (Luke  vii.  21-23).  As  if  He  had  said,  "  Go  and  tell  John  My  kingdom  is  a 
spiritual  kingdom,  and  the  employment  of  other  than  spiritual  means  would  be 
uncongenial  and  obstructive."  5.  That  our  Lord  not  only  employed  evidence  in 
contradistinction  from  worldly  display  and  physical  force,  but  that  He  presented 
to  these  inquirers  and  the  multitude  moral  evidence  as  superior  to  miraculous. 
I.  Chkist's  pbeaching  consisted,  in  a  remakkable  degree,  of  deeds.  1.  Thus  on 
this  occasion,  the  God-like  reply  to  the  inquiry,  "  Art  Thou  He  that  should  come  ?  " 
His  deeds  spoke.  He  entered  into  no  argumentative  defence  of  His  claims — 
"  Actions  speak  louder  than  words."  "  In  the  same  hour  He  cured  many  of  their 
infirmities  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  spirits  ;  and  unto  many  that  were  blind  He  gave 
sight. "  He  left  the  stupendous  miracles  He  had  performed  to  speak  for  themselves 
(Psa.  xii.1-3).  The  heavens  had  done  much,  and  now  He  is  in  the  world  to  develop 
what  the  heavens  could  not  declare.  It  was  not  to  be  expected  that  His  more  full  mani- 
festation would  be  verbal  merely,  or  chiefly,  for  how  can  speech,  which  is  but  the 
symbol  of  thought,  convey  ideas  of  what  thought  cannot  grasp  respecting  "  God. 
who  is  a  spirit,"  immaterial,  infinite,  invisible,  incomprehensible.  Speech  fails  to 
io  justice  to  the  finite,  the  visible,  the  material,  and  comprehensible  ;  to  convey  the 
greatest  and  best  conceptions  of  our  own  minds.  2.  Christ's  verbal  teaching 
related  especially  to  Himself.  Each  portion  of  it  was  either  the  vindication  of 
acts  He  had  performed,  or  an  intimation  of  some  purpose  he  was  about  to  accom- 
plish, or  a  development  of  the  kingdom  He  was  then  establishing — relating  to  itM 


«M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIi.  [chap.  to. 

natare,  origin,  character,  or  growth.  3.  This  distinctive  and  important  fact  sup- 
plies a  reply  to  the  following  objections.  (1)  The  first  objection  we  refer  to,  more 
frequently  felt  than  expressed,  relates  to  the  greater  fulness  of  evangelical  doctrinea 
in  the  Epistles  than  in  the  Gospels.  Although  the  latter  comprise  the  discourses 
and  teaching  of  Christ  Himself,  we  reply  to  this  by  saying,  "  Christ  came  not  so 
much  to  preach  the  gospel  as  to  procure  it,  to  establish  and  confirm  it,  to  perform 
the  deeds,  the  record  of  which  constitutes  the  gospel.  (2)  The  second  objection 
urged  from  the  time  of  Celsus  downwards  is,  that  parallels  to  some  of  our  Lord's 
sayings  are  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Plato,  Isocrates,  and  others.  Hence  it 
has  been  inferred,  absurdly  enough,  that  the  gospel  had  been  anticipated — that 
Christianity  was  not  original.  To  which  we  reply,  admitting  the  supposed  resem- 
blances, the  wonder  is  that  they  are  so  extremely  few — two  or  three  mere  maxims 
of  morality,  and  these  but  the  distant  reverberations  of  Sinai's  echoes  of  the  ancient 
and  moral  law.  What  is  Christianity  ?  Nothing  but  a  few  maxims  of  morality  T 
We  triumphantly  point  inquirers  for  Christianity  to  her  spirit  and  her  works — hor 
resemblance  to  her  Lord.  II.  His  woKKa  week  wondeefdl.  It  is  a  frequent  descrip- 
tion given  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament,  "  He  only  doeth  wonderful  things."  To 
achieve  wonders  is  the  prerogative  of  God.  "He  alone  doeth  wonders";  and  this 
called  forth  the  grateful  praises  of  His  people.  Not  only  is  God  the  wonder-worker, 
but  strictly  speaking,  all  that  God  does  are  wonders,  only  wonders.  The  atom  is  as 
an  atom  not  less  wonderful  than  a  world.  Both  owe  their  origin  to  His  creative 
power,  and  are  impressed  with  the  Divine  signature.  Was  it  strange  then  that 
when  "  God  wa?  manifested  in  the  flesh,"  that  when  He  appeared  amongst  us,  who 
was  predicted  as  "  the  wonderful,"  His  works  and  deeds  should  be  "  mighty  signs 
and  wonders."  There  was  a  sense  in  which  He  could  do  nothing  which  was  not 
wonderful ;  His  constitution  made  it  impossible  that  anything  ordinary  could  emanate 
from  Him.  III.  His  wonders  were  mercies.  1.  All  His  miracles  were  miracles  of 
mercy.  Nor  was  it  necessary  to  alter  His  laws,  imposed  at  the  first  on  nature,  they 
suffered  no  violence  from  His  mercy ;  on  the  contrary,  they  harmonized  with  it.  In 
giving  sight  to  the  blind,  He  was  but  restoring  the  eye  to  the  use  and  exercise  of  its 
proper  function.  His  power  He  used  as  a  trust  to  be  administered  for  man's  good  alone. 

2.  Besides  the  present  happiness.  His  mercies  conveyed  in  the  physical  and  mental 
benefits,  miraculously  bestowed,  they  had  a  higher  value,  a  symbolical  meaning, 
pointing  to  spiritual  necessities  and  suppHes,  to  the  things  relating  to  our  redemption. 

3.  His  miracles  demonstrated  His  power,  and  our  interest  in  turning  the  elements  of 
earth  to  account  of  spiritual  uses,  relating  them  to  heaven.  In  opening  the  blind 
eye  He  denoted  that  He  came  to  be  the  Light  of  the  world,  and  that  we  need  that 
the  eye  of  the  understanding  should  be  open  to  receive  that  light.  The  greatest 
wonder  was  that  of  His  incarnation.  In  comparison  with  this  wonder,  all  mere 
acts  of  His  power  were  less  splendid.  This  was  the  long  desired  and  promised 
wonder.  The  ancient  tabernacle  foreshadowed  His  tabernacling  among  men.  The 
temple  with  its  indwelling  Shekinah  symbolically  predicted  this.  Every  instance 
of  union  between  God  and  man,  and  the  union  of  soul  and  body,  prefigured  this 
infinitely  more  mysterious  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  His  person. 
IV.  His  MERCIES,  Uke  His  acts,  by  which  He  replied  to  John's  disciples,  webb 
ANSWERS  TO  man's  NECESSITIES.  This  is  Only  another  mode  of  saying  that  the 
blessings  of  His  redemption  are  fully  adapted  to  man's  exigencies.  It  might  have 
been  otherwise.  His  words  might  have  been  works ;  His  works  might  have  been 
wonders  ;  His  wonders  might  have  been  mercies ;  and  yet,  after  all,  there  might 
have  been  a  want  of  strict  suitableness  between  our  necessities  and  the  mode  of 
meeting  them,  but  the  text  reminds  us  that  His  mercies  and  deeds  are  exactly 
Buitable  and  fully  answerable  to  the  exigencies.  1.  This  correspondence  admits  of 
universal  application.  He  comprehended  the  entire  scheme  of  nature  and  Provi- 
dence. No  legitimate  question  on  any  natural  subject  can  ever  arise  in  the  mind 
of  man,  which  his  Creator  and  Bedeemer  has  not  foreseen  ;  to  which  He  has  not 
inserted  an  answer  in  the  tbings  which  He  has  made.  Ten  thousand  answers  are 
silently  awaiting  the  future  questions  which  shall  call  them  forth.  At  this  moment, 
while  we  are  assembled  here,  the  Creator  may  be  elsewhere  exhibiting  similar 
demonstrations  of  His  perfections  in  reply  to  inquirers.  In  the  ampUtude  of  space, 
hosts  of  intelligent  beings  may  be  collected  around  the  chaos  of  a  world,  wondering 
whether  it  will  ever  be  restored  to  harmony  and  order ;  whether  all  creative  acts 
are  at  an  end,  and  while  they  are  inquiring  the  fiat  may  go  forth  from  the  Creator 
again,  as  "  in  the  beginning,"  "Let  there  be  light,"  and  the  light  of  Divine  power 
naj  kindle  aroand  them.     2.  The  lessons  of  the  Old  Testament  are  represented 


OBAT.  m.]  8T.  LUKE.  698 

«3  replies.  God  was  graciously  pleased  to  allow  Himself  to  be  inquired  of.  HI3 
replies  were  called  responses  or  oracles.  3.  But  now  Christ  had  come  as  the 
living  oracle ;  from  Him  the  questions  which  human  guilt  and  misery  had  never 
oeased  to  agitate,  were  to  receive  a  full  practical  satisfactory  reply.  V.  A  prao> 
TiCAL  Christianity  alone,  a  Christianity  embodied  in  deeds  of  mercy,  adequately 

ILLUSTRATES   THE    WORKS    OF    REDEMPTION   BY    ChRIST.       •'  BlcSSOd    is    he,    whoSOevet 

«hall  not  be  offended  in  Me."  Our  Lord  meant  not  that  His  wondrous  work* 
should  end  with  Himself.  All  power  was  given  to  Him  as  Mediator  and  Head 
of  the  Church,  as  a  centre  of  an  ever-enlarging  circle.  From  Him  as  the  Head 
of  all  things  to  the  Church  all  emanates.  {J.  Harris,  D.D.)  The  soul  dependent 
on  physical  conditions: — However  good  and  great  yon  may  be  in  the  Christian 
life,  your  soul  will  never  be  independent  of  physical  conditions.  I  feel  I  am 
uttering  a  most  practical,  useful  truth  here,  one  that  may  give  relief  to  a  great 
many  Christians  who  are  worried  and  despondent  at  times.  Doctor  Kush,  a 
monarch  in  medicine,  after  curing  hundreds  of  cases  of  mental  depression,  himself 
fell  sick  and  lost  his  religious  hope,  and  he  would  not  believe  his  pastor  when  the 
pastor  told  him  that  his  spiritual  depression  was  only  a  consequence  of  physical 
depression.  Andrew  Fuller,  Thomes  Scott,  William  Cowper,  Thomas  Boston,  David 
Brainard,  Philip  Melancthon,  were  mighty  men  for  God,  but  all  of  them  illustrations 
of  the  fact  that  a  man's  soul  is  not  independent  of  his  physical  health.  An  emi- 
nent physician  gave  as  his  opinion  that  no  man  ever  died  a  greatly  triumphant 
death  whose  disease  was  below  the  diaphragm.  Stackhonse,  the  learned  Christian 
writer,  says  he  does  not  think  Saul  was  insane  when  David  played  the  harp  before 
him,  but  it  was  a  hypochondria  coming  from  inflammation  of  the  liver.  The 
Dean  of  Carlisle,  one  of  the  best  men  that  ever  lived,  and  one  of  the  most  useful, 
sat  down  and  wrote :  *'  Though  I  have  endeavoured  to  discharge  my  duty  as  well 
%8  I  could,  yet  sadness  and  melancholy  of  heart  stick  close  by  and  increase  upon 
me.  I  tell  nobody,  but  I  am  very  much  sunk  indeed,  and  I  wish  I  could  have  the 
relief  of  weeping  as  I  used  to.  My  days  are  exceedingly  dark  and  di<itressing.  In 
a  word.  Almighty  God  seems  to  hide  His  face,  and  I  intrust  the  secret  to  hardly 
uny  earthly  being.  I  know  not  what  will  become  of  me.  There  is,  doubtless,  a 
good  deal  of  bodily  affliction  mingled  with  this,  but  it  is  not  all  so.  I  bless  God, 
however,  that  I  never  lose  sight  of  the  Cross,  and,  though  I  should  die  without 
seeing  any  personal  interest  in  the  Eedeemer's  merits,  I  hope  that  I  shall  be  found 
*t  His  feet.  I  will  thank  you  for  a  word  at  your  leisure.  My  door  is  bolted  at  the 
Mme  I  am  writing  this,  for  I  am  full  of  tears."  (Dr.  Talmage.)  Inactivity  a 
tause  of  doubt : — Doubt  often  comes  from  inactivity.  We  cannot  give  the  philosophy 
vf  it,  but  this  is  the  fact,  that  Christians  who  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  sit  thinking 
of  themselves,  meditating,  sentimentalising,  are  almost  sure  to  become  the  prey  to 
iLark,  blank  misgivings.  John  the  Baptist,  struggling  in  the  desert,  needs  no  proof 
4iat  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  John  shut  up  became  morbid  and  doubtful  immediately. 
We  are  mysteries,  but  here  is  the  practical  lesson  of  it  aU :  for  sadness,  for  suffering, 
for  misgivings,  there  is  no  remedy  but  stirring  and  doing.  {F.  TV.  Robertson,  M.A.) 
Christ  is  the  dispeller  of  dnubt : — During  his  earlier  life  Dr.  Merle  D'Aubigne,  the 
'Jwiss  historian  of  the  Reformation,  was  grievously  vexed  with  depressing  doubts. 
He  went  to  his  old  teacher  for  help.  The  shrewd  old  man  refused  to  answer  the 
/oung  man's  perplexities,  saying,  "Were  I  to  get  you  rid  of  these  doubts,  others 
would  come.  There  is  a  shorter  way  of  destroying  them.  Let  Christ  be  really  to 
you  the  Son  of  God  the  Saviour.  Do  His  will.  His  light  will  dispel  the  clouds, 
and  His  Spirit  will  lead  you  into  all  truth."  The  old  man  was  right,  and  the 
young  D'Aubign6  was  wise  enough  to  adopt  hia  counsel.  He  hoisted  anchor,  and 
moved  out  of  the  region  of  fogs,  and  quietly  anchored  himself  under  the  sunshine 
of  Christ's  countenance.  (Dr.  Guyler.)  Devotion  to  Christ  a  cure  for  despondency:-— 
Active  devotion  to  Christ's  service  is  another  cure  for  spiritual  despondency.  The 
faith-faculty  gets  numb  by  long  inaction,  just  as  a  limb  becomes  numb  and  useless 
if  it  is  not  exercised.  The  love-power  grows  cold  if  it  is  not  kept  fired  up.  When 
faith  and  love  both  run  low,  the  soul  easily  falls  into  an  ague-fit.  What  you  need 
is  to  get  out  of  yourself  into  a  sympathy  with,  and  downright  efforts  for,  the  good 
of  others.  When  a  desponding  Christian  came  to  old  Dr.  Alexander  for  relief,  the 
Doctor  urged  him  to  prayer.  "  I  do  pray  continually."  "  What  do  you  pray  for?  " 
The  young  student  said,  "  I  pray  that  the  Lord  would  lift  upon  me  the  light  of  Hia 
countenance."  "  Then,"  replied  the  sagacious  veteran,  "  go  now  and  pray  that  He 
will  use  you  for  the  conversion  of  souls."  (Ibid.)  To  the  poor  the  gospel  ll 
fpreached. — The  gospel  preached  to  the  poor: — I.  Thb  kzoklucnot  or  tbib  law.    K 


694  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  vik 

new  development  of  a  heaven-laid  plan  to  enlighten  the  poor  ;  to  raise  them  in  the 
scale  of  being;  to  sweeten  and  adorn  their  lot  by  the  honours  of  intellectual  culture, 
the  comforts  of  social  life,  and  the  hopes  of  immortality.  The  wisdom  of  our  text, 
as  a  poor's  law,  excels  all  the  contrivances  of  men.  It  does  not  so  much  provide 
for  the  poor  as  it  prevents  men  from  being  poor.  It  cuts  oS  the  causes  of  poverty. 
II.  The  obligation  it  lays  upon  us.  The  way  to  the  most  effective  sense  of  duty 
is  by  discovering  the  need  and  the  worth  of  the  thing  that  is  enjoined ;  and  is  this 
a  thing  to  be  countermanded  or  opposed  ?  But  if  the  argument  from  the  goodness 
of  precept  seem  too  weak,  let  us  view  its  peremptory  demand.  It  is  the  will  o£  our 
Saviour  that  none  hve  in  a  Christian  land  without  hearing  the  glad  sound,  that  so 
all  may  walk  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  III.  How  is  this  good  law  of  oub 
Lord  to  bb  fulfilled  ?  (N.  Paterson.)  Christ's  works  : — 1.  Our  Saviour's  works 
were  words.  2.  His  works  were  wonders.  3.  His  wonders  were  wonders  of  mercy. 
4.  His  wonders  of  mercy  were  suited  to  the  necessities  of  man.  5.  The  suitableness 
of  His  wonders  of  mercy  to  the  necessities  of  man  is  a  satisfactory  proof  of  His 
Messiabship,  (G.  Brooks.)  The  suitability  of  the  gospel  to  the  poor : — The  gospel 
is  especially  adapted  to  the  poor,  in  respect  of — 1.  Their  education.  2.  Their 
resources.  3.  Their  opportunities.  4.  Their  prospects.  (Ibid.)  A  preacher  to^ 
the  poor: — John  Wesley  always  preferred  the  middling  and  lower  classes  to  the 
wealthy.  He  said  "  If  I  might  choose  I  should  still,  as  I  have  done  hitherto,  preach 
the  gospel  to  the  poor."  Trophies  of  the  work  of  Christ : — Before  many  a  Popish 
shrine  on  the  Continent  one  sees  exhibited  a  great  variety  of  crutches,  together  with 
wax  models  of  arms,  legs,  and  other  limbs.  These  are  supposed  to  represent  the 
cures  wrought  by  devotion  at  that  altar — the  memorials  of  the  healing  power  of  the 
saint.  Poor,  miserable  superstition,  all  of  it,  and  yet  what  a  reminder  to  the  be- 
liever in  Jesus  as  to  his  duty  and  his  privilege  ?  Having  pleaded  at  the  feet  ot 
Jesus,  we  have  found  salvation ;  have  we  remembered  to  record  this  wonder  of  Hi» 
hand  ?  If  we  hung  up  memorials  of  all  His  matchless  grace,  what  crutches  and 
bandages  and  trophies  of  every  sort  should  we  pile  together  I  Temper  subdued, 
pride  humbled,  unbelief  slain,  sin  cast  down,  sloth  ashamed,  carelessness  rebuked. 
The  cross  has  healed  all  manner  of  diseases,  and  its  honours  should  be  proclaimed 
with  every  rising  and   setting  sun.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christianity  and  the 

poor : — A  celebrated  doctor  of  divinity  m  London,  who  is  now  in  heaven  I  have  no 
doubt — a  vei-y  excellent  and  godly  man — gave  notice  one  Sunday  that  he  intended 
to  visit  all  his  people,  and  said,  that  in  order  to  be  able  to  get  round  and  visit  them' 
and  their  families  once  in  the  year,  he  should  take  all  the  seatholders  in  order.  A 
person  well  known  to  me,  who  was  then  a  poor  man,  was  delighted  with  the  idea 
that  the  minister  was  coming  to  his  house  to  see  him,  and  about  a  week  or  two 
before  he  conceived  it  would  be  his  turn  his  wife  was  very  careful  to  sweep  the 
hearth  and  keep  the  house  tidy,  and  the  man  ran  home  early  from  work,  hoping 
each  night  to  find  the  Doctor  there.  This  went  on  for  a  considerable  time.  H& 
either  forgot  his  promise,  or  grew  weary  in  performing  it,  or  for  some  other  reason 
never  went  to  this  poor  man's  house ;  and  the  result  was  this,  the  man  lost  con- 
fidence in  all  preachers,  and  said,  "  They  care  for  the  rich,  but  they  do  not  care  for 
us  who  are  poor."  Ihat  man  never  settled  down  to  any  one  place  of  worship  for 
many  years,  till  at  last  he  dropped  into  Exeter  Hall  and  remained  my  hearer  for 
years  till  Providence  removed  him.  It  was  no  small  task  to  make  him  believe  that 
any  minister  could  be  an  honest  man,  and  oould  impartially  love  both  rich  and 
poor.     (Ibid.) 

Yet.  23.  And  blessed  Is  he,  whosoever  shall  not  be  ofTonded  In  Me. — Taking 
offence  at  Christ : — I.  Some  are  offended  and  stumble  at  Christ,  on  the  pretence 
that  there  is  not  sufficient  evidence  of  His  Divine  mission.  2.  Some  are  offended 
in  Christ  because  of  circumstances  connected  with  the  Person  and  history  of  Christ 
Himself.  (1)  His  dignity  and  Godhead.  (2)  His  humiliation.  3.  Some  are 
offended  in  Christ  because  of  His  peculiar  doctrines.  They  dislike  mysteries,  they 
say.  But  what  is  there  which  is  not  mysterious,  when  searched  into  very  closely  ?  4. 
Some  are  offended  at  Christ  because  of  His  precepts,  or  the  holy  life  which  He 
requires  them  to  lead.  6.  Some  are  offended  in  Christ  on  accouut  of  the  conduct 
of  those  who  profess  to  be  His  followers.  But,  however  lamentable  such  miscon- 
duct may  be,  it  is  unjust  to  impute  it  to  Christ,  or  His  gospel.  We  ought  always 
to  distinguish  between  the  system  and  the  inconsistencies  of  those  who  profess  to 
hold  it.  6.  Many  are  offended  in  Christ  because  of  the  trials  to  which  fidelity  to 
Bim  would  expose  them.     [James  Foote,  M.A.)         The  blessedness  of  not  being' 


CKAP.  yn.]  ST.  LVKE.  695 

offended  in  Christ : — 1.  A  fatal  stumble  in  the  way  to  happiness,  which  many  of 
the  hearers  of  the  gospel  make.  They  are  offended  in  Christ,  They  stumble  at 
Him.  Observe  here,  the  object  of  their  offence,  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  at  Him  the 
•world  is  offended.  The  God  that  made  and  guides  the  world,  the  Saviour  tha* 
redeemed  them,  does  not  please  the  world.  What  wonder  then  that  others  cannot 
do  it.  There  is  something  in  the  mystery  of  Christ,  with  which  the  unbeliever  will- 
always  be  finding  fault.  The  world  is  unholy,  and  takes  offence  at  Him.  He  is^ 
the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory :  and  they,  like  owls  and  bats,  are  blinded  at 
the  shining  Sun,  and  therefore  carefully  keep  at  a  distance  from  Him.  They  are 
offended.  In  the  Greek,  scandalized.  Now  the  blind  world,  by  reason  of  their 
own  corruption,  are  thus  offended  or  scandalized  in  Christ.  "  And  He  shall  be  for 
a  sanctuary ;  but  for  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of  offence,  to  both  the 
houses  of  Israel :  for  a  gin  and  for  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  And 
many  among  them  shall  stumble,  and  fall,  and  be  broken,  and  be  snared,  and  be 
taken."  2.  In  the  text  there  is  the  happiness  of  those  who  escape  this  fatal  stumble. 
I  shall  show — I.  What  it  is  to  stumble  at  Christ  and  be  offended  in  Him.  II,  That 
stumbling  at  Christ  abounds  very  much  in  the  world.  III.  That  they  are  happy 
indeed  who  are  kept  from  being  offended  in  Him.  And  then  add  some  improve- 
ment.      I.    To   SHOW  WHAT   IT   IS   TO   STUMBLE   AT   ChRIST,  AND  BE    OFFENDED  IN  HiM. 

This  is  a  very  awful  matter.  For  a  man  to  die  of  his  disease,  when  he  might  have 
been  cureri,  is  sad;  but  it  is  a  double  death  for  one  to  destroy  himself  by  the  abuse 
of  a  remedy  prescribed  that  would  have  cured  him  infallibly.  It  has  reference  to 
four  things  in  the  general.  1.  To  the  grand  device  of  salvation  through  Jesus 
Christ,  laid  in  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  and  fixed  by  the  Divine  counsel.  And 
at  this  the  unbelieving  world  ever  stumbles,  and  their  hearts  can  never  fall  in  with 
it.  2.  To  the  offer  of  Christ  made  in  the  gospel.  To  be  the  sinner's  Head,  Lord, 
and  Husband.  To  be  their  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  their  all  and  instead  of  all. 
But  sinners  love  not  the  offer,  they  stumble  at  His  offices.  3.  To  the  making  us« 
of  Christ  for  all  the  purposes  for  which  the  Father  has  given  Him.  4.  To  the 
practical  understanding  of  sinners.  They  ever  form  a  wrong  judgment  of  Christ, 
and  nothing  less  than  overpowering  grace  will  rectify  their  apprehensions  of  Him. 
This  stumbling  at  Christ  lies  in  these  four  things.  (1)  The  blind  soul  ever  finds 
pome  fault  in  the  mystery  of  Christ.  There  is  always  something  in  or  about 
Christ  that  disgusts  the  sinner,  is  quite  disagreeable  and  shocking  to  him.  The 
Son  of  God  is  not  a  match  suitable  to  those  whose  minds  are  not  savingly  en- 
lightened. (2)  That  which  disgusts  them,  is  what  they  cannot  get  over.  There  is 
something  not  to  be  found  in  Him,  which  they  cannot  want,  and  something  in 
Him  which  they  cannot  endure.  And  by  no  art  can  tliey  reconcile  their  hearts  to 
it.  (3)  Because  they  cannot  get  over  that  one  thing,  it  keeps  Christ  and  the  soul 
asunder  effectually.  Could  the  Jews  have  got  OTer  the  offence  of  the  mean  appear- 
ance of  Christ,  and  reconciled  it  to  their  own  notion  of  the  Messiah,  they  would 
have  been  fond  of  Him,  as  they  were  while  He  was  not  come.  (4)  This  keeping 
Christ  and  the  soul  asunder,  the  soul  is  at  length  thereby  ruined,  and  brought  into 
a  worse  case  than  if  Christ  had  never  come  in  the  way.  "  If  I  had  not  come,"  says 
He,  "and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin  ;  but  now  they  have  no  cloak 
for  their  sin."  II.  To  show  that  stumbling  at  Christ  abounds  very  much  ik 
THE  WORLD.  Let  US  view  the  heaps  upon  heaps  that  are  l,ying  broken,  snared,  and 
taken.  1.  Let  us  take  a  view  of  those  that  are  lying  rotting  above  the  ground  in 
open  profanity ;  they  are  kept  away  from  Christ,  even  by  the  very  far-off  sight  of 
Him  and  His  way.  There  aro  many  at  this  day  who  cry,  "  Let  us  break  their 
bands  asunder,  and  cast  their  cords  from  us.  We  will  not  have  this  Man  to  reiga 
over  us."  2.  Let  us  take  a  view  of  those  who  are  lying  dead  upon  their  murdered 
convictions.  3.  Those  that  are  lying  broken  and  pining  away,  having  stumbled* 
over  the  Cross  of  Christ.  4.  Those  that  are  fallen  away  from  the  lusts  of  Christ's. 
consolation,  to  the  fulsome  breasts  of  the  world  and  their  own  lusts.  In  every 
age  there  are  many  like  the  mixed  multitude  that  came  out  of  Egypt,  who  for  a 
time  kept  up  in  the  wilderness,  but  afterwards  lost  hopes  of  Canaan,  and  fell  a 
*'  lusting,  and  even  the  children  of  Israel  also  wept  again,  and  said.  Who  shall 
give  us  flesh  to  eat?  "  Finally,  Look  at  those  whose  soul  exercises  have  issued  in 
putting  their  case  in  the  hands  of  a  physician  of  no  value.     III.  To  show  that 

IHEY  ABE  HAPPT  INDEED  WHO  ARE  KEPT  FROM  BEING  OFFENDED  IN  HiM.       1.  Their  eye» 

are  opened  to  see  that  superlative  glory  in  Christ  that  all  the  unbelieving  world 
•aniiot  discover.  2.  Their  hearts  are  new  formed,  cast  into  a  new  mould,  other- 
Wise  they  could  never  be  pleased  with  Him.     "  But  as  many  as  received  Him,  t» 


€96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  Tit. 

them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  who  believe  on  His 
name."  3.  That  soul  cannot  fail  to  embrace  Christ,  to  receive  Him  by  faith  and 
unite  with  Him.  For  to  be  well  pleased  with  Christ,  is  in  effect  to  say  amen  to 
the  great  bargain.  Uses  for  improvement :  1.  Be  convinced  then  of  this  bias  of 
the  heart,  this  disposition  of  the  soul  to  stumble  at  Jesus  Christ.  2.  I  exhort  one 
and  all  of  you,  that  have  a  mind  for  any  share  of  eternal  happiness,  and  particu- 
larly  communicants,  that  you  would  try  yourselves  this  night,  whether  you  be  well 
pleased  with  Christ  or  not.     (T.  Boston.) 

Vers.  24-27.    What  went   ye   out  Into    the  wilderness  for  to   see? — Three 

questions : — Why  did  our  Lord  select  these  figures  rather  than  others  ?  I.  Our 
Lord's  three  questions  beoall  the  vbrt  scene,  the  peculiar  form,  akd  thb 
ANIMATING  SPIRIT  OF  THE  Baptist's  MINISTRY.  1.  The  fiist  would  tecall,  to  the 
listening  crowd,  Jordan,  with  its  reedy,  wind-swept  banks — the  strong  rapid  stream, 
by  which  they  had  listened  to  the  prophet's  call,  and  in  which  they  had  been 
plunged  for  the  remission  of  their  sins.  2.  The  second  would  recall  the  asceticism 
of  the  Baptist,  the  rude  simplicity  of  his  garb,  the  rustic  fare  with  which  he 
was  content.  3.  The  third  would  recall  the  fervour  and  inspiration  with  which 
he  spoke,  whom  "  all  men  confessed  to  be  a  prophet  indeed,"  and  the  profound 
impression  he  had  made  upon  their  light,  fluctuating  hearts.  II.  We  may  take 
these  questions  as  setting  forth  the  Baptist's  relations  to  man,  to  self,  to  God. 
1.  John  was  no  reed  to  be  shaken  by  the  breath  of  popular  applause.  He  delivered 
his  rebukes  with  fearlessness.  2.  Severe  to  others,  he  was  also  severe  to  himself. 
He  might  have  dwelt  in  king's  houses,  yet  he  made  the  desert  his  home.  A 
preacher  of  temperance,  he  carried  his  own  temperance  to  asceticism.  3.  Severe 
in  the  demands  he  made  on  men,  still  more  severe  in  his  demands  on  himself ;  he 
devoted  himself  wholly  to  the  will  and  service  of  God.  In  his  relation  to  God  he 
proved  himself  a  true  prophet,  yea,  and  very  much  more  than  a  prophet,  a  man  of 
God  who  was  not  disobedient  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  III.  We  may  take  these 
questions  as  addressed  to  the  thoughts  and  intents,  the  wishes  and  hopes,  of 
the  crowd  who  listened  to  them.  What  did  you  want  and  expect  to  find  ?  Did 
you  not  covertly  hope  that,  as  John  became  popular,  he  would  bend  before  the 
popular  currents  of  thought  and  aim  ?  And  yet,  could  this  have  been  your  expecta- 
tion and  your  hope  f  Had  you  wanted  a  courtier  who  would  speak  smooth  things 
to  you,  would  you  not  have  gone  to  the  palace  for  him  ?  But,  whatever  drew  you 
into  the  wilderness,  whatever  you  thought  or  hoped,  did  not  you  find  a  prophet  ? 
As  you  listened  to  him,  did  not  you  find  that  life  grew  large  and  solemn?  (S.  Cox, 
D.D.)  Sight-seers  : — Thrice,  in  as  many  minutes,  our  Lord  demands  of  the 
multitude,  "  What  went  ye  out  to  see  ?  "  Here  was  their  error :  professing  concern 
to  know  the  will  of  God,  to  prepare  themselves  for  His  service  and  kingdom,  they 
were  bent  on  sights,  on  spectacles,  on  indulging  their  curiosity  and  love  of  the 
marvellous.  They  went  out  not  to  hear  a  prophet,  but  to  see  a  prophet ;  not  to 
imitate  the  temperance  and  abstinence  of  the  Baptist,  but  to  gaze  on  a  man  who 
could  prefer  camel's  hair  to  soft  clothing ;  not  to  feel  the  Divine  regenerating  mind 
of  the  Spirit,  but  to  gape  at  the  reed  which  shook  and  trembled  in  it.  And  this  is 
the  error  against  which  we  must  guard.  We  are  not  to  be  over-mnch  concerned 
with  the  spectacular,  the  external,  the  marvellous  in  religion,  but  to  fix  our  thoughta 
and  affections  on  its  interior  and  eternal  realities.  {Ibid.)  The  unshaken  prO' 
phet: — The  form  into  which  Christ  in  this  passage  throws  His  view  of  the  character 
of  John  the  Baptist  illustrates  more  than  the  symbolic  method  of  His  teaching. 
One  sees  in  the  choice  of  a  natural  object  like  the  reed  shaking  in  the  wind  in  order 
to  form  a  contrast  to  the  unshaken  temper  of  the  Baptist,  the  same  love  of  sym- 
bolism which  led  Him  in  His  parables  to  make  the  ordinary  things  of  Nature  and 
of  human  nature  images  of  the  relations  and  laws  of  the  spiritual  kingdom.  In 
the  case  of  the  parables,  symbolism  is  deliberately  used  for  the  purpose  of  instruo- 
tion.  In  the  case  before  us  it  is  used,  as  it  were,  unconsciously,  and  it  reveals  the 
natural  way  in  which  His  mind  united  the  world  of  Nature  to  the  world  of  Man. 
When  the  image  of  the  Baptist  rose  before  Him — stern,  uncompromising,  fixed  in 
moral  strength,  and  with  it  the  Jordan  bank  where  first  He  met  him,  and  the 
baptismal  hour  when  He  stood  in  the  flowing  river — He  remembered  the  reeds  as 
they  shook  in  impotent  vacillation  in  the  wind,  clasped  the  two  images  together  in 
vivid  contrast,  and  said,  "What  went  ye  out  into  the  wilderness  to  see?  A  reed 
Bhaken  by  the  wind  in  the  stream  of  the  Jordan  ?  nay,  a  rock,  deep-rooted,  firm, 
immovable  "    I.  Everything  we  know  of  the  Baptist  confirms  this  vikw.     H« 


aBAF.  vn.]  ST.  LUKS.  «9T 

learnt  concentration  of  will  in  the  solitary  life  of  the  desert.  With  the  unshaken 
firmuess  which  Christ  saw  as  a  root  in  his  character,  he  accepted  his  position  at 
once  and  for  ever.  Not  one  step  did  he  take  beyond  his  mission,  though  he  must 
have  seen  to  some  distance  beyond  it.  Never  for  a  moment  did  he  cease  to  point 
to  Another  away  from  himself.  It  is  as  noble  a  piece  of  self-renunciation  as  history 
affords,  and  it  was  unshaken.  Though  a  hundred  temptations  beset  him  to  do  so, 
he  never  allowed  his  teaching  to  step  beyond  the  limits  of  its  special  work.  He  met 
his  death  because  he  was  no  reed  to  be  shaken  by  the  promises  of  a  wicked  king. 
II.  And  now  to  make  this  eeal  to  ourselves.  1.  Fidelity  to  our  vocation  in 
life.  2.  The  sinking  of  self  in  religious  work.  3.  The  being  unshaken  in  our 
truth  and  right,  both  in  act  and  speech,  against  worldly  influences  when  they  are 
evil ;  and  even  when  they  are  not  evil  in  themselves,  when  they  make  us  weak  and 
vacillating.  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  The  Christian  ministry :— I.  It  is  not 
A  LINK  op  peiests.  The  principle  of  the  priesthood  rests  upon  a  truth,  the  media- 
torial power  which  man  exercises  over  man.  The  apostles  were  in  a  sense  media- 
tors, and  80  far  priests.  But  the  prophecy  of  old  was  taken  up  joyfully  by  the 
apostles  as  the  richest  tune  in  the  mediatorial  kingdom,  when  the  last  offices  of  the 
priesthood  should  be  taken  away,  when  they  should  no  longer  teach  every  man  his 
brother,  saying,  Know  the  Lord,  for  all  should  know  Him,  from  the  least  even  unto 
the  greatest.  This,  then,  is  the  spiritual  priesthood.  But  the  priestly  system — 
1.  Bemoves  God  from  the  soul,  whereas  God  is  ever  near.  2.  Degrades  humanity, 
for  its  language  tells  us  not  of  the  affinity  of  man  to  God,  but  of  the  immense 
distance  between  the  two.  3.  Produces  a  slavish  worship.  Pass  on  to  consider 
what  the  ministry  is.  II.  It  is  prophetical,  not  priestly.  We  greatly  mistake  if 
we  think  that  the  office  of  the  prophet  was  simply  to  predict  future  events.  1.  It 
was  the  office  of  the  prophet  to  teach  eternal  truths.  John's  only  prediction  was, 
"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  2.  All  the  most  sublime  passages  in  the 
Bible  are  from  the  writings  of  the  prophets.  The  priestly  writings  were  but  tem- 
porary. 3.  The  difference  between  the  prophet  and  the  priest  was  that  it  was  the 
office  of  the  prophet  to  counteract  the  priestly  office.  "  Bring  no  more  vain  obla- 
tions," &c.  "  Wash  you,  make  you  clean."  III.  The  ministry  of  oub  Blessed 
Lord  Himself,  here  on  earth,  was  prophetical  and  not  priestly.  I  lay  a  stress 
on  that  expression  "  here  on  earth,"  because  unquestionably  He  is  a  priest  in 
I'eaven  above.  The  high  priesthood  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  spoken  of  in  the 
Hebrews.  There  it  is  denied  on  earth,  but  asserted  to  be  in  heaven.  "  For  if  He 
were  on  earth.  He  should  not  be  a  priest "  ;  in  other  words,  there  is  a  priesthood 
now,  but  no  earthly  priesthood.  In  conclusion,  I  notice  two  points  which  seem  to 
favour  the  notion  of  a  priesthood : — 1.  Absolution.  Unquestionably,  there  is  a 
power  of  absolution  in  the  ministry  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  but  it  is  the  power 
of  the  prophet  and  not  of  the  priest.  2.  Apostolical  succession.  There  is  such  a 
thing ;  but  it  is  a  succession  of  prophets  and  not  of  priests,  a  succession  never 
extinct  or  broken.  (F.  W,  Robertson,  M.A.)  Good  and  bad  ends  in  attending 
ministrations: — I.  We  ought  always  to  have  an  end  in  view  in  attending 
THE  ministrations  OF  THE  SANCTtJABY.  1.  It  is  due  to  ourselvcs.  2.  It  is  due 
to  God.  3.  It  is  due  to  the  occasion.  II.  There  are  some  ends  we  ought 
KOT  TO  PBOPOSB  TO  OURSELVES.  1.  The  gratification  of  curiosity.  2.  The  exer- 
cise of  a  critical  and  censorious  spirit.  3.  The  improvement  of  our  social 
position.  4.  The  pacifying  of  our  conscience.  III.  There  are  some  bnds 
THAT  SHOULD  ALWAYS  BE  PRESENT  TO  OUB  THOUGHTS.  1.  Conversion.  2.  In- 
struction. 3.  Impression.  4.  The  diffusion  of  the  gospel.  {G.  Brooks.)  A 
reed  shaken  by  the  wind: — The  ordinary  interpretation  of  this  expression  has 
been  this :  "  Did  you  suppose  that  John  was  one  of  the  weaklings  of  this  world,  a 
mere  courtier  with  dehcate  words  and  flowing  robes,  who  would  be  tremulously 
Becking  popular  approval,  who  would  turn  and  trim  in  order  to  secure  favour,  now 
one  thing  and  now  another,  like  a  rush  shivering  in  the  breeze  ?  "  But  lately,  a 
new  suggestion  has  been  made  by  one  who  was  born  in  Palestine,  and  who  has  been 
educated  in  the  Greek  language.  He  says  that  shepherd-boys  often  shelter  them- 
selves among  the  tall  grass,  and  while  away  the  hours  of  hot  sunshine  by  playing 
on  their  native  flutes  ;  hence  one  frequently  almost  stumbles  upon  such  a  musician 
by  the  rivers  or  along  the  hillsides.  So  soft  is  the  tone  of  the  feeble  instrument 
that  it  appears  effeminate,  and  might  well  be  the  symbol  of  a  gentle  sweetness  of 
entertainment  without  vigour  or  force.  So  here  the  exposition  may  be  somewhat 
like  this — "  Did  ye  come  down  here  beside  the  Jordan  to  hear  a  timid  little  flute- 
player,  a  reed  blown  with  one's  breath  ?  "     {€.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 


698  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  Tn. 

Ver.  27.  Behold  I  send  My  messenger  before  My  face. — John  first,  then  Jems: — 

I.  What  did  John  the  Baptist  pheach?  1.  He  delivered  the  whole  law  against 
fiin,  arousing  the  consciences  of  people.  2.  He  made  a  demand  for  immediate 
repentance  (Matt.  iii.  10<.  3.  He  heralded  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  predicted  of  old. 
4.  He  announced  the  special  office  of  Jesus  as  a  Eedeemer  of  men  (John  i.  29-36). 

II.  Now  what  did  Jesos  teach  when  it  came  to  His  TDBN?  1.  Christ  testified 
to  the  entire  accuracy  of  John's  doctrine  (Matt.  xi.  11).  2.  He  proclaimed  the  full 
necessity  of  an  atonement.  3.  He  declared  that  the  necessary  sacrifice  was  now  to 
be  accomplished  by  Himself  (John  iii.  16,  17).  It  shocked  and  stumbled  His 
disciples,  but  He  persisted  in  declaring  that  He  came  into  the  world  to  die.  4.  He 
thus  raised  no  new  issue  between  men  and  God,  but  the  rather  narrowed  down  all 
the  old  into  one  ;  He  made  it  clear  that  faith  was  to  be  the  instrument  of  salvation 
(John  vi.  28,  29),  III.  Thus,  then,  we  reach  the  conclusion  that,  so  far  as  Jesus' 
teaching  and  John's  teaching  had  value  in  the  New  Testament,  the  point  of 
obeatest  importance  is  the  order  between  them.  John's  came  earliest  in  fact, 
and  earliest  in  logical  necessity.  1.  The  historic  position  of  the  two  men  is  enough  to 
show  all  that  is  here  claimed.  There  is  an  order  in  doctrine  under  the  gospel  arrange- 
ment as  strict  as  the  order  of  demonstration  in  problems  in  Euclid's  geometry.  John's 
work  was  a  necessity  and  a  solemn  pre-requisite  to  the  work  of  Jesas.  2.  The  similar 
form  of  procedure  which  in  all  their  teaching  these  two  preachers  preserved,  adds 
confirmation  to  the  proof.  John  presented  the  law  first,  then  the  gospel ;  but  his 
office  was  plainly  to  press  the  law  into  prominence.  Jesus  presented  the  law  first, 
then  the  gospel ;  but  His  office  was  to  bring  the  gospel  into  prominence.  In  both 
cases  the  law  came  earliest.  3.  Our  conclusion,  therefore,  is  inevitable  and  clear. 
There  remains  no  reason  now  why  a  single  proposition  should  not  be  framed  for 
permanent  recollection  and  use:  law-work  preceded  gospel-work  in  all  God'a 
dealings  with  souls.  Practical  inferences  in  conclusion  :  1.  We  see  why  religious  in- 
struction in  our  day  sometimes  appears  so  tame,  and  proves  so  inefficacious.  It  ia 
because  Christian  people  preach  Jesus  without  John.  2.  We  see  why  inquirers  are 
BO  slow  in  finding  peace  at  the  cross.  Peace  ?  Why,  there  has  been  no  disturb- 
ance 1  (see  Ezek.  xxxiii.  32).  3.  We  see  why  there  is  so  much  of  unrest  and 
misgiving  among  Christian  people.  They  have  no  intelligent  sense  of  Christ's 
legal  work  in  bearing  the  curse  of  the  law  in  their  behalf.  Hence  they  labour  to 
keep  up  a  mere  fire  of  fervour  in  their  souls.  They  have  studied  regeneration  more 
than  justification  ;  and  it  is  by  justification  that  one  finds  peace.  So,  not  united 
consciously  to  Christ  as  a  Surety,  they  are  not  sure.  4.  We  see  why  backsliding  is 
BO  frequent  as  the  sin  of  converts.  Some  have  never  been  taught  what  leaving  first 
love  implies.  5.  Finally,  we  see  how  the  new  life  begins  and  continues,  according 
to  the  revealed  plan  (Eom.  v.  1,  2).     (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  28.  For  I  say  unto  you,  Among  those  that  are  bom  of  women  there  Is  not 
a  greater  prophet  than  John  the  Baptist. — Bluch  more  than  a  prophet,  but  less  than 
a  Ghrinian  worker : — John's  greatness  not  that  of  function  or  office  only,  but  of 
character.  But  his  greatness  bows  before  the  excelling  and  incomparable  greatness 
of  the  Lord.  Further,  our  Lord  here  declares  that  every  lowliest  sinner  who 
accepted  Him  as  his  very  own  Saviour,  thereby  passed  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  by  this  one  act  and  fact  took  a  stamp  of  greatness  besides  which  even  that  of 
John  the  Baptist  was  dwarfed.  As  our  tidal  rivers  enlarge  into  bays  and  reaches  of 
the  sea  by  the  sea's  simple  flowing  into  them,  or  communicating  its  own  mass  and 
strength  and  riches  to  them ;  so  these  relatively  narrow  beings  of  ours  become 
spacious  and  Christlike  by  the  indwelling  and  sway  of  the  Spirit  with  all  the  new  and 
august  power  of  the  new  kingdom.  Three  practical  remarks.  1.  Be  it  ours  who  are 
privileged  to  work  for  Christ  to  emulate  John  the  Baptist's  type  of  work.  No  thought 
of  self.  2.  Be  it  ours  in  the  full  day  of  the  gospel  to  realize  our  greater  responsibility. 
3.  Be  it  ours  to  beware  of  assumption  (or  presumption)  of  this  excelling  greatness. 
Mere  function,  mere  human  recognition,  will  count  for  nothing  beneath  the  eye  of 
Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  (Dr.  Grosart.)  Nature  and  circumstances : — Jesus 
told  men  that  the  true  greatness  of  human  life  must  come  by  following  Him.  It 
was  inevitable,  then,  that  men  should  ask,  "  How  is  it  about  those  great  men  who 
are  not  His  followers ;  those  great  men  who  have  gone  before  Him — are  they  not 
truly  great  ?  And  if  they  are,  what  has  become  of  His  saying  that  true  greatness 
lies  only  in  Him,  and  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  to  which  He  is  so  earnestly  summon- 
ing us  ?  "  To  this  question  Jesus  gave  answer  in  the  words  of  the  text.  Let  aa 
itudy  the  answer.     I.  It  is  a  question  which  belongs  not  to  tho  things  of  Christ, 


mix.  Til.]  ST.  LUKE.  «99 

nor  to  religions  things  alone.  All  life  suggests  it ;  for  in  all  life  there  are  two  ways 
of  estimating  the  probable  value  of  men — one  by  the  direct  perception  of  their 
characters,  the  other  by  the  institutions  to  which  they  belong,  and  the  privileges 
which  they  enjoy.  Sense  in  which  the  school-boy  of  to-day  is  greater  than 
Socrates.  The  two  elements  of  greatness — greatness  of  nature,  and  greatness  of 
circumstance.  They  are  distinct  from  one  another ;  they  do  not  make  each  other. 
II.  Christ  recognizes  the  two  elements  of  personal  greatness  and  lofty  condition, 
and  He  seems  almost  to  suggest  another  truth,  which  is  at  any  rate  familiar  to  our 
experience  of  life — that  personal  power  which  has  been  manifest  in  some  lower 
region  of  life  seems  sometimes  to  be  temporarily  lost  and  dimmed  with  the  advance 
of  the  person  who  possesses  it  into  a  higher  condition.  What  really  is  a  progress 
seems,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  involve  a  loss.  III.  In  ordinary  life  the  power  of  the 
temptation  to  be  satisfied  with  greatness  in  some  lower  sphere  and  not  to  aspire  to 
the  highest  sort  of  existence,  is  constantly  appearing.  IV.  See  bow  the  truth  of 
the  text  applies  to  the  explanation  and  understanding  of  a  true  and  noble  life  lived 
in  a  false  faith.  I  believe  that  this  is  the  simple  truth  which  a  good  many  puzzled 
people  among  us  need  to  know.  The  Christian,  with  his  unbelieving  friend  wbose 
daily  life,  so  pure,  upright,  and  honest,  shames  the  poor  half-discouraged  believer 
every  day — what  can  you  say  to  him  ?  1.  Bid  him  rejoice  that  his  Christ  can  and 
does  do  for  that  friend  of  his  so  much  even  when  that  friend  denies  Him.  2.  Bid 
him  see  that  if  that  friend  of  his  could  conscientiously  know  and  cordially  acknow- 
ledge the  Christ  who  is  doing  so  much  for  him  already,  he  would  give  that  Christ  a 
tshance  to  do  still  more  which  now  He  cannot  do.  3.  Let  him,  for  himself,  be  filled 
with  an  inspiring  shame  which  shall  make  him  determined  to  be  worthier  of  his 
higher  faith.  This  is  the  true  ministry  which  ought  to  come  to  any  Christian  from 
the  presence  of  a  man  who  believes  far  less  than  he  does,  and  is  a  far  better  man 
than  he  is.  V.  See  how  all  of  this  must  tell  upon  the  whole  idea  of  Christian 
missions.  There  may  have  been  a  time  when,  in  order  to  make  it  seem  right  for 
the  Christian  world  to  send  missionaries  to  the  heathen,  it  required  to  be  made 
out  that  all  heathen  virtue  was  a  falsehood  and  delusion.  That  day  is  past,  if  it 
ever  existed.  May  not  the  Christian  glory  in  every  outbreak  of  the  heathen's 
goodness  as  a  sign  of  the  power  with  which  his  Christ,  even  unknown,  may  fill  a 
human  life  which  in  the  very  darkness  of  its  ignorance  is  obedient  to  whatever  best 
spiritual  force  it  feels  ?  May  not  that  very  sight  reveal  to  him  what  that  aspiring 
heathenism  might  become  if  it  could  be  made  aware  of  the  Christ  whom  it  is  in  its 
nnconsoiousness  obeying  ?  May  he  not,  even  while  he  goes  out  to  tell  the  heathen 
his  completer  gospel,  be  filled  with  an  inspiring  shame  at  his  own  poor  use  and 
exhibition  of  that  gospel  which  he  offers  to  the  heathen  world  ?  This  is  the  true 
attitude  of  Christendom  to  paganism.  It  is  not  arrogant ;  it  brings  no  insult ;  it 
comes  like  brother  to  brother,  full  of  honour  for  the  nature  to  which  it  offers  the 
larger  knowledge  of  the  Father's  life.  To  such  brave  missionary  impulse  as  that 
let  us  be  sure  that  the  increase  of  rational  and  spiritual  Christianity  will  only  add 
ever  new  and  stronger  impulse  and  inspiration.  {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)  The 
judgment  of  Jestis  on  John  : — One  thing  clear  at  the  outset,  viz.,  that  the  comparison 
is  not  absolute,  but  relative  to  certain  aspects  under  which  the  parties  compared  are 
viewed ;  such  as  the  happiness  they  respectively  enjoy,  the  spirit  by  which  they 
are  respectively  animated,  or  the  nature  of  the  spiritual  movements  with  which 
they  are  respectively  identified.  Christ's  purpose  in  making  the  statement  was  not 
to  assist  the  people  to  take  full  and  accurate  measure  of  John's  genius  and 
character.  He  did  not  discuss  the  question  of  the  Baptist's  comparative  greatness 
in  the  spirit  in  which,  in  a  debating  society,  youths  might  discuss  the  question, 
Who  was  the  greater  man  and  general — Caesar  or  Napoleon  ?  He  was  concerned 
about  far  higher  matters.  His  anxiety  was  to  get  people  to  understand  the  spiritual 
phenomenon  of  their  time,  and  in  particular  to  form  true,  just,  and  wholesome 
opinions  concerning  the  religious  movements  with  which  John  and  Himself  were 
identified  respectively.  For  the  opinions  we  form  of  men  very  seriously  affect  our 
opinions  concerning  principles  and  movements.  Those  who  thought  too  much  of 
John  would  remain  with  him,  and  never  join  the  society  of  the  Christ  whose 
harbinger  he  was.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  thought  too  little  of  John  would 
think  just  as  little  of  Christ.  It  is  manifest,  then,  that  the  judgment  pronounced  is 
not  so  much  on  a  man  as  on  an  era.  It  is  a  judgment  on  the  law  given  by  Moses ; 
and  the  comparison  made  between  the  last  prophet  of  law  and  any  little  one  in  the 
kingdom  signifies  the  immense  inferiority  of  the  legal  economy  to  the  era  of  grace 
vrhioh  came  by  Jesus  Christ.     Paraphrased,  the  verse  means :  John,  the  last 


700  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  th, 

prophet  of  the  old  time,  was  a  great  prophet — none  greater.  No  one  who  went 
before  ever  did  better  justice  to  the  law  than  he ;  preached  it  with  more  power  and 
boldness,  embodied  it  in  a  more  upright,  blameless  life,  or  gained  for  its  claims 
more  widespread  and  respectful  attention.  Still,  with  all  that,  nay,  just  because 
he  is  a  hero  of  law,  John  is  a  weak,  one-sided  man.  What  he  has  is  good,  but  he 
wants  something  of  far  more  value,  something  which  puts  its  possessors  on  a 
different  platform  altogether  from  that  which  he  occupies,  insomuch  that  it  may  ba 
said  without  extravagance  that  those  who  possess  it,  though  immeasurably  infezior 
to  John  in  other  respects,  are  greater  than  he.  He  wants  the  spirit  of  the  new^ 
time,  of  the  era  of  the  better  hope.  Strong  in  zeal,  he  is  defective  in  love  ;  strong 
in  denunciation,  he  is  weak  in  patience  towards  the  sinful ;  strong  in  ascetio 
abstinence,  he  is  weak  in  the  social  and  sympathetic  affections ;  strong  as  the 
whirlwind,  the  earthquake,  and  the  fire,  he  is  weak  in  the  moral  influence  that 
comes  through  the  still  small  voice  of  a  meek  and  merciful  mind.  In  these 
respects,  any  one  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  animated  by  the  characteristic  spirit  of 
love  is  greater  than  he.  The  programme  of  Jesus  as  in  contrast  to  that  of  John 
might  be  summed  up  in  these  two  principles  : — 1.  Salvation  by  Divine  mercy,  not 
by  penance.  2.  New  life  by  regeneration,  not  by  reform.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.} 
Was  John  the  Baptist  not  in  the  Kingdom  f — He  was  outside  it  in  the  same  sense  in 
which  many  excellent  men  are  outside  the  visible  Church,  though  not,  thank  God, 
on  that  account  outside  the  invisible  Church.  In  former  times  he  had  proclaimed 
the  near  approach  of  the  kingdom,  but  at  this  moment  he  was  in  doubt  whether  either 
the  King  or  kingdom  had  come,  the  actual  characteristics  of  both  being  so  different 
from  what  he  had  expected.  In  this  sense  John  was  outside  the  kingdom :  he  was 
not  connected  with  it  as  a  visible  historical  movement  called  by  this  name.  The 
Kingdom  of  God  was  in  him,  in  his  heart,  in  his  thoughts  continually.  His  very 
message  of  doubting  inquiry  showed  this ;  for  his  was  a  case  in  which  there  was 
more  faith  in  honest  earnest  doubt  than  there  is  in  the  belief  of  many  men.  And 
in  what  he  said  Jesus  had  no  thought  of  calhng  in  question,  or  of  so  much  as 
hinting  a  suspicion,  as  to  John's  spiritual  state.  And  we  must  strive  in  this  respect 
to  imitate  our  Lord,  and  to  bear  in  mind  that  because  a  man  is  outside  the  visible 
Church  he  is  not  therefore  unsaved ;  that  there  may  be  many  who,  from  one  cause 
or  another,  are  alienated  from  the  visible  Church,  who  nevertheless  are  children 
of  God  and  citizens  of  His  kingdom,  though  in  many  respects  too  probably 
erring,  one-sided,  defective  men.  If  Christ  judged  John  leniently  and  chari- 
tably, how  much  more  should  we  abstain  from  judging  those  who  are  without 
and  full  of  prejudices  against  Christianity,  when  too  probably  the  blame 
of  their  prejudice  and  alienation  lies  at  our  own  door  I  Surely  this  is  a  very 
legitimate  lesson  to  draw  from  the  striking  saying  we  have  been  studying.  (Ibid.) 
Grace  is  better  than  power : — To  insist,  in  the  presence  of  a  successful  millionaire, 
or  a  triumphant  prince,  or  a  victorious  soldier,  or  a  medalled  artist,  that  the  veriest 
infant  in  the  class  of  a  Sunday-school,  who  has  intelligently  learned  the  articulate 
language  of  love  to  the  Saviour,  is  better  than  he,  is  a  brave  thing  to  do,  of  course. 
But  whether  the  courage  will  be  rewarded  with  any  prosperity  in  making  him 
believe  it,  is  quite  another  consideration.  It  is  power  that  most  men  are  seeking,  and 
not  grace.  And  it  is  a  pity  that  they  do  not  all  get  either,  even  after  the  seeking. 
Think  of  the  unfortunate  architecture  of  Cologne  CathedraL  The  pile  of  stone 
has  stood  through  the  ages  incomplete;  just  now  it  has  at  last  been  finished.  But — 
most  singular  fate  of  genius — nobody  on  all  this  earth  knows  at  the  dedication 
who  drew  the  early  plans  for  the  building,  or  whose  is  the  fame  of  its  beauty. 
John  Keats  left  for  his  tombstone  in  Kome  the  somewhat  violent  epitaph  :  "  Here 
lies  one  whose  name  was  writ  in  water ! "  Alas  1  cannot  we  hope  that  it  was 
written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of  Life?  It  is  exceedingly  interesting  to  find  the 
jealous  Turner's  beautiful  landscapes  between  the  two  Claudes  in  the  British 
Gallery ;  for  we  are  glad  to  know  neither  of  the  great  canvasses  suffered  from  the 
comparison.  But  then  who  can  help  putting  the  tranquil  inquiry.  What  difference 
does  it  make  to  those  painters  now  which  of  them  is  considered  the  better  artist  7 
And  where  is  Turner  to-day,  and  where  is  Claude  Lorraine  also?  For  grace  settles 
the  long  mysterious  future ;  and  gift  is  not  grace.  Socrates  was  a  great  man ;  but  some 
say  he  sold  his  wife  at  a  price.  Alexander  was  a  great  monarch ;  but  he  died  in  a 
drunken  debauch.  Lord  Byron  was  a  great  man ;  but  his  statue  at  Trinity  College 
has  on  its  front  look  the  divinity  of  a  genius,  and  on  its  profile  one  side  is  the  leer  of 
a  lecher.  It  would  be  useless  to  deny  that  these  famous  people  had  power  ;  but 
grace  is  better  than  power     (c.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)        The  smallest  diamond  it 


CHAP,  vii.]  8T.  LUKE.  701 

made  of  more  precious  substance  than  the  largest  flint.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
The  greatness  of  the  Baptist : — In  John  x.  41  it  is  stated  that  "  John  did  no 
miracle,"  and  to  some  this  may  seem  inconsistent  with  what  our  Lord  here  declared 
concerning  him.  Mightiness  indeed  is  reckoned,  and  very  justly  reckoned,  a 
considerable  element  of  a  prophet's  greatness.  Let  us,  then,  consider  how  John 
the  Baptist  deserves  the  title  of  the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  in  spite  of  his  having 
never  wrought  a  miracle.  1.  It  is  a  greater  thing  to  exercise  a  wide  moral  and 
spiritual  influence  upon  our  generation,  than  to  work  a  miracle  before  their  eyes. 
To  work  a  miracle  is  to  exhibit  power  over  matter ;  to  exercise  a  wide  moral  and 
spiritual  influence  is  to  exhibit  a  power  over  mind.  To  be  made  the  means,  in 
God's  hand,  of  swaying  the  human  will,  curbing  the  unruly  human  passions, 
arousing  the  human  conscience  to  wholesome  alarms  and  sincere  inquiries  after 
the  way  of  salvation,  is  a  higher  distinction  than  to  be  made  the  means  of  reversing 
nature's  laws,  or  restraining  the  fury  of  the  elements,  or  calling  forth  the  tenants 
of  the  sepulchre  from  their  dreary  abode.  2.  It  is  partly,  I  conceive,  in  his  very 
lack  of  miraculous  power,  that  the  grandeur  of  John  the  Baptist  as  a  prophet 
consists.  Without  the  aid  of  miracles  to  give  effect  to  his  words  he  wrought  a 
national  reformation.  Without  supernatural  resources  he  accomplished  what  other 
prophets  were  only  able  to  effect  with  their  aid.  3.  John  Baptist's  magnanimity 
is  another  feature  which  enhances  his  greatness  as  a  prophet.  He  sinks  self,  that 
he  may  exalt  Christ.  4.  Another  element  in  his  greatness  is  the  relation  in  which 
he  stood  to  Christ  as  His  forerunner,  and  the  opportunity  which  it  afforded  him 
of  bearing  testimony  to  the  person  of  our  Lord.  Concluding  lessons :  1.  Learn  to 
estimate  aright,  and  not  by  the  world's  standard,  the  true  greatness  of  man. 
2.  The  testimony  of  Christ  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy.     {Dean  Goulbum.) 

Ver.  30.  Rejected  the  comiBel  of  Gtod  against  themselves. — The  rejection  of  the 
counsel  of  God  by  the  Pharisees : — There  they  stood  on  the  banks  of  Jordan,  self- 
complacency  written  on  their  countenances,  the  calm  peace  of  death  upon  their 
hearts ;  whispering  to  one  another  as  they  heard  the  fervid  words  of  the  preacher, 
♦•  Never  mind ;  you  and  I  know  better  than  that ;  we  are  not  to  allow  ourselves  to 
be  carried  away  by  this  hot-headed  enthusiast ;  we  are  too  intelligent  people  for 
that ;  we  are  educated  people ;  we  have  a  certain  refinement  which,  of  itself, 
precludes  our  being  so  influenced.  That  is  not  the  man  for  us  ;  we  will  go  back  to 
our  synagogue.  I  like  to  hear  the  calm,  quiet  exposition  which  Babbi  So-and-so 
gives  of  the  Book  of  the  Law ;  it  is  very  interesting  to  listen  to  him,  but  this 
enthusiastic  fanatic  does  ns  no  good  :  come  away,  come  away;  we  have  had  enough. 
He  calls  us  'a  generation  of  vipers.'  You  cannot  listen  to  a  man  that  insults  you." 
*'  But  the  Pharisees  and  the  lawyers  rejected,"  &c.  Yes,  and  that  very  moment 
"  the  axe  was  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree."  Yet  another  moment,  and  that  axe 
should  be  lifted  up  by  the  hand  of  Divine  judgment ;  a  few  short  moment!  more, 
and  that  stroke  should  fall ;  only  a  few  years  were  to  pass  over  their  heads,  and 
the  city  they  gloried  in,  and  the  temple  they  prided  themselves  about,  were  to  lie 
strewn  along  the  dust.  Their  name  was  to  be  obliterated  from  the  roll  of  the 
nations  of  the  earth ;  their  national  existence  was  to  be  trampled  upon ;  their 
streets  were  to  be  drenched  with  blood  ;  they  themselves,  as  a  den  of  robbers  or  a 
gang  of  murderers,  were  to  be  crucified  round  the  wall  of  their  own  city,  or  dragged 
into  captivity  to  adorn  the  triumphs  of  a  foreign  conqueror.  All  this  was  already 
in  store;  the  edge  of  the  axe  was  already  sharp,  and  the  hand  of  justice  was 
already  grasping  it ;  and,  all  the  while,  these  poor  self-complacent  men  were  flattering 
themselves  that  the  message  was  not  for  them.  "  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father ; 
we  are  the  children  of  privilege ;  what  have  we  to  fear  ?  "  And  so  they  slept  their 
sleep  ;  and  so  they  "  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against  their  own  souls,"  There 
are  plenty  of  Pharisees  in  our  own  day,  and  they  are  just  as  true  to  the  instincts  of 
their  own  life  as  were  the  Pharisees  of  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  What  was  the 
characteristic  of  these  Pharisees  ?  Self-complacency.  They  were  satisfied  with 
themselves.  They  had  not  yet  found  out  "the  plague  of  their  own  hearts." 
W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.) 

Vers.  31-34.  Wherennto  then  shall  I  Uken  th*  men  of  this  generation. — The 
Baptist  and  Christ : — In  the  metaphor  of  the  reed  shaking  in  the  wind,  we  traced 
that  close  observation  of  nature  which  enabled  Christ  to  interpret  so  much  of 
bmnan  life  to  man.  In  the  similitude  He  uses  here  we  trace  His  close  observation 
of  the  ordinary  aspects  of  human  life,  and  the  use  which  He  made  of  them  to 


702  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th. 

interpret  to  men  His  own  thoughts,  and  the  times  in  which  He  lived.  Every  one 
knows  from  pictures,  from  descriptions,  the  general  appearance  of  the  market-place 
of  an  Eastern  town.  One  may  image  the  quiet  figure  of  Christ  moving  through 
the  throng,  enjoying  its  humours,  with  now  a  gentle  smile,  and  now  an  inexplicable 
sadness  on  His  face,  as  if  all  things  spoke  to  Him  of  far-off  analogies.  One  sight 
He  often  saw — the  children  at  play  in  the  unoccupied  spaces  and  comers  of  the 
markets.  They  had  their  games  in  and  out  among  the  serious  doing  of  the 
place,  and  one  of  these  games  is  often  spoken  of  in  Eastern  tales.  It  is  the  acting 
of  childish  dramas  which  the  children  themselves  invent.  Often  three  or  four 
exhibit  their  little  talents  for  the  rest,  while  now  and  then  a  bearded  man  or  a 
veiled  woman  loiter  by  to  watch  the  sport.  Sometimes  the  invented  story  is 
sportive,  sometimes  sorrowful,  and  the  acting  of  them  is  good  or  bad,  according  to 
the  sympathy  given  to  the  children.  One  such  scene,  at  least,  remained  vividly  ia 
EHs  mind  (and  He  uses  it  with  astonishing  force),  when  the  little  band  of  actors, 
having  tried  to  win  the  favour  of  their  comrades  with  tiny  tragedy,  and  then  with 
tiny  comedy,  failed  in  their  hopes,  and  said,  "We  have  piped  unto  you,  and  ye  have 
not  danced  ;  we  have  mourned  to  you,  and  ye  have  not  wept."  In  this  slight  scene 
Christ  saw  a  picture  of  the  religious  state  of  Palestine.  There  was  no  moral  depth 
in  that  society,  no  vital  strength  to  carry  out  in  a  life  the  wavering  feelings  of 
repentance.  At  first  they  tried  the  Baptist,  but  they  soon  had  enoufjh  of  that 
resolute  teaching.  They  turned  away  with  indignation,  and  said,  "  He  hath  a 
devil."  They  were  mourned  unto,  and  they  had  not  lamented.  All  the  same,  they 
could  not  get  rid  of  the  religious  impulse  in  their  hearts.  It  seemed  that  Christ 
required  no  ascetic  life,  that  He  did  not  wish  them  to  separate  themselves  from  the 
world.  •'  This  is  the  teacher  for  us,"  they  said,  and  they  sought  EUm  out  and 
followed  Him,  "  We  will  dance  to  His  piping,"  was  their  thought,  "  and  possess  a 
religion."  But  the  result  was  a  still  more  complete  failure.  1.  The  religion  of  the 
Baptist  had  been  too  hard  for  them  because  of  its  stern  morality.  It  demanded 
outward  purity.  "  We  shall  be  better  off  with  Christ,"  they  thought.  And  they 
found  themselves  worse  off  than  before.  It  was  bad  enough  to  hear  that  the  whole 
of  the  outward  life  had  to  be  reformed ;  it  was  ten  times  worse  to  hear  that 
the  inward  life  had  to  be  reformed.  2.  The  religion  of  the  Baptist  had  been 
too  hard  for  them  because  of  its  demand  for  self-sacrifice.  Ajid  lo  1  Christ 
was  ten  times  more  severe  on  this  point  than  John.  They  turned  away  in 
wrath,  but  the  little  grain  of  conscience  that  still  remained  made  them  bitter. 
To  relieve  their  conscience,  they  turned  to  abuse  and  vilify  Him  who  had 
shown  them  a  vision  they  could  not  bear.  If  they  could  put  Him  in  the 
wrong,  they  might  put  themselves  in  the  right.  "  Behold,  then,  a  gluttonous 
man,"  &c.  They  were  piped  unto,  and  they  had  not  danced.  There  is  much 
the  same  sort  of  thing  among  men  now.  3.  Another  class  of  men  turned  from 
the  Baptist  to  look  at  the  religion  of  Christ — the  religious  leaders  of  the  day, 
the  Pharisees.  These  drifted  out  to  John  in  the  wilderness  ;  the  wave  of  religious 
excitement  had  sent  its  tide  even  into  their  land-locked  harbours ;  one  wonders 
what  took  these  models  of  piety  to  John.  He  could  not  understand  it ;  his 
astonishment  was  frank  enough.  '*  Who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come  ?  "  When  they  found  that  John  did  not  pay  them  more  attention  than  the 
rest,  when  they  saw  that  he  talked  with  the  pubhcan  as  he  did  with  them,  they 
turned  back,  saying,  "  He  hath  a  devil."  So  the  hypocrites  among  them  thought 
they  would  hear  what  Christ  had  to  say.  He  might  do  them  more  honour.  He 
might  recognize  their  proud  position  as  leaders  of  religion.  But  alas  1  they  were 
disappointed.  I  suppose  no  sharper  or  more  indignant  language  was  ever  used  by 
man  against  other  men  than  the  words  with  which  Christ  denounced  them.  As  to 
the  other  class  of  Pharisees  who  were  pious  bigots,  they  found  in  Christ  all  that 
they  had  disliked  in  John  multiplied  tenfold.  He  would  have  nothing  to  do  with 
them  unless  they  came  to  Him  and  humbly  confessed  themselves  sinners.  Not 
among  their  ranks,  but  among  unlearned  fishermen  and  villagers  He  chose  Hia 
special  followers.  He  dined  with  the  publicans  ;  even  at  one  of  their  houses  He 
admitted  the  sinful  woman  to  salvation.  It  was  more  than  could  be  borne.  This 
was  music  no  man  could  dance  to.  There  are  men  of  this  sort  at  this  time  among 
us.  (Stovford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.)  Children  at  play  : — (To  children.)  The  ohildrea 
of  two  thousand  years  ago  were  very  like  the  children  of  to-day,  even  in  their 
sports.  Then,  as  now,  when  a  number  of  children  came  together,  and  especially 
when  they  came  together  out  of  doors,  they  found  it  impossible  to  sit  stiU  or  stand 
«till.    Whatever  the  game  at  which  they  played,  there  was  pretty  sore  to  be  soma 


WUP.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  703 

mimicry  in  it,  some  quaint  imitation  or  comic  burlesque  of  what  they  had  seen 
their  elders  do.  Now  it  happened  one  day  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  He  passed 
through  the  streets  and  bazaars  of  a  Galilean  town,  came  on  a  number  of  children 
who  were  thus  employed.  They  played  first  at  a  wedding,  and  then  at  a  funeral. 
And  we  cannot  wonder  that  they  chose  these  two  ceremonies  for  imitation.  For  a 
Jettish  wedding  was  then,  as  to  this  day  an  Eastern  wedding  is,  a  very  gay 
spectacle,  sure  to  seize  the  fancy  of  children.  The  bridegroom  and  the  young 
men  who  accompanied  him  were  tricked  out  in  their  best  and  brightest  robes  ;  and 
they  went  in  public  procession,  with  music  and  with  perfumes  floating  in  the  air, 
to  fetch  the  bride  to  her  new  home.  For  many  days  after  the  wedding  open  house 
was  kept.  There  was  much  mirth  and  feasting.  The  friends  of  the  wedded  pair 
went,  with  trains  of  their  kinsfolk  and  servants,  to  carry  them  their  presents,  or  to 
pay  calls  of  ceremony  and  congratulation.  The  whole  town  was  alive  with  music 
and  dancing  and  feasting;  and  in  the  streets  gay  companies  were  continually 
passing  to  and  fro.  That  was  thought  a  very  poor  marriage,  the  festivities  of  which 
were  not  kept  up  for  at  least  a  week.  So,  again,  a  Jewish  funeral  must  have  been  a 
very  striking  and  dramatic  spectacle  to  children.  The  body  was  carried  by  on  an  open 
bier,  so  that  all  could  see  it.  And  not  only  did  the  kinsfolk  and  friends  of  the  dead 
man  follow  him  to  the  grave  with  the  most  extravagant  expressions  of  grief ;  but 
they  were  foolish  enough  to  hire  professional  mourners,  who  tore  their  hair,  and 
beat  their  breasts,  and  raised  a  keen  cry  or  wail.  Now  children  who  saw  these  sad 
processions  constantly  going  about  the  streets  could  not  fail  to  be  impressed  by  the 
dramatic  features  of  the  scene,  and  were  likely  enough  to  imitate  and  burlesque  it 
in  their  play.  That  was  what  the  children  whom  Jesus  watched  had  been  doing. 
First  they  had  said,  "  Let's  play  at  marrying ! "  And  then  the  more  forward 
and  lively  children  of  the  company  began  to  march,  and  to  move  their  fingers  up  and 
down  as  if  they  were  stopping  and  unstopping  the  holes  of  a  flute.  One  of  them, 
no  doubt,  was  chosen  to  personate  the  bridegroom,  and  others  to  stand  for  the 
•'  sons  of  the  bridechamber,"  i.e.,  the  young  men  who  accompanied  him;  and  off 
they  started,  as  though  to  fetch  the  bride  home,  expecting  that  the  rest  of  the 
children  would  follow,  dancing  and  shouting,  and  pretending  to  carry  torches.  But 
those  who  should  have  filled  this  part  declined  to  fill  it.  They  were  sulky,  and 
would  not  play  at  this  game.  And  so  the  cheerful  children  had  to  say  to  the  sulky 
ones,  "  Why,  what's  the  matter  ?  We  fluted  to  you,  and  you  did  not  dance."  Then 
they  thought  they  would  try  another  game.  Perhaps  the  first  was  too  lively.  And 
so  tiiey  say,  "  Let's  play  at  burying  1  "  And  off  they  go  like  bearers  of  the  bier,  or 
like  the  hired  mourners,  walking  with  folded  hands  and  downcast  heads,  but  every 
now  and  then  flinging  up  their  heads,  and  howling.  Oh,  so  dreadfully.  But  their 
companions  won't  play.  This  game  does  not  suit  them  either.  For,  again,  the 
first  place  is  not  assigned  to  them.  And  so,  the  livelier,  the  merry,  good-tempered 
children  have  to  turn  upon  them  again,  and  say,  "  Whatever  is  the  matter  with  you 
to-day  ?  We  wailed,  and  ye  did  not  beat  your  breasts."  Now  if  these  children  had 
known  that  Jesus  was  watching  them ;  if,  moreover,  they  had  known  how  kind  and 
good  He  was,  do  you  think  that  any  of  them  would  have  turned  sulky  and  refused 
to  play  ?  It  will  do  much  to  make  you  and  those  about  you  happy  if  you  will 
learn  to  play  in  the  right  spirit.  But  this  is  not  the  only  or  the  best  lesson  which 
Christ  has  made  these  children  teach  us.  He  told  the  men  who  were  listening  to 
Him  that  they  were  like  those  children  in  their  treatment  of  John  the  Baptist  and 
Himself.  "  The  fault,"  He  said,  "is  in  you,  not  in  the  Baptist  or  the  Son  of  Man." 
We  are  to  show  the  very  opposite  spirit.  Instead  of  hating  the  truth,  and  refusing 
to  listen  to  it,  wherever  or  however  God  speaks  to  us,  we  are  to  love  the  truth,  and 
to  welcome  it,  whatever  the  form  or  the  tone  it  takes.  Put  yourselves  to  this  test : 
"  Am  I  really  trying  to  do  God's  will  and  to  love  it,  as  Jesus  did  ?  Whether  I 
work  or  play,  do  I  try  to  show  the  kindly,  unselfish,  cheerful  temper  which  He 
approves?"      (S.   Cox,  D.I),)  On  tlie  impossibility  of  pleasing  everybody: — 

Explain  the  phrases,  "children";  "market-place"  ;  "piped  unto  you"  ;  "mourned 
unto  you."    Learn — I.  The  gospel  is  sent  only  to  sinners.     II.  It  is  kioht  to 

OSB    VABIOUS    MEANS   TO   BBINQ    MEN    UNDER   THE    POWER   OF   THE    GOSPEL.     Look  at  the 

difference  between  the  ministry  of  Jesus  and  that  of  John.     III.  In  the  C8«  op 

THESE  means  IT  WILL  BE  IMPOSSIBLE  TO  PLEASE  EVERYBODY.      Johu  WaS  a  rcclui^e,  and 

they  said  be  h»d  a  devil.  Jesus  came  eating  and  drinking,  and  they  said,  "  Behold  a 
gluttonous  man,"  <feo.  IV.  All  true  preachers  of  the  gospel  may  expect  opposition. 
V.  Nevertheless,  we  must  not  cease  declaring  the  truth.  (A.  F.  Barfield.) 
Transition  periods : — This  little  picture  of  children's  plays,  which  Jesus  gives  us,  ia 


704  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Yn. 

an  illustration  of  the  illogical  objections  made  against  the  truth,  and  shows  cs 
many  things.  1.  It  shows  us  how  uniform  are  the  tendencies  of  human  nature  in 
all  ages  and  times.  Jesus,  passing  through  the  market  of  Nazareth,  or  Cana,  saw 
the  children  playing  their  games,  just  as  children  play  them  now.  The  little  Syriaa 
boys  and  girls  belonging  to  the  great  Semitic  race,  living  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago,  amid  Asiatic  customs  and  scenery,  were  just  such  little  children  as  you  and  I 
saw  playing  on  the  common  yesterday.  They  played  games,  imitating  the  customs 
of  grown  people  ;  just  as  little  children  now  play  soldiers,  play  horse  and  driver,  so 
they  then  played  weddings  and  funerals.  2.  It  shows  us  Christ's  habit  of  taking 
illustrations  from  everyday  life.  In  His  teachings  there  is  nothing  conventional, 
nothing  formal.  No  fact  in  God's  world  is  to  Him  common  or  unclean,  it.  It  also 
shows  how  much  easier  it  is  for  good  men,  though  differing  in  ideas,  tastes,  and 
methods,  to  agree  in  a  mutual  r«spect  and  sympathy,  than  for  self-willed  men  to 
form  any  permanent  union.  No  two  were  more  unlike  than  Jesus  and  John  ;  but 
they  had  a  common  aim.  It  was  to  do  God's  will ;  to  make  the  world  better.  So 
they  had  a  mutual  respect  for  each  other.  There  was  a  real  union  between  them. 
John  made  the  turning-point  from  the  law  to  the  gospel  ;  his  was  the  transition 
period,  within  sight  of  the  gospel,  yet  with  the  terror  of  the  law  behind  it.  Such  & 
transition  period  has  continued  in  the  Church  down  to  our  time.  Perhaps  the 
majority  of  Christians  are  now  living,  not  under  the  dominion  of  law,  nor  yet  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  but  in  the  dispensation  of  John  the  Baptist.  But  half-way  con- 
victions are  not  very  satisfactory,  and  the  remedy  for  this  evil  is  to  put  both  the  law 
and  the  gospel  in  their  right  place.  We  cannot  dispense  with  either,  but  we  wish  ta 
distinguish  between  their  sphere  and  their  work.  {James  Freeman  Clarke.} 
Fickleness  and  folly  in  dialing  with  religion  and  its  professors  and  teachers  : — I. 
The  contrabiety  between  the  conduct  of  Christ  and  that  of  John,  as  d£Scbib£0 
in  the  text,  was  rendered  necessary  by  the  differing  standpoints  and  missionft 
OF  EACH.  These  descriptions — "  neither  eating  bread  nor  drinking  wine,"  and  "  eat- 
ing and  drinking  " — are  particular  features,  put  for  general  character  and  conduct. 
John's  abstemiousness  and  austerity  befitted  him  as  the  last  prophet  of  the  Old 
Dispensation.  Christ  had  come  to  establish  a  new  order  of  things,  to  substitute  for 
the  bondage  of  the  law  the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  to  insist  on  inward  purity  as  of  in- 
finitely greater  importance  than  outward  observance.  Specifically  his  eating  and 
drinking  meant— 1.  His  oneness  with  humanity.  2.  The  sacredness  of  common 
life  and  occupations.  3.  That  the  natural  appetites  are  to  be  reasonably  and  legiti- 
mately satisfied,  not  trampled  upon.  4.  That  religion  has  its  social  side.  5.  That 
it  is  possible  to  be  in  the  world  while  not  of  it.  II.  The  people,  with  theib  leaders, 

HOT    RECOGNIZmO    THAT    THIS    DIVERGENCE   WAS    FITTING    AND    NECESSARY,   MI8JODGEl> 

BOTH  Christ  and  John.  The  really  austere  life  of  John  was  a  reproach  to  the 
pretended  austerity  of  the  Pharisees,  whilst  the  immaculate  purity  of  Him  who 
could  yet  suffer  His  feet  to  be  washed  by  the  tears  of  the  woman  who  was  a  sinner 
rebuked  alike  their  uncharitableness  and  their  hypocrisy.  Hence,  not  being  will- 
ing to  repent  at  the  call  of  John,  or  to  Liumble  themselves  at  the  command  of  Christ, 
they  must,  to  be  consistent  in  their  hypocrisy,  condemn  alike  Christ  and  John — 
pronounce  them  to  be  either  immoral  in  Ufe,  or  endued  with  power  from  below. 
But  the  point  in  which  they  most  pointedly  warn  us  not  to  copy  their  example 
is  here — that  they  formed  their  judgments  upon  grounds  so  insufficient.  Learn  the 
danger  of  hasty  judgments— 1.  As  regards  the  person  judged.  2.  Others,  who 
might  be  benefited  by  him.    3.  Ourselves.     Prejudices  hide  the  truth.    III.  The 

TEXT  SHOWS  HOW  EASY  IT  WAS  FOB  THE  MEN  OF  ChRIST'S  DAT,  AS  IT  IS  FOR  US,  TO  FIND  AN 

EXCUSE  WHEN  ONE  IS  WANTED.  How  did  the  Pharisees,  feeling  conscious  that  they 
were  wrong,  excuse  themselves  the  trouble  of  putting  themselves  right  ?  They 
adopted  the  plan  which  is  said  sometimes  to  be  resorted  to  by  legal  pleaders  :  "  If 
you  have  a  weak  case,  blacken  your  opponent's  counsel."  How  true  a  picture  of  the 
way  in  which  men  generally  treat  unpalatable  truth  !  Note  some  of  the  flimaj 
grounds  on  which  many  reject  Christianity,  or  refuse  to  make  a  Christian  profes 
sion,  e.g.,  difficulties  in  the  Bible  ;  inconsistency  in  professing  Christians.  (J.  R. 
Bailey.)  The  sanctity  of  the  common  life  :— 1.  Poverty  the  common  lot.  2.  The 
happy  endurance  of  poverty  rare.  The  secret  of  its  trust.  3.  Besides  these  sweet 
virtues  of  resignation,  trust  and  contentment,  there  is  another  which  seemq  to  me 
to  become  rarer  and  rarer — cheerfulness.  Our  age  is  not  only  perplexed  but  sad. 
There  is  not  enough  of  enthusiasm  and  unselfishness  left  among  us  for  hearty  and 
wholesome  laughter.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  The  use  of  the  world  : — Christian, 
■ell-aaorifiee  is  not  asceticism.     The  idea  of  the  essential  badness  of  pleasure  ha» 


aup.  vrx.]  8T.  LTJKE.  70j> 

been  very  cominonly  held  and  advocated  by  the  propounders  of  pthical  and  religions 
systems.  Even  Plato  says  that  every  pleasure  enjoyed  is  as  a  nail  fastening  the  soul 
more  securely  in  its  dungeon ;  every  pleasure  given  up  a  nail  withdrawn,  and  hastens 
on  the  period  of  its  release.  Like  many  other  views  which  find  no  warranty  in  the 
Christianity  of  Olirist,  it  has  had  a  considerable  influence  upon  the  Christianity  of 
Christendom.  The  pillar  saints,  e.g.  If  pleasure  were  essentially  sinful,  Stylitea 
was  the  wisest  of  men.  This  not  the  kind  of  self-denial  which  Christ  requires 
from  us.  Serious  and  earnest  as  He  was,  no  one  can  say  that  He  was  a  harsh  or 
gloomy  ascetic.  Think  of  Him  at  the  marriage-festival.  Think  of  His  friendly 
visits  to  the  family  at  Bethany.  Think  of  Him  at  the  great  feast  in  Levi's  house. 
Think  of  His  final  interview  with  the  disciples  on  the  shore  of  Tiberias,  when  He 
accosted  them  with  the  words,  "Children,  have  ye  any  meat?  "  and  then,  leading  the 
way  to  a  fire,  "  with  fish  laid  thereon  and  bread,"  said  to  them,  "  come  and  dine." 
Christ  never  bids  us  give  up  anything  that  is  good,  unless  it  would  keep  us  from 
something  that  is  better.  "  The  Son  of  man  came  eating  and  drinking."  Ay,  the 
very  Man  of  Sorrows  refused  to  join  in  the  irrational  worship  of  pain.  {A.  W. 
Momerie,  M.A.,  D.Sc.)  The  Son  of  man: — This  title  is  in  the  New  Testament 
significantly  enough  used,  with  one  exception  [Stephen],  by  Christ  alone.  It 
emphasizes  the  humanity  of  Him  who  bears  it,  but  a  humanity  that  accomplishes 
a  Divine  work,  creates  and  controls  a  society  which  is  so  finely  human  because  so 
entirely  a  realization  of  the  thought  or  mind  of  God  as  to  man.  Schleiermacher 
rightly  said  :  "  Christ  would  not  have  adopted  this  title  had  He  not  been  conscious 
of  a  complete  participation  in  human  nature.  But  His  use  of  it  would  have  been 
meaningless  had  He  not  had  a  right  to  it  which  other  men  could  not  possess." 
The  Son  of  man  is  the  bond  between  earth  and  heaven,  belongs  in  an  equal  degree 
to  both;  He  is  the  medium  through  which  God  reaches  man  and  man  reaches  God. 
The  title,  so  often  and  so  emphatically  used,  enables  us  to  see  what  Christ  conceived 
Himself  to  be,  and  where  He  believed  Himself  to  stand  ;  He  affirmed  that  He  pos- 
sessed our  common  human  nature.  But  He  also  affirmed  His  pre-eminence — "  The 
Son  of  man."  Other  persons  had  been,  or  were,  sons  of  individual  men,  members 
of  particular  nations  or  families  ;  bat  Jesus,  as  "the  Son  of  man,"  was  no  man's 
son,  but  the  child  of  humanity  ;  belonged  to  no  age,  but  to  all  ages  ;  to  no  family 
or  people,  but  to  mankind.  He  is,  as  the  Divine  idea  realized,  universal  and  ever- 
lasting, an  individual  who  is,  in  a  sense,  humanity.  {A.  M.  Fairbaim,  D.D.) 
Divine  friendship  : — In  the  Bible  Christ  is  presented  to  us  in  many  aspects — as  a 
Judge,  a  Saviour,  a  Counsellor  ;  as  Brother,  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  In  this 
passage  He  stands  forth  in  the  light  and  garb  of  a  Friend.  I  do  not  intend  to 
analyse  friendship,  and  enumerate  its  elements.  I  will  only  suggest  one  or  two  of 
the  more  prominent.  I.  Constancy.  II.  Impaktialitt.  Not  a  friend  only  to  the 
good.  III.  Sympathy.  IV.  Thb  spiett  of  helpfulness.  Christ  was  the  friend  of 
those  who  were  morally  all  wrong.  It  is  to  those  whose  lives  have  been  a  failure, 
whose  natures,  spiritually  considered,  are  aU  in  ruins,  that  Jesus  comes  in  the  spirit 
of  friendly  assistance.  (IV.  H.  H.  Murray.)  Sinners  wilful  and  perverse: — I. 
The  companions  of  these  perverse  children  employed  various  means  to  conquer 

THEIR  OBSTINACY  AND  PERSUADE  THEM  TO  JOIN  IN  THEIR  AMUSEMENTS.  So  God  haS  em- 
ployed a  great  variety  of  means  to  persuade  sinners  to  embrace  the  gospel.  He  has 
sent  judgments  to  subdue,  and  mercies  to  melt  them  ;  arguments  to  convince,  and 
motives  to  persuade  them  ;  threatenings  to  terrify,  and  invitations  to  allure  them. 
In  different  parts  of  His  Word  He  has  exhibited  Divine  truth  in  every  possible 
variety  of  form.  In  one  place  it  is  presented  plainly  to  the  mind  in  the  form  of 
doctrines  ;  in  another,  it  is  couched  under  the  veil  of  some  instructive  and  striking 
parable  ;  in  a  third,  it  is  presented  to  us  in  a  garb  of  types  and  shadows  ;  in  a 
fourth,  it  is  illustrated  by  the  most  beautiful  figures  ;  and,  in  a  fifth,  exemplified  in 
some  well-drawn  character,  or  interesting  portion  of  history.  Corresponding  to 
these  various  means,  and  to  the  different  modes  of  instruction  adopted  in  His  Word, 
are  the  various  gifts  and  qualifications,  with  which  He  furnishes  those  who  are  sent 
as  His  ambassadors  to  men.  As  He  knows  the  different  tastes  and  dispositions  of 
men,  and  the  modes  of  address  best  adapted  to  convince  and  persuade  them.  He 
endues  His  messengers  with  a  great  diversity  of  gifts,  so  that  by  one  or  another  of 
them,  every  class  of  hearers  may  be  gratified.  II.  Notwithstanding  the  different 
means  employed  with  these  perverse  children,  they  would  not  be  prevailed  upon 
TO  comply  with  the  wishes  of  their  COMPANIONS.  We  have  piped  unto  you,  say 
they,  but  ye  have  not  danced  ;  we  have  mourned  unto  you,  but  ye  have  not 
lamented.      Precisely  similar  is  the  conduct  of  impenitent  sinners.      IH,  Tom 

45 


706  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nu 

REASON  WHY  THESB  PKBVEBSE  CHILDREN  C0T7LO  NOT  BE  PERSUADED  TO  COMPLY 
WITH  THE  WISHES  0»  THEIB  COMPANION,  WAS,  THAT  THEY  WERE  OUT  OF  HUMOUR, 
OR     FOR     SOME     OTHER     REASON     FELT     INDISPOSED     TO    ORATIPT    THEM.       Similar    is 

the  reason,  why  sinners  will  not  be  persuaded  to  embrace  the  Gospel,  by  all  the 
means  which  God  employs  for  this  purpose.  They  do  not  come  to  Christ  for  life, 
because  they  will  not.  {E.  Pay  son,  D.D.)  The  success  of  the  gospel: — I. 
Observe  God's  gracious  dealing  with  man.  He  useth  all  kind  of  means,  sendeth 
men  of  several  nature?,  austere  John,  and  meek  Christ.  He  turns  Himself  into  all 
shapes  to  gain  wretched  man  unto  Him.  II.  Observe  the  ordkb  God  useth  ;  first 
John,  then  Cheist.  John  prepares  the  way,  throwing  down  hills  :  "  0  ye  genera- 
tion of  vipers  "  (Matt.  iii.  7).  Oh,  say  they,  this  man  is  too  harsh,  I  think  he  hath 
a  devil.  Then  Christ  comes  with  blessed  :  "  Blessed  are  the  poor,  blessed  are  you 
that  weep,"  Ac.  (Matt.  v.  3,  seq.).  So  He  sent  the  law  first,  then  the  gospel ;  first 
He  threatens,  then  promises.  III.  Observe  that  the  manner  of  their  teaching  is 
double,  bt  doctrine  and  life,  and  these  agree,  wherein  observe  it  is  good  that  life 
and  doctrine  should  suit ;  for  John's  life  was  austere  and  retired,  his  doctrine  was 
also  tending  to  beat  down  the  proud  conceits  of  man.  Christ  came  to  all,  conversed 
with  aU  meekly  and  lovingly ;  and  the  reason  of  God's  making  use  of  men  of  severe  dis- 
positions is,  because  of  the  different  natures  of  men,  whereof  some  cau  better  relish 
one  nature  than  another.  Some  love  the  hot  and  fieiy  nature,  others  delight  in  the 
meek  spirit ;  and  though  there  be  diversity  of  gifts,  yet  they  come  from  the  same  Spirit. 
Even  as  the  diverse  smells  of  flowers  comes  from  the  same  influence,  and  the  diverse 
sounds  in  the  organs  comes  from  the  same  breath,  so  doth  the  Spirit  diffuse  itself 
diversely,  as  it  meets  with  diverse  natures.  Yet  all  tendeth  to  the  perfecting  of  one 
work.  And  the  papists  shall  never  be  able  to  prove  their  foolish  austere  vows  of  a 
solitary  life,  &c.,  to  be  preferred  before  communication  and  society,  unless  they  will 
prove  John  better  than  Christ.  And  again,  this  should  teach  us  to  moderate  our 
censures  of  the  diverse  natures  and  carriage  of  men,  as  knowing  that  God  in  wisdom 
hath  appointed  it  for  excellent  use,  and  that  all  agree  in  the  building  up  of  the 
spiritual  temple  of  the  Church.  IV.  Observe  that  where  grace  doth  not  over- 
power nature,  no  means  will  prevail  over  the  obdurate  nature  of  man.  Neither 
John  nor  Christ  could  work  anything  upon  these  Pharisees.  V.  In  the  next  place, 
observe,  from  the  calumniation  of  the  scribes,  that  rebellion  and  opposition 
AOAiNST  goodness  IS  NEVER  WITHOUT  SHOW  OF  REASON ;  and  men  they  will  never  go  to 
hell,  but  they  have  reason  for  it.  Austere  John  "  hath  a  devil "  ;  sociable  Christ 
"  is  a  wine-bibber."  And  the  reason  is,  the  pride  of  man,  that  will  not  be  thought 
so  foolish  as  to  speak,  or  do  anything  without  reason,  and  therefore  when  it  is  want- 
ing they  will  feign  one.  VL  For  use  therefore  of  this  doctrine,  let  us  account  it 
NO  strange  matter  if  we  be  traduced,  disgraced,  and  scandalised,  for  it  was 
Christ's  and  John's  lot.  Great  slanders  must  be  maintained  from  great  men,  such  as 
them  that  sit  in  Moses's  chair,  the  Pharisees  and  Scribes.    VII.  Let  us  take  heed 

WE  TAKE  NOT  A  THING  IN  THE  WRONO  SENSE  AND  OF  VAIN  PREJUDICE.    Men  are  witty  tO  lay 

stumbling-blocks  in  their  own  way  to  heaven.  This  preacher  is  too  strict,  that  too 
mild  ;  this  too  plain,  that  too  poor.  *»  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  all  her  children  " 
(ver.  35).  I.  From  the  connection  of  these  words  with  the  former,  by  this  word 
"  but,"  we  may  observe,  that  it  is  the  lot  of  God's  truth  to  have  diverse  enter- 
tainments IN  this  world.  Some  will  be  children  of  wisdom,  and  justify  it  ;  others, 
as  the  Pharisees,  will  scandalise  it.  This  is  wisdom  ;  and  called  so  here  by  way  of 
emphasis,  showing  it  is  the  only  excellent  wisdom,  which  will  further  appear  in 
these  respects.  1.  It  doth  arise  from  a  higher  beginning  than  all  other  wisdom 
whatever  ;  for  it  comes  from  God's  goodness  and  mercy.  2.  The  matter.  It  is  a 
deep  mystery.  Christ,  God-man  ;  His  nature,  offices,  and  benefits.  3.  It  is  more 
powerful  than  all  other  wisdom  ;  for  it  transforms  us.  It  makes  us  wise,  and 
changes  us  from  wicked,  and  makes  us  good.  4.  It  is  better  than  the  law,  which 
was  a  killing  letter.  This  gives  life.  5.  Furthermore,  this  wisdom  is  everlasting, 
and  it  is  ancientest :  intended  before  the  world  was.  It  is  also  inviolable.  God 
will  change  the  course  of  nature  for  His  Church's  sake  ;  and  sooner  will  He  break 
covenant  with  the  day  and  night  than  this  covenant,  which  shall  be  for  ever  (Psa. 
six.  9).  6.  The  end  of  it  is  "to  bring  us  home  to  God"  (1  John  i.  3),  1.  From 
the  doctrine  we  may  observe,  therefore,  that  those  that  follow  the  best  rule,  which 
is  God's  Word,  and  intend  the  best  end,  which  is  their  own  salvation,  these 
are  the  most  wise.  2.  And,  in  the  second  place,  let  this  persuade  us  to  attend 
upon  wisdom,  be  we  who  we  will  be,  a  publican,  an  extortioner,  a  persecuting 
Saul.     3.  In   the  next  place,  observe  the  children  of  wisdom  do  justify  i* , 


CHAJ.  vn.l  8T.  LUKE.  707 

thnt  is,  thej  receive  it,  approve  it,  defend  it,  maintain  it.  {R.  Sibben,  D.D.) 
On  profanenett  to  disparage  religious  characters : — I.  I  design,  in  the  first  place,  to 

EXPIiAIM  THIS  PASBAOE.      II.   HoW  SHAUi  WB  APPLT   TO  CUB  EDIFICATION   THE   LESSONS 

WHICH  THIS  PORTION  OF  HoLT  ScRiPTDBE  C0NVET8  ?  1.  Let  ua  considcr  it  as  a 
very  nnfavourable  symptom  of  the  state  of  our  hearts,  if  we  discover  in  ourselves 
a  propensity  to  cavil  at  religion ;  and  to  impute  blame  to  those  persons,  whether 
ministers  of  the  gospel  or  individuals  among  the  laity,  who,  by  holiness  of  life  and 
conversation,  conspicuously  demonstrate  the  power  of  faith.  2.  If,  through  the 
influence  of  Divine  grace,  you  have  been  brought  to  the  love  of  religion,  wonder 
not,  nor  be  discouraged,  when  you  hear  the  truths  of  the  gospel  slandered,  or  your- 
self made  the  theme  of  evil-speaking  for  tbeir  sake.  Thus  it  always  has  been ;  and 
thus,  until  Christianity  shall  have  established  a  more  general  dominion  over  the 
hearts  of  those  who  avow  themselves  her  subjects,  it  always  will  be.  3.  Justify 
wisdom,  justify  true  religion,  by  manifesting  yourselves  to  be  her  children.  4.  If  you 
thus  justify  wisdom,  behold  the  hour  approaches  when  before  the  assembled  world 
wisdom  shall  justify  you.  (T.  Gishome!)  Children  sitting  in  the  market-place  : — I. 
That  the  pbeachino  the  gospel  of  peace  and  reconciliation  to  sinners  mat 
FITLY  BE  compared  TO  SWEET  AND  souL-RAVisHiNQ  MUSIC.  1.  Musio  hath  its  dis- 
tinct notes,  and  that  makes  it  melodious ;  so  ministers  should  preach  distinctly,  not 
confusedly,  for  that  makes  no  music.  "  If  the  trumpet  gives  an  uncertain  sound, 
who  shall  prepare  to  the  battle  ?  "  (I  Cor.  xiv.  8.)  2.  He  that  would  make  sweet 
music,  must  not  harp  too  much  upon  one  string,  or  have  only  one  distinct  note. 
So  a  preacher  that  would  make  right  gospel-music,  must  not  always  preach  upon 
one  particular  gospel  truth.  3.  It  is  a  curious  art  to  attain  to  the  clear  knowledge 
of  music,  and  to  be  very  skilful,  or  play  well  upon  an  instrument.  So  it  is  a  most 
blessed  spiritual  art  to  know  how  to  preach  the  gospel  with  all  true  spiritual  wis- 
dom ;  for  as  music  is  a  mystery,  so  is  the  gospel  a  great  mystery.  4.  Some 
musicians  make  sweeter  music  than  others,  though  all  may  have  some  skill  in  it ; 
80  some  ministers  make  more  sweet  gospel  music  than  others.  5.  Music  elevates 
the  hearts  of  some  people  wonderfully  ;  so  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  tends  to  raise, 
nay,  to  ravish,  the  hearts  of  gracious  persons.  6.  But  though  musio  is  sweet  to 
some,  others  love  it  not,  but  cry,  "  Away  with  it,  it  makes  our  hearts  sad."    II.  That 

THOUGH  THE  MINISTERS  OF  ChRIST  DO  WHAT  THEY  CAN,  OB  STUDY  WHAT  WAYB  AND 
METHODS  THEY  CAN,  AND  LIVE  NEVER  80  CIRCUMSPECTLY,  YET  THEIR  PEB80NS  NOB 
THEIB  MINISTRY  SHALL  BE  ACCEPTED  OF  SOME  PEEVISH  AND  FBOWARD  PEOPLE.    (B.  Kcack.) 

Criticism  easy : — Nearly  everybody  has  heard  the  story  of  the  painter  of  olden 
time  who  exposed  his  picture  to  the  public  criticism,  and  put  a  paint-brush  handy, 
that  anybody  might  paint  out  any  particular  feature  he  did  not  approve.  Of 
course,  the  stupid  man  soon  found  that  everybody  had  some  fault  to  find,  and  his 
picture  was  totally  obliterated.  Just  as  it  was  with  that  artist's  picture,  so  it  ia 
with  the  life-work  of  the  majority.  Somebody  will  be  pretty  sure  to  take  a 
crooked  and  distorted  view  of  our  characters  and  doings,  however  meritorious  they 
may  be.  Some  will  do  this  wilfully  and  maliciously,  others  through  misunder- 
standing. Unfair  objections  are  often  prompted  by  selfishness : — Many  an  objector 
to  Christianity  in  oar  day,  if  he  said  out  what  he  really  thinks,  would  say,  "  I  dis- 
believe Christianity,  because  it  does  not  prophesy  good  concerning  me,  but  evil ;  it 
makes  such  serious  demands,  it  sets  up  so  high  a  standard,  it  implies  that  so  much 
I  say  and  do  is  a  great  mistake  that  I  muit  away  with  it.  I  cannot  do  and  be 
what  it  enjoins  without  doing  violence  to  my  inclinations,  to  my  fixed  habits  of 
life  and  thought."  This,  before  his  conversion,  was  the  case  with  the  great 
Augustine.  Augustine  tells  us  in  his  "  Confessions "  how  completely  he  was 
enchained  by  his  passions,  and  how,  after  he  had  become  intellectually  satisfied 
of  the  truth  of  the  creed  of  the  Christian  Church,  he  was  held  back  from  conver- 
sion  by  the  fear  that  he  would  have  to  give  up  so  muoh  to  which  he  was  attached. 
(Dr.  Talmage.) 

Ver.  35.  But  wisdom  Is  Justified  of  all  her  children. — Wisdom's  justification:-— 
We  trace  the  truth  and  the  applicability  of  this  saying — I.  In  the  different 
FIELDS  OF  PURELY  HUMAN  iNTEBESx  AND  STUDY.  Each  subject  that  engages  the 
attention  of  man  has  a  wisdom,  that  is  to  say,  governing  principles,  methods, 
modes  of  thought  and  inquiry — in  short,  a  philosophy  peculiar  to  its  own.  Those 
who  have  mastered  this  wisdom  even  in  part  are  prepared  for  results  which  are 
startling  or  absurd  in  the  eyes  of  others  who  are  strangers  to  it.  II.  In  xhb 
AEQioN  4  F  HUMAH  OHABACTKB.    That  which  enables  as  to  do  justice  to  chartoUr  is 


709  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [cha».  th, 

sympathy  with  it.  III.  Ik  beoabd  to  the  Christian  cbeed.  Here,  too,  it  is 
slear,  npon  reflection,  that  "  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  childien."  The  word 
'*  wisdom  "  in  our  Lord's  mouth  had  a  special  significance.  His  more  instructed 
hearers  would  recognize  in  it  an  ancient  and  cc-n-ecrated  word  (see  Prov.  viii.). 
This  Eternal  Wisdom,  born  of  a  virgin  in  the  fulness  of  time,  crucified,  bruised, 
risen,  ascended,  is  at  once  the  Teacher,  and  in  the  main  the  substance,  of  the 
Christian  creed.  Two  practical  lessons :  1.  Nothing  is  so  fatal  to  the  recognition 
of  moral  and  religious  truth  as  a  scornful  temper.  2.  Wisdom  may  and  roust  be 
won  by  prayer.  (Canon  Liddon.)  Wisdom  justified  of  her  children : — "  Justified  " 
means  acquitted,  recognized,  or  acknowledged.  "Of"  means  "by."  And  Christ 
Bays,  "  Wisdom  is  recognized  by  her  children."  The  wisdom  of  a  Divine  life  had 
appeared  in  two  forms— ascetic  in  John  the  Baptist,  social  in  Christ.  The  world 
recognized  it  in  neither.  In  John  they  said  it  was  insanity  ;  in  Christ  worldlinesa 
and  irreligion.  To  the  world  Christ  replies  that  they  were  incompetent  judges. 
None  could  recognize  the  Divine  life  but  those  who  lived  it ;  none  justify  wisdom 
except  her  children.  The  Divine  life  was  always  the  same,  but  it  expressed  itself 
outwardly  in  no  special  single  form  of  life.  Wisdom,  under  whatever  form  she 
might  appear — the  life  of  asceticism  or  the  life  social — would  be  justified  or 
recognized  by  her  children.  I.  The  tone  or  mind  which  capacitates  fob  judo- 
INO  HUMAN  chabacteb.  By  sympathy  alone  can  you  judge  of  character.  This  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  metaphor.  A  mother,  changing  her  garb,  may  be  mistaken  by 
strangers,  but  under  every  metamorphosis  she  is  recognized  by  her  children,  who 
know  her  voice  by  the  secret  tact  of  sympathy.  Would  you  judge  of  Christ? 
Feel  Christ.     "Learn   to  love  one  living  man."    II.  The  tone  of  mind  which 

incapacitates,  and    the    HINDEANCES   to   bight   judgment    of   H0MAN   CHABACTEB.       1. 

The  habit  of  insincere  praise  incapacitates  for  forming  a  right  judgment  of  charac- 
ter. During  the  life  of  Jesus  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  alike  flattered  Him. 
To  their  unreal  flatteries  He  returned  indignant  replies  :  "  Why  tempt  ye  Me,  ye 
hypocrites  ?  "  2.  A  light,  satirical,  and  irreverent  spirit  also  incapacitates.  See 
how  ribaldry  unfitted  them  for  judging,  and  how  even  a  Divine  character  could  be 
made  to  seem  ridiculous  1  That  such  cannot  judge  of  character  is  intelligible. 
One  reason  is— (1)  Because  excellence  of  character  is  not  shown  them ;  and 
another,  (2)  because  this  spirit  withers  all  it  touches.  3.  Jealousy  incapacitates 
for  forming  a  right  judgment.  The  scribes  were  jealous  of  Christ,  because  His 
teaching  was  on  a  principle  different  from  theirs ;  the  Pharisees,  because  His 
righteousness  was  of  a  different  stamp.  Joseph's  brethren,  Haman — examples  of 
jealousy.  (F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  Life's  gladness,  its  joy,  its  humour,  and  its 
mirth,  are  sometimes  stumbling-blocks  to  "  serious  "  people.  Wisdom's  children, 
in  the  main,  we  charitably  and  devoutly  hope  they  are,  but  none  the  less  we  see  in 
them  a  touch  and  trick  of  the  children  in  the  market-place.  There  is  a  foolish 
seriousness,  and  there  is  a  wise  mirth.  How  often  do  we  see  pathos  an^  humour, 
tears  and  laughter,  rapidly  following  each  other,  even  joining  and  blending  ia  the 
person  of  some  strong,  wise  man,  whom  we  can  both  respect  and  love ;  while  the 
stolid  people,  who  pride  themselves  upon  their  "  seriousness,"  too  dull  for  mirth, 
are  amongst  the  most  unlovable.  Eobert  HaU  was  conspicuous  for  the  blending 
in  his  fine  nature  of  the  pathos  and  humour  that  we  speak  of.  On  one  occasion, 
when  he  had  preached  a  most  solemn  and  pathetic  discourse,  and  was  followed  in 
the  evening  by  a  "serious"  brother,  when  the  day's  work  was  done,  he  was  as 
witty  as  he  was  wise,  mirthful  and  jocund,  and  the  cause  of  wit  in  others.  The 
"  serious  "  brother  at  length  remonstrated.  "  Mr.  Hall,  I  am  surprised  at  you,  sir, 
after  the  solemn  discourse  you  preached  this  morning,  that  you  should  trifle  as  you 
are  doing  now."  "Are  you,  sir,"  replied  Mr .  Hall ;  "shall  I  tell  yon  the  differ- 
ence between  you  and  me,  sir  ?  You  talk  your  nonsense  in  the  pulpit,  I  talk  mine 
out  of  it."  A  bit  of  sound  philosophy  I  for  the  bent  spring  when  released  will 
recoil,  and  where  the  mind  of  a  man  has  been  wrought  up  to  the  highest  tension, 
the  reaction,  by  God's  great  mercy,  comes  as  one  of  the  conservators  of  the  forces 
of  life.  And  herein,  also,  is  wisdom  justified  of  her  children.  {J.  W.  Lance.) 
If  wisdom  was  justified  in  the  cases  both  of  John  and  Jesus,  it  follows — I.  That 

WISDOM  IS  COMPATIBLE  WITH  TABIOUB  WATS  OF  LTFB.  H.  ThAT  WISDOM  18  NOT  A 
TIME-SBBVKB,   SEEKING    TO    PLEASE     THX    WOBLD   BT   FOLLOWING   ITS  FASHION.        Many 

men,  many  minds.  It  is  hard  to  please  all,  and  best  not  to  try.  Following 
fashion  is  wearisome,  for  fashion  changes  fast.  (A.  B.  Bniee,  D.D.)  Wayward- 
neu  and  wisdom: — I.  Wb  have  hebb  a  comtbast  pbksbnted.  On  the  one  side 
the  perrerseness  and  waywardness  of  man ;  on  the  other  side  the  sympathy  :t 


«HiF.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  709 

wisdom  with  wisdom  ;  the  kindred  and  affinity  which  exists  hetween  the  voice  of 
God  in  His  Word  and  the  voice  of  God  in  the  heart  and  conscience  of  His  crea- 
tures. II.  The  waywardness  of  which  oub  Lord  here  speaks  is  more  ob  less 
XN  Aiiii  or  VB.  III.  The  most  distressing  form  of  it  is  that  in  which  it  rons 
ON  into  the  affairs  of  the  soul.  (Dean  Vaughan.)  Seeing  wisdom: — They 
whose  hearts  are  softened  by  a  true  self-knowledge,  and  enlightened  by  a  real 
communion  with  God ;  they  who  are  wise  in  that  wisdom  of  which  the  condition  is 
humility,  and  the  beginning  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  will  see  wisdom  in  that  which  to 
the  caviller  is  folly,  will  recognize  a  Divine  harmony  where  all  is  discord  to  the 
self-confident,  and  own  an  abundance  of  resource  worthy  of  the  All-wise  and  the 
AU-mercifnl,  in  that  variety  of  evidence  which  affords  to  different  minds  and,  per- 
haps, to  different  ages  of  the  world,  their  appropriate,  as  well  as  conclusive, 
reason  for  believing.  The  very  things  which  others  calumniate  are  to 
them  indications  of  wisdom.  They  see  how  the  message  of  the  Baptist 
and  the  habits  of  the  Baptist  —  the  of&ce  of  the  Saviour  and  the  life 
of  the  Saviour — are  severally  harmonious  and  of  a  piece.  {Ibid.)  Wisdom's 
justification :  —  The  union  of  good  men  is  internal,  though  there  may  be 
outward  differences.  The  union  of  selfish  men  may  be  external,  but  there  are 
always  inward  differences.  The  children  of  folly  may  unite  for  a  common  purpose, 
may  be  allied  together  as  Herod  and  Pilate  were  allied  against  Christ.  Pirates  may 
join  for  plunder  ;  the  children  of  this  world,  for  power,  pleasure,  and  earthly  gain, 
But  there  is  no  inward  union,  and,  as  soon  as  the  outward  advantage  of  the  alliance 
ceases,  the  partnership  is  dissolved.  But  good  men,  though  separated  outward  y, 
are  inwardly  at  one.  They  belong  to  one  invisible  and  indivisible  Church.  By  and 
by  they  shall  come  together  outwardly,  and  pee  eye  to  eye.  The  inevitable  logic  of 
faith  and  reason  shall  at  last  unite  them,  and  then  "  wisdom  shall  be  justified  of  all 
her  children."  John  the  Baptist  will  understand  Christ ;  Barnabas  will  comprehend 
Paul :  Fenelon  and  Martin  Luther,  Athanasius  and  Arius,  Dr.  Channing  and  Dr. 
Beecher,  will  recognize  each  other's  worth,  and  bless  God  together  for  what  each 
has  accomplished  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  So  shall  wisdom  be  at  last  justified 
of  all  her  children.  So  shall  all  good  men,  sincerely  desiring  to  do  right,  be  found 
at  last  to  be  walking  together  on  the  same  road  towards  the  best  things.  Wisdom 
is  not  sectarian  nor  bigoted  ;  she  has  a  large  Church,  and  many  children,  and  is 
justified  of  them  all.     {James  Freeman  Clarke.) 

Vers.  36-50.  And,  behold,  a  woman  In  the  city  which  was  a  sinner. — Jesus  anointed 
by  a  weeping  penitent  in  tlie  house  of  Sivion  the  Phansee  :  Much  love  shoion  lohere 
much  sin  has  been  forgiven  : — I.  It  is  to  this  individual  that  our  attention  is,  in 
the  first  place,  to  be  directed.  Her  name  is  not  given,  but  only  her  character. 
This  poor  sinner  had  very  different  reasons  from  those  of  the  Pharisee  for  wishing  to 
see  Jesus.  The  recent  miracle  of  restoring  to  life  the  widow  of  Nain's  son,  had  pro- 
duced, in  regard  to  its  author,  a  deep  and  general  impression.  "  There  came,"  we 
are  told,  "  a  fear  on  all :  and  they  glorified  God,  saying,  that  a  great  prophet  is  risen 
up  among  us,  and  that  God  hathi  visited  His  people.  And  this  rumour  of  Him  went 
forth  throughout  all  Judaea."  Simon,  among  others,  wished  to  know  something 
more  perfectly  concerning  Him.  The  motives  of  the  poor  sinner  were  of  a  far  higher 
and  more  interesting  nature.  She  also  had  heard  the  fame  of  Him  who  had  raised 
the  dead,  and,  instead  of  merely  musing  whether  He  was  a  prophet,  she  seems  to 
have  been  fully  persuaded  that  this  was  the  case ;  nay,  that  He  was  the  Great 
Prophet — the  promised  Messiah — the  Saviour  of  sinners.  Yet  all  that  she  had 
heard  of  Him  only  made  her  wish  to  hear  more.  She  had  already  tasted  of  the 
fountain  of  living  waters ;  and  the  language  of  her  soul  was,  "Let  me  drink  again — 
let  me  drink  abundantly."  1.  She  evinced  her  humility  and  her  godly  sorrow. 
Nor  did  her  humility  proceed  only  from  the  profound  sense  which  she  had  of  His 
surpassing  excellence  and  dignity.  It  proceeded  partly  from  the  feeling  of  her  own 
past  guilt  and  exceeding  unworthiness.  Her  humility,  in  other  words,  was  closely 
associated  with  her  deep  and  godly  sorrow.  2.  But,  by  her  conduct  in  the  guest- 
chamber,  the  penitent  also  evinced  her  gratitude  and  affection.  Great  as  were  het 
modesty  and  humility,  she  did  not  permit  these  feelings  to  keep  her  back,  even  in 
the  presence  of  uncharitable  observers,  from  expressing  her  unspeakable  obHgationfl 
and  ardent  attachment  to  Jesus.  They  were  tears  of  affection  not  less  than  oi 
sorrow.  They  were  what  she  could  neither  repress  nor  conceal.  3.  The  penitent 
here  evinced  her  profound  sense  of  the  veneration  and  homage  that  were  due  ta 
Christ.    She  came  for  the  express  purpose  of  anointing  Him— not  only  of  acknow« 


710  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vn^ 

ledging  her  personal  obligations  and  attachment  to  Him,  but  of  owning  and  honour- 
ing Him  as  the  Messiah  or  Anointed  One.  He  was  the  object  of  her  faith  not  less 
than  of  her  love.      II.  The  next  subject,  then,  which  now  solicits  our  attention,  iB 

THE  WAY  IN  WHICH  OUB  LoKD  MET  THE  INWARD  SURMISES  AND  COMPLAINTS  OP  THB. 
PHAEISES,  AND  IN  WHICH  He  NOT  ONLY  VINDICATED  THE  CONDUCT  OF  THB  WEEPINGK 
PENITENT,  BUT    SET  IT    FORTH  AS   AN   HONOURABLE    CONTRAST    TO    THE    CONDUCT    OF   THB 

Pharisee  HIMSELF.     {J.  Grierson.)         The  penitent : — In  the  conduct  of  this  peni- 
tent we  may  observe  the  following  particulars  :  1.  Her  deep  humility — "  She  stood 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus."     Mary,  the  sister  of  Martha,  sat  at  His  feet,  which  might 
signify  the  calm,  settled,  and  composed  state  of  her  mind.    But  this  woman  stood ; 
a  posture  which  denotes  humility,  reverence,  and  fear.     She  stood  like  a  servant  in 
waiting,  ready  to  put  in  practice  what  she  had  designed  for  His  honour.      2.  Ob- 
serve the  holy  shame  of  this  penitent — "  She  stood  at  Jesus'  feet  behind  Him," 
Such  was  the  beauty  of  His  holiness  that  she  was  ashamed,  and  such  the  glory  ol 
His  majesty  that  she  was  afraid  to  look  Him  in  the  face.    3.  Her  unfeigned  sorrow — 
♦'She  stood  behind  Him  weeping."    Those  eyes,  which  had  been  the  inlets  of 
temptation  and  sin,  now  become  the  outlets  of  godly  sorrow.     4.  Her  sorrow  was 
not  only  sincere,  but  abundant — "  She  stood  weeping,  and  washed  His  feet  with 
tears."    It  was  not  a  sudden  gust,  but  a  continual  flow.     5.  Witness  the  ardour  of 
her  love  to  Christ — "  She  kissed  His  feet,  and  anointed  them  with  the  ointment." 
A  pardoned  sinner  will  think  no  expense  too  great  whereby  he  may  honour  Christ 
or  testify  his  love  to  Him.     6.  Her  contempt  of  the  world.     She  did  not  mind  the 
things  of  the  world  any  more  than  the  men  of  the  world.     The  box  of  precious 
ointment  was  of  little  value  to  one  who  had  found  the  pearl  of  great  price.     7.  Her 
gratitude  and  joy.    All  her  grief  was  mingled  with  love  and  thankfulness ;  her  tears 
were  tears  of  joy  for  sin  pardoned,  as  well  as  of  sorrow  for  sin  committed.      Her 
ointment  became  a  thank-offering  to  her  Saviour.    From  this  instructive  history  wet 
may  learn  that  the  displays  of  Divine  mercy  have  always  a  practical  tendency. 
{B.  Beddome,  M.A.)    A  great  sinner  and  a  great  Saviour  : — 1.  First,  the  chabacter 
or  THE  WOMAN.     Everything  in  Scripture  is  addressed  to  character.      Oh,  how  true 
is  that  statement  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  when  he  declared  that  "  Jesus  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief."    Witness  the  record  given  in 
the  Word  of  God  of  a  variety  of  prominent  characters  who  have  been  the  recipients 
of  the  grace  of  God.     Go  back  to  old  father  Abraham ;  an  idolator  amongst  th« 
Chaldeans,  yet  the  grace  of  God  found  him,  and  brought  him  out,  and  distinguished 
him.    Mark  the  character  of  Jacob.     I  cannot  admire  it,  except  in  that  which  grace 
did  for  him.    He  was  a  deceitful,  supplanting  young  man ;  and  who  would  not  cen- 
sure him  for  the  conduct  he  pursued  in  obtaining  the  blessing?     Beloved,  I  wish 
you  to  be  brought  to  a  deep  consciousness  that  sinnership  belongs  to  us,  as  well  as 
to  the  woman  of  the  city,  and  that  our  sinnership  is  such  that  nothing  but  the 
blood  of  Christ  can  meet  our  condition  before  God.    Mark  yet  further.    This  poor 
woman  was  evidently  overwhelmed  with  the  consciousness  of  her  sinnership.     It  is 
not  simply  a  cold  admission  of  the  fact,  but  compunction  is  felt,  distress  of  soul 
realized,  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart  bestowed,  an  overwhelming  consciousness 
that  you  deserve  nothing  but  eternal  wrath.     II.  Now  let  us  glance  at  the  oppor- 
tunity WHICH  THE  POOR  WOMAN  HAD  OF  COMING  TO  Jesus.   There  is  Something  interest- 
ing in  the  fact  that  it  should  have  been  in  a  Pharisee's  house.   Think  for  a  moment, 
here,  of  the  display  of  discriminating  grace.      Simon  might  look  upon  her  to  hate, 
but  JesQS  looked  upon  her  to  manifest  that  the  distinguishing  grace  which  He  is 
accustomed  to  exercise  in  the  most  sovereign  manner  had  reached  her  heart ;  and 
thus,  in  Simon's  own  house,  the  discriminating  grace  of  God  was  exhibited  to  take 
the  sinner  and  to  leave  the  Pharisee.     Moreover,  this  poor  woman  must  have  been 
informed  where  Jesus  was,  and  what  He  was  as  the  sinner's  Friend ;  and  this  is  the 
very  pith  of  the  message  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.     Our  great  business,  from  Sabbath 
to  Sabbath,  and  from  week  to  week,  is  to  pubhsh  the  name  and  the  fame  of  the 
sinner's  Friend.     There  must  have  been,  after  all,  an  influence  put  forth  upon  this 
poor  woman's  soul  to  bring  her  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  or  she  would  never  have  come 
there.      III.  We  now  come  to  the  manifestation  of  feeling  in  this  poor  woman. 
What  are  the  feelings  that  she  must  have  been  the  subject  of?     The  first  I  shall 
mention  is  the  feeling  of  necessity,  and  the  second  is  that  of  a  new  nature's  affec- 
tion for  what  she  had  discovered.     She  loved  much.     This  feeling  of  necessity  not 
only  brings  the  sinner  to  Jesus  under  Divine  power  and  might,  but  constrains  th» 
einner  to  put  forth  the  emotion  which  is  described  of  this  woman — weeping.    I  do 
cot  so  much  regard  the  literal  effusion  of  water  from  the  bodily  eyes  as  I  do  the 


CHA*.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  711 

■weef.inK  of  the  soul — tVie  compnnction  of  the  spirit ;  though,  with  persons  who  are 
naturally  sensitive,  this  very  compunction  will  flow  forth  in  external  tears,  but  in 
other  constitutions  not  so  visibly.  I  am  very  much  afraid  that  many  who  pass  for 
Christians  have  glided  into  their  Christianity  in  a  very  smooth  and  easy  manner ; 
and  I  as  sf.rongly  fear  that  they  will  glide  out  of  it  as  easily,  and  perish  for  ever. 
The  best  repentance  which  is  known  cm  earth  is  that  which  flows  from  Calvary, 
from  atoning  blood,  from  pardoning  love  in  the  contrite  soul.  What  knowest  thou, 
my  hearers,  of  these  feelings  ?  Many  persons  are  greatly  frightened  about  going  to 
hell,  and  sometimes,  perhaps,  grieve  lest  they  should  do  so.  IV.  Let  ua  now  pass 
on  to  say  a.  pew  words  concerning  this  poor  woman's  expectations.  No  doubt  they 
were  great.  They  are  not  recorded,  but  I  should  think  we  might  sum  them  up  in 
two  particulars.  She  expected  to  eye  the  glories  of  His  person,  and  gaze  upon  Him 
with  delight ;  and  she  expected,  also,  to  receive  absolution  from  Him,  and  she  got 
both.  Now,  if  you  are  brought  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  I  would  have  you  encourage 
this  two-fold  expectation.  The  first  is,  to  eye  the  personal  and  official  glories  of 
Christ.  Think,  for  a  moment,  of  the  privilege  of  gazing  by  faith  upon  Him,  who  is 
declared  to  be  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His 
person."  "  Behold  Me,"  is  His  cry.  Look  off  from  everything  else  to  gaze  upon 
the  precious  Christ  of  God,  and  know  more  and  more  of  Him  ;  yea,  till  ye  "  know 
even  as  ye  are  known."  This  poor  woman  expected,  also,  to  receive  absolution  from 
the  Saviour,  and  she  obtained  it.  A  word  relative  to  the  difference  between  the 
declaration  of  the  doctrine  of  absolution,  and  the  reception  of  it  from  Christ  by  the 
poor  sinner.  They  are  two  different  things.  Unto  Simon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
said,  "  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven."  But  that  would  not  have  satisfied 
her  if  she  had  stopped  there.  {J.  Irons.)  A  bruised  reed: — Probably  when 
Simon  invited  our  Saviour  to  dine  there  were  a  great  many  that  wondered  why. 
Simon  was,  I  suppose,  a  very  good-natured  fellow,  evidently  shallow,  but  easily 
excited  and  easily  forgetting  it.  He  was  a  slate,  on  which  you  could  write  that 
which  you  could  easily  rub  out.  Everybody  was  running  after  the  Saviour,  and 
Simon  was  one  of  those  men  that  liked  to  catch  lions  and  parade  them  in  his 
house.  He  was,  therefore,  patronizing  Christ.  Still  he  did  it  cautiously.  He  pro- 
fessed simply  to  be  His  gracious  entertainer.  Christ  went.  It  is  of  more  importance 
perhaps  to  ask,  "  Why  did  He  go  there  ?  "  Well,  He  went,  because  He  was  neither 
an  ascetic  nor  a  rigorous  moralist,  after  the  modern  sense  of  the  term.  He  never 
was  afraid  of  soiling  Himself.  He  carried  in  Him  the  Ught  that  dispels  darkness. 
Nor  do  I  suppose  He  ever  once  thought,  "  What  will  folks  say  J  Is  it  best  for  Me 
to  go  ?  "  While  they  were  reclining  there  was  an  uninvited  guest  that  came  in, 
"  And  behold  ! " — an  exclamation,  to  arrest  attention — '•  a  woman  which  was  a 
sinner."  Her  outward  life  had  been  bad.  But  there  was  a  woman  within  the 
woman,  a  soul  hidden  within  the  body.  How  knew  she  of  Christ  ?  She  had  heard 
Him  doubtless.  She  had  beheld  His  face  and  His  eye  of  mercy,  and  the  gentleness 
with  which  He  treated  children  and  the  poor,  and  she  had  said  within  herself,  "  If 
there  is  a  good  man  living,  that  man  is  good."  So,  hearing  that  He  was  gone  to 
dine  with  the  Pharisee,  she  determined  to  go  and  see  Him.  What  kind  of  a  teacher 
must  that  man  have  been  who  could  inspire  in  a  harlot's  bosom  those  conceptions 
of  human  and  Divine  greatness  as  manifested  in  Christ,  and  who  could  also  draw 
towards  Him  from  out  all  the  lines  of  wickedness  a  creature  like  unto  this  woman  ? 
Christ  was  a  prophet,  and  more  than  a  prophet.  He  saw  not  only  the  woman,  but 
also  the  man ;  her  depth  and  power,  his  shallowness  and  feebleness.  He  then 
preaches  a  short  sermon  to  Simon.  No  words  had  passed,  but  He  answers  Simon's 
thought.  Let  us  believe,  with  all  true  charity,  that  from  the  hour  of  her  resurrec- 
tion she  followed  the  footsteps  of  her  new-found  Master,  and  that  she  dwells  with 
Him  in  the  purity  and  the  bliss  of  immortality.  Now  translate  from  the  wonderful 
scene  some  lessons.  1.  Your  own  duty.  Separate  not  yourselves  from  those  that 
have  gone  wrong.  2.  Have  faith  to  believe  that  under  bad  appearances  there  yet 
lurks  and  there  yet  sighs  a  soul,  a  moral  conscience.  3.  Never  forget  that  when  a 
man  has  gone  wrong  he  can  go  right.  God  is  on  the  side  of  every  man  that,  having 
stumbled  and  fallen,  gathers  himself  together  and  gets  up ;  and,  though  his  gar- 
ments may  for  a  long  time  be  soiled,  he  is  on  his  feet  again,  and  prepared  to  resist 
ftgain.  Do  not  forget  the  all-loving  heart  of  God.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Jesus  in 
Sivion's  house : — I.  The  forbearance  and  condescension  of  Christ.    II.  Love  is  im 

PROPORTION  TO    THE    GREATNESS   OF  THE    BENEFITS    PELT   TO  BE  RBCEITBD.        HI-    FlOm 

Simon's  mistake  learn  the  danger  if  spiritual  pride.     1.  Spiritual  pride  blinded 
his  eyes  as  to  himself.    2.  It  mislad  him  in  estimating  the  character  of  this  woman. 


TIJ  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA».  THi 

3.  It  prevented  him  understanding  Christ.      {T>.  Longviill.)  Mtich  forgiveness, 

much  love  : — The  woman  had  a  definite  purpose  in  coming  to  the  house  of  Simon. 
She  came,  not  to  be  a  mere  spectator,  but  to  anoint  her  benefactor  with  a  box  of 
precious  ointment.  Her  benefactor  we  must  assume  Jesus  to  have  been,  though  we 
know  nothing  of  the  previous  relations.  Conduct  so  unusual  could  not  fail  to  create 
a  general  sensation  in  the  guest-chamber,  and  especially  to  arrest  the  astonished 
attention  of  the  host.  Happily  for  the  object  of  his  harsh  judgment,  there  was  One 
present  who  could  divine  the  real  situation.  One  brief,  simple  parable  serves  at 
once  to  apologize  for  the  accused,  and  to  bring  a  counter-charge  against  the  accuser. 
The  parable  was  spoken  with  a  threefold  aim.    I.  To  defend  the  conduct  of  thb 

WOMAN  BY  SUGGESTING  THB  POINTS  OF  VIEW  UNDER  WHICH  IT  OUGHT  TO  BE  REGARDED. 
II.    To  IMPUGN   THE   CONDUCT   OF  THE   PHARISEE.        IH.    To    DEFEND    THE    CONDUCT   OF 

Jesus  Himself  in  ACCEPTING  the  HOMAGE  rendered.  {A.B.Bruce,D.D.)    Lessons: — 
1.  Let  sinners   of  every  name  and  degree  be  encouraged  by  this  narrative  to 
go  at   once  to  Christ.      2.    If   we  would   be   successful   in   raising  the   fallen, 
and   reclaiming  the  abandoned,   we   must  be  willing  to  touch  them,  and  to  be 
touched  by  them.    3.  If  we  wish  to  love  God  much,  we  must  think  much  of  what 
we  owe  to  Him.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        Faith  and  forgiveness  : — 1.  Does  it  not 
seem  as  if  the  Pharisee,  if  he  had  had  a  larger  heart,  would  have  gained  something 
of  the  experience  of  the  woman's  sin  without  entrance  into  the  sin  in  the  midst  of 
which  she  had  lived,  and  so  would  have  known  the  richness  of  love  with  which  she 
came  to  the  Saviour  ?     2.  The  Pharisee  has  precisely  the  same  reason  for  thanking 
God  for  having  been  saved  from  falling  into  sin  that  any  vilest  sinner  has  for 
thanking  God  when  he  has  been  dragged  out  of  sin  after  falling  into  it.     3. 
Kemember  (1)  that  yon  have  the  right  and  the  power  to  rescue  your  brother-man, 
and  share  in  the  enthusiastic  and  ecstatic  gratitude  of  the  rescued  soul ;  (2)  that 
every  soul  has  sin  enough  in  it  to  warrant  a  consecration  of  the  whole  life  to  the  God 
who  has  rescued  the  soul,  even  from  that  degree  of  sin  in  which  it  has  lived ;  (3) 
that  the  sense  of  preservation  may  lay  as  deep  a  hold  upon  our  affections  as  the 
sense  of  rescue.     {Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.)        The  weeping  penitent : — I.  Love  for  the 
Saviour  brought  her  into  His  presence.     II.  Humility  for  her  sin  brought  her  to 
His  feet.    III.  Sorrow  for  her  sin  made  her  weep  at  His  feet.    IV.  Gkatitudk 
for  sin  forgiven  led  her  to  wash  and  anoint  His  feet.     (J.  Dobie,  D.D.)        Oriental 
feasts : — The  guests  are  m  their  places,  not  sitting  cross-legged  on  the  floor,  like 
modern  Orientals,  nor  seated  on  chairs,  as  with  ourselves ;  but  reclining,  after  the 
old  Boman  fashion,  on  couches,  the  head  being  towards  the  table,  and  the  feet, 
unsandalled,  stretched  out  behind,  while  the  body  rested  on  the  left  side  and  elbow. 
Around  the  walls  of  the  room  sit  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  place  who  have 
heard  of  the  feast,  and  who  have  come  in  to  see  the  banquet,  and  to  listen  to 
the  conversation.    In  one  of  the  earliest,  and  Ftill  one  of  the  best,  of  the  books  of 
Eastern  travel,  being  the  report  of  the  party  of  which  Andrew  Bonar  and  Bobert 
McCheyne  were  members,  we  find  the  following  statement : — "  At  dinner,  at  the 
Consul's  house  at  Damietta,  we  were  much  interested  in  observing  a  custom  of  the 
country.     In  the  room  where  we  were  received,  besides  the  divan  on  which  we  sat, 
there  were  seats  all  round  the  walls.     Many  came  in  and  took  their  places  on  these 
side  seats  uninvited  and  yet  unchallenged.     They  spoke  to  those  at  table  on  busi- 
ness or  the  news  of  the  day,  and  our  host  spoke  freely  to  them."    {W.  M.  Taylor, 
D.D.)        Jestis  and  the  woman: — There  was  an  unrecorded  history  behind  this 
manifestation.    The  two  must  have  met  before.     This  was  not  the  first  time  she 
had  seen  the  Lord.    On  some  previous  occasion  virtue  had  gone  out  of  Him  to 
her,  and  had  awakened  new  hope  within  her.     She  saw  the  possibility  of  being 
forgiven,  even  for  her  life  of  sin.     She  felt  uprising  within  her  the  determination 
to  become  a  pure  and  noble  woman.    Nay,  she  had  the  persuasion  that  she  was 
already  pardoned  and  accepted  by  God ;  and  so,  unmoved  by  all  surrounding  dis- 
couragements, conscious  of  nothing  but  that  He  was  there  to  whom  she  owed  her 
new-born  blessedness,  she  eagerly  threw  herself  upon  His  feet,  and  took  this  method 
of  telling  Him  ••  all  that  was  in  her  heart."     She  came  to  Him,  not  as  a  penitent 
seeking  pardon,  but  as  a  sinner  already  forgiven ;  and  so  that  which  looked  like 
extravagance  to  others  was  perfectly  natural  in  her,  and  thoroughly  acceptable  to 
Him.     It  was  but  the  "  return  and  repercussion  "  of  that  love  which  He  had  already 
shown  to  her.    Her  tears  were,  as  Luther  calls  them,  "  heart-water'  ,  they  were  the 
distillation  of  her  gratitude.     She  had  not  come  indeed  to  weep;  she  Lad  come 
designing  to  use  the  ointment  only.    But  her  tears  had,  as  it  were,  stoLn  a  march 
npou  her;  they  had  come  unbidden  and  unexpected,  and  had  rather  interfered 


«Bir.  -m.}  ST.  LUKE.  Tl» 

•with  the  fulfibnent  of  her  purpose.  But,  in  order  that  her  original  intention  might 
be  thoroughly  carried  out,  she  wiped  them  from  His  feet  with  her  flowing  tresses, 
and  then  poured  over  Him  the  precious  ointment,  whose  odour  filled  the  house. 
{Ibid. )  At  His  feet :— I.  It  is  a.  becomino  postdee.  1,  As  He  is  Divine,  let  us  pay 
Him  lowliest  reverence,  2.  As  we  are  sinful,  let  us  make  humble  confession.  3.  A« 
He  is  Lord,  let  us  make  full  submission.  4.  As  He  is  All  in  All,  let  us  manifest 
immovable  dependence.  5.  As  He  is  infinitely  wise,  let  us  wait  His  appointed 
time.  The  best  are  at  His  feet,  joyfully  bowing  before  Him.  The  worst  must  come 
there  whether  they  will  or  no.  II.  It  is  a  helpful  postuee — 1.  For  a  weeping^ 
penitent  (Luke  vii.  38).  2.  For  a  resting  convert  (viii.  35).  3.  For  a  pleadinjf 
intercessor  (viii.  41).  4.  For  a  willing  learner  (x.  39).  5.  For  a  grateful  worshipper 
(xvii.  16).  6.  For  a  saint  beholding  his  Lord's  glory  (Rev.  i.  17).  III.  It  is  a  safb 
POSTUEE.  1.  Jesus  will  not  refuse  us  that  position,  for  it  is  one  which  we  ought  to 
occupy.  2.  Jesus  will  not  spurn  the  humbly  submissive,  who  in  self-despair  cast 
themselves  before  Him.  3.  Jesus  will  not  suffer  any  to  harm  those  who  seek 
refuge  at  His  feet.  4.  Jesus  will  not  deny  us  the  eternal  privilege  of  abiding  there. 
Let  this  be  our  continual  posture — sorrowing  or  rejoicing,  hoping  or  fearing,  suffering' 
or  working,  teaching  or  learning,  in  secret  or  in  public,  in  life  and  in  death.  (C. 
H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Pharisee's  mistake : — I.  As  it  eegaeded  Chkist.  1.  He  could 
not  read  Christ's  nature,  and  undervalued  it.  2.  In  regard  to  Christ,  he  mistook 
also  His  way  of  rescuing  from  sin.  II.  As  it  eegaeded  the  woman.  1.  The 
Pharisee  thought  that  as  a  sinner  she  was  to  be  despised.  2.  He  did  not  see  that 
into  her  heart  a  new  life  had  entered.  III.  As  it  eegaeded  himself.  1.  The 
Pharisee  showed  that  he  did  not  know  his  own  heart.  2.  He  did  not  see  that  in 
condemning  this  woman  he  was  rejecting  the  salvation  of  Christ.    IV.  Some  tedths 

WHICH  WE  MAV  LEAEN  FBOM  THE  PhABISEE's  MISTAKE,       1.    ThoSC  who  profeSS  TCligion 

should  be  careful  how  they  give  a  false  view  of  it  by  uncharitable  judgments  and 
assumptions  of  superiority.  2.  On  the  other  side,  we  must  remind  those  who 
profess  to  be  seeking  religion  that  they  are  bound  to  form  their  judgment  of  it  from 
its  Author.  (J.  Ker,  D.D.)  She  is  a  sinner : — This  is  the  Pharisee's  compendious 
trial  and  verdict  and  sentence  of  one  in  whose  soul,  it  seems,  the  sore  but  whole- 
some struggle  of  repentance  was  actively  going  on.  "  She  is  a  sinner"  ;  accursed 
from  God  she  is,  and  must  continue.  There  is  abomination  in  her  touch,  and 
falsehood  in  her  tears.  All  that  a  prophet  can  do  for  her  is  to  pass  her  by  on  the 
other  side.  Thus  reasoned  a  sincere,  respectable  man  among  the  Jews ;  not  a 
monster  of  intolerance;  not  a  brutal  scorner  of  the  suffering;  but  a  respectable 
Jew  of  the  most  exact  sect  among  the  Jews,  speaking  in  the  interests  of  society,  ami 
echoing  an  acknowledged  social  principle.  And  thus  reason  many  sincere  and 
worthy  men  amongst  ourselves  almost  two  thousand  years  after  the  Lord  has 
taught  lessons  of  another  spirit  and  a  more  loving  wisdom.  "  She  is  a  sinner." 
One  word  suffices  to  classify  all  that  have  gone  astray ;  the  Pharisee  makes  no 
inquiries,  draws  no  distinctions,  indulges  no  hopes.  It  is  all  one  to  him  whether 
a  depraved  will  or  a  giddy  vanity  made  her  a  willing  victim,  or  the  sheer  presence  of 
starvation  drove  her  to  ruin.  It  is  all  one  whether,  every  day  when  she  rises  and 
every  night  when  she  lies  down  she  hates  herself,  and  in  bitter  anguish  compares 
the  thing  she  is  with  what  she  was  ;  or  acquiesces  in  her  own  destruction,  and  does 
all  she  can  to  hasten  the  darkness  that  is  settling  down  upon  her  moral  nature,  and 
to  welcome  the  perfect  night.  We  pass  our  hasty  sentence  upon  thousands  and  tens 
of  thousands  of  erring  beings,  not  considering  for  a  moment  how  many  among  them 
are  devoured  by  an  unspeakable  remorse ;  how  many  are  capable  of  sorrow,  though 
they  stave  it  off  ;  how  few,  comparatively,  are  the  hopeless  children  of  perdition, 
lost  in  this  world  and  the  world  to  come.  Now  there  are  two  facts  which  may  well 
make  us  pause  ere  we  adopt  the  hard  and  thoughtless  rule  of  society  in  dealing  with 
guilt ;  and  they  are  facts,  not  surmises.  1.  Society  is,  in  a  large  measure,  respon- 
Bible  for  the  very  sins  which  it  so  readily  condemns  and  casts  out.  _  2.  That  there 
is  hardly  any  escape  for  those  who  have  once  entered  the  path  of  sin.  "  She  is  a 
siuner  " ;  no  one  will  take  her  into  a  blameless  home  to  employ  her ;  no  one  will 
yisit  her  and  give  her  counsel.  Thus  does  one  step  in  sin  utterly  destroy  one  whom 
God  created  to  serve  and  praise  Him.  God  bids  the  sinner  turn  from  evil  ways, 
and  we  will  give  her  no  chance  of  turning.  (Archbishop  Thomson.)  Represen- 
tative  characters : — The  woman  represents  humanity,  or  the  soul  of  human  nature  ; 
Simon,  the  world,  or  worldly  wisdom ;  Christ,  Divinity,  or  the  Divine  purposes  of 
good  to  usward.  Simon  is  an  incarnation  of  what  St.  Paul  calls  the  beggarly  ele- 
ments ;  Christ  cf  spirituality ;  the  woman  of  sin.    {Preacher's  Lantern.)       The  secrtt 


714  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OHA».  nu 

of  devotion : — I.  We  find  here  an  illustration  of  the  becognized  value  of  all  acts 
OF  8IMPLE-HEAKTED  DEVOTION  TO  Chbist.  In  the  Ect  of  justification  God  is  entirely 
sovereign,  and  man  is  entirely  passive ;  but  in  the  work  of  sanctification  which 
succeeds  it  we  are  permitted  to  co-operate  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  all  along  ia 
our  career,  as  the  forgiven  children  of  the  Highest,  we  are  welcomed  in  the  mini* 
stries  of  affection  which  evidence  our  appreciation  of  Divine  grace,  Th»  early 
reformers  had  no  confusion  in  regard  to  this  point.  Their  notion  as  to  the  proper 
blending  of  faith  and  works  may  be  Been  in  the  two  seals  which  Martin  Luther  used 
indiscriminately  in  his  correspondence.  On  one  was  cut  his  family  coat-of-arms — 
two  hammers  laid  crosswise,  with  a  blunt  head  and  a  sharp  head,  his  father's  tools 
at  the  time  when  he  was  a  miner ;  and  Martin  used  often,  in  connection  with  this, 
to  quote  the  saying  of  Achilles :  "  Let  others  have  wealth  who  will ;  my  portion  ia 
work."  Upon  the  second  seal  was  cut  the  device  of  a  heart,  with  wings  on  each 
side  of  it  spread  ont  as  if  soaring,  and  underneath  this  was  the  Latin  motto: 
"  Petimus  astra."  II.  Our  second  lesson  is  concerning  the  active  pbinciple  on 
WHICH  ZEAL  PBOCEED8,  AND  TKOM  WHICH  COMES  ITS  VALUE.  1.  Many  men  feel  the 
superior  power  and  dignity  of  a  Christian  life,  and  so  seek  something  like  conformity 
to  its  maxims.  They  move  on  in  a  correct  living  of  outward  morality,  because  it 
brings  a  reputation  with  others  and  satisfaction  in  their  own  minds :  they  are  wont 
to  speak  pleasantly  of  themselves  as  "  outsiders,  with  a  great  respect  for  religion, 
you  know  I  "  No  value  whatever  in  this.  The  instincts  of  an  honest  heart  make 
tis  claim,  as  the  very  first  characteristic  of  friendship,  its  disinterestedness.  We 
will  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  used  or  patronized ;  can  we  suppose  God  will  endure 
it  ?  2.  Another  motive,  which  gives  to  many  a  life  a  sort  of  religious  cast,  is  found 
in  conscientiousness.  We  are  all  by  nature  devout ;  something  draws  us,  and  keeps 
drawing,  to  God ;  we  grow  uneasy  under  its  tension.  We  seek  a  kind  of  temporary 
relief  by  yielding  a  Uttle,  without  at  all  intending  to  yield  the  whole ;  just  as  th« 
foolish  fish  is  said  to  run  up  towards  the  fisherman  for  a  moment,  to  ease  oS  the 
stress  of  the  hook,  and  yet  without  purposing  ever  to  leave  the  water.  Such  a 
service  of  God  we  call  "  duty. "  Now  there  is  no  value  either  in  the  surrender  we 
make,  or  in  the  acceptance  we  profess.  When  we  give  up  sin  from  mere  pressure 
of  pain,  we  are  apt  to  choose  those  which  will  be  missed  the  least,  and  have  grown 
the  weariest  in  indulgence.  Nor  is  our  obedience  any  better ;  we  go  on  with  a  round 
of  duty-doing  as  senseless  as  the  whirling  of  a  Japanese  praying-machine  in  the 
market-place.  Our  motive  is  the  refinement  of  selfishness,  for  we  work  like  a 
galley-slave  who  is  afraid  of  the  lash.  Because  we  mean  to  cheat  on  the  "  principal " 
by  and  by,  we  scrupulously  keep  paying  the  regular  •'  interest "  now.  And  all  this 
is  mere  hypocrisy.  3.  The  true  motive  for  all  Christian  zeal  is  found  in  love — 
simple,  honest  affection  for  Christ  as  the  Lord  of  grace  and  glory.  A  good  deed  is 
measured  by  the  temper  and  feeling  which  underlies  it.  III.  The  becollbction  bt 
WHICH  TBUE  ZEAL  18  STIMULATED.  "  To  whom  little  is  forgivcu,  the  same  loveth 
little."  The  one  great  matter  of  notice  here  is  that  alabaster  box.  It  becomes  the 
symbol  of  a  heart  full  of  experience,  which  no  possible  language  could  describe.  It 
would  have  been  more  properly  named  a  phial  or  a  jar.  It  was  one  of  those  small 
vessels,  wont  to  be  cherished  in  that  day  by  vain  and  siUy  women,  containing  rare 
and  curiously-perfumed  cosmetics,  used  by  the  fastidious  Orientals  for  a  meretricious 
and  luxurious  toilet.  Two  things,  therefore,  were  exhibited  in  the  act  of  this  woman 
— penitence  and  faith.  1.  Her  penitence  appears  in  the  surrender  of  the  unguent; 
it  was  one  of  the  tools  of  her  trade.  By  this  act  she  avowed  her  definite  and  final 
relinquishment  of  that  old,  gay  life  she  had  been  living.  2.  Observe,  also,  the 
faith  in  this  action.  She  ventured  much  when  she  came  to  that  feast  unbidden. 
If  Jesus  should  rebuke  her,  she  would  be  excluded  with  contumely  and  contempt. 
But  she  trusted  Him  with  all  her  heart;  she  believed  in  her  forgiveness  in  the 
very  moment  of  asking  for  it.  So  she  offered  her  Saviour  the  highest  of  all  she 
had.  She  gave  Jesus  her  last  glory ;  He  gave  her  His  full  pardon  of  her  sins 
as  His  reward  and  benediction  in  returu.  (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Jesus  in 
the  house  of  the  Pharisee : — Then  one  of  the  Pharisees  desired  that  Jesus  would 
eat  bread  with  them  ;  and  as  the  crowd  falls  back  they  go  on  their  way  together 
to  this  Pharisee's  house.  And  now  He  lies  reclining  on  the  couch.  Let  us 
TOBN  TO  LOOK  AT  THE  HOST.  He  has  given  Christ  a  very  heartless  welcome,  and 
fk  very  scanty  entertainment.  The  commonest  courtesies  of  life  were  wanting. 
There  was  no  hint  of  enthusiasm,  no  whisper  of  affection ;  no  token  of  any  loving 
regard.  Not  even  was  it  a  stately  formality — all  was  as  empty  as  it  was  cold.  Yet 
do  not  put  down  this  man  as  a  hypocrite  or  a  knave.     Not  at  all.     We  overdo  the 


eatr.  th.]  ST.  LUKE.  715 

eharacter  of  the  Pharisee,  and  so  -we  destroy  it  altogether.  This  man  is  jnst  a  fair 
type  of  a  great  many  religious  people  to-day — people  who  are  quite  willing  to  extend 
a  kind  of  patronage  to  tiie  claims  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  who  never  put  themselves 
much  out  of  the  way  for  Him.  They  give  their  heart  and  energy  to  their  business 
— for  that  no  care,  no  toil,  nothing  is  grudged.  They  give  their  enthusiasm  to 
politics,  if  they  live  in  the  city ;  if  they  live  in  the  country  they  share  it  with 
their  horses  and  guns.  They  keep  their  money  for  themselves.  For  religion  they 
are  willing  to  expend  an  occasional  hour  on  Sunday,  and  a  yet  more  occasional 
subscription.  Alas  1  that  our  Blessed  Bedeemer,  the  King  of  Heaven,  should  find 
«till  so  cold  a  welcome  and  so  scanty  an  entertainment  in  many  a  house  to-day ! 
With  such  people  there  may  be  a  degree  of  orthodoxy  on  which  they  pride  them- 
flelves,  but  what  is  much  more  rigid  and  essential  is  a  certain  refinement  of  taste, 
which  is  really  the  only  religion  of  many ;  there  is,  too,  a  certain  standard  of 
morality,  less  important,  however,  than  the  standard  of  taste ;  and  for  everybody 
who  does  not  come  up  to  their  standard  either  of  manners  or  morals,  there  is  a 
Btoning  to  death  with  hard  judgments— and  an  equal  condemnation  for  those  who 
venture  to  go  beyond  their  standard.  Look  at  it.  It  is  religion  without  any  love 
to  God  and  without  any  love  to  man.  it  is  religion  without  any  deep  sense  of 
indebtedness,  and  without  any  glad  devotion.  There  it  is :  religion  without  any 
deep  sense  of  sin,  and  so  without  any  glad  sense  of  forgiveness;  religion  without 
any  need,  and  so  without  riches ;  religion  without  a  Saviour,  and  so  without  any 
love.  This  man  knew  of  a  law  which  demanded  a  certain  degree  of  goodness :  that 
was  exactly  the  goodness  which  he  himself  lived  up  to.  And  good  people  like 
liimself,  of  course,  should  go  to  heaven  for  ever  and  ever.  And  bad  people  like  this 
■woman  should  go — elsewhere  ;  and  he  went  on  his  way  quite  comfortable  and  con- 
tented with  an  arrangement  altogether  so  advantageous  to  himself.  Look  at  this 
man  carefully ;  and  see  in  him  a  peril  that  besets  all  of  us  who  are  brought  up  in 
religious  forms  and  observances.  It  is  religion  without  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God, 
who  is  come  to  convince  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  come; 
to  make  these  the  great  and  awful  realities,  by  which  the  world  is  tested  and  all 
things  are  esteemed,  for  without  that  Holy  Spirit  who  is  come  to  shed  the  love  of 
God  abroad  in  the  heart,  God  is  but  a  name ;  religion  is  but  a  form  ;  sin  is  but  a 
notion.  Now  let  tjs  tubn  to  the  tji»invited  visitor.  The  Eastern  custom  of 
hospitality  meant  very  literally  "open  house."  The  curiosity  with  which  the  people 
iollowed  Jesus  everywhere  would  be  sure  to  follow  Him  here,  and  though  He  has 
entered  into  the  house  He  cannot  be  hid.  And  yet  of  all  heresies  the  moat  persis- 
tent and  most  deadly  is  that  of  which  the  Church  makes  but  little  ado.  It  is  this 
— that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  into  the  world  to  save  good  people  who  don't  think  they 
need  any  saving ;  and  if  real  sinners  come  to  Him — dreadful  sinners :  black  sinners — 
it  is  a  presumption  and  an  intrusion  which  good  people  cannot  tolerate.     See  hebb 

THE  BIGHT  CHABACTER,  IN  THE  BIOHT  PLACE,  SEBKINO   THE   BIGHT  THING,  IN  THE  BIGHT 

WAT.  A  sinner  at  the  feet  of  Jesus — here  is  a  sight  that  all  heaven  shall  coma 
forth  to  rejoice  over  ;  and  they  shall  go  back  to  celebrate  it  in  the  sweetest  musio 
that  even  angels  ever  sang.  "  She  is  a  sinner  " — it  is  the  only  certificate  of  character 
that  Jesus  wanted.  The  only  thing  for  which  He  came,  the  only  work  for  which 
He  had  qualified  Himself,  had  to  do  with  sinners.  "  She  is  ignorant,"  said  Simon, 
within  himself.  "  The  people  that  knoweth  not  the  law  is  accursed.  What  does 
this  wretched  woman  understand  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
What  appreciation  can  she  have  of  its  lofty  promises  and  high  glory  ?  "  She  knew 
that  she  was  a  sinner  and  in  that  she  knew  more  than  Simon  knew  ;  and  knew  all 
that  she  needed  to  know.  A  sinner  at  His  feet.  Oh,  blessed  hiding-place  1  A 
refuge  sure  and  safe,  in  His  shadow,  within  reach  of  that  Hand,  there,  where  all 
the  heart  may  pour  forth  its  sorrow  and  the  story  of  ita  Bin,  where  all  His  love  may 
look  its  benediction,  and  may  touch  with  healing  power.  Coming  in  the  right  way. 
She  just  cast  herself  upon  His  love  and  help.  Having  no  hope  but  in  Him,  feeling 
that  the  torrents  swept  and  surged  about  her,  but  that  Hand  held  her  and  was 
lifting  her  up,  and  should  set  her  feet  upon  the  rock.  She  came  unto  Him  and 
found  the  rest  that  she  sought.  The  hold  of  the  past  was  loosed  and  broken  ;  ita 
record  was  blotted  out  and  forgotten.  The  touch  of  that  gracious  Hand  healed 
the  broken  heart.  His  words  fell  like  the  very  music  of  heaven  upon  her  soul. 
"  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  And  there  came  a  new  life,  fresh,  sweet,  pure, 
beautiful,  like  the  Ufa  of  a  little  child.  This  is  Jesus,  our  Saviour,  who  speaks  to 
as  this  day.  "Come  unto  Me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  But  the  story  is  not 
finished  yet.    There  with  the  sobbing  woman  dovm  at  His  feet,  with  that  gxaciona 


716  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  fit 

Hand  laid  on  the  bent  head— that  Hand  whose  touch  healed  the  broken  heart- 
Jesus  became  her  Advocate  and  Defender.  The  silence  was  broken  as  Jesus  looked 
up  and  said,  "Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee."  With  what  rich  blessing 
must  every  word  have  fallen  upon  her — what  gentle  courtesy  and  tender  grace 
was  Hisl  (M.  G.  Pearse.)  The  woman  that  wot  a  sinner : — Here  are  two  silver 
bells,  let  us  ring  them ;  their  notes  are  heavenly — 0  for  ears  to  hear  their  rich, 
clear  melody !  The  first  note  is  "  grace,"  and  the  second  tone  is  "  love."  I» 
Geace,  the  most  costly  of  spikenard :  this  story  literally  drips  with  it,  like  those 
Oriental  trees  which  bleed  perfume.  1.  First,  grace  is  here  glorified  in  its  object. 
She  was  "a  sinuer" — a  sinner  not  in  the  flippant,  unmeaning,  every-day  sense  of 
the  term,  but  a  sinner  in  the  blacker,  filthier,  and  more  obnoxious  sense.  Grac» 
has  pitched  upon  the  most  unlikely  cases  in  order  to  show  itself  to  be  grace ;  it  baa 
found  a  dwelling-place  for  itself  in  the  most  unworthy  heart,  that  its  freeness  might 
be  the  better  seen.  2.  Grace  is  greatly  magnified  in  its  fruits.  Who  would  have 
thought  that  a  woman  who  had  yielded  her  members  to  be  servants  of  unrighteous- 
ness, to  her  shame  and  confusion,  should  have  now  become,  what  if  I  call  her  a 
maid  of  honour  to  the  King  of  kings  ? — one  of  Christ's  most  favoured  servitors  ? 
This  woman,  apart  from  grace,  had  remained  black  and  defiled  still  to  her  dying 
day,  but  the  grace  of  God  wrought  a  wondrous  transformation,  removing  the  impu- 
dence of  her  face,  the  flattery  from  her  lips,  the  finery  from  her  dress,  aud  the  lust 
from  her  heart.  Eyes  which  were  full  of  adultery,  were  now  founts  of  repentance  ; 
lips  which  were  doors  of  lascivious  speech,  now  yield  holy  kisses — the  profligate 
was  a  penitent,  the  castaway  a  new  creature.  All  the  actions  which  are  athibuted 
to  this  woman  illustrate  the  transforming  power  of  Divine  grace.  Note  the  woman's 
humility.  She  had  once  possessed  a  brazen  face,  and  knew  no  bashfulness,  but  now 
she  stands  behind  the  Saviour.  3.  I  would  have  you  remark,  in  the  third  place, 
that  grace  is  seen  by  attentive  eyes  in  our  Lord's  acceptance  of  what  this  chosen 
vessel  had  to  bring.  Jesus  knew  her  sin.  Oh,  that  Jesus  should  ever  accept  any- 
thing  of  me,  that  He  should  be  willing  to  accept  my  tears,  willing  to  receive  my 
prayers  and  my  praises  1  4.  Further,  grace  is  displayed  in  this  narrative  when  you 
see  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  become  the  defender  of  the  penitent.  Everywhere  grace 
is  the  object  of  human  cavil :  men  snap  at  it  like  evening  wolves.  Some  object  to 
grace  in  its  perpetuity,  they  struggle  against  persevering  grace;  but  others,  like 
this  Simon,  struggle  against  the  bounty  of  grace.  5.  Once  more,  my  brethren,  the 
grace  of  God  is  seen  in  this  narrative  in  the  bestowal  of  yet  richer  favours.  Great 
grace  saved  her,  rich  grace  encouraged  her,  unbounded  grace  gave  her  a  Divine 
assurance  of  forgiveness.  "  Go  in  peace."  II.  Love.  1.  Its  source.  There  is  no 
such  thing  as  mere  natural  love  to  God.  The  only  true  love  which  can  burn  in  the 
human  breast  towards  the  Lord,  is  that  which  the  Holy  Ghost  Himself  kindles. 
2.  Its  secondary  cause  is  faith.  The  fiftieth  verse  tells  us,  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved 
thee."  Our  souls  do  not  begin  with  loving  Christ,  but  the  first  lesson  is  to  trust. 
Many  penitents  attempt  this  difficult  task ;  they  aspire  to  reach  the  stair-head  without 
treading  the  steps ;  they  would  needs  be  at  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple  before  they  have 
crossed  the  threshold.  Grace  is  the  source  of  love,  but  faith  is  the  agent  by  which  love 
is  brought  to  us.  3.  The  food  of  love  is  a  sense  of  sin,  and  a  grateful  sense  of  foi  givenesa. 
The  service  this  woman  rendered  to  our  Lord  was  perfectly  voluntary.  No  one 
suggested  it,  much  less  pressed  it  upon  her.  Her  service  to  Jesus  was  personal.  She 
did  it  all  herself,  and  afl  to  Him.  Do  you  notice  how  many  times  the  pronoun 
occurs  in  our  text?  "  She  stood  at  His  feet  behind  Him  weeping,  and  bega,n  to 
wash  His  feet  with  tears,  and  did  wipe  th^m  with  the  hairs  of  her  head,  and  kissed 
Hit  feet,  and  anointed  them  with  the  ointment."  She  served  Christ  Himself.  _  For- 
getfulness  of  the  personality  of  Christ  takes  away  the  very  vitality  of  our  religion. 
How  much  better  will  you  teach,  this  afternoon,  in  your  Sabbath-school  class,  it 
you  teach  your  children  for  Christ  I  The  woman's  service  showed  her  love  in  that 
it  was  fervent.  There  was  so  much  affection  in  it — nothing  conventional ;  no 
following  chilly  propriety,  no  hesitating  inquiry  for  precedents.  Why  did  she  kiss 
His  feet?  Was  it  not  a  superfluity  ?  0  for  more  of  this  guileless  piety,  which  hurla 
decorum  and  regulation  to  the  winds.  This  woman's  love  is  a  lesson  to  us  in  the 
opportunity  which  she  seized.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  woman  that  was  a  sinner: — 
I.  The  person  descbibed.  1.  She  was  a  sinner.  This  applies  to  all.  2.  A  notorious 
sinner.  3.  A  mourning  and  deeply  penitent  sinner.  II.  The  coubse  which  shb 
iLOOPno.  1.  Strong  desires  after  the  Saviour.  2.  Deep  humility  and  lowliness  of 
mind.  8.  Deep  contrition.  4.  True  and  hearty  affection  to  Christ.  5.  Liberality 
•nd  devotedness  to  Christ.    6.  An  after-life  worthy  of  the  profession  she  now  made- 


CHAP.  VII.]  ST.  LUKE,  717 

She  attended  Christ  in  many  of  His  journeys,  Ac.  III.  The  public  testimont  bhb 
BECKiYED.     She  had  honoured  Jesus  ;  and  He  now  honours  her,  by  testifying  of  her. 

1.  He  testified  to  her  forgiveness.  2.  He  testified  to  her  faith  as  the  instrumental 
cause.  3.  He  testified  to  the  greatness  of  her  love.  4.  He  testified  to  His  approval 
and  acceptance  of  her.  Application.  Learn :  1.  The  condescension  of  Christ.  2. 
The  riches  of  His  grace.  3.  His  power  and  willingness  to  save  the  chief  of  sinners. 
4.  The  true  way  of  coming  to  Christ.  5,  The  effects  of  true  love  to  Him.  (J. 
Bums,  D.D.)  1  he  penitent  citizen: — 1.  Her  humility.  She  takes  her  stand  at 
the  feet  of  Christ,  esteeming  the  lowest  place  too  good  for  her,  so  vile  an  abject. 

2.  Bashfulness  and  shame.  She  doth  not  boldly  face  Christ,  but  gets  behind  Him ; 
being  conscious  of  her  sins,  which  thus  placed  her  deservedly.  3.  Sorrow.  The 
rock  ia  now  turned  into  a  water-pool,  and  the  flint  into  a  river  of  waters:  she  weeps, 
and  in  such  abundance,  as  that  she  washeth  Christ's  feet  with  those  streams  of  peni- 
tence. 4.  Bevenge.  That  hair  which  she  had  so  often  gently  combed,  and  cunningly 
broidered  against  the  glass,  and  then  spread  forth  as  a  net  to  catch  her  amorous 
companions  withal,  she  now  employs  in  the  wiping  those  feet,  which  she  had  with 
her  tears  washed.  5.  Love;  manifested  in  kissing  Christ's  feet,  acknowledging 
thereby  that  she  tasted  of  the  comfort  that  was  in  Him.  0  how  gladly  will  one  who 
hath  escaped  drowning  kiss  the  shore !  6.  Bounty,  She  pours  a  precious  and  costly 
ointment  upon  those  feet  she  had  thus  washed  and  kissed.  Every  way  she  approved 
herself  a  perfect  penitent.  And  therefore  no  marvel  (the  great  prize  coming)  if  the 
trumpets  sound;  the  news  of  this  rare  convert  is  proclaimed  with  an  "  Ecce,  Behold 
a  woman."  (N.  Rogers.)  Jesus  attracting  sinners : — Travelling  along  a  country 
road  in  a  hot  summer's  day,  you  may  have  noticed  the  people  before  you  turn  aside 
at  a  certain  point,  and  gather  around  something  that  was  yet  hidden  from  you. 
You  knew  at  once  that  it  was  a  clear,  cold  spring  that  drew  them  all  together  there. 
Each  of  them  wanted  something  which  that  spring  could  supply.  Or  you  have 
seen  iron  filings  leap  up  and  cling  to  the  poles  of  a  magnet  when  it  was  brought  near 
to  them.  The  attraction  of  the  magnet  drew  them  to  itself.  So  sinners  were 
drawn  to  Jesus ;  they  felt  that  in  Him  was  all  fulness,  and  that  He  could  supply 
their  need.  {American  Sunday  School  Times.)  Love  produces  repentance  : — From 
this  incident  we  see  what  it  is  that  produces  true  repentance.  If  you  were  going 
out  into  the  open  air  on  a  frosty  day,  and  were  taking  a  lump  of  ice,  you  might 
pound  it  with  a  pestle,  but  it  would  still  continue  ice.  You  might  break  it  into  ten 
thousand  atoms,  but  so  long  as  you  continue  in  that  wintry  atmosphere,  every  frag- 
ment, however  small,  will  t^till  be  frozen.  But  come  within.  Bring  in  the  ice 
beside  your  own  bright  and  blazing  fire,  and  soon  in  that  genial  glow  "  the  waters 
flow."  A  man  may  try  to  make  himself  contrite ;  he  may  search  out  his  sins  and 
set  them  before  him,  and  dwell  on  all  their  enormity,  and  still  feel  no  true  repen- 
tance. Though  pounded  with  penances  in  the  mortar  of  fasts  and  macerations,  hia 
heart  continues  hard  and  icy  still.  And  as  long  as  you  keep  in  that  legal  atmosphere 
it  cannot  thaw.  There  may  be  elaborate  confession,  a  got-up  sort  of  penitence,  a 
voluntary  humility,  but  there  is  no  godly  sorrow.  But  come  to  Jesus  with  His 
words  of  grace  and  truth.  From  the  cold  winter  night  of  the  ascetic,  come  into 
the  summer  of  the  Great  Evangelist.  Let  that  flinty  frozen  spirit  bask  a  little  in  the 
beams  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Listen  for  a  little  to  those  words  which  melted 
this  sinner  into  a  penitent — which  broke  her  alabaster  box  and  brimmed  over  in 
tears  of  ecstatic  sorrow  and  self -condemning  devotion  :  for,  finding  that  you  too  have 
much  forgiven,  you  also  will  love  much.  (J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Self-righteous 
murmuring  : — When  the  prodigal  son  returned  home,  that  respectable  elder  brother 
of  hia  was  the  only  one  who  begrudged  his  welcome.  So  this  punctilious  Pharisee 
murmared  at  the  woman  who  anointed  Jesus'  feet.  It  is  told  of  a  noted  geologist 
that  once,  when  travelling  over  a  new  district,  he  hired  an  ignorant  countryman  to 
carry  the  specimens  of  the  different  rocks  which  he  had  collected,  to  his  inn.  The 
countrymen  afterwards,  conscious  of  his  own  superior  knowledge,  used  to  tell  of 
"  the  poor  mad  gentleman  who  went  around  gathering  stones."  The  Pharisee,  clad 
in  his  own  self-righteousness,  has  the  same  difficulty  regarding  the  mission  of  Jesus  ; 
he  cannot  see  how  Jesua  stoops  to  even  the  outcast.  He  does  not  see  the  hidden 
jewel  of  the  soul ;  he  forgets  that  the  physician  must  lay  his  hand  upon  the  loath  • 
some  sore,  if  he  would  heal  it.  (American  Sunday  School  Times.)  An  unfeeling 
religionist : — There  is  a  story  in  the  Bustan  of  the  famous  Persian  poet  Saadi, 
which  seems  an  echo  of  this  evangelical  history.  Jesus,  while  on  earth,  was  once 
entertained  in  the  cell  of  a  dervish,  or  monk,  of  eminent  reputation  for  sanctity. 
In  the  same  city  dwelt  a  youth,  sunk  in  every  sin,  '*  whose  heart  was  so  black  that 


718  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTB,ATOn.  [oha».  tie, 

Satan  himself  shrank  back  from  it  in  horror."  This  last  presently  appeared  before 
the  cell  of  the  monk,  and,  as  if  smitten  by  the  very  presence  of  the  Divine  prophet, 
began  to  lament  deeply  the  sin  and  misery  of  his  life  past,  and,  shedding  abundant 
tears,  to  implore  pardon  and  grace.  The  monk  indignantly  interrupted  him,  de- 
manding how  he  dared  to  appear  in  his  presence,  and  in  that  of  God's  holy  prophet; 
assured  him  that  for  him  it  wks  in  vain  to  seek  forgiveness ;  and  to  prove  how  inexor- 
ably he  considered  his  lot  was  fixed  for  hell,  exclaimed  :  "  My  God,  grant  me  but 
one  thing — that  I  may  stand  far  from  this  man  in  the  judgment  day  !  "  On  thia 
Jesus  spoke :  "  It  shall  be  even  so  ;  the  prayer  of  both  is  granted.  This  sinner  haa 
sought  mercy  and  grace,  and  has  not  sought  them  in  vain.  His  sins  are  forgiven : 
his  place  shall  be  in  Paradise  at  the  last  day.  But  this  monk  has  prayed  that  he 
may  never  stand  near  this  sinner.  His  prayer,  too,  is  granted :  hell  shall  be  hia 
place  ;  for  there  this  sinner  shall  never  come."  (Trench.)  The  nun  and  the  peni- 
tent : — One  of  the  legends  of  Ballycastle  preserves  a  touching  story.  It  is  of  a  holy 
nun  whose  frail  sister  had  repented  her  evil  ways  and  sought  sanctuary  at  the  con- 
vent. It  was  winter ;  the  shelter  she  claimed  was  granted,  but  the  sinless  sister 
refused  to  remain  under  the  same  roof  with  the  repentant  sinner.  She  left  the 
threshold,  and  proceeded  to  pray  in  the  open  air ;  but  looking  towards  the  convent, 
she  was  startled  by  perceiving  a  brilliant  light  issue  from  one  of  the  cells,  where  she 
knew  that  neither  taper  nor  fire  could  have  been  burning.  She  proceeded  to  her 
sister's  bed — for  it  was  in  that  room  the  light  was  shining — just  in  time  to  receive 
her  last  sigh  of  repentance.  The  light  had  vanished,  but  the  recluse  received  it  as 
a  sign  from  heaven  that  the  offender  had  been  pardoned,  and  learned  thenceforward 
to  be  more  merciful  in  judging,  and  more  Christlike  in  forgiving.  {S.  C.  Hall.) 
Influence  of  Christ's  love : — A  pious  man  relates  the  following  incident:  One  day  I 
passed  a  shed  where  I  saw  several  men  at  work  loosening  a  waggon  whose  wheela 
had  frozen  into  the  ice.  One  of  the  men  went  to  work  with  axe  and  hammer,  and 
with  much  labour  loosened  one  of  the  wheels,  not,  however,  without  doing  consider- 
able injury  to  it.  Suddenly,  the  woman  of  the  house  came  near,  with  a  pailful  of 
hot  water,  and  poured  it  on  the  spokes.  The  wheels  were  now  quickly  loosened,  and 
the  loud  praises  of  those  standing  near  were  bestowed  on  the  woman.  I  thought : 
I  will  note  this !  The  warming  influence  of  Christ's  love  loosens  the  icy  bands 
around  a  sinful  heart  sooner  than  the  axe  of  carnal  power  or  dogmatic  opposition. 

Ver.  40.  Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee. — On  administering  reproof: — 
1.  To  say  somewhat  to  our  brother  when  we  see  him  run  into  an  error.  In  such 
a  case  we  may  not  be  silent.  •'  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour, 
and  not  suffer  sin  upon  him "  (Levit.  xix.  17).  Observe — 2.  Courteous  usage 
should  not  keep  us  from  telling  men  of  their  faults,  and  discovering  their  failings 
to  them,  {N.  Rogers.)  Rebuke  in  parable : — It  is  none  of  the  worst  observations 
we  meet  withal  in  Oleaster ;  that  the  holy  prophets  in  dealing  with  great  ones 
have  spoken  most  an  end  in  parables,  as  our  Saviour  did  here  to  Simon.  Let 
reproof  be  as  good  and  wholesome  diet  as  a  partridge,  yet  it  would  not  be  served 
in  to  a  great  man's  table  raw,  or  with  the  feathers  on,  but  cooked  and  seasoned. 
Reproof  of  them  must  be  well  wrapped  up  (as  we  do  a  pill  in  sugar),  that  it  may 
the  more  easily  be  swallowed,  and  work  before  they  think  on  it.  But  it  may  not 
be  wholly  withheld  from  any  man  whatever,  be  he  our  dearest  friend.  In  so 
doing  we  should  deal  unkindly  with  them  who  deal  friendly  with  us.  Unhappy 
is  that  friendship,  saith  Carthusianus,  which  favouring  our  brother's  oares  doth 
break  his  neck.  Such  friendship  David  putteth  in  his  Litany,  and  desireth  God 
to  keep  him  from.  (Ibid.)  On  receiving  reproof: — The  word  Christ  speaks 
ought  to  be  received  with  all  readiness  of  spirit.  Thus  Simon  received  it,  so 
ought  we.  Eli  desired  Samuel  to  tell  him  all  (1  Sam.  iii.  17).  Such  should  be 
the  desire  of  all  God's  people,  that  God's  ministers  would  deal  faithfully  with 
them  in  delivering  the  whole  counsel  of  God  unto  them — as  well  one  part  as 
another.  Wantons,  you  know,  come  into  a  garden  to  pick  only  flowers  ;  here  they 
pick  a  gay,  and  there  another ;  but  the  good  housewife  comes  to  gather  herbs :  bo 
should  we  come  into  God's  house  to  hear  His  Word.  {Ibid  )  The  ear  the  door 
to  the  soul : — The  devil's  study  is  to  keep  this  door  shut,  that  Christ  may  not  enter. 
Like  a  gaoler,  he  will  sometimes  be  content  to  let  his  prisoner  have  hands  and 
feet  free,  provided  the  prison  doors  and  gates  be  fast  locked  and  barred.  Hia 
captives  shall  sometimes  give  an  ahns,  or  do  some  other  outward  work  of  mercy, 
come  to  church  to  satisfy  the  law.  Sec.  But  he  cannot  endure  the  doors  should 
stand  open,  for  fear  of  an  escape.    (So  Acts  vii.  57 ;  Psa.  Iviii.  45.)    Search  tho 


«BAP.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  719 

Scriptures,  and  yoa  shall  find  that  none  was  cured  with  greater  diffioolty  than  ha 
that  had  a  deaf  and  dumb  spirit.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  41.   There  was  a  certain  creditor  which  had  two  dehtors. — God  it  our 

Creditor  : — <Tod  is  this  Creditor;  He  trusts  us  with  His  goods;  what  we  have  we 
have  from  Him  to  use.  1.  How  many  daily  speud  of  God's  stock  and  store. 
Neither  man  nor  beast  (for  the  use  of  man),  but  daily  receive  from  His  hand,  and 
seek  to  be  further  trusted  (Psa.  civ.  27).  It  would  undo  the  richest  man  that  ever 
was  to  have  so  many  in  his  debt  at  once.  2.  Think  how  prodigal  and  expensive 
men  are  in  spending  on  God's  stock ;  how  prodigal  of  His  mercy,  patif  nee,  good- 
ness, &o.  (Rom.  ii.  4,  5).  How  lavish  are  men  of  the  time  lent,  of  health,  wealth, 
&o.  (Luke  XV.).  Look  but  on  the  life  of  some  one  sinner,  and  judge  of  the  rest 
{Hosea  xii.  1 ;  Jer.  xx.  7).  3.  Consider  we  with  ourselves  how  long  God  hath  for- 
borne and  been  out  of  purse.  4.  Add  to  all  God's  bounty  and  liberality — which  is 
renewed  to  us  daily — He  is  as  willing  still  to  lend  us,  as  if  we  had  paid  Him  in  all, 
and  owed  Him  not  a  groat.  5.  In  all  our  wants  and  needs,  from  hence  we  have 
direction  to  whom  to  go  a-borrowing.  (1)  He  is  a  bountiful  Creditor,  and  no  needy 
one ;  better  provided  than  any  other.  He  hath  for  our  need,  nnd  always  is  at 
home.  (2)  He  stands  not  upon  any  great  security ;  He  is  willing  to  take  our  words, 
our  promises,  for  the  payment  (Gen.  xxviii.  20 ;  1  Sam.  i.  11;  Matt,  xviii.  26,  27). 
Only  He  expects  that  we  should  be  just  of  our  words,  that  we  may  be  again  trusted 
(Eccles.  V.  4).  (3)  Though  we  borrow  of  him  to-day,  yet  if  we  stand  in  need  of 
Him  to-morrow,  as  questionless  we  shall,  and  desire  to  be  further  trusted.  He  will 
be  willing  to  pleasure  us,  especially  when  He  sees  we  employ  those  talents  well 
wherewith  He  hath  betrusted  us.  {N.  Rogers.)  Other  debts  : — 1.  A  day  is  set  for 
the  payment  of  other  debts.  Till  the  day  be  come  we  fear  no  arrest,  they  cannot 
be  exacted.  But  the  sinner  goes  in  danger  every  hour;  God  may  arrest  him  when- 
soever it  pleaseth  Him,  as  He  often  doth  and  hath  done,  when  men  think  them- 
selves most  safe  (1  Sam.  xv.  32 ;  Dan.  v.  4-30 ;  Job  xxi.  13).  2.  Other  debts 
make  us  liable  but  to  a  bodily  arrest  only.  The  conscience  may  be  free ;  but  the 
debt  of  sin  doth  endanger  both  body  and  soul  too.  3.  Other  debts  may  be  for- 
gotten, and  so  not  required ;  but  the  debt  of  sin  cannot  be  forgotten  of  the  Lord 
{Amos  viii.  7).  He  keepeth  a  debt-book,  wherein  all  is  written,  with  the  day  and 
place,  &c.  (Isa.  Ixv.  6).  Cain's  debt  is  as  fresh  in  God's  mind  as  if  it  were  but 
yesterday.  4.  From  other  debtors  there  may  be  some  protection,  either  place  or 
person  may  keep  us  from  arrest ;  but  there  is  no  protection  against  the  Lord's 
attachments.  Angels  nor  men  cannot  save  us  (Job  x.  7).  The  horns  of  the  altar 
cannot  protect  us  (1  Kings  ii.  28-31).  Nor  can  mountains  and  rocks  conceal  uf 
(Rev.  vi.  16).  5.  There  may  be  a  flying  away  from  other  debtors,  and  a  hiding; 
ourselves  from  man's  attachments ;  but  flying  here  will  not  save  us  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7). 
6.  In  man's  prison  some  favour  may  be  showed,  good  usage  obtained ;  but  in  the 
prison  wherein  sin  doth  cast  us,  there  is  no  ease.  7.  If  thou  art  not  freed  out 
of  the  hands  of  other  creditors,  by  friends  or  other  means,  yet  death  will  free 
thee.  But  it  is  not  so  here,  the  debt  which  sin  cast  thee  into  is  most  called  for, 
and  most  terrible  after  death.  (Ibid.)  Condition  of  these  two  debtors  ; — All  are 
not  alike  indebted  to  the  Lord.  Some  are  more  indebted  to  Him  than  others. 
This  appears  by  that  parable  (Luke  xvi.  5)  ;  and  by  other  express  scripture 
(Matt.  xi.  21 ;  xii.  31 ;  xxiii.  14,  15,  24).  1.  All  have  not  received  from  the  Lord 
a  like  number  of  pounds  nor  talents.  He  hath  not  given  to  all  a  like  stock  to 
trade  with  (Luke  xix.  14;  Matt.  ixv.  14).  2.  Again,  all  are  not  ahke  deep  in 
respect  of  actual  transgressions.  For  albeit  original  sin  be  equally  and  alike 
extended  unto  all,  it  hath  no  degree  nor  parts  in  any  child  of  Adam  more  than 
other ;  yet  actual  sins  committed  by  us  are  of  a  thousand  kinds,  and  every  vice 
hath  its  latitude  and  degree.  Some  are  bound  up  in  folio,  other  some  in  quarto, 
others  in  octavo,  and  the  sins  of  some  other  in  a  decimo  sexto.  3.  We  have 
learned  better,  and  accordingly  we  should  examine  of  what  kind  our  sins  are,  and 
how  much  our  debt  is ;  and  as  we  find,  let  us  put  down  in  our  account.  To  help 
as  a  little  in  this  our  search,  take  this  for  a  general  rule,  the  more  directly  any 
sin  is  done  against  God,  the  greater  the  sin  is  to  be  accounted  of,  and  the  more 
the  debt.  Thus  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  greatest  sin,  because  he  who 
committeth  that  sin,  sinneth  of  malice,  purposely  to  despite  the  Spirit  of  grace. 
Hence  it  foUows — (1)  The  sins  of  the  highest  degree  against  the  first  table 
are  greater  than  the  sins  of  the  highest  degree  against  the  second  tablew 
(2)  Those  sins  that  are  committed  against  the  means  which  should  keep  us  from 


TJO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB,  [OHAF.  TO. 

•in  are  greater  than  other  (Matt.  xi.  24).  So  sins  against  knowledge  are  greater  than 
those  that  are  committed  out  of  simple  ignorance  (Luke  xii.  47;  James  iv.  17). 
And  as  it  is  thus  in  the  sins  of  omission,  so  also  in  the  sins  of  commission  (Acts 
iii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  Paul  found  mercy,  because  he  did  it  ignorantly.  So  sins 
•gainst  the  gospel  are  greater  than  those  against  the  law,  for  that  they  are  com- 
mitted against  more  light  "This  is  the  condemnation,"  saith  Christ,  "  that  light  is 
come  into  the  world"  (John  iii.  19).  To  commit  sin  in  the  clear  light  of  the  gospel 
is  a  reproach  not  much  unlike  that  of  Absolom.  "  He  committed  wickedness  in  the 
Bight  of  the  sun."  (3)  Sins  often  committed  are  greater  than  those  but  once  com- 
mitted by  us,  for  that  here  is  an  abusing  of  God's  patience  and  forbearance  (Bom. 
ii.  4,  5  ;  Jer.  v.  6  ;  2  Peter  ii.  22).  In  arithmetic  a  figure,  in  the  first  place,  stands 
lor  itself ;  in  the  second  place,  it  stands  for  ten ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  for  a 
hundred,  and  so  higher.  {Ibid.)  No  peace  to  the  debtor : — Augustus  hearing 
that  the  goods  of  a  merchant  who  died  much  in  debt  were  set  forth  to  sale,  he  sent 
to  buy  his  pillow,  saying  that  he  thought  it  had  some  rare  virtue  in  it  to  get  one 
asleep,  seeing  he  that  owed  so  much  could  sleep  on  it  eo  quietly.  As  for  these  who 
are  so  deep  in  arrearages  with  God,  and  in  such  danger  by  reason  of  their  debt,  and 
yet  sleep  securely,  God  keep  me  from  their  bed  and  pillow.  That  sleep  of  theirs  is 
but  Porkepose  playing  before  a  tempest.  (Ibid.)  Small  debts : — 1.  That  the  nature 
of  sin  stands  not  in  the  material  part,  but  in  the  form,  which  is  the  transgression  of 
the  law.  2.  SmaM  sins,  with  their  multitude  and  number,  hurt  the  soul  as  much 
as  great  sins  do  with  their  weight.  3.  Small  sins  serve  to  make  way  for  greater. 
Huntsmen  first  ply  the  deer  with  their  little  beagles,  till  it  be  heated  and  blown,  and 
then  they  put  on  their  great  buckhounds.  Such  use  the  devil  makes  of  little  sins.  A 
long  thread  of  iniquity  he  hath  let  in  with  a  small  needle,  as  we  find  in  David's  case, 
and  in  Peter's,  Ac.  A  great  fire  hath  been  kindled  by  a  little  spark ;  and  a  great 
blot  made  with  a  little  hair  hanging  in  the  pen.  4.  Small  sins  are  cured  with  more 
difiSculty  than  greater.  A  wound  made  with  a  stiletto  is  more  dangerous  than  a 
wound  made  with  Goliath's  sword ;  here  the  wound  presently  doseth  up,  and  so 
bleeds  inwardly  in  greater  abundance.  5.  Forget  not  what  Christ  suffered  for  small 
sins,  even  His  precious  blood  (Heb.  ix.  7).  Our  great  sins  were  as  the  spear  in  His 
Bide,  and  as  the  nails  in  His  blessed  hands  and  feet ;  and  our  small  sins  were  as  the 
thorns  upon  His  head,  they,  though  small,  yet  put  Him  to  pain  and  grief.  How  dare 
we  crown  the  Son  of  God  (again)  with  thorns,  and  put  Him  by  our  small  sins  to  an 
after  suffering  ?  {Ibid.)  Free  forgiveness  : — I.  It  is  an  unspeakable  mercy  to 
HAVE  ouB  SINS  FORGIVEN.  This  is  the  first  desire  and  prayer  of  an  awakened 
sinner,  and  a  principal  blessing  in  the  covenant  of  grace.  II.  It  is  the  sole  pre- 
BoGATiYB  OF  GoD  TO  FORGIVE  BIN.  Noue  Can  pass  by  an  offence  but  the  party 
offended,  and  none  can  discharge  a  debt  but  the  person  with  whom  it  was  con- 
tracted. III.  Those  to  whom  God  forgives  bin  have  nothing  to  pay.  The  whole 
creation  is  become  insolvent.    IV.  Those   whose   bins  are  pardoned  are  first 

BROUGHT  TO  BEE  THAT  THEY  HAVE  NOTHING  TO  PAY.  V.  ThE  FOBOIVEKESS  OF  BINS  IS 
ALL  OF  GRACE.      VI.  ThE  FORGIVENESS  OF  BIN  TENDS  TO  GLORIFY  GoD.      HeUCe  We  may 

learn — 1.  How  much  those  wrong  God  who  entertain  hard  thoughts  of  Him.  2. 
What  gratitude  and  love  is  due  to  Him  from  those  whose  sins  are  pardoned  I  (B. 
Beddome,  M.A.)  From  the  whole,  we  may  observe  these  six  things.  1.  That 
sinners  are  in  debt  to  God,  as  having  violated  His  law,  and  so  laid  themselves  open 
to  the  punishment  threatened :  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  2.  Some  have  con- 
tracted greater  guilt,  and  so  are  more  in  debt  to  God  than  others,  as  having  laid 
themselves  open  to  greater  punishment ;  from  the  greater  advantages  they  have 
enjoyed  and  abused,  they  have  more  to  answer  for  and  more  to  fear.  8.  It  is  the 
common  condition  of  sinners  indebted  to  God  that  they  have  nothing  to  pay, 
nothing  to  satisfy  Divine  justice,  or  redeem  themselves  from  deserved  wrath.  4. 
God  is  able  and  ready  to  forgive  the  greatest  debt  and  debtors,  as  well  as  the  least; 
those  that  owe  five  hundred  pence,  as  well  as  those  that  owe  fifty.  5.  Whom  God 
forgives,  He  forgives  freely ;  not  excluding  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  but  upon  the 
account  of  it,  which  is  so  far  from  lessening  the  freeness  of  that  grace  that  forgives 
ns,  that  it  greatly  exalts  it.  I.  Some  who  have  run  far  in  debt  to  God  have  bebh 
FORGIVEN.  Manasseh  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  Paul  and  Mary  Magdalene.  1. 
Thus  He  magnifies  His  patience,  and  proves  it  Divine,  the  patience  of  God,  and  not 
of  a  creature,  much  less  of  a  man.  (1  Tim.  i.  16.)  2.  Some  whose  iniquities  have 
abounded  have  been  forgiven,  for  the  greater  exaltation  of  grace.  Grace  is  thus 
exalted  and  glorified — (1)  In  its  fulness ;  that  so  where  sin  hath  abounded  grace 
may  much  more  abound.     (2)  Herein  grace  shines  in  its  freeness ;  which,  that  ik 


«BAP.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  781 

may  be  regarded,  it  is  God's  method,  before  He  makes  the  offer  of  pardon,  to  sum 
ap  what  sinners  have  been  and  done  (Isa.  xliii.  22-24).     II.  What  thebb  is  in 

lOBOIVING    GBACE    TO     BE    AN    ABGOMENT    FOB    LOVE     IN    THOSE    THAT    BECEIVB    IT.  If 

blessedness  he  an  argument  for  love,  forgiveness  has  this  belonging  to  it,  and  con- 
nected with  it  (Psa.  xxxii.  1,  2).  This  is  a  comprehensive  blessing,  and  the  founda- 
tion of  many  others.  They  who  have  their  sins  forgiven,  are  freed  from  the 
greatest  evil,  the  wrath  of  God,  and  eternal  condemnation.  Pardon  of  sin  is  a 
covenant-mercy,  always  connected  with  the  favour  of  God,  and  a  special  relation  to 
to  Him.  The  pardon  of  sin  will  sweeten  every  other  mercy,  and  render  any  out- 
ward burden  or  affliction  tolerable.  Sin  imbitters,  and  adds  a  weight  to  any  afflic- 
tion ;  but  pardon  doth  lighten  and  sweeten  it.  In  a  word,  the  sinner,  pardoned  in 
this  world,  shall  have  eternal  life  in  the  future.     III.  How  Goo's  gbace,  as  fbeely 

rOBGIVING  GBEATEB  DEBTS,  SHOULD  LEAD  THE    FOKGIVEN   SOUL  TO  LOVE  HiM  THE  MOEE . 

And  here  God's  rich  grace,  freely  forgiving  greater  debts — 1.  Tends  to  this,  as  it 
frees  the  soul  from  greater  torment,  to  which  its  multiplied  sins  laid  it  open,  espe- 
cially those  committed  against  Ught  and  grace.  2.  God's  mercy,  as  forgiving 
greater  debts,  may  free  the  soul  from  the  more  tormentful  apprehensions  it  is  under, 
even  here,  of  the  wrath  to  come,  and  so  engage  Him  to  love  the  more.  3.  The 
greater  and  more  astonishing  grace  abounding  towards  great  sinners,  and  singling 
them  out  for  mercy  when  others  are  left,  is  another  ground  of  greater  love.  Appli- 
cation :  1.  Have  such  as  have  run  deeply  in  debt  to  God  been  freely  forgiven  by  Him  ? 
What  reason  have  we,  then,  to  believe  Him  when  He  declares  Himself  thus,  "As  I 
live,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from 
his  way  and  live  "  1  2.  How  unreasonable  are  the  hard  and  horrid  thoughts  whereby 
sinners,  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  vileness  and  guilt,  are  kept  off  from  a  for- 
giving God  ?  3.  How  disingenuous  would  it  be  for  any  to  go  on  with  the  greater 
security  and  boldness  in  sin,  because  God  is  ready  so  freely  to  forgive  the  greatest 
debt  ?  4.  For  the  greatesi  sinners  to  say,  There  is  no  hope  in  their  case,  is  to  say 
what  they  have  no  warrant  for,  from  God  or  His  Word.  5.  Let  such  as  have  any 
good  hope  that  their  debts,  how  large  soever,  are  forgiven,  love  much,  yea,  love  the 
more,  the  larger  their  debts  have  been.  If  we  are  pardoned  at  all,  it  is  a  very  great 
debt  from  which  we  are  discharged.  0  let  us  labour  after  suitable  afifection,  and 
Bhow  it.  (1)  By  reflecting  npon  sin  with  the  greater  shame  and  sorrow,  hatred  and 
abhorrence,  as  committed  against  so  good  a  God.  (2)  Having  much  forgiven, 
love  God  the  more,  and  give  Him  the  glory  due  unto  His  name.  "Who  is  a  God 
like  unto  Thee,  who  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  transgression,"  &c.  (3) 
Having  much  forgiven,  let  your  love  show  itself  greater  by  your  growing  esteem  of 
Jesus  Christ,  whose  blood  was  the  price  of  your  pardon,  and  though  it  is  given  you 
freely,  coat  ffim  His  life.     (D.  Wilcox.) 

Vers.  42,  43.  He  fimnMy  forgave  them  both. — Free  forgivenesi: — There  is 
one  thing  that  is  needful  in  all  true  religion — there  is  no  religion  without  it — and 
that  is  love  towards  God.  It  is  quite  true  that  some  Christians  love  God  more 
than  others.  Cannot  you  fancy  what  those  two  men  went  through  ?  They  would 
not  each  go  through  the  same  experience.  There  was  a  great  difference  between 
their  cases.  Take  the  first  man.  You  can  fancy  his  saying  to  himself :  "  Well,  it 
is  a  nasty  thing,  this  little  debt  of  mine ;  I  wish  I  had  not  got  so  much  behind- 
hand ;  I  do  not  quite  know  how  I  am  going  to  clear  it  off,  but  I  must  try :  perhaps 
my  creditor  will  be  content  with  a  few  instalments ;  if  I  pay  him  half  a  crown  a 
week  for  such  a  time  I  shall  begin  to  make  a  hole  in  the  debt,  and,  ultimately,  he 
may  get  it  all :  I  must  cast  myself  on  his  forbearance."  The  other  can  indulge  in 
no  such  hope.  Let  one  of  you — a  poor,  labouring  man,  earning  fifteen  or  eighteen 
shillings  a  week — put  himself  in  that  man's  position.  Just  imagine  yourself 
encumbered  with  a  debt  of  a  hundred  pounds.  How  hopeless  a  thing  it  would 
seem  to  you  ;  all  your  efforts  to  clear  it  off  must  fail ;  you  might  work  almost  to 
death,  and  yet  the  debt  would  be  there  still.  We  can  fancy  what  took  place  in 
that  man's  house  as  the  reckoning  day  drew  near.  The  debt  laws  in  those 
countries,  you  know,  were  terribly  severe.  His  feeling  is  one  of  hopelessness. 
The  prison  looms  up  in  view ;  he  will  be  sold,  and  all  that  he  hath,  his  children 
will  be  torn  from  him ;  his  little  home  will  be  broken  up.  How  desolate  the  man 
feels  !  Try  to  make  him  happy  if  you  can.  Go  and  talk  cheerfully  to  him.  Tell 
him  to  have  good  hope,  to  keep  up  his  courage,  and  that  sort  of  thing.  You  cannot 
bring  a  smile  to  the  man's  face  ;  he  looks  as  miserable  as  he  cac  be.  On  his  way 
be  meets  the  other  man,  and  he  asks  him  what  his  business  is.     "  Well,"  says  ha, 

46 


728  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tti. 

"  I  have  got  an  awkward  affair — not  very  serious,  but  still  awkward  *,  I  have  a  nasty 
little  debt  that  I  cannot  settle ;  I  am  sure  I  don't  know  how  the  creditor  will  treat 
me;  there  are  those  fifty  pence  that  I  owe  him  ;  I  know  he  has  a  right  to  exact 
them  to  the  very  last  farthing,  and  I  have  •  nothing  to  pay  ' ;  I  do  not  know  how 
he  will  deal  with  me."  "  WeU,  what  are  you  going  to  do  ?  "  "  Oh,  I  am  going  to 
make  a  few  proposals  to  him,  and  see  if  I  cannot  get  him  to  take  a  few  instalments, 
so  that  I  may  pay  him  off  by  degrees.  What  is  your  case,  my  poor  fellow  ?  You 
look  very  sad."  "Oh,  mine  is  a  far  more  serious  case  than  yours."  At  last  the 
great  man  stands  before  them.  "  Well,"  he  says,  "  have  you  got  your  money?  " 
They  both  hang  down  their  heads.  Turning  to  one  he  says,  "  Have  you  got  yonr 
fifty  pence?"  "No,  sir,  I  have  not  got  it."  "Why  have  you  not  got  it?'* 
"  WeU,  sir,  the  truth  is,  I  have  got  no  money — I  am  a  bankrupt — I  have  nothing 
to  pay."  Then,  turning  to  the  other,  he  says,  "  What  have  you  got  to  say  for 
yourself?  Have  you  got  your  five  hundred  pence?"  His  head  hangs  down ;  tears 
come  into  the  strong  man's  eyes  ;  his  body  quivers  with  emotion ;  he  can  hardly 
control  himself.  The  next  moment  the  mystery  is  solved.  "  He  frankly  forgave 
them  both."  The  one  man  rises  to  his  feet,  and  says,  "  Sir,  I  thank  you."  The 
other  drops  on  his  knees,  and  buries  his  head  in  his  hands.  He  cannot  thank  his 
benefactor,  he  is  too  much  overpowered.  The  one  man  feels,  "  Well,  he  is  very  kind  in 
his  dealing  with  me."  The  other  feels, "  He  has  saved  me  from  ruin ;  I  should  have 
been  utterly  lost  if  this  man  had  not  acted  such  a  generous  part  towards  me."  The 
one  man  goes  out  of  the  house  with  a  kind  of  respectful  feeling  towards  his  bene- 
factor. The  other  goes  away  with  the  feeling  that  he  has  been  bought  over,  so  to 
speak,  by  the  benefactor's  goodness :  that  all  that  he  has,  and  all  that  he  is,  belongs 
to  that  man  who  has  stretched  out  his  hand  of  forgiveness,  and  done  him  so  un- 
expected a  favour.  Now,  my  dear  friends,  among  the  many  figures  which  bring 
before  us  some  idea  of  our  sin,  there  are  very  few  more  suggestive  than  this  figure 
of  debt.  Now,  is  there  any  difference  between  us  in  this  respect  ?  Yes,  doubtless, 
there  are  shades  of  difference.  Some  owe  more  than  others.  Some  have  been 
more  prodigal  in  wasting  the  Master's  substance  than  others  ;  but  there  are  none 
of  us  who  can  say  that  they  owe  an  inconsiderable  debt.  Friends,  have  you  come 
to  the  point  which  these  debtors  reached  ?  Have  you  discovered,  that  all  your  life, 
you  have  been  heaping  up  debt,  and  that  you  have  "  nothing  to  pay?"  What! 
will  you  tell  me  that  these  debtors  did  not  know  that  they  were  forgiven  t  There 
are  plenty  of  nominal  Christians  in  our  day  who  say,  "  Ah  1  but  then  we  cannot 
know  that  we  are  forgiven ;  we  may  have  a  faint  idea  about  it,  but  we  cannot  know 
it."  Did  not  these  debtors  know  it?  {W.  Hay  Aitken.)  The  parable  of  the 
two  debtors : — This  parable  suggests  a  grave  question,  a  question  the  answer  to 
which  branches  out  into  many  forms  of  practical  truth.  In  the  parable,  the  debtor 
who  owes  five  hundred  pence  seems  to  have  the  advantage  over  the  debtor  who 
owes  fifty.  More  is  forgiven  him,  and  he  loves  more ;  he  is  quit  of  the  larger  debt, 
and  proves  the  better  man.  In  the  narrative,  the  Roman  who  is  a  sinner  seems,  in 
like  manner,  to  have  the  advantage  over  the  man  who  is  a  Pharisee — the  harlot 
over  the  devotee.  She  is  more  open  to  the  words  of  Christ,  and,  once  forgiven, 
shows  incomparably  the  warmer  love.  Now,  if  this  parable  and  narrative  stood 
alone,  we  might  not  care  to  raise  the  question,  whether  or  not  it  is  well  to  have 
sinned  much — whether  the  greatest  love  springs  from  the  most  heinous  trans- 
gressions, just  as  the  fairest  flowers  and  most  fruitful  trees  spring  from  a  plentifully 
manured  soil?  But  they  do  not  stand  alone.  The  impression  they  make  is 
deepened  as  we  listen  to  other  parables,  as  we  turn  to  other  narratives.  (The  two 
sons  ;  the  prodigal ;  the  Pharisee  and  publican.)  Is  it,  then,  an  advantage  to  hav« 
offended  much,  to  have  gone  far  and  deep  into  sin  ?  To  suppose  that  to  be  the 
case  is  to  utter  a  monstrous  libel  against  God  and  man.  Nevertheless  the  parables 
which  seem  to  support  this  view  subserve  a  most  useful  purpose ;  they  oontEiin 
truths  which  we  are  very  apt  to  neglect,  and  suggest  warnings  of  which  we  stand  in 
constant  need,  1.  Observe  that  flagrant  sinners  are  much  more  likely  to  discover 
that  they  are  sinners  than  moraUsts  and  ritualists.  2.  The  much  and  the  little  of 
sin  are  for  the  most  part  measures  of  conscience,  not  of  iniquity.  3.  Christ  do«i 
not  teach  us  to  run  into  sin,  but  to  hate  hypocrisy — the  worst  of  sins.  4.  Christ 
specially  warns  us  against  forming  those  hard  judgments  of  our  brethren,  which  of 
all  men  the  "unco'  guid"  are  apt  to  form.     (S.  Cox,  D.D.)        Love's  foremost : — 

I.   WS  MUST   FIBST   BE   SAVED   IN   THE   SAME   HANNEB  AS  OTHERS.      1.    All  are  in  debt ; 

we  must  heartily  own  this  to  be  our  case.  2.  None  have  anything  to  pay ;  we  must 
eonfesB  this,  without  reserve,  as  being  our  own  personal  condition.    3.  The  loving 


CHAP,  vn.]  ST.  LUKE,  72» 

Lord  forgives  in  each  case ;  personally  we  have  exceeding  great  need  of  such  re- 
mission. We  must  feel  this.  4.  In  each  case  He  forgives  frankly,  or  without  any 
consideration  or  recompense  ;  it  must  be  so  with  us.  We  must  accept  free  grace 
and  undeserved  favour.  6.  Out  of  this  arises  love.  By  a  sense  of  free  grace  we 
begin  to  love  our  Lord  ;  and  in  the  same  way  we  go  on  to  love  Him  more.  II.  Wb 
MUST  AIM  AT  A  DEEP  SENSE  OF  SIN.  1.  It  was  the  cousciousness  of  great  indebted- 
ness which  created  the  great  love  in  the  penitent  woman.  Not  her  sin,  but  the 
consciousness  of  it,  was  the  basis  of  her  loving  character.  2.  Where  sin  has  been 
open  and  loud,  there  ought  to  be  this  specially  humbling  consciousness ;  for  it 
would  be  an  evidence  of  untruthfulness  if  it  were  not  manifest  (1  Cor.  xv.  9). 
3.  Yet  is  it  frequently  found  in  the  most  moral,  and  it  abounds  in  saints  of  high 
degree  (1  John  i.  8).  4.  It  is  to  be  cultivated.  III.  This  will  lead  to  a  highlt 
IjOVino  cakbiage  towards  oub  Lord.  1.  We  shall  desire  to  be  near  Him,  even  at 
His  feet.  2.  We  shall  make  bold  confession,  and  shall  do  this  at  all  risks.  3.  We 
shall  show  deep  humility,  delighting  even  to  wash  His  feet.  4.  We  shall  exhibit 
thorough  contrition,  beholding  Him  with  tears.  5.  We  shall  render  earnest 
service;  doing  all  in  our  power  for  Jesus,  as  this  woman  did.  6.  We  shall 
make  total  consecration  of  all  that  we  have ;  our  tears,  our  choicest  gifts,  our 
hearts,  ourselves.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  parable  of  the  two  debtors: — I.  Thb 
incident  which  occasioned  the  parable.  1.  The  anointing.  2.  The  woman. 
3.  The  manner  in  which  the  Jews  sat  at  meat.  4.  The  woman's  conduct.  (1)  Her 
deep  humility.  (2)  Her  ardent  affection.  (3)  Her  grateful  sacrifice.  5.  The  pre- 
sumption which  led  Simon  to  his  surmisings  respecting  Christ.  II.  The  paeablb 
itself.  1.  That  sins  against  God  are  justly  denominated  debts.  (1)  Because 
they  imply  the  withholding  from  God  what  is  due  to  Him.  (2)  Because  they  render 
us  liable  to  be  cast  into  the  prison  of  hell.  2.  That  all  mankind  are  debtors  to  God, 
but  in  different  degrees.  3.  That  no  debtor  to  God  is  capable  of  paying  the  debt 
he  owes.  4.  That  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  or  debts,  is  of  the  utmost  import- 
ance to  us.  5.  That  a  consciousness  of  our  own  insolvency  must  precede  our 
pardon.  6.  That  forgiveness  may  be  confidently  expected,  when  sought  in  the 
way  of  God's  appointment.  III.  Oub  Lord's  application  of  the  parable.  1.  Just 
reproof  wisely  given.  The  evils  reproved  in  the  Pharisee  were  various  and  marked ; 
including  (1)  His  unbelief  in  the  Saviour's  mission.  (2)  His  self-esteem.  (3)  His 
censoriousness.  (4)  His  want  of  respect  for  Christ.  2.  Seasonable  consolation 
graciously  administered.  3.  Divine  instruction  kindly  suggested.  (1)  That  Christ 
is  truly  God.  This  is  evident  from  His  knowledge  of  Simon's  thoughts,  and  from 
the  blessings  He  conferred.  (2)  That  forgiveness  is  certain  to  all  true  believers. 
{T.  Gibson,  M.A.)  The  two  debtors  : — I.  Man  is  here  represented  as  a  debtor. 
God  as  our  Creator  has  an  undoubted  right  to  the  universal  obedience  of  His 
creatures.  To  Him  we  owe  the  consecration  of  every  power  and  faculty,  whether 
of  mind  or  body.  As  moral  Governor  of  the  world,  it  is  for  Him  to  propound  the 
rule  of  our  duty ;  and  accordingly  He  has  given  us  a  law,  the  transcript  of  His 
own  Divine  perfections,  immutable  in  its  demands,  universal  and  perpetual  in  its 
obligations.  But  where  is  the  individual  who  has  kept  it  ?  There  is  none  who 
has.  Consider,  each  one,  the  vast  number  of  your  debts.  They  are  too  many  to 
be  told.  God's  Book  is  full  of  them.  II.  Ample  provision  has  been  made  fob 
THE  FEEE  REMISSION  OF  THB  UNTOLD  DEBT.  As  man  IS  entirely  ruined  by  sin,  so  he 
is  entirely  saved  by  the  free  grace  of  God.  The  debt  is  paid,  justice  is  satisfied, 
God  is  glorified,  and  the  sinner  is  saved.  But  by  what  mighty  process  has  this 
been  effected?  God  in  the  person  of  His  Son  appears  as  the  Substitute  for 
offenders.  And  it  is  a  complete  forgiveness,  extending  to  the  five  hundred  as  well 
as  to  the  fifty  pence.  III.  Notice  also  the  oeateful  love  which  invariably 
VOLL0W8  A  sense  OF  PARDONING  MERCY.  Do  not,  howcvcr,  imagine  that  the  penitent 
women  was  forgiven  because  "  she  loved  much."  Her  love  was  not  the  procuring 
cause,  but  the  effect,  fruit,  and  evidence  of  the  pardon  she  had  received.  Much  had 
been  forgiven  her,  therefore  she  loved  her  Saviour  much  in  return.  {James 
Williams,  M.A.)  The  two  debtors  : — Our  Lord's  immediate  object  in  this  parable 
was  to  defend  the  woman  and  justify  His  own  allowance  of  her  presence  and 
expressions  of  affections.  This  defence  and  justification  are  accomplished  when 
it  is  shown  that  the  very  familiarities  which  the  Pharisee  thought  Jesus  should 
have  rebuked  are  the  proof  that  the  woman  is  forgiven,  cleansed,  and  pure.  1. 
Christ  points  to  the  woman's  demonstrations  of  love  to  Him  as  proof  that  her  sina 
•re  forgiven.  His  argument  is,  that  she  has  been  forgiven  a  debt,  and  therefore 
JoTCi  her  creditor.    It  is  Christ  Himself  she  loves,  and  He  therefore  is  the  oreditol 


T24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOH.  fcHl*.  m. 

Trho  hu  forgiven  her ;  bnt  her  debt  was  sin,  transgression  against  God,  and  it  ia 
therefore  God  who  is  her  true  creditor.    Christ  thus  identifies  Himself  with  God, 
and  in  the  simplest  manner  accepts  love  to  Himself  as  if  it  were  love  to  God,  and 
as  decisive  evidence  regarding  the  woman's  relation  to  the  Highest.   Love  to  Christ, 
therefore,  is  the  measure  and  the  pledge  of  purity.    3.  Love  to  Christ  is  the  result 
of  forgiveness,  and  varies  with  the  amount  of  debt  forgiven.     It  is  not,  however, 
simply  the  amount  of  sin,  but  the  sense  of  it,  which  is  the  measure  of  gratitude  to 
Him  who  forgives  it.     (M.  Bods,  D.D.)        The  two  debtors  : — There  are  aggravated 
sinners  who  have  no  deep  sense  of  sin,  and  there  are  great  saints  who  regard  them- 
selves as  the  chief  of  sinners.    The  measure  of  one's  gratitude  for  forgiveness  is  the 
conception  which  he  has  of  his  sin.    He  who  makes  light  of  his  sin  will  make 
light  also  of  salvation.    But  he  who  has  a  profound  conviction  of  the  evil  of  sin 
as  the  abominable  thing  which  God  hates,  will  have  an  overwhelming  sense  of 
God's  love  in  granting    him    forgiveness.      The    deeper    an    apprehension    of 
the    exceeding    sinfulness   of    sin,   the    greater  will  be  our  love  to  Him  who 
gives  us  deliverance  from  it.    And  where  there  is  that  sense  of  the  hatefulness 
of   sin,  there  will  be  no  disposition  to  go  deeper  into  it.      1.  Let  sinners  of 
every  name  and  degree  be  encouraged  by  this  narrative  to  go  at  once  to  Christ. 
He  will  in  no  wise  cast  them  out.     "A  bruised  reed"  was  not  deemed  worthy 
of  the  shepherd's  trouble  when  he  was  piping  in  the  field ;  and  so  he  flung  it 
away,  and  got  another.     "Smoking  flax"  gives  an  offensive  odour;   and  rather 
than  be  annoyed  with  it,  the  housewife  will  take  it  out  of  the  lamp,  and  tread  upon 
it.    But  it  was  otherwise  with  Jesus.    That  which  others  would  cast  away,  He 
sought  to  retain,  and  turn  to  good  account.     That  which  others  would  give  up  as 
hopeless,  He  would  not  abandon.    2.  If  we  would  be  successful  in  raising  the  fallen, 
and  reclaiming  the  abandoned,  we  must  be  willing  to  "  touch  "  them,  and  to  be 
"  touched  "  by  them.     In  other  words,  we  must  come  into  warm,  loving,  personal 
contact  with  them.     What  an  uplift  Christ  gave  to  the  soul  of  this  poor  woman, 
when  He,  the  pure  and  holy,  let  her  thus  approach  Him !     And  this  was  His  way 
all  through  His  ministry.    Contact  is  needed,  if  virtue  is  to  go  out.     When  the 
Lord  wished  to  save  the  human  race.  He  touched  it  by  taking  on  Him  our  nature, 
without  onr  nature's  pollution.    So  we  must  take  the  nature  of  the  degraded,  with- 
out its  impurity,  if  we  would  help  him.     We  must  stoop  to  take  him  by  the  hand, 
or  to  let  him  grasp  our  hand,  if  we  would  lift  him  up.     3.  If  we  wish  to  love  God 
much,  we  must  think  much  of  what  we  owe  to  Him.    Low  views  of  sin  lead  to  a 
ligiit  estimate  of  the  blessing  of  pardon,  and  a  light  estimate  of  the  blessing  of 
pardon  will  lead  to  but  a  little  love  of  God.     This  cuts  deep,  my  brethren.     Your 
love  to  God  will  be  but  the  other  side  of  your  hatred  of  sin  ;  and  there,  as  it  seems 
to  me,  is  the  radical  defect  in  much  of  the  religious  experience  of  the  day.     Men 
make  light  of  their  obligation  to  Christ  because  they  have  first  made  light  of  sin. 
Low  views  of  the  evil  of  sin  are  at  the  root  of  all  heresies  in  doctrine  and  all  un- 
holiness  in  life.     Get  rid  of  all  such  minimizing  ideas  of  sin,  I  beseech  you  ;  and 
to  that  end  come  near  the  cross,  for  nowhere  does  sin  seem  so  vile  as  it  does  there. 
(FT.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)        Bankrupt  debtors  discharged :— I.  First,  let  us  think  of 
THEIR  BANKRUPTCY.    This  was  their  condition.    They  were  unquestionably  in  debt. 
If  they  could  have  disputed  the  creditor's  claim,  no  doubt  they  would  have  done  bo. 
If  they  could  have  pleaded  that  they  were  never  indebted,  or  that  they  had  already 
paid,  no  doubt  they  would  have  been  glad  to  have  done  so  ;  but  they  could  not  raise 
a  question  ;  their  debt  could  not  be  denied.     Another  fact  was  also  clear  to  them, 
namely,  that  they  had  nothing  to  pay  with.     No  doubt  they  had  made  diligent 
search ;  they  had  turned  out  their  pockets,  their  cash-boxes,  and  their  lockers,  and 
they  had  found  nothing  :  they  had  looked  for  their  household  goods,  but  these  had 
vanished  piece  by  piece.     Now  there  are  certain  temptations  to  which  all  bankrupt 
sinners  are  much  subject.    One  of  these  is  to  try  and  forget  their  spiritual  estate 
altogether.     Another  temptation  to  a  man  in  this  condition  is  to  make  as  good  a 
show  as  he  can.     A  man  who  is  very  near  bankruptcy  is  often  noticed  for  the  dash 
he  cuts.     There  are  some  men  of  like  manners ;  they  have  nothing  that  they  can 
offer  unto  God,  but  yet  they  exhibit  a  glittering  self-righteousness.    Another  temp- 
tation which  lurks  in  the  way  of  a  bankrupt  sinner  is  that  of  making  promises  of 
what  he  will  do.    And  thus  do  sinners  too.    Another  temptation  is,  always  to  ask 
for  more  time — as  if  this  was  all  that  was  needed.     Settle  this  business  before  you 
tttend  to  anything  else.     Take  care  that  yoa  face  it,  like  an  honest  man,  and  not 
as  one  who  makes  the  best  of  a  bad  story.    One  thing  more :  it  will  be  your  wisdom 
to  give  up  all  attempts  to  pay,  because  you  have  nothing  to  pay  with.    IL  Our 


tmir.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  721 

second  head  is,  their  free  discharge.  "He  frankly  forgave  them  both."  1.  In  this 
free  discharge  I  admire,  first  of  all,  the  goodness  of  the  great  Creditor.  What  a 
gracious  heart  He  had  I  What  kindness  He  showed  1  He  said,  "  Poor  souls,  you 
can  never  pay  Me,  but  you  need  not  be  cast  down  because  of  it,  for  I  freely  cancel 
your  debts."  Oh,  the  goodness  of  it  I  Oh,  the  largeness  of  the  beart  of  God  I  I 
was  reading  of  Ctesar  the  other  day.  He  had  been  at  fierce  war  with  Pompey,  and 
at  last  he  conquered  him,  and  when  he  conquered  him  he  found  among  the  spoil 
Pompey's  private  cabinet,  in  which  were  contained  letters  from  the  various  noblemen 
and  senators  of  Rome  who  had  sided  with  him.  In  many  a  letter  there  was  fatal 
evidence  against  the  most  eminent  Eomans,  but  what  did  Caesar  do  ?  He  destroyed 
every  document.  He  would  have  no  knowledge  of  his  enemies,  for  he  freely  for- 
gave them  and  wished  to  know  no  more.  In  this  Caesar  proved  that  he  was  fit  to 
govern  the  nation.  But  look  at  the  splendour  of  God  when  He  puts  all  our  sins 
into  one  cabinet,  and  then  destroys  the  whole.  2.  Then,  observe  the  freeness  of  it. 
They  did  not  stand  there  and  say,  "  Oh,  good  sir,  we  cannot  pay,"  and  plead  and 
beg  as  for  their  lives ;  but  He  freely  said  to  them,  "  You  cannot  pay,  but  I  can 
forgive."  3.  Furthermore,  this  debt  was  fully  discharged.  4.  A  very  efifectual 
forgiveness  too.  6.  An  eternal  discharge.  III.  I  now  beg  your  very  special  atten- 
tion to  the  last  point,  and  that  is  the  connection  between  this  bankruptcy  and 
THIS  FREE  DISCHARGE.  It  Is  Said,  *'  WIieTi  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he  frankly 
forgave  them  both."  There  is  a  time  when  pardon  comes,  and  that  time  is  when 
self-sufficiency  goes.  A  sense  of  spiritual  bankruptcy  shows  that  a  man  has  become 
thoughtful;  and  this  is  essential  to  salvation.  Next,  when  we  come  to  feel  our 
bankruptcy,  we  then  make  an  honest  confession,  and  to  that  confession  a  promise 
is  given — "  he  that  confesseth  his  sin  shall  find  mercy."  The  two  debtors  had 
owned  to  their  debts,  and  they  had  also  openly  confessed,  though  it  must  have  gone 
against  the  grain  a  bit,  that  they  could  not  pay.  Under  conviction  a  poor  soul 
sees  the  reality  of  sin  and  of  pardon.  My  dear  hearer,  you  will  never  believe  in  the 
reality  of  forgiveness  till  you  have  felt  the  reality  of  sin.  I  do  believe  that  the  Lord 
will  give  us  our  quittance  when  we  have  got  to  our  last  farthing,  and  not  till  then, 
because  only  then  do  we  look  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Ah,  my  dear  friends,  as 
long  as  we  have  anything  else  to  look  to,  we  never  will  look  to  Christ.  That  blessed 
port  into  which  no  ship  did  ever  run  in  a  storm  without  finding  a  sure  haven  is 
shunned  by  all  your  gallant  vessels :  they  will  rather  put  into  any  port  along  the 
coast  of  self-deceit  than  make  for  the  harbour  which  is  marked  out  by  the  two 
lighthouses  of  free  grace  and  dying  love.  We  are  emptied  to  be  .filled.  When  we 
cannot  give,  God  can  forgive.  (G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Two  ways  of  discharging  a 
debt : — A  debt  may  be  paid,  or  it  may  be  pardoned.  If  it  is  paid,  the  debtor  owes 
no  thanks  to  his  creditor.  If  it  is  pardoned,  gratitude  for  the  grace  is  a  duty.  A 
man  under  a  burden  of  debt  ought  to  know  whether  he  can  pay  what  he  owes,  or 
whether  his  only  hope  is  of  being  forgiven.  If  he  has  anything  to  offer,  he  ought 
to  proffer  it.  If  he  has  nothing  to  offer,  he  ought  to  say  so,  and  implore  forgiveness 
as  an  unmerited  favour.  These  two  ways  of  wiping  out  a  debt  ought  never  to  be 
confounded.  In  the  one  case,  a  man  looks  for  a  receipt ;  in  the  other,  for  a  pardon. 
It  is  the  same  in  the  moral  world  as  in  the  material.  A  man  can  either  meet  and 
discharge  his  moral  obligations,  or  he  cannot.  It  is  the  one  thing  or  the  other. 
Apologies  or  excuses  are  not  a  payment.  Yet  how  common  it  is  for  one  who  has 
nothing  to  pay  with  to  thrust  forward  an  excuse  or  an  apology  in  place  of  a  request 
for  forgiveness.  This  is  always  evasive  and  unmanly.  Instead  of  saying,  "  I  for- 
got," or  "  I  didn't  mean  to,"  or  "  It  was  a  mistake,"  or  "  It  was  an  accident,"  we 
ought  to  come  out  frankly  and  unequivocally  with  the  admission,  "  I  was  wrong. 
Forgive  me  "  ;  or  "  I  failed  to  do  as  I  agreed  to  do.  Forgive  me  "  ;  or  •'  I  did 
not  do  as  I  was  directed  to.  Forgive  me."  Don't  let  us  shirk  our  duty  of 
asking  forgiveness  when  we  have  nothing  to  pay  with.  (H.  Clay  Trumbull.) 
A  generous  creditor : — One  Reuben  Rouzy,  of  Virginia,  owed  the  general  about  one 
thousand  pounds.  While  President  of  the  United  States,  one  of  his  agents  brought 
an  action  for  the  money;  judgment  was  obtained,  and  execution  issued  against  the 
body  of  the  defendant,  who  was  taken  to  gaol.  He  had  a  considerable  landed 
estate,  but  this  kind  of  property  cannot  be  sold  in  Virginia  for  debts,  unless  at  the 
discretion  of  the  person.  He  had  a  large  family,  and  for  the  sake  of  his  children 
preferred  lying  in  gaol  to  selling  his  land.  A  friend  hinted  to  him  that  probably 
General  Washington  did  not  know  anything  of  the  proceeding,  and  that  it  might 
he  well  to  send  him  a  petition,  with  a  statement  of  the  circumstance.  He  did  so, 
Mid  the  very  next  post  from  Philadelphia  after  the  arrival  of  his  petition  in  that 


7M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tit 

city  bronght  him  an  order  for  his  immediate  release,  together  with  a  full  discharge, 
and  a  severe  reprimand  to  the  agent  for  having  acted  in  such  a  manner.  Poor 
Bouzy  was,  in  consequence,  restored  to  his  family,  who  never  laid  down  their  heads 
at  night  without  presenting  prayers  to  Heaven  for  their  "  beloved  Washington." 
Providence  smiled  upon  the  labours  of  the  grateful  family,  and  in  a  few  years 
Bouzy  enjoyed  the  exquisite  pleasure  of  being  able  to  lay  the  one  thousand  pounds, 
with  the  interest,  at  the  feet  of  this  truly  great  man.  Washington  reminded  him 
that  the  debt  was  discharged ;  Bouzy  replied,  the  debt  of  his  family  to  the  father 
of  their  country  ond  preserver  of  their  parent  could  never  be  discharged ;  and  the 
general,  to  avoid  the  pressing  importunity  of  the  grateful  Virginian,  who  would  not 
be  denied,  accepted  the  money ;  only,  however,  to  divide  it  among  Rouzy's  children, 
which  he  immediately  did.  (Arvine.)  Released  from  debt : — There  is  a  story  of 
a  rich  Eastern  master  whose  most  skilful  artizan  began  to  fall  off  in  his  work.  The 
master  spoke  to  his  steward  about  it.  The  steward  replied :  "  It  is  no  wonder  that 
the  poor  fellow  cannot  turn  out  good  work.  His  hands  tremble  so  that  he  cannot 
manage  his  tools ;  his  eyes  are  so  full  of  tears  often  that  he  cannot  see  what  he  is 
about.  A  heavy  debt  is  pressing  him,  so  that  he  even  drinks  to  drown  his 
sorrow.  While  that  debt  remains,  you  need  not  expect  him  to  produce 
any  more  good  work."  •*  Then,"  replied  the  generous  master,  "  go  and  tell  him 
that  his  debt  is  paid."  From  that  hour  the  artizan  was  a  changed  man.  His 
tears  were  dried  and  he  plied  his  tools  with  a  happy  heart;  his  work 
was  done  better  than  ever  before.  When  they  had  nothing  to  pay  : — 1.  Had 
man  any  ability  left,  and  were  able  to  do  something  towards  the  payment  of  the 
debt  due ;  yet  if  he  cannot  do  all,  how  is  the  debt  paid  t  Let  but  twelve  pence  be 
wanting  in  the  payment  of  a  £100,  the  bond,  you  know,  is  not  discharged ;  let 
light  gold  be  tendered,  will  it  be  accepted  f  Our  best  works  are  full  of  imperfec- 
tions (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  2.  All  the  good  a  man  can  do,  though  he  do  more  then  ever  any 
man  did,  is  itself  a  due  debt,  and  how  shall  that  go  for  a  discharge  of  former 
debts  ?  One  debt  will  not  discharge  another,  nor  the  payment  of  this  year's  rent 
discharge  the  last  year's  forfeiture.  {N.  Rogers.)  We  are  not  only  debtors  but 
bankrupts : — 1.  A  bankrupt  makes  great  show  of  what  he  hath  not ;  so  doth  a 
sinner  (Prov.  xiii.  7).  2.  A  bankrupt  will  be  borrowing  of  every  one,  but  pay  none 
to  whom  he  is  indebted ;  thus  the  sinner  borrows  of  all.  Of  God,  of  man,  of  the 
creatures ;  but  that  love,  duty,  service,  that  is  expected,  he  performs  not.  Pro* 
mises,  tows,  bonds,  all  are  broken  (Bom.  i.).  3.  A  bankrupt  will  take  up  at  high 
rates,  and  put  off  at  low  ;  buy  dear,  bat  sell  cheap ;  so  doth  the  sinner.  Ahab  takes 
up  land,  Naboth's  vineyard ;  Achan,  a  wedge  of  gold ;  Gehazi,  a  bribe ;  Esau, 
Jacob's  pottage  ;  Judas,  thirty  pence.  All  these  took  up  their  wares  at  dear  rates, 
as  do  the  sinners  of  these  days.  But  one  day  will  be  forced  to  cry  out  with 
Lysimachus,  "  How  great  a  kingdom  for  how  small  a  pleasure  have  I  lost  1 "  4.  A 
bankrupt  will  be  offering  composition  to  his  creditors  ;  but  it  shall  be  very  little, 
three  or  four  shillings  in  the  pound — it  may  be  not  so  much.  Thus  deals  the 
sinner;  he  will  be  offering  a  composition  as  Pharaoh  did  (Exod.  viii.  25).  5.  A 
bankrupt  cannot  be  trusted  of  any  one  that  knows  him,  no  more  a  sinner ;  God 
will  not  trust  him  (Job  iv.  18,  19)  ;  Christ  will  not  trust  him  (John  ii.  24) ;  nor  will 
the  goiy,  if  they  be  wise  (Jer.  ix.  14 ;  Micah  vii.  2 ;  Job  xii,  14,  15).  We  may 
expect  love  and  duty  from  them,  but  how  can  they  pay  who  have  nothing  ?  {Ibid.) 
Remission  and  forgiveness  of  sins  is  attainable  : — There  is  a  possibility  for  a  sinner 
to  have  his  debts  pardoned  and  remitted  (Acts  iii.  19 ;  x.  43  ;  xxvi.  18).  1.  The 
sacrifices  under  the  law  prefigured  as  much  (Heb.  v.).  2.  The  grounds  are  two: 
(1)  Mercy  in  God,  who  "  desireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner  "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11). 
It  is  His  name  to  be  merciful ;  an  attribute  as  infinite  as  Himself,  it  suits  with  His 
nature.  (2)  Merit  in  Christ.  By  His  sacrifice  He  satisfied  Ood's  justice,  and 
paid  the  debt  of  sin  (1  Cor.  xv.  9  ;  Gal.  i.  4  ;  Eph.  i.  7 ;  Col.  i.  14;  1  John  iii.  5  ; 
Heb.  ix.  26).  But  whence  is  it  that  men  are  so  careless  in  seeking  after  this  one 
thing  necessary  ?  Divers  reasons  may  be  rendered  of  this  great  neglect.  1.  An 
erroneous  judgment  about  the  thing  itself.  Some  think  it  is  that  which  cannot  be 
had,  or  if  it  be  feasable,  yet  it  is  not  so  necessary  as  other  blessings,  which  lies 
Uiem  more  in  hand  to  seek  after.  The  error  of  which  opinions  what  hath  been 
said  before,  discovers.  2.  This  great  neglect  ariseth  from  want  of  due  consideration 
of  men's  present  states,  they  spend  no  thoughts  this  way ;  like  bankrupts,  they  love 
not  to  cast  up  their  accounts.  3.  This  ariseth  in  some  through  a  bold  presumption 
of  God's  mercy,  conceiting  that  God  will  forgive  us  oar  sins,  though  we  take  no 
pains  about  it.    4.  God  in  forgiving  sin,  fully  forgives  it,  no  part  of  the  debt  i* 


CHAP.  TO.]  ST.  LUKE.  72? 

reserved  to  be  exacted  of  us.  {Ibid.)  Pardon  require*  increased  care  for  the 
future  : — And,  to  conclude,  be  careful  that  we  lay  up  safe  our  discharge  and  pardon, 
having  once  obtained  it.  How  careful  men  are  to  lock  up  a  general  discharge 
from  some  pecuniary  debts,  we  know  well  enough;  but  no  discharge  to  this,  so 
lay  it  up,  that  yoa  may  not  have  it  to  seek  in  the  hour  of  temptations  and  trial. 
Such  times  you  must  expect,  and  then  your  acquittance,  sealed  with  Christ's' 
blood,  will  stand  you  in  much  stead.  Our  carelessness  this  way  often  causeth  God- 
to  hide  from  us  the  comfort  of  it,  to  the  end  that  we  may  seek  it  up  and  keep  it 
better.  Thus  we  lay  some  piece  of  plate  aside  for  a  while  to  teach  a  careless  child 
or  servant  to  be  more  careful  of  it  after  it  is  returned.  And  thus  much  of  the 
fulness  of  God's  pardoning.  Come  we  now  to  the  freeness  of  it.  He  frankly 
forgave  them  both.  Whence  observe  we — Remission  is  of  free  grace  and  mercy ;. 
whom  God  forgives  He  forgives  gratis.  The  pope  indeed  sells  pardons  ;  God  sella 
none — what  God  doth  this  way  He  doth  freely.  (Ibid.)  Them  both: — 1.  For- 
giveness and  pardon  is  general  to  all  that  cast  themselves  on  God's  free  mercy 
for  it.     2.  God  forgiveth  great  debts  as  well  as  small,  hundreds  as  well  as  tens. 

3.  He  who  owes  least  stands  (as  well)  in  need  of  mercy  and  forgiveness  as  he  who 
owes  most.  Which  of  them  will  love  Him  most : — God  is  truly  loved  of  all  those 
whose  sins  are  pardoned.  This  is  a  truth  granted  and  unquestioned.  If  need 
were,  it  might  be  further  strengthened  from  sundry  other  texts  (Psa.  cxvi.,  1  xviii. 
1 ;  Cant.  xiii.  2,  5  ;  Phil.  iii.  8,  9 ;  Psa.  cxix.  132).  How  can  it  otherwise  be  ?  For 
every  act  of  God's  special  favour  begets  another  in  the  heart  of  the  godly  like 
it.  He  choosing  them,  they  choose  Him  again ;  He  calls  them,  they  call  on 
Him  ;  He  loving  them,  they  must  needs  again  love  Him.  •'  We  love  Him,"  saith 
St.  John,  •*  because  He  loved  us  first."  The  cold  stone  cannot  cast  forth  heat,  as 
you  know,  till  it  be  warmed  by  the  sunbeams  :  being  warmed  by  them,  then  it 
reflecteth  back  some  of  the  heat  which  it  received  ;  thus  is  it  with  our  cold  hearts. 
{Ibid.)  I  might  use  many  arguments  to  put  you  on  upon  this  pursuit.  There  is 
no  duty  hath  more  reasons  to  speak  for  it  than  this  hath.  I  will  name  only  two, 
which  St.  Bernard  hath ;  the  one  is  in  respect  of  God,  the  other  in  regard  of 
ourselves.  I.  In  respect  op  God,  and  so  nothing  is  more  just  and  equal  than 
that  He  should  be  loved  of  us.  1.  This  is  tbat  He  doth  require  both  in  law  and 
gospel  (Deut.  vi.  5 ;  Matt.  xxii.  38).  It  is  the  first  and  great  commandment,  and 
that  on  which  all  other  acceptable  services  are  grounded.  2.  This  is  that  He  doth 
deserve,  for  hath  not  He  placed  in  us  that  affection  of  love  ?  Is  it  not  a  stream  of 
that  living  fountain  who  is  love  itself  (1  John  iv.  8)  ?  Now  "  he  that  plants  a  vine- 
yard should  drink  of  the  wine  thereof,"  saith  the  apostle  (1  Cor.  ix.  7).  And  God 
who  hath  planted  this  affection  in  us,  should  chiefly  taste  of  it  Himself.  3.  God 
hath  manifested  His  love  to  us  in  giving  His  only  beloved  son  for  us  (John  iii.  16). 
He  hath  begun  to  us  in  the  cup  of  love  (1  John  iv.  10).  Is  it  not  fit  that  we 
should  pledge  Him  ?  It  is  an  elegant  observation  of  St.  Bernard  upon  the  Can- 
ticles ;  of  all  the  motions  and  affections  of  the  soul,  none  is  so  reciprocal  as  love. 

4.  Besides,  there  is  nothing  in  God  but  deserves  love ;  ••  I  will  call  upon  God," 
saith  David,  ••  who  is  worthy  to  be  praised  "  (Psa.  xviii.  3).  So  may  we  say  truly, 
"  I  will  call  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  worthy  to  be  loved."  But  if  in  case  we  set  our  love 
on  any  other  object  than  the  Lord,  we  become  losers  and  not  savers.  By  loving 
Him  we  are  made  better  both  in  grace  and  glory.  You  know  love  assimilates  the 
heart  to  the  thing  loved ;  so  love  of  honour  makes  the  heart  proud ;  love  of 
pleasure  makes  the  heart  vicious  and  loose,  <fec.  And  the  love  of  God  makes  us 
to  conform  unto  His  image,  and  be  like  Him  in  holiness ;  thus  we  become  better 
through  our  loving  God  in  grace.  II.  All  that  love  God  do  not  love  Him  with 
THE  LIKE  DEGREE  OF  LovB.  {Ibid.)  God  seeu  in  little  love  : — They  do  not  weU  to 
forget  that  Caesar's  image  is  not  only  seen  in  his  coin  of  gold,  but  in  his  silver 
penny ;  and  that  this  degree  of  love,  though  weak,  is  also  the  gift  of  God,  and  not 
to  be  despised  (Zach.  iv.  10;  1  Cor.  L  11;  iii.  1).  He  that  made  the  elephant 
made  the  ant ;  the  fly  as  well  as  the  eagle  ;  the  poorest  worm  which  creeps  on  the 
earth,  as  well  as  the  most  glorious  angel,  is  the  work  of  God's  hands,  and  He  looks 
to  be  glorified  in  His  least  works  as  well  as  greatest.  {Ibid.)  Small  love  not  to  be 
despised  if  it  be  growing  : — Give  the  humble  daisy  leave  to  grow,  though  it  sprout 
not  up  to  that  height  as  doth  the  marigold.  And  let  not  him  that  joineth  the  frame 
despise  him  that  heweth  the  timber  or  makes  the  pins ;  who  so  hath  greatest  degree 
of  grace,  let  him  use  it  to  God's  glory,  but  no  way  despise  his  weak  brother,  who 
comes  far  short  of  his  scantling.  Let  it  serve  for  an  encouragement  to  those 
whose    hearts    are   newly  wai-med  with  the   beams  of   love,  though  they  find 


7»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [iOha*.  yn. 

rt  not  tindled  to  that  height  that  others  of  God's  children  have  attained  onto.  It 
is  not  every  one's  portion  to  attain  to  that  height  of  passion,  so  as  to  be  sick  of 
love.  God  takes  in  good  part  a  growing  and  increasing  love  which  maybe  attained. 
1.  By  enlarging  our  communion  with  God  both  in  public  and  private  duties. 
Strangeness,  you  know,  breeds  an  overliness  with  men ;  so  with  God.  The  nearer 
the  fire,  the  greater  the  heat ;  speak  often  to  God  by  prayer,  hear  Him  again  speak- 
ing unto  you  by  His  Word  and  Spirit.  2.  By  weaning  our  hearts  more  and  more 
from  this  world.  You  know  superfluous  branches  draw  the  sap  from  the  top 
boughs,  and  the  love  of  the  world  draws  the  love  of  God  out  of  our  hearts,  as  we 
find  in  Demas  (2  Tim.  iv.  9).  3.  Carefully  observe  and  call  to  mind  the  many  and 
fiweet  experiences  you  have  of  God's  love  and  favour.  The  more  plentiful  our  ap- 
prehension is  of  God's  love  to  us,  the  more  will  our  hearts  be  enlarged  to  love  Him 
again.  (Ibid.)  Love  : — 1.  Inflamed  or  burning  love  will  not  be  easily  quenched; 
much  water,  many  floods  cannot  do  it  (Cant.  viii.  7).  It  is  firm  and  invincible,  so 
that  neither  force  nor  fraud,  promises  nor  persecutions,  height  nor  depth,  things 
present  nor  things  to  come,  shall  be  able  to  prevail  against  it.  2.  Love  inflamed 
is  still  ascending.  It  hath  earnest  and  affectionate  longings  after  God,  and  to 
enjoy  Him.  3.  Inflamed  love  gives  great  light.  It  is  like  a  fired  beacon  on  a  hill, 
all  the  country  take  notice  of  it.  Such  cannot  forbear  but  they  must  be  speaking 
in  God's  praise,  and  admiring  everything  that  is  in  Him.  "  The  tongue  is  the  pen 
of  a  ready  writer"  (Cant.  v.  9).     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  44.  Simon,  seest  thou  this  woman  ? — Penitence  worth  seeing : — Not  only  with 
the  bodily  eye,  for  with  that  he  saw  and  mistook,  but  with  consideration  and  obser- 
vation. The  deportment  of  a  true  penitent  is  worth  our  seeing  ;  their  carriage  and 
conversation  is  worthy  observation.  (N.  Rogers.)  Thou  gavest  Me  no  water  for 
My  feet:  Ceremonies  of  courtesy: — And,  to  reason  from  the  less  to  the  greater,  if 
ritual  observances  are  requisite  for  the  full  welcome  of  friends,  think  it  not  enough 
in  entertaining  your  Saviour  that  you  give  Him  the  substance  of  good  usage, 
neglecting  the  compliments.  Simon,  you  see,  here  gave  Him  both  meat  and  wel- 
come, yet  the  neglect  of  washing,  kissing,  and  anointing  is  not  well  taken.  When 
we  come  to  His  house,  and  to  His  ordinances,  as  to  the  word,  sacraments,  prayer, 
we  make  Him  good  cheer,  He  esteems  Himself  then  feasted ;  but  if  we  perform  not 
these  things  with  the  decency  of  outward  carriage,  we  give  Him  neither  water, 
kiss,  nor  oiL  Believe  it,  our  best  actions  receive  either  life  or  bane  from  their 
circumstances ;  the  substance  or  matter  of  a  work  may  be  good,  and  yet  the  work 
cannot  be  so  called,  unless  it  be  done  modo  et  forma.  Velvet  is  good  matter  to  make 
a  garment,  timber  good  matter  to  build  a  house ;  and  yet  the  one  may  be  so  marred  in 
the  cutting  and  the  other  in  the  framing,  as  that  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
shaU  attain  the  name  of  good.  What  is  good  in  the  substance  may  be  sin  in  the 
circumstance,  and  for  want  of  care  about  the  manner,  the  best  work  may  be  done 
thanklessly.  (Ihid.)  She  hath  washed  My  feet  with  tears  : — There  are  two  sorts 
of  tears,  as  shows  St.  Austin.  Some  are  commendable,  others  are  discommendable. 
1.  Commendable  tears  are  natural  or  spiritual.  Natural  tears,  as  Jer.  xxxi.  15. 
These  discover  natural  affection,  and  being  well  bounded  are  not  to  be  blamed 
(Luke  xxiii.  28).  2.  Spiritual  tears  are  either  tears  of  passion  and  contrition,  as 
Matt.  xxvi.  75,  or  of  compassion  and  devotion,  as  Jer.  ix.  1,  2  ;  Luke  xix.  Tears 
culpable  or  discommendable  are  likewise  of  two  sorts,  temporal  or  infernal.  1. 
Temporal,  are  those  shed  in  this  life  by  wicked  ones.  And  they  are  of  two  sorts, 
worldly  or  hypocritical.  (1)  Worldly  tears  are  those  which  are  occasioned  merely 
for  worldly  losses.  Of  these  we  read  in  Ezek.  viii.  14 ;  Hos.  vii.  14 ;  Heb.  xii. 
.  (2)  Hypocritical  tears  are  those  which  are  produced  from  dissimulation  and  deceit. 
Of  these  we  read  in  Jer.  xli.  5,  6.  2.  Infernal  tears  are  those  shed  by  the  damned 
in  hell  (Luke  xiii.  28  ;  Matt.  xxiv.  51 ;  xxv.  30).  (Ihid.)  The  smart  of  sin  a  good 
sign : — And  as  it  is  in  a  diseased  body  or  with  some  old  sore,  if  in  the  dressing  of 
the  wound  no  pain  be  felt,  we  conclude  the  flesh  is  dead,  but  when  the  patient 
begins  to  complain  of  the  pain  and  is  sensible  of  the  smart,  then  it  is  taken  for  a 
good  sign  that  the  cure  is  in  a  good  forwardness.  (Ibid.)  Is  shedding  of  tears 
absolutely  necessary  in  godly  sorrow  f — May  not  the  heart  be  drowned,  and  yet  the 
eyes  dry  ?  Tears  are  additions  and  necessary  appendences  of  true  repentance,  but 
4iot  always  necessary  and  true  tokens  of  it.  Some  have  repented  truly  who  have 
not  wept,  and  some  have  wept  bitterly  who  have  not  repented  truly.  All  who  shed 
iears  are  not  straightway  penitents ;  the  hardest  marble  against  some  weather  may 
weep.    And  how  often  do  we  see  the  dew  to  stand  on  the  blasted  com  or  grass. 


CHA».  vn.]  ST.  LUKE.  729 

Thare  are  eyeing  waters  spoken  of  by  Jeremiah,  as  well  as  clonds  without  water, 
spoken  of  by  St.  Jude.  It  is  an  easy  matter  to  give  you  instances  (Gen.  xvii.  3,  4  •, 
1  Sam.  xxiv.  17 ;  Mai.  ii.  13).  Tears  are  deceitful  things ;  nothing  sooner  dried 
np  than  a  tear,  and,  therefore,  not  to  be  trusted  too  far.  For  a  man  may  as  well 
go  to  his  grave's  end  by  water  as  by  land.  {Ibid.)  Tears  few  at  first : — In  a 
deep  or  fresh  wound  in  the  body,  there  is  not  first  that  pain  felt,  nor  so  much  blood 
seen,  as  is  in  a  little  cut  of  the  finger,  because  the  part  is  astonied  for  the  time.  Sa 
is  it  sometimes  with  the  soul.  The  wine  vessel,  you  know,  without  vent  runs  not 
though  it  be  ready  to  burst.  (Ibid.)  Tears  vocal: — Tears  have  a  voice  with 
them,  nay,  they  are  not  only  voeal,  but  importunate.  "  What  do  you  weeping,  and 
breaking  my  heart?  "  saith  St.  Paul  (Acts  xxi.  13).  You  may  remember  how  the 
tears  of  Moses,  whilst  he  was  floating  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes  on  the  water,  prevailed 
with  Pharaoh's  daughter.  ^  "  The  babe  wept,"  saith  the  text,  "  and  she  had  com- 
passion on  him  "  (Exod.  ii.  6),  (Ibid.)  To  answer  the  greatness  of  our  sin  with 
the  greatness  of  our  sorrow: — According  to  the  proportion  of  the  one,  should^ 
the  other  be  proportioned.  Look  how  grievously  we  have  sinned,  so  greatly 
should  our  sins  be  bewailed  and  lamented.  A  deep  wound  must  have  a  large 
plaster,  and  our  repentance,  as  showeth  St.  Cyprian,  must  not  be  less  than  our 
fault.  {Ibid.)  Sorrow  for  sin  must  not  be  slight : — Where  sins  are  great,  think  it 
not  enough  that  your  sorrow  be  slight.  If  thy  sins  be  small  and  little,  thy  sorrow 
may  be  the  less,  but  if  great,  thy  grief  must  be  suitable.  A  garment  that  is  deeply 
soiled  cannot,  without  much  rubbing  and  many  lavers,  become  clean.  Where  there 
is  a  deep  pollution,  and  of  a  scarlet  tincture,  there  must  be  not  only  ablutin,  bufc 
balneatio,  a  soaking  and  bathing  in  the  tears  of  eontrition,  as  is  required  in  Isa. 

1.  16).  But  may  not  a  man  exceed  in  sorrow,  may  he  not  grieve  over  much  ?  A, 
man  cannot  exceed  in  the  displeasure  of  his  will  against  sin,  yet  he  may  in  the- 
testification  of  his  displeasure  by  weeping  and  macerating  of  his  body.  Too  much> 
moistening  chokes  a  plant,  when  moderate  moistening  quickens  it.  Too  much 
rain  gulls  the  earth,  and  standing  waters  on  low  grounds  breed  nothing  hot  flags 
and  rushes.  So  it  is  with  our  hearts  when  they  prove  standing  pools.  {Ibid.) 
Sorrow  for  sin  measured  by  duration: — A  torrent  may  run  faster  for  the  present 
than  a  continual  current,  but  the  current  is  to  be  preferred,  and  hath  more  water 
in  it  than  the  torrent.  One  keeps  open  house  at  Christmas,  but  all  the  year  after 
the  gates  are  shut ;  he  hath  taken  up  a  city's  refuge.  Another  keeps  a  constant 
and  full  table  all  the  year,  though  at  that  time  he  may  not  be  compared  with  the 
other  for  abundance.  Which  of  these  two  now  would  you  count  the  best  house- 
keeper ?  I  suppose  you  wiU  grant  the  latter.  So  is  it  here.  {Ibid.)  Grace 
quickened  by  tears : — By  tears,  likewise,  grace  is  quickened.  They  are  not  like 
well  water,  springing  out  of  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  nor  like  rain,  distilling  from 
the  clouds  which  clear  the  air,  but  they  are  as  the  dew  of  Hermon,  which  makes 
all  herbs  to  flourish.  Such  as  mourn  for  sin  grow  up  as  the  hly,  and  fasten  them- 
selves in  grace  like  the  trees  of  Lebanon.  They  are  like  the  former  and  the  latter 
rain,  they  make  the  heart  fruitful  in  all  good  works,  as  you  see  here  in  Mary.  It 
is  a  sovereign  water,  and  will  fetch  the  sinner  again  to  the  life  of  grace  though 
never  so  far  gone.  As  for  glory  hereafter  (Psa.  cxxvi.  5).  Thus  as  the  sun  draws 
np  vapours  from  the  earth,  not  for  itself,  but  to  restore  them  back  again ;  so  dotb 
God  our  tears.  But  the  bottle  spoken  of  (Psa.  Ivi.  8),  and  the  vial  (Eev.  v.  8),  are 
for  the  saints  both.  In  them  He  preserves  both  their  tears  and  prajers.  Not  a 
drop  of  their  eye-water  will  He  suffer  to  run  in  waste.  He  catcheth  every  tear 
before  it  comes  to  the  ground ;  and  till  death  close  up  those  two  fountains,  Jor  and 
Dan,  flowing  from  Mount  Lebanon,  they  shall  never  fail  running,  but  then  shall 
our  souls  be  wafted  in  them  from  grace  to  glory,  as  they  were  first  transported  by 
them  here  from  sin  to  grace.  {Ibid.)  The  city  of  waters  taken  by  Satan: — If, 
in  case  what  hath  been  said  of  the  good  which  our  tears  procure  for  us  prevail  not,, 
then  give  me  leave  to  add  a  word  of  the  great  danger  which  follows  upon  the 
neglect  of  them,  and  it  shall  be  only  by  way  of  allusion  to  that  we  read  (2  Sam. 
xii.  27).  Joab  having  taken  the  city  of  waters,  he  sent  to  David  and  willed  him  to 
eome  quickly  to  take  the  city  itself,  well  knowing  that  it  could  not  hold  out,  the  city 
of  waters  being  cut  off  before.  Thus  when  Satan  hath  taken  the  eyes  and  cut  off 
the  pipes,  can  you  think  your  soul  can  long  hold  out  against  his  temptations?  (Ibid.) 
Wiped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head  : — 1.  In  true  repentance  there  is  a  converting 
of  those  things  which  have  been  abused  to  the  service  of  sin  to  the  service  of  Qodi 

2.  That  the  best  ornament  of  the  body,  in  the  judgment  of  a  penitent,  is  not  too 
good  to  be  employed  about  the  meanest  piece  of  service  which  ooneems  Christ^ 


78»  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [oha».  rT% 

(Ibid.)  Truth  impressed  by  living  examplet : — After  all,  there  is  no  bo  forcibla 
-way  of  impressing  truth  as  by  a  living  example.  The  parable  of  the  two  debtors 
could  but  faintly  show  the  power  of  forgiveness  to  win  gratitude,  in  comparison 
with  that  vivid  picture  of  the  penitent,  trusting,  grateful  woman,  washing  the  feet 
of  her  Saviour  with  her  tears,  and  wiping  them  with  her  dishevelled  hair.  And 
so  it  has  been  from  the  beginning.  Would  you  realize  the  power  of  one  person  in 
tempting  others  to  ruin  ?  Seest  thou  this  woman  Eve,  or  this  woman  Jezebel  ? 
"Would  you  realize  the  beauty  of  fidelity  in  friendship  ?  Seest  thou  this  woman 
Euth?  Would  you  realize  the  grandeur  of  moral  heroism?  Seest  thou  this 
woman  Esther?  Would  you  realize  the  holy  influence  of  a  mother's  love  and 
faithfulness  ?  Seest  thou  this  woman  Jochebed,  or  this  woman  Hannah,  or  this 
woman  Eunice  ?  Would  you  realize  the  power  of  unwavering  faith  ?  Seest  thou  this 
woman  of  Syro-Phoenicia  ?  Would  you  realize  the  force  and  beauty  of  any  trait 
of  human  character,  or  the  preciousness  of  any  truth  which  God  would  have  his 
children  to  bear  in  mind  ?  Seest  thou  this  woman  before  you,  who  illustrates  it  aa 
it  could  not  be  taught  in  any  other  way  ?  That  woman  is  your  mother,  your  wife, 
your  sister,  your  friend,  your  neighbour.  Look  at  her  glorious  example,  and  thank 
God  for  the  blessedness  of  His  grace  in  a  willing  and  trustful  human  heart.  (H. 
Clay  Trumbull.)  Seeat  thou  this  woman* — Simon  had  not  seen  the  woman  yet. 
He  had  only  seen  the  sinner.  Look,  then,  on  the  woman  at  last,  0  Pharisee.  Look 
upon  her  in  the  light  of  the  parable  you  have  just  heard.  Look  on  thyself,  too, 
for  as  yet  thou  hast  not  seen  thyself — the  Pharisee  hiding  the  man  from  thy 
incurious  eyes.  Thou  poor  blind  Pharisee  I  if  love  be  the  proof  of  forgiveness,  how 
much  hast  thou,  loving  so  little,  been  forgiven  ?    (S.  Cox,  D.D.) 

Ver.  46.  My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint. — The  use  of  hospitality  : — For 
such  is  our  frailty  that  if  we  were  not  strengthened  and  refreshed  with  baits  in  the 
way  our  minds  would  grow  dull  and  sluggish,  and  our  bodies  be  tired  out.  The 
heathen  of  old  could  say  that  the  life  of  a  man  without  some  delight  was  like  a 
long  way  without  an  inn,  in  which  all  is  travel  and  toil,  but  no  comfort  or 
refreshing.  The  soul  of  such  an  one  would  be  like  a  flower  that  grows  always  in 
the  shade,  which  is  nothing  so  sweet  nor  lovely  as  that  which  grows  in  the  sight  of 
the  sun.  {N.  Rogers.)  Perfumes : — "  My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint." 
Perfumes  were  associated  with  almost  every  action  and  event  in  the  life  of  the 
ancients.  The  free  use  of  them  was  peculiarly  delightful  and  refreshing  to  the 
Orientals.  A  bouquet  of  fragrant  flowers  was  carried  in  the  hand;  or  rooms  were 
fumigated  with  the  odorous  vapours  of  burning  resins ;  or  the  body  was  anointed 
with  oil  mixed  with  the  aromatic  qualities  of  some  plants  extracted  by  boiling  ;  or 
scents  were  worn  about  the  person  in  gold  or  silver  boxes,  or  in  alabaster  vials. 
When  entertainments  were  given,  the  rooms  were  fumigated:  and  it  was  customary 
for  a  servant  to  attend  every  guest  as  he  seated  himself,  to  anoint  his  head,  sprinkle 
his  person  with  rose-water,  or  appiy  incense  to  his  face  and  beard  ;  and  so  entirely 
was  the  use  of  perfumes  on  such  occasions  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  the 
people  that  the  Saviour  reproached  Simon  for  the  omission  of  this  mark  of 
attention,  leaving  it  to  be  performed  by  a  woman.     (H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  47.  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven. — Her  sins : — Incontlnency  of 
life  is  enough  to  give  the  denomination,  and  is  a  sin  that  is  accompanied  with  many 
other  sins  besides  itself.  A  brood  of  sins  are  hatched  out  of  this  one  egg.  Instance 
we  but  in  David's  case  (we  need  go  no  further).  The  devil  having  prevailed  with 
him  in  the  sin  of  adultery,  draws  him  on  to  other  sins,  whereby  he  might  hide 
his  wickedness  from  the  world,  so  that  they  might  not  espy  it.  (Ibid.)  The 
greatest  sin : — I  have  read  a  story  of  a  hermit  that  led  a  devout  and  solitary  life. 
One  day  talking  with  the  devil,  he  demanded  of  him  which  were  the  greatest  sins; 
he  answered  him,  Covetousness  and  lust.  The  other  demanded  again  whether 
blasphemy  and  perjury  were  not  greater.  The  reply  of  Satan  was  that  in  the 
schools  of  divinity  they  were  the  greater  sins,  but  for  the  increase  of  his  revenues, 
the  other  were  far  the  greater.  And  therefore  Bede  styles  lust,  filiam  diaboli,  "  the 
daughter  of  the  devil,"  which  bringeth  forth  many  children  to  him  daily.  Nor  doth 
any  one  such  special  service  to  the  devil  as  an  harlot.  (Ibid.)  That  grievous 
sinners  upon  repentance  shall  find  mercy: — And  for  further  proof,  read  2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  12  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12,  13  ;  Acts  ii.  38,  39 ;  Luke  xv.  20.  Though 
then  thou  hast  been  an  egregious  sinner  and  led  a  vicious  life,  defiling  thy  soul 
with  many  sins,  yet  suffer  not  thyself  through  Satan's  malice  to  be  plunged  into  tha 


«HAP.  VII.]  ST.  LUKE.  781 

pit  of  deopair  ;  thou  hast  provoked  God's  justice  grievously  heretofore  by  thy  pre- 
sumption, wrong  not  His  mercy  through  desperation.  (Ibid.)  For  she  loved 
tnnch. — A  note  ^  inference  : — But  are  they  ignorant  of  this  ;  the  "for"  is  oftentimes 
a  note  of  inference  or  consequence,  and  as  well  an  argument  of  the  effect  from  the 
isause,  as  of  the  cause  from  the  effect.  We  say  it  is  spring-time.  Why  so?  "  For," 
or  "  because  "  the  fig-tree  puts  forth  and  buds.  The  putting  forth  of  the  fig-tree  argues 
the  spring-time,  but  the  huddling  and  putting  forth  of  the  fig-tree  is  not  the  cause 
of  spring-time.  I  say  this  child  is  alive,  because  it  cries  ;  or  this  man  lives,  because 
he  moves ;  will  any  so  understand  me  as  if  I  meant  the  crying  of  the  one  and  the 
moving  of  the  other  is  the  cause  of  life  and  motion  in  the  one  or  in  the  other  ?  Our 
Saviour  Himself  useth  this  kind  of  arguing,  as  we  find:  "  I  have  called  you  friends, 
for  all  things  I  have  heard  of  My  Father,  I  have  made  known  unto  you  "  (John 
XV.  15),  where  declaring  of  those  things  to  them  is  the  effect  not  cause  of  His  love. 
And  that  our  Saviour  here  reasoneth  from  the  effect  to  the  cause  is  evident  enough 
from  the  whole  discourse.  (Ibid.)  Love  as  a  cause  ;— A  proof  (a  posteriori)  from 
the  effect  is  a  strong  proof,  and  very  demonstrative.  Thus  the  truth  of  our  faith 
is  to  be  proved  (James  ii.  18).  And  of  repentance  (2  Cor.  vii.  11).  And  of  charity 
■(1  John  iii.  14).  And  so  St.  James  proves  wisdom  from  above  by  the  effects 
(James  iii.  17).  Still  Scripture  puts  us  upon  the  trial  of  our  graces,  by  these  kind 
of  proofs.  Grace  is  invisible  in  its  nature,  it  cannot  be  seen  in  habitu.  Therefore,  as 
God  was  seen  to  Moses,  so  is  grace  to  men,  by  its  back  parts;  and  as  the  wind, 
•which  no  man  can  see  in  its  proper  essence,  by  the  full  sails  of  the  ship  is  perceived 
which  way  it  stands.  Let  this  be  a  direction  to  us  in  our  examination  and  trial 
of  ourselves.  Would  I  know  if  the  sun  shines  ?  there  is  no  climbing  up  to  the  sky 
to  be  resolved,  nor  examining  what  matter  it  is  made  of ;  I  look  upon  the  beams 
shining  on  the  earth,  I  perceive  it  is  up  and  shines  by  the  light  and  heat  it  gives. 
Would  I  know  if  God  hath  elected  me  to  hfe  and  to  salvation?  There  is  no 
climbing  up  into  heaven  to  know  His  decrees  and  hidden  counsel  (as  too  many 
would  most  audaciously)  but  study  well  the  marks  of  it  from  the  effects.  The  head 
of  Nilus  cannot  be  found,  but  the  sweet  springs  issuing  from  thence  are  well 
known.  No  surer  way  to  the  sea,  than  by  taking  a  river  by  the  hand.  Our  vocation 
and  sanctification  will  carry  us  to  election  (Rom.  viii.  30;  2  Peter  i.  5-10).  These  are 
the  means  whereby  our  election  and  salvation  is  made  certain,  not  the  efficient  causes 
whereby  it  comes  to  be  decreed.  The  sun,  not  the  shadow,  makes  the  day,  yet  we  know 
not  how  the  day  goes  by  the  sun,  but  by  the  shadow.  In  a  word,  as  the  planets  are 
known  by  their  influence,  the  diamond  by  his  lustre,  and  the  soul  by  her  vital  opera- 
tions, 80  grace  is  more  sensibly  known  to  us  by  the  effects  thereof.  Secondly,  we 
observe  from  hence,  that  a  true  and  unfeigned  love  of  Christ  is  a  sure  si«?u  that  our 
Bins  are  remittfd.  (Ibid.)  Love  hard  to  simulate: — This  grace  can  the  hardiest 
be  counterfeited  of  any  other  grace.  There  is  scarce  anything  else  that  we  can 
instance  in,  saith  one,  but  a  hypocrite  may  go  cheek  by  jowl  with  a  good  Christian. 
He  may  do  all  outward  services,  he  may  abstain  from  sin,  a  great  change  may  be 
wrought  in  him ;  we  know  how  far  the  third  ground  went  (Matt,  xiii.)  And  those 
(Heb.  vi.)  But  this  they  cannot  counterfeit  to  love  the  Lord.  A  hypocrite  rnay 
hear  the  Word,  pray,  give  alms,  but  to  do  these  out  of  love,  that  is  a  thing  which 
no  hypocrite  is  able  to  reach  unto.  Secondly,  though  saving  graces  have  their 
counterfeits,  yet  a  man  may  be  assured  by  the  Word  that  he  hath  this  and  other 
graces  in  him  in  sincerity,  so  as  that  he  cannot  be  deceived  in  them.  For  as  God 
gave  Moses  in  the  Mount  a  pattern,  according  to  which  He  would  have  all  things 
made  in  the  Tabernacle  (Heb.  viii.  5),  so  that  when  he  viewed  the  work  and  saw 
all  was  done  according  to  that  pattern,  He  was  sure  He  had  done  right,  and  blessed 
them,  as  we  read  (Exod.  xxxix.  43).  So  hath  God  given  us  a  pattern  in  His  Word, 
•ccording  to  which  He  would  have  everything  in  His  spiritual  tabernacle  (as  faith, 
repentance,  love,  obedience,  &c.)  to  be  wrought.  And  if  a  man  can  find  that  the 
grace  he  hath  be  according  to  the  pattern,  as  (if  he  take  pains  with  himself  to  view 
the  work,  as  Moses  did)  he  may,  then  he  may  be  sure  it  is  right,  and  shall  have 
cause  of  rejoicing,  as  the  apostle  saith  (Gal.  vi.  4).  Thirdly,  Learn  hence  a  notable 
way  to  establish  our  hearts  in  the  assurance  of  the  pardon  of  sin.  Thou  needest 
not  climb  up  into  heaven  to  search  God's  books,  whether  they  be  crossed  or  no, 
there  to  behold  the  face  of  God  whether  He  smile  or  frown;  but  dive  into  thine  own 
Boul,  and  there  find  out  what  love  thou  bearest  to  thy  Maker  and  blessed  Savionr ; 
if  thou  findest  that  thou  lovest  Him  unfeignedly,  that  is,  that  thou  lovest  Him  more 
than  these,  lovest  Him  for  Himself,  for  those  beauties  and  exceUencies  that  are  in 
Elm.    It  is  the  greatest  comfort  that  thou  canst  have  in  this  life,  for  that  thott 


732  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tiu 

mayest  rest  assured  hereupon  that  God  is  reconciled  to  thee,  and  that  thy  sins  (ba 
they  never  so  great  or  many)  are  forgiven  thee.  Finding  this  in  thee,  thou  mayest 
be  sure,  and  never  till  then  canst  thou  be  assured  of  it.  For,  we  may  easier  carry 
coals  in  our  bosom  without  burning,  than  by  faith  apprehend  truly  this  love  ot 
God  in  the  pardoning  of  sin  without  finding  our  hearts  burn  in  love  to  Hin» 
answerably.  Only  see  that  our  love  be  rightly  qualified,  that  it  hath  these 
requisites  which  God's  Word  speaJss  of,  that  it  be  with  all  our  hearts,  with  all  our 
seals,  with  all  our  might  (Deut.  vi.  5 ;  Mark  x.  30.)  In  the  fourth  place  we  do 
observe.  That  loving  much  argues  much  mercy  received  from  the  beloved  party. 
{Ibid.)  Love  and  forgiveness  : — This  story  contains  three  figures,  who  may  stand 
for  OB  as  the  types  of  the  Divine  love  and  of  all  its  operation  in  the  world,  of  the 
way  in  which  it  is  received  or  rejected,  and  of  the  consequences  of  its  reception  or 
rejection.  There  is  the  unloving,  cleanly,  respectable,  self-complacent  Pharisee,  with 
all  his  contempt  for  "this  woman."  There  is  the  woman,  with  gross  sin  and 
mighty  penitence,  the  great  burst  of  love  that  is  flowing  out  of  her  heart  sweeping 
before  it,  as  it  were,  all  the  guilt  of  her  transgressions.  And,  high  over  all,  brooding 
over  all,  loving  each,  knowing  each,  pitying  each,  willing  to  save  and  be  the  Friend 
and  Brother  of  each,  is  the  embodied  and  manifested  Divine  love,  the  knowledge 
of  whom  is  love  in  our  hearts,  and  "life  eternal."    I.  Christ  hebb  stands  as  a 

MANIFESTATION    OF    THE    DiVINK    LOVE    COMING    FORTH    AMONGST    SINNERS.        1.    He,    aS 

bringing  to  us  the  love  of  God,  shows  it  to  us,  as  not  at  all  dependent  upon  our 
merits  or  deserts.  "  He  frankly  forgave  them  both."  2.  He  tells  us,  too,  that 
whilst  that  love  is  not  caused  by  us,  but  comes  from  the  nature  of  God,  it  is  not 
turned  away  by  our  sins.  Christ's  knowledge  of  the  woman  as  a  sinner  ;  what  did  it 
do  to  His  love  for  her  7  It  made  that  love  gentle  and  tender,  as  knowing  that  she 
could  not  bear  the  revelation  of  the  blaze  of  His  purity.  "  Daughter,  I  know  all 
about  it — all  thy  wanderings  and  thy  vile  transgressions :  I  know  them  all,  and  My 
love  is  mightier  than  all  these.  They  may  be  as  the  great  sea,  but  My  love  is  like 
the  everlasting  mountains  whose  roots  go  dovm  beneath  the  ocean ;  and  My  love  ia 
like  the  everlasting  heaven,  whose  brightness  covers  it  all  over."  3.  Christ  teaches 
us  here  that  this  Divine  love,  when  it  comes  forth  among  sinners,  necessarily 
manifests  itself  first  in  the  form  of  forgiveness.  There  was  nothing  to  be  done 
with  the  debtors  until  the  debt  was  wiped  out.  4.  We  see  here  the  love  of  God, 
last  of  all,  demanding  service.  II.  This  woman — the  penitent  lovinglt 
RECOGNIZING  THE  DiviNE  LOVE.  Great  bluuders  have  been  built  on  the  words  of  our 
text.  I  daresay  you  have  often  seen  epitaphs  written  on  gravestones,  with  this 
misplaced  idea  on  them,  "Very  sinful;  but  there  was  a  great  deal  of  love  in  the 
person ;  and  for  the  sake  of  the  love,  God  passed  by  the  sin  I  "  Now,  when  Christ 
says,  "  she  loved  much,"  He  does  not  mean  to  say  that  her  love  was  the  cause  of 
her  forgiveness — not  at  all.  He  means  to  say  that  her  love  was  the  proof  of  her 
forgiveness.  As  for  instance,  we  might  say,  "  The  woman  is  in  great  distress,  for 
she  weeps ;  "  but  we  do  not  mean  thereby  that  the  weeping  is  the  reason  of  the 
distress,  but  the  means  of  our  knowing  the  sorrow.  The  love  does  not  go  before 
the  forgiveness,  but  the  forgiveness  before  the  love.  That  this  is  the  true  interpre- 
tation you  will  see,  if  you  look  back  for  a  moment  at  the  narrative  which  precedes: 
"  He  frankly  forgave  them  both  :  tell  me,  therefore,  which  of  them  will  love  Him 
most  ?  "  1.  Then  all  true  love  to  God  is  preceded  in  the  heart  by  these  two  things 
— a  sense  of  sin,  and  an  assurance  of  pardon.  2.  Love  precedes  ail  acceptable  and 
faithful  service.  If  you  want  to  do,  love.  If  you  want  to  know,  love.  III.  A  third 
character  stands  here — the  unloving  and  self-righteous  man,  all  ignorant  o» 
THE  love  of  Christ.  Simon  is  the  antithesis  of  the  woman  and  her  character. 
What  was  it  that  made  this  man's  morality  a  piece  of  dead  nothingness. 
What  was  it  that  made  his  orthodoxy  just  so  many  dry  words,  from  out  of 
which  all  the  life  had  gone  ?  This  one  thing  :  there  was  no  love  in  it.  And,  love 
is  the  foundation  of  all  obedience.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  text  teaches — 
I.  That  sin  is  pardonable.  A  very  elementary  truth,  yet  a  very  important  one. 
The  obstacle  to  forgiveness.  1.  Not  in  God.  2.  Not  in  nature.  3.  Not  in  the 
sinner,  if  he  repents.  II.  Much  sin  can  be  repented  of  and  therefore  forgiven. 
"  Her  sins,  which  are  many."  III.  A  great  sinner  can  be  a  great  saint.  Bunyan, 
in  his  sermon  on  "  The  Jerusalem  sinner  saved,"  explaining  the  reasons  why  Jesus 
would  have  mercy  offered  in  the  first  place  to  the  biggest  sinners,  remarks,  "  H 
Christ  loves  to  be  loved  a  little,  He  loves  to  be  loved  much ;  but  there  is  not  any 
that  are  capable  of  loving  much,  save  those  that  have  much  forgiven  them."  Having 
eited  Paul  as  an  instance,  he  adds  the  quaint  reflection,  "  I  wonder  how  far  a : 


CBAr.  vn.]  ST.  LUKE,  T3S 

might  go  among  the  oonverted  sinners  of  the  smaller  size  before  he  could  find  one 
that  80  much  as  looked  anything  this  wayward."  Then  coming  to  the  scene  in 
Simon's  house,  the  moral  lesson  it  suggests  is  thus  put:  "Alasl  Christ  has  but 
little  thanks  for  the  saving  of  little  sinners.  He  gets  not  water  for  His  feet  by  the 
saving  of  such  sinners.  There  are  abundance  of  dry-eyed  Christians  in  the  world, 
and  abundance  of  dry-eyed  duties  too — duties  that  were  never  wetted  with  the  tears 
of  contrition  and  repentance,  nor  even  sweetened  with  the  great  sinner's  box  of 
ointment."    {A,  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 

THE  WOMAN  THAT  WAS  A  SINNEB. 

Simon,  her  kisses  will  not  soil ; 

Her  tears  are  pure  as  rain  ; 
Eye  not  her  hair's  untwisted  coO, 

Baptized  in  pardoning  pain. 

For  God  hath  pardoned  all  her  mtuh. 

Her  iron  bands  have  burst ; 
Her  love  could  never  have  been  sacb 

Had  not  His  love  been  first. 

But  oh  !  rejf)ice  ye  sisters  pure. 

Who  hardly  know  her  case ; 
There  is  no  sin  but  has  its  cure, 

Its  all-consuming  grace. 

He  did  not  leave  her  soul  in  hell, 

'Mong  shards  the  silver  dove. 
But  raised  her  pure  that  she  might  tell 

Her  sisters  how  to  love. 

She  gave  Him  all  your  best  love  can. 

Was  He  despised  and  sad  ? 
Yes ;  and  yet  never  mighty  man 

Such  perfect  homage  had. 

Jesus,  by  whose  forgiveness  sweet 
Her  love  grew  so  intense. 

We,  sinners  all,  come  round  Thy  feet- 
Lord,  make  no  difference.  (Oeorge  MaeeUmald.) 

The  value  of  deep  feelings : — ^Tou  will  observe  the  very  striking  instance  here  of 
the  difference  between  natural  feeling  and  conventional  feeling.  There  are  many 
]>er8onB  who  would  not  desecrate,  by  wearing  the  hat,  any  cathedral  or  church,  but 
who  are  not  troubled  by  sin  in  their  own  souls — by  pride,  malice,  envy  or  uncharit- 
ableness.  This  woman  was  heart  broken  in  the  presence  of  the  Saviour,  the  contrast 
of  whose  purity  and  truth  threw  such  a  light  of  revelation  upon  her  own  past  life  ; 
but  in  all  her  feelings,  so  strikingly  manifested,  the  Pharisee  saw  nothing.  1.  In 
the  beginning  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  love  is  to  be  derived  only  from  a  sense 
of  benefit  conferred,  and  that  the  conscious  benefit  of  forgiven  sin  is  the  true 
fountain  of  the  highest  love.  For  love  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the 
love-principle  in  the  subject  of  it.  We  do  not  love  God  merely  on  account  of  what 
He  has  done  for  us.  We  begin  to  love  God  by  a  perception  of  His  great  mercy  to 
us.  It  then  goes  higher,  and  widens  and  purifies  itself.  2.  Nor  must  we  reason 
falsaly  upon  the  implications  of  this  passage.  For  we  might  say,  "  If  love  is  to  be 
in  proportion  to  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  then  men  should  sin  freely  in  order  that 
they  may  love  greatly."  Paul  had  precisely  the  same  case  presented  to  his  mind 
by  an  objector.  He  had  been  urging  that  God's  grace  was  in  proportion  to  a 
man's  sin  ;  and  the  objector  said,  ♦'  Must  we,  then,  go  on  and  sin  that  grace  may 
abound  ?  "  '•  No,  God  forbid  1  "  said  the  apostle.  "  That  would  be  contrary  to  the 
very  nature  of  love.  It  is  impossible  for  a  man  who  loves  to  go  on  sinning  for  the 
sake  of  loving  more,  or  for  the  sake  of  winning  more  grace.  The  two  ideas  are 
practically  incompatible  with  each  other."  Nor  are  we  to  say,  "  As  I  have  not  been 
a  great  sinner,  I  am  not  bound  to  love  much."  3.  But  not  to  speak  longer  apoa 
these  possible  perversions  of  this  truth  here,  I  proceed  further  to  say  that  it  is  a  tnitb 


T84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaf.  ▼» 

which  opens  for  consideration  the  question  of  the  yalne  of  great  feelings,  deep 
feelings — especially  a  profound  experience  of  personal  sinfulness  incident  to  a 
Christian  life.  There  is  a  powerful  effect  wrought  upon  a  man's  moral  nature  by 
the  mental  experience  through  which  he  goes.  If  a  man  has  had  such  a  struggle 
with  himself  that  he  is  profoundly  impressed  with  the  might  of  evil  in  him  ;  if 
there  has  been  in  his  experience  a  revelation  of  the  destructive  tendencies  of  sin  ; 
all  this  experience  would  tend  to  produce,  most  vividly  and  most  powerfully,  • 
sense  of  God's  grace.  His  sense  of  the  gift  is  to  be  measured  by  this  experience. 
No  man  that  has  a  low  conception  of  sin  will  ever  have  a  very  high  conception  of 
grace.  God's  rescue  will  seem  great  in  proportion  to  your  conscious  peril.  How 
much  has  been  forgiven  you  will  be  determined  by  how  much  you  consciously  have 
been  in  debt.  As  a  practical  matter,  almost  all  men  know  that  eminent  experiences 
have  grown  out  of  profound  convictions  of  sin,  and  come  up  to  this  point  of  con- 
viction of  sin,  and  stopped  there.  It  may  be  that  you  have  not  enough  conviction 
of  sin ;  you  have  enough  to  begin  a  life  of  reformation  with.  Then  what  will 
happen  ?  In  proportion  as  a  man  goes  toward  that  which  is  right,  his  conscience 
becomes  firm,  his  moral  sense  becomes  stronger,  and  conviction  of  sin,  like  every 
other  Christian  experience,  will  develop  and  grow.  Let  the  sense  of  sin  grow  a( 
you  grow.  A  profound  experience  of  unworth  will  open  more  and  more  upon  you, 
as  you  go  on  in  the  Divine  life.  The  magnitude  of  the  debt  that  has  been  forgiven 
you,  will  constitute  a  growing  practical  Christian  experience.  You  are  like  a  child 
that  wants  to  read  a  book,  but  will  not  learn  his  letters  because  he  does  not  want 
to  touch  a  book  till  he  can  go  off  all  at  once.  You  must  learn  your  letters  before 
you  can  read.  The  experience  of  every  trait,  of  every  element  of  Christian  life,  is 
an  experience  that  begins  small  and  waxes  larger,  and  by  and  by  becomes  like  a 
branch  of  a  tree  in  full  top.  And  that  which  is  true  of  every  other  feeling  is  true 
of  this  one — namely,  conviction  of  sin.  If,  then,  you  have  enough  feeling  to  condemn 
Tou,  you  have  enough  for  yeast.  4.  Very  wicked  men  ought  to  become  very 
eminent  and  active  Christians.  Usually,  men  who  have  been  very  wicked,  are  men 
who  have  very  strong  natures.  Men  who  have  been  dissipated,  are  men  who  have 
had  very  strong  passions  and  appetites.  Usually  a  wicked  man  is  a  man  of  power 
and  audacity,  if  he  is  very  wicked ;  but  where  there  is  great  power  to  do  wrong, 
there  is  great  power  to  react  from  wrong  ;  and  if  a  man  has  been  going  away  from 
God  with  vigour,  that  same  vigour  should  supply  him  with  the  elements  by  which 
to  return.  It  is  pitiful  to  see  a  man  fruitful,  energetic,  from  day  to  day,  and  con- 
stantly diversifying  his  experience  in  wickedness,  but  sterile,  and  close,  and  formal, 
and  proper  when  he  becomes  a  Christian.  Bad  men  also  are  usually  acquainted 
with  human  life.  They  know  the  dispositions  of  their  fellow-men  ;  and  whatever 
knowledge  there  is  of  bad  men  they  have.  And  snch  men  are  bound  to  consecrate 
their  knowledge,  and  to  bring  it  into  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has 
forgiven  them,  and  renewed  their  life,  if  they  are  born  again.  If  a  man  has  been  a 
gambler,  and  is  converted  from  his  wicked  way,  that  ought  to  be  a  sphere  in  which 
he  feels  peculiarly  called  to  labour.  There  is  also  a  sense  of  Divine  goodness  that 
ought  to  go  with  cases  of  conversions  of  bad  men,  and  that  ought  to  be  specially 
affecting  and  influential.  I  see  a  great  many  persons  who  try  to  serve  God  softly. 
The  devil  puts  excuses  into  their  mouths  like  these  :  "  I  ought  not  to  meddle  with 
sacred  things.  I  ought  not  to  put  on  airs  in  religion,  or  give  people  reason  to  suppose 
that  I  do."  And  under  these  guises  they  do  but  little,  and  very  soon  wither  and  go 
back  to  their  old  state.  If,  therefore,  within  the  hearing  of  my  voice,  there  are 
those  who  are  thinking  about  a  Christian  life,  I  open  the  door  of  the  church  to 
you — but  on  this  condition  ;  come  in  with  all  your  might  1  If  you  have  been  • 
■wearing  man,  your  lips  must  not  be  dumb  now  in  the  praise  of  that  God  whom 
you  have  been  blaspheming  all  your  Ufe.  If  you  were  sick,  and  your  case  had 
been  given  over  by  all  the  physicians,  and  a  stranger  should  come  to  your  town, 
and  should  examine  into  your  diflaculty,  and  should  say,  "It  is  a  struggle 
with  death  itself,  but  I  am  in  possession  of  knowledge  by  which  I  think  I  can 
heal  you ; "  and  he  should  never  leave  you  day  nor  night,  but  should  cling  to 
you  through  weeks  and  weeks,  and  at  last  raise  you  to  health,  would  it  not  be 
contemptibly  mean  if  you  should  be  ashamed  to  acknowledge  him  to  be  your 
physician,  and  testify  to  what  he  had  done  for  you?  If  I  was  that  physician, 
would  I  not  have  a  right  to  have  my  name  and  my  skill  made  known  by  you  ? 
6.  Men  who  have  sinned,  not  by  their  passions  but  by  their  higher  faculties,  if 
they  would  be  true  Christians,  must  have  just  the  same  spiritual  momentum— 
thoogh  for  different  reasons — as  those  that  have  sinned  by  their  lower  faculties.   6. 


MAP.  yn.]  8T.  LUKE.  W 

Let  erery  man  who  is  going  to  begin  a  Christian  life  pursue  the  same  course 
that  she  pursued  whose  name  has  been  made  memorable,  and  whose  soul  this  day 
chants  before  her  Beloved  in  heaven — or  she  is  one  of  those  of  whom  Christ  says, 
*'  The  publicans  and  the  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  of  God  before  you,"  Pharisees, 
(fl".  W.  Beecher.)  Much  love  the  fruit  of  abundant  pardon: — Learn  from  the 
mistake  of  the  Pharisee  to  be  very  careful  in  the  formation  of  your  opinions  of 
others,  and  especially  in  the  expression  of  your  judgment.  Great  changes  may  take 
place  in  persons,  which  changes  do  not  come  to  your  ears.     I.  The  fibst  of  these 

LESSONS   IS,    THAT   GRATITUDE    IN   A     LIVING    HEART     RISES     WITH    THE     OCCASION.         YoU 

know  that  gratitude  is  a  joyous  sense  of  obligation,  I  lay  great  stress  upon  that 
word  "joyous."  There  may  be  a  sense  of  obligation  without  thankfulness — 
there  may  be  a  sense  of  obligation  associated  with  hatred,  and  malice,  and 
revenge.  There  are  men  who  are  excited  to  indignation  by  obligations  which 
they  cannot  cast  off.  Gratitude  is  a  joyous  sense  of  obligation  to  another, 
accompanied  by  a  desire  to  confess  that  obligation.  If  this  sense  be  absent, 
and  if  the  consciousness  be  painful,  and  if  a  man  shrink  from  the  utterance  of 
acknowledgment  of  the  obligation,  gratitude  is  not  in  his  heart.  Now,  as  the 
mercury  in  the  barometer  rises  with  the  lightness  of  the  atmosphere,  and  in  the 
thermometer  with  the  heat  of  the  atmosphere,  so  gratitude  in  a  true  heart  swells 
with  the  extent  of  the  obligation.  Christ  says  of  this  woman,  "  Her  sins,  which  are 
many,  are  forgiven,  for  she  loved  much  ;  but  to  whom  little  is  forgiven,  the  same 
loveth  little."  Thankfulness  in  this  poor  woman's  soul  had  reached  a  very  high 
point ;  that  is,  it  responded  to  the  demand  made  upon  it.  Gratitude  in  a  living  heart 
will  not  be  stationary.  As  the  clouds  of  guilt  and  sorrow  are  blotted  out  from  the 
firmament  of  the  man's  heart,  and  from  the  firmament  of  the  man's  prospects,  thank- 
fulness will  rise.  Gratitude  cannot  be  the  same  in  two  individuals  of  equal  spiritual 
sensitiveness,  but  of  different  conditions.  "  She  loved  much  :  but  to  whom  little  is 
forgiven,  the  same  loveth  little."  The  difference  in  the  condition,  the  heart  being 
alive,  produces  the  difference  in  the  thankfulness.  As  a  trunk-line  receives  traflBo 
from  its  branch-lines,  or  as  the  principal  stream  through  a  valley  receives  accession 
by  tributary  streams,  so  thankfulness  is  deep  or  shallow,  wide  or  narrow,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  circumstances  which  call  it  forth.  The  highest  occasion  of  thankfulness 
is  large  pardon  from  God — pardon  dispensed  by  God  abundantly.  Sin  admits  of 
degree.  Transgressions  may  be  many  or  few,  and  they  are  marked  by  degrees  of 
aggravation.  Observe,  too,  the  manner  in  which  God  dispenses  forgiveness.  He 
pardons  freely,  without  money,  and  without  price ;  readily,  without  the  vain 
repetition  of  continued  entreaty — abundantly,  making  the  scarlet,  snow,  and  the 
crimson,  wool.  Now,  until  a  guilty  man  is  forgiven  by  his  God,  none  of  the  gifts  of 
the  Father  of  Mercies  partake  thoroughly  of  the  natuie  of  blessing.  He  has  health, 
and  strength,  and  Ufe  ;  but  these  are  only  adding  distance  to  his  wanderings  from 
God.  Strong  gratitude,  brethren,  is  very  free  in  its  utterance.  It  is  not  restricted 
to  place.  The  man  who  is  really  thankful  cannot  expend  his  emotions  in  the 
eacredness  of  retirement  only.  Yet  the  thankful  heart  is  not  dependent  upon  the 
excitement  of  the  multitude.  Still,  gratitude  is  not  restricted  to  time,  or  to  mode. 
It  finds  regular  seasons  for  utterance — in  the  morning  and  evening,  and  at  noon-day. 
It  will  lisp  hke  an  infant ;  it  can  chant  like  a  seraph.  It  will  utter  itself  in  a  sigh 
or  in  a  song,  in  a  tear  or  in  an  alabaster,  in  a  look  or  in  a  course  of  service.  Look 
at  a  third  fact.  Gratitude  breaks  the  laws  of  propriety  which  a  formalist  would 
recognize.  It  puts  its  hand  on  the  best  and  it  offers  the  best.  Now,  how  ought 
the  gratitude  of  a  forgiven  man  to  be  expressed  ?  Honour  the  Saviour's  person  in 
the  persons  of  His  disciples.  (S.  Martin.)  She  loved  much  :  she  had  much 
forgiven : — In  treating  this  subject  more  fully  I  shall  try  to  analyze — I.  The  secret 
springs  of  the  poor  sinner's  conduct.  II.  The  nature  of  the  action,  which  was 
viewed  so  diversely  by  the  Pharisees  and  the  Lord.  I.  The  springs  of  the 
woman's  CONDUCT.  The  woman  was  "  a  sinner."  Into  the  precise  form  or  extent 
of  her  transgression  there  is  no  need  to  pry.  The  word  was  very  significant ;  a 
•'  lost  woman  "  would  be  its  equivalent  now.  The  sin  was  one  which  filled  her 
whole  consciousness.  The  springs  of  her  action,  perhaps,  lie  here.  1.  In  her 
desperate  self-abandonment  the  Lord  had  lit  one  ray  of  hope  within  her  spirit. 
"  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.'' 
What  sin-crushed  spirit  would  not  leap  to  hear  such  words  from  such  Divine  U^js  t 
Despair  is  the  devil's  own  instrument.  The  first  step  in  the  reformation  of  the  most 
abandoned  profligates  is  to  get  them  to  care  for  themselves — to  think  themselves 
worth  the  care.   Doubtless,  this  poor  sinner  had  long  loathed  her  vocation.   Doubt- 


73fl  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [«■!».  vn. 

less,  the  burainir  blush  of  shame  had  often  stained  her  cheek,  and  tears,  tears  that 
had  a  tinge  of  blood  in  them,  had  often  dimmed  her  eye,  when  she  remembered  that 
she  had  lost  her  womanhood,  lost  her  soul,  lost  her  life,  for  ever.  Surely,  too,  th& 
thought  of  reformation  had  often  visited  her.  But  the  "Where  shaU  I  go,  what 
shall  I  do  ?  "  as  often  checked  her.  "  Who  in  this  universe  cares  for  a  woman  that 
is  a  sinner  ?  "  2.  The  Lord  had  quickened  within  her  numbed  and  withered  heart 
the  pulses  of  a  blessed  and  purifying  love.  Love  is  the  strong  redeemer  of  pollution. 
How  hard  and  how  long  will  even  a  human  love  struggle  against  the  pollution  of  & 
sensual  life.  The  devil  has  not  fairly  secured  his  victim  until  the  very  embers  of 
love  are  extinguished  in  the  hearth-fire  of  the  heart.  Jesus  made  her  a  woman 
again.  The  tendrils  of  love,  torn  from  their  pristine  hold,  all  tangled  and  rotting 
on  the  damp  earth  whereon  she  grovelled,  began  to  tingle  aud  thrill  again.  Heaven 
seemed  to  open  above  her  and  beam  its  benediction.     II.  And  now  let  ds  turn  oub 

THOUGHTS  TO  THE  NATUBE  OF  THE  ACTION,  AND  ANALYZE  THE  OPPOSING  JUDGMBNTB 
WHICH   WEBB   PASSED    ON     IT    BY   THE     DISCIPLES   AND     THE     LoRD.        Worldly    wlsdom 

would  probably  find  a  double  objection  to  this  transaction.  1.  It  was  shameful  that 
a  woman,  who  was  a  sinner,  should  approach  a  prophet;  and — 2.  The  gift  was  lavish 
and  wasteful,  and  might  have  been  put  to  better  use.  And  Jesus  seems  to  me  to  say 
by  His  answers — 1.  That  love — such  love— must  be  left  to  its  native  affinities.  Its 
elections  are  absolute,  its  decisions  are  supreme.  2.  The  Lord  said  that  there  are 
gifts  which  a  love  like  hers  alone  can  justify.  "  She  loved  much,"  He  pleaded,  in 
answer  to  the  glances  which  condemned  the  occasion  as  a  scandal,  and  the  gift  aa 
a  waste.  There  are  gifts  which  are  simply  the  utterance  of  the  heart  of  the  giver, 
outlets  of  surcharged  feeling,  expressions  of  thoughts  too  deep  for  words,  for  tears. 
Let  the  cold  and  cautious  stand  aside  while  such  are  passing,  nor  stay  the  flight  of 
these  angels  on  the  wing.  The  heart's  first  duty  is  to  find  itself  expression.  She 
loved  much  ;  she  spent  her  living  in  telling  how  much  she  loved.  Simon,  there  ia 
a  malignant  devil  in  that  cautious  calculation.  Moreover,  love  like  hers  is  not  so 
uncalculating,  though  it  disdains  Pharisaic  measures.  The  woman  gave  her  living, 
but  she  won  her  soul.  The  ointment  was  lost,  and  the  money  which  bought  it,  but 
her  soul  was  for  ever  rid  of  its  burden,  and  was  braced  for  conflict  and  heavenly 
work.  Love,  though  profuse  in  gifts,  clears  the  intellect,  kindles  the  spirit,  stira 
the  courage,  and  nerves  the  hands.  3.  The  Saviour  says  that  love  like  hers  may 
well  seek  strange  and  profuse  expressions,  for  it  is  the  parent  of  a  glory  and  blessed- 
ness which  transcends  all  utterance  and  thought.  Love  is  life.  The  woman  who 
was  a  sinner,  loving  much,  grew  more  swiftly  and  strongly  to  saintly  perfectness, 
than  Simon  the  just  Pharisee  measuring  and  obeying.  Love,  like  electric  fire,  leaps 
swiftly  to  its  object.  Justness,  the  quiet  sense  of  duty,  the  careful  measuring  of 
obligations,  travels  slowly,  though  wisely  and  surely,  along  the  road.  (Bead  Lok* 
vii.  47-50.)    {J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.) 

Ver.  48.  Tby  sins  are  forgiven. — Assurance  of  forgivenett : — It  is  not  enough 
that  our  sins  are  pardoned  in  heaven,  but  we  are  to  endeavour  and  seek  after  the 
particular  assurance  of  the  pardon  of  them  to  our  own  consciences  for  our 
further  comfort.  Unknown  things  are  not  desired.  How,  then,  can  they  be  rejoiced 
in?  Say  a  man  be  in  prison  for  treason  fast  bound,  and  that  a  pardon  is  granted 
to  him,  yet,  till  he  knows  thereof,  he  can  rejoice  no  more  in  that  his  happiness  than  if 
he  were  to  be  executed  the  next  day.  (N.  Rogers.)  Personal  assurance  : — This 
serves  to  stir  us  up  earnestly  to  seek  after  particular  assurance  of  the  remission  of 
sins,  as  we  desire  true  comfort  to  our  souls.  Let  a  man  know  never  so  much 
of  God  and  of  Christ  His  Son,  yet  the  general  apprehension  of  these  things  will 
but  add  a  kind  of  vexation  to  his  spirit,  till  he  have  assurance  of  some  special 
interest  he  hath  in  God's  mercies.  What  a  torment  is  it  for  a  hunger- starved 
beggar  to  pass  by  a  wedding-house,  and  smell  good  cheer,  yet  (Tantalus  like)  never 
taste  of  it  ?  What  a  vexation  to  a  poor  man  to  see  a  great  dole  given,  and  multi- 
tudes relieved  by  it,  yet  he  get  nothing  ?  So  is  it  certainly  in  this  case  ;  the  more 
any  man  knoweth  of  Christ,  and  of  the  plenteous  redemption  that  is  by  Him  pur- 
chased through  His  blood,  the  greater  must  the  horror  of  his  soul  be  when  he 
findeth  that  he  hath  no  part  therein.  (Ibid.)  The  blessing  of  forgiveruss  :— 
The  text  may  suggest  to  us  four  subjects  or  heads  of  consideration.  1.  The  for- 
giveness of  sin.  2.  The  forgiver  of  sin.  3.  The  means  of  forgiveness.  4.  The 
blessed  effect  in  the  heart  of  man — "  Go  in  peace."     {J.  Slade,  M.A.)  Pardon 

available  for  the  greatest  sinner : — When  the  last  war  had  passed,  the  Government 
of  the  United  States  made  proclamation  of  pardon  te  the  common  soldiery  in  the 


CHAP,  vn.]  -ST.  LUKE.  T87 

Confederate  army,  but  not  to  the  chief  soldiers.  The  gospel  of  Christ  does  not  act 
in  that  way.  It  says  pardon  for  all,  but  especially  for  the  chief  of  sinners.  I  do 
not  now  think  of  a  single  passage  that  says  a  small  sinner  may  be  saved ;  but  I  do  think 
of  passages  that  say  a  great  sinner  may  be  saved.  If  there  be  sins  only  faintly 
faued,  just  a  Uttle  tinged,  so  faintly  coloured  you  can  hardly  see  them,  there  is  no 
special  pardon  promised  in  the  Bible  for  those  sins;  but  if  they  be  glaring — red 
like  crimson — then  they  shall  be  as  snow.  Now,  my  brethren,  I  do  not  state  this 
to  put  a  premium  on  great  iniquity.  I  merely  say  this  to  encourage  that  man  in 
this  house  who  feels  he  is  so  far  gone  from  God  that  there  ia  no  mercy  for  him.  I 
want  to  tell  him  there  is  a  good  chance.     {Dr.  Talmage.) 

Ver.  49.  Began  to  say  within  themselves. — Care  to  hf.  exercised  in  our  judg- 
ment of  others : — This  should  teach  us  to  take  heed  how  we  pass  sentenoa 
upon  tne  inward  intentions  and  purposes  of  men.  This  power  is  God's,  and 
belongs  to  Him;  what  have  we  to  do  to  usurp  it?  It  is  a  well  too  deep 
for  us  to  draw  in.  And  yet,  such  is  the  presumption  of  some,  that  they 
will  take  upon  them  infallibly  to  know  what  is  in  the  bottom  of  that  well,  whence 
ariseth  jealousies  and  contentions,  many  times  as  causeless  as  pernicious.  Indeed, 
by  some  discoveries  there  may  be  some  conjectures;  but  let  not  a  small  conjecture 
make  thee  a  great  offender.  Every  key  a  man  meets  with  is  not  the  right  one  for 
this  lock  ;  every  likelihood  thou  apprehendest  is  not  a  sure  sign  of  what  is  within 
ihe  breast.  Not  to  let  a  man  be  private  in  his  house  is  a  great  injury ;  not  to  let  a 
t2*n  be  pvJvate  in  his  heart  is  a  greater.  Lastly,  let  us  be  persuaded  hence  to  be 
as  upright  before  the  Lord  in  thought  as  we  are  just  in  dealing  before  men.  ^  It  is 
not  the  white  fleece  God  especially  eyes,  but  the  sound  liver.  He  hath  windows 
into  the  soul,  and  there  sees  that  hypocrisy  which  lies  lurking  there.  He  is  very 
list  of  hearing,  and  well  understandeth  what  the  heart  thinketh,  and  (as  before 
was  showed)  will  answer  us  accordingly,     (N.  Rogers.) 

Ver.  50.  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee.— Saving  faith: — It  is  not  every  faith  that 
saves  the  soul.  There  may  be  faith  in  a  falsehood  which  leads  only  to  delusion, 
and  ends  in  destruction.  There  is  a  faith  that  saves  ;  it  puts  us  into  immediate 
and  vital  and  permanent  union  with  the  Son  of  God.  What  was  the  nature  of  this 
woman's  faith?  Was  it  merely  an  intellectual  opinion,  a  clear  conviction  that 
this  wonderful  man  of  Nazareth  was  a  strong  and  sympathetic  character  whom  she 
could  trust  ?  Yes,  it  was  that,  and  a  great  deal  more.  It  was  a  transaction  by 
which  she  approached  Christ  humbly,  embraced  His  very  feet,  acknowledged  her 
sinfulness,  and  relied  on  Him  to  do  for  her  some  great  spiritual  good.  The  woman 
was  really  saved  through  her  faith.  Jesus  Christ  Himself  did  the  saving  work. 
When  I  turn  the  faucet  in  my  house,  it  is  not  the  faucet  or  the  water-pipe  that 
fills  my  empty  pitcher.  I  simply  put  my  pitcher  in  actual  connection  with  the 
inexhaustible  reservoir  which  is  at  the  other  end  of  the  pipe.  When  I  exercise 
faith  in  a  crucified  Saviour,  I  put  my  guilty  self  into  connection  with  His  Divine 
self,  my  utter  emptiness  into  connection  with  His  infinite  fulness.  This  ib  the 
faith  which  the  apostles  preached,  and  which  you  and  I  must  practise.  "  Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  Not  in  Christianity,  but  on 
Christ.  Not  enough  to  believe  in  the  Christ  described  in  the  New  Testament, 
Millions  of  unconverted  people  do  this,  just  as  they  believe  in  Wilberforce  as  a 
noble  philanthropist,  or  in  Lincoln  as  an  unselfish  patriot.  When  the  miner  looks 
at  the  rope  which  is  to  lower  him  into  the  deep  mine,  he  may  coolly  say  to  him- 
self, "I  have  faith  in  that  rope.  It  looks  well  made  and  strong."  That  is  his 
opinion ;  but  when  he  grasps  it,  and  swings  down  by  it  into  the  dark  yawning 
chasm,  then  he  is  believing  on  the  rope.  This  is  more  than  opinion,  it  is  a  volun- 
tary transaction.  Faith  is  the  clmg  to  the  rope,  but  it  is  the  rope  itself  that 
supports  the  miner.  I.  Faith  is  a  veet  simple  pbocess.  The  most  vital  of  all 
acts  is  as  easily  comprehended  as  a  baby  comprehends  the  idea  of  drawing  nourish- 
ment from  a  mother's  breast,  and  falling  asleep  in  a  mother's  arms.  H.  Faith  is 
A  SENSIBLE  ACT.  The  highest  exercise  of  reason  is  to  trust  what  the  Almighty  has 
said,  and  to  rely  on  what  He  has  promised.  III.  Faith  is  a  stooping  grace. 
Self  must  go  down  before  we  can  be  Ufted  up  into  Christ's  favour  and  likeness. 
IV.  Faith  is  the  stbbngthening  grace.  Through  this  channel  flows  in  the 
power  from  on  high.  V.  Finally,  it  is  the  grace  which  completely  satisfies. 
When  a  hungry  soul  has  found  this  food,  the  aching  void  is  filled.  (T.  L.  Cuyler, 
DJ).)        The  prominence  of  faith  in  the  thoughu  of  Christ:— Thia  was  only  to 

47 


738  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rn. 

be  expected  in  one  who  preached  a  gospel  of  grace.  Grace  and  faith  are  eorrela- 
tives.  A  gospel  of  grace  is  a  gospel  which  proclaims  a  God  whose  nature  it  is  tn 
give.  The  proper  attitude  of  those  who  worship  such  a  God  to  the  object  of  their 
worship  is  that  of  recipiency.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  To  hold  a  correct  dogmati/! 
definition  of  "  saving  faith  "  has  been  considered  the  most  important  criterion  of  a 
standing  or  falling  Church.  Yet  I  defy  anybody  to  put  into  dogmatic  shape  thit> 
woman's  "  saving  faith."  It  put  itself  into  shape,  but  it  was  the  shape  of  feelin(7 
and  of  action;  of  love  which  braved  all  to  express  itself  in  outward  acts  of 
reverence  and  affection ;  of  sorrow  which  found  more  joy  in  bitter  weeping  than 
ever  in  laughter  and  in  song ;  of  personal  devotion  which  recked  nothing  of  any 
one  else's  opinion,  if  only  it  might  gain  one  kind  word  from  Him.  Whoever  they 
they  need  not  fear  but  that  theirs  is  ♦'  saving  faith."  {R.  Winterbotham,  M.A.) 
The  work  of  faith  and  love  in  salvation : — It  is  surprising  to  think  that  th« 
conclusion  of  this  affecting  incident  should  have  been  made  the  battle-field  on 
which  controversialists  should  have  contended,  whether  this  woman  was  saved 
by  faith  alone,  "Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee";  or  by  love,  "Her  sins,  which 
are  many,  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much  " ;  and  as  love  is  assumed  to  be 
a  work,  some  on  one  side  would  deny  that  love  had  anything  to  do  with  saving 
her,  whilst  others,  on  the  other  side,  would  assert  that  her  faith,  unless  it  was 
mixed  with  love  or  issued  in  love,  would  be  simply  the  faith  of  devils.  Now,  let  ug 
try  and  reconstruct,  as  it  were,  the  spiritual  history  of  this  woman.  In  its  leading 
features  I  think  we  cannot  be  far  wrong.  Our  knowledge  of  human  society  would 
teach  us  that  she  could  scarcely  have  been  the  only  sinner  of  her  class.  Very 
likely  great  numbers  who  sinned  either  openly  or  secretly  after  the  same  sort  of 
sin  had  heard,  along  with  her,  the  Lord's  call  to  repentance.  But  there  was  that 
within  her  which  attracted  her  to  Him,  and  made  her  listen  to  Him,  whilst  other 
similar  sinners  did  not.  What  was  that  ?  It  was  an  alteration  in  her  will,  a  sense 
of  sin  as  foul  and  polluting,  which  made  her  not  only  be  willing,  but  "will  "  {i.e., 
strongly  desire)  to  be  rid  of  it.  This  was  the  root  of  all.  What  was  it  ?  Being  a 
change  of  heart,  or  mind,  a  turning  from  sin  and  turning  to  God,  we  may  call  it 
repentance  ;  but  it  was  not  repentance  alone,  if  so,  it  would  have  turned  to  despair 
— it  was  inextricably  mixed  with  faith,  faith  in  God  and  goodness,  a  belief  in  the 
present  excellence  and  future  triumph  of  purity,  as  distinguished  from  the  present 
degradation  and  future  condemnation  of  impurity.  So  it  was  faith  as  the  evidence 
of  things  not  seen.  This  gave  her  the  ear  to  listen  to  the  words  of  Christ,  because 
in  them  she  heard  the  words  of  One  who  was  Himself  divinely  pure,  and  yet 
showed  Himself  able  and  willing  to  relieve  the  hearts  of  all  who  came  to  Him 
under  the  burden  of  impurity.  This  was  a  further  act  of  faith  on  her  part.  She 
not  only  believed  in  a  God  of  purity,  but  in  Christ  as  the  representative  of  that 
God  of  purity.  She  consequently  came  to  Him  in  spirit  as  she  listened  to  His 
words,  because  His  words  first  opened  before  her  the  door  of  hope.  So  then  we 
have  here  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  remarkable  words  of  the  apostle,  "  We 
are  saved  by  hope."  If  the  words  of  Christ  had  not  been  full  of  hope  for  a  per- 
son in  her  sad  condition,  she  would  not  have  listened  to  Him  so  as  to  be  attracted 
to  Him.  But  we  have  used  the  word  "  attract "  ;  what  is  the  attraction  of  soul  to 
soul  ?  Most  people  would  unquestionably  call  it  love,  and  they  would  be  right ; 
for  how  could  there  be  the  attraction  of  a  penitent  soul  to  a  pure,  yet  loving. 
Saviour,  for  such  benefits  as  forgiveness  and  cleansing,  without  love  ?  What  was 
it,  then,  which  "  saved  "  her  ?  It  was  her  will,  the  opposite  of  the  will  of  those 
to  whom  the  Lord  said,  "Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me  that  ye  may  have  life." 
Being  the  change  of  her  will,  it  was  repentance  {metanoia),  "  repentance 
unto  life " ;  but  repentance  which  differed  from  despair  or  worldly  sor- 
row, because  it  was  inspired  by  hope.  It  was  a  change  of  mind  God- 
ward,  and  so  was  faith  in  God;  and  Christward,  because  it  recognized  in  the 
Lord  the  Saviour  from  sin  ;  and  yet  from  first  to  last  it  was  faith,  whose  very  life 
was  holy  love.  She  was  attracted  to  the  former  guilty  partners  of  her  sin  by  unholy 
love ;  she  was  attracted  to  Christ  by  penitent,  believing,  hopeful,  holy  love.  It 
seems  to  me  the  height  of  folly  and  presumption  to  try  to  separate  the  will,  the 
repentance,  the  faith,  the  hope,  the  love,  and  assign  to  each  their  respective  parts 
in  the  matter  of  salvation.  God  hath  joined  all  together ;  let  ns  not  try,  even  in 
thought,  to  put  them  asunder.  But  what  is  the  significance  of  the  Lord's  words, 
"  Her  sins,  which  are  many,  are  forgiven ;  for  she  loved  much  "  ?  The  real  drift 
veems  to  be  in  the  many  sins  (at  iroXkai)  and  the  loving  much  (ttoXv),  the  snma 


•HAP.  •«,]  ST.  LUKE.  78$ 

Greek  adjective.  A  sinful  life  such  as  hers,  in  which  she  had  laid  herself  out  to 
seduce  others  to  sin,  required  a  deep  sense  of  guilt,  a  deep  repentance :  a  superficial, 
light-hearted  sorrow  in  her  case  would  have  been,  humanly  speaking,  of  no  avail, 
no  repentance  at  all ;  but  God,  in  His  mercy,  gave  her  true  and  godly  sorrow.  This 
appeared  in  her  whole  action,  particularly  in  her  washing  the  Lord's  feet  with  her 
tears,  and  wiping  them  with  tlie  hairs  of  her  head.  Now,  Mary  of  Bethany  similarly 
poured  precious  ointment  on  the  Lord's  feet,  and  similarly  wiped  them  with  her 
hair ;  but  in  all  the  three  accounts  there  is  not  a  word  said  of  her  shedding  a 
single  tear ;  and  if  she  had,  her  tears  would  not  have  been  those  of  penitence,  but 
of  gratitude  for  the  restoration  of  her  brother.  What,  then,  was  the  washing  of 
the  Lord's  feet  with  her  tears  ?  of  what,  I  mean,  was  it  the  sign  7— of  repentance  ? 
of  faith?  of  love?  Of  all  three,  I  answer,  all  inseparable,  all  permeating  one 
another,  all  sustaining  and  nourishing  one  another.  The  whole  action,  if  a  sincere 
one,  could  not  have  existed  without  all  three.  The  Lord's  words,  then,  cannot  have 
the  slightest  bearing  on  any  post-ref  ormation  disputes  respecting  faith  and  works,  faith 
and  love,  love  as  preceding  forgiveness,  or  love  as  following  it.  They  are  emphatically 
natural  words,  describing  the  natural  effect  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  soul ;  for 
though  grace  be  above  nature,  it  yet  works  not  unnaturally,  but  naturally,  accord- 
ing to  its  own  nature,  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the  human  being  who  receives 
it.  {M.  F.  Sadler,  M.A.)  The  true  and  believing  penitent  even  in  this  life  is 
saved: — For — 1.  We  have  salvation  in  the  promises  of  it  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  2.  We 
have  it  in  those  graces  which  begin  it  (John  xvii.  3 ;  Tit.  iii.  6,  and  ii.  12  ;  John  iii. 
8).  3.  We  have  it  in  the  assurance  of  it.  Doth  the  Lord  say  and  shall  He  not 
do  ?  His  foundation  standeth  sure  and  hath  His  seal.  And  if  this  counsel  be, 
of  God  as  Gamaliel  said  in  another  case,  ye  cannot  destroy  it.  {N.  Rogers.) 
The  weeping  penitent  and  the  disdainful  Pharisee  .-—I.  The  principle  to  which 
ouB  LoBD  ATTRIBUTED  HER  BAiVATioN  WAS  HER  FAITH.  This  was  the  medium 
through  which  the  blessing  was  conveyed,  and  this  was  indeed  the  secret  spring 
of  all  her  proceeding.  And  in  wbat  way,  we  ask,  could  this  individual  have 
been  saved  except  by  faith?  As  for  salvation  by  works,  that  was  out  of  the 
question  in  her  case.  She  was  a  sinner,  as  the  Evangelist  testifies  ;  and  therefore, 
instead  of  being  justified  by  the  law,  was  convicted  by  it  as  a  transgressor.  What 
was  there  then  that  could  save  her  ?  Her  relation  to  Abraham  ?  That  she  had 
virtually  renounced,  and  by  advancing  any  plea  on  that  ground  would  only  have 
convicted  herself  of  apostasy.  The  comparative  innocence  of  her  early  years? 
The  sacrifices  of  the  law  ?  These  had  no  power  to  pnrify  the  conscience ;  nor 
could  "  thousands  of  rams,  or  ten  thousand  rivers  of  oil  "  have  washed  away  a 
single  stain.  Might  her  repentance,  then,  have  saved  her,  and  her  diligent  efforts 
after  reformation  ?  Alas,  the  convictions  and  terrors  of  a  guilty  conscience  furnish 
no  propitiation  for  sin,  and  have  in  them  more  of  fretfolness  and  irritation  than  of 
submission  and  loyal  obedience.  And  as  for  the  feelings  of  broken-hearted  contri- 
tion, of  genuine  love,  of  all  true  devotion,  these  are  the  fruits  and  evidences  of 
mercy  already  experienced ;  and  therefore,  instead  of  saving  the  soul,  they  show  it 
to  be  already  saved.  Her  faith  saved  her  as  accepting  the  blessing  freely  given  her 
of  God.  And  this  view  of  faith  refutes  the  notion  of  those  who,  from  a  mistaken 
seal  for  morality,  ascribe  the  saving  eflBcacy  of  faith  to  the  moral  excellence  of  this 
principle  as  implying  submission  and  obedience ;  for  this  is  to  make  faith  itself  a 
work,  and  to  ascribe  salvation  to  ourselves  in  performing  it.  But  in  Scripture, 
salvation  by  faith  is  constantly  opposed  to  all  idea  of  desert  on  our  part ;  for  "  to 
him  that  worketh  is  the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt ;  but  to  him  that 
worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  Him  who  justifieth  the  ungodly  " — that  is,  one  in 
himself  ungodly — "his  faith  is  counted  for  righteousness."  We  appropriate  a 
gift,  we  have  said,  by  accepting  it ;  but  does  this  acceptance  merit  the  gift  ?  II. 
Having  said  this  much  of  the  nature  of  faith,  it  is  fit  we  proceed  to  consider  its 
GRACIOUS  AND  BLESSED  ErrECTS  AND  EVIDENCES.  FoT  whilc  faith  savcs  US  simply 
as  receiving  the  Saviour,  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  it  is  an  intelligent,  holy,  and 
powerful  principle :  intelligent,  as  implying  a  just  apprehension  of  man's  state  and 
of  God's  character ;  holy,  as  being  the  "  gift  of  God,"  and  the  first  fruit  of  Hia 
regenerating  grace :  powerful,  as  bringing  us  under  the  influence  and  authority  of 
those  great  truths  which  it  is  its  essential  character  to  embrace.  ^  For  let  it  not  be 
thought  that  in  matters  of  religion,  those  laws  that  regulate  intelligent  natures  are 
reversed,  or  that  any  such  strange  anomaly  can  exist  in  the  spiritual  world  as  a 
soul  that  believes,  yet  neither  feels  nor  acts.    But  instead  of  general  language, 


740  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Toha*.  mot. 

behold  the  genuine  effects  of  faith  exemplified  in  her  to  ■whom  our  Lord  addressed 
the  words  before  us.     My  brethren,  the  graces  observable  in  this  woman  are  the 
natural  fruits  and  proper  evidences  of  faith,  wherever  it  is  found.    The  peculiaritiea 
of  her  situation  could  affect  only  the  mode  of  expressing  them.     Is  not  penitence  a 
natural  and  necessary  effect  of  faith  ?    In  order  of  time,  they  are  coincident  and 
inseparable ;  for  as  there  can  be  no  impenitent  believer,  so  neither  can  there  be 
any  unbeheving  penitent ;  but  in  order  of  nature,  since  the  discoveries  of  Divine 
truth  are  the  means  of  awakening  repentance,  it  is  manifest  faith  must  precede  it, 
to  give  these  discoveries  effect.    And  faith,  ushered  in  by  contrition,  has  love  for 
an  inseparable  associate,     "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  " ;  and,  in  spite  of  the 
cavils  of  unbelief,  to  add,  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee,  go  in  peace."    My  brethren, 
it  is  the  glory  of  the  grace  of  the  gospel,  that  it  enfolds  the  chief  of  sinners ;  and 
blessed  are  those  who  are  enabled,  as  chief  of  sinners,  to  embrace  this  gospel 
grace.     {H.  Grey,  D.D.)         In  peace. — Peace: — Peace  is  twofold.      1.  There  is 
a  bad  and  appearing  peace.    2.  A  true  and  sincere  peace.     Bad  peace  is  threefold. 
1.  A  defiled  and  polluted  peace,  as  is  that  we  find  mentioned  (Psa.  ii.  1,  2 ;  ix.  21 ; 
Ixxxiii.  4-6),  BO  Ephraim  against  Manassah,  Manassah  against  Ephraim  ;  and  both 
against  Judah:   Herod  against  Pilate,   Pilate  against  Herod;    and  both  against 
Christ.    Est  damonum  legio  concors,  there  ia  such  a  peace  as  this  amongst  the 
devils;  seven  could  agree  well  together  in  Mary's  heart,  yea  a  legion  we  read  of  were 
in  another.    "  If  a  house  be  divided  against  itself  it  cannot  stand."  2.  A  dissembled 
and  counterfeited  peace,  when  a  man  pretends  peace,  but  intends  mischief.     So 
Joab  spake  peaceably  to  Abner  when  he  stabbed  him ;  Absolom  invited  Ammon  to  a 
feast  when  he  intended  to  murder  him.    3.  An  inordinate  peace,  which  is  when 
the  greater  and  better  obeys  the  less  and  inferior.    So  Adam  obeyed  Eve ;  Abraham 
yielded  unto  Lot,  &o.     None  of  these  kinds  of  peace  are  here  meant.     That  peace 
which  our  Saviour  speaks  of  is  true  and  sincere  peace,  which  St.  Bernard  thus 
tripleth.     1.  External.     This  is  that  peace  we  have  with  men  for  the  time  we  live 
in  this  world  (Rom.  xii.  18).     (1)  In  the  commonwealth,  as  when  we  are  free  from 
civil  wars  within,  and  foreign  enemies  without  (Jer.  xxix.  7).     (2)  In  the  family,  or 
special  places  where  we  live,  of  which  peace  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  iii.  12),  and  our 
Saviour  (Mark  ix.  50).    2.  Internal,  which  is  the  peace  of  conscience,  proceeding 
from  the  assurance  we  have  of  God's  favour  through  Christ.     3.  Eternal,  which  is 
that  perfect  rest  and  happiness,  which  the  saints  shall  enjoy  in  heaven  with  God 
hereafter  (Isa.  Ivii.  2).     The  peace  that  our  Saviour  here  speaks  of  to  this  woman 
is,  that  internal   or  pectoral  peace,  that  stable  and  comfortable  tranquility  of 
conscience.     Peace  of  conscience  is  the  fruit  of  justification  by  faith.     (Col.  i.  20; 
Ephes.  ii.  21;  Rom.  v.  1.)    These  texts  of  Scripture  make  strongly  for  the  truth 
dehvered.    Alas  for  sinners !  the  misery  of  such  as  are  not  reconciled  unto  God, 
•'  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked,  saith  my  God  "  (Isa.  Ivii.  21).    No  peace,  none 
with  God,  none  with  angels,  none  with  men,  none  with  the  creatures.     They  are 
like  unto  Ishmael,  whose  hand  was  against  every  man,  and  every  man's  hand 
against  him.    They  may  well  fear  with  Cain,  "  Every  one  that  findeth  me  will  slay 
me."    AU  creatures  being  God's  executioners,  and  ready  pressed  to  do  His  will.    In 
no  place  peace  :  what  Solomon  speaks  of  an  ill  wife  may  aptly  be  apphed  to  an  ill 
conscience.    At  no  time  peace.     But  how  doth  this  seeming  or  false  peace  of 
sinners  differ  from  that  peace  which  ariseth  from  assurance  of  God's  favour  through 
faith  in  Christ  ?    1.  The  conscience  of  a  sinner  is  quiet,  for  that  it  hath  no  sight 
nor  sense  of  sin.  2.  A  benumbed  conscience,  though  it  be  quiet  yet  it  comf orteth  not, 
3.  A  dead  or  benumbed  conscience  feareth  not  sin,  nor  God's  wrath  for  sin.      But 
a  good  conscience  is  very  fearful  of  giving  God  the  least  offence.    As  it  was  said  of 
Hezekiah,  that  "  he  feared  God  greatly,"  so  is  it  with  the  godly.    4.  From  the  un- 
speakable benefits  that  true  peace  brings  along  with  it.    What  is  it  that  can  make 
a  man  happy,  but  attends  on  peace?    It  comprehends  in  the  very  name  of  it  all 
happiness,  both  of  estate  and  disposition.    That  mountain  whereon  Christ  ascended 
though  it  abounded  with  palms,  pines,  and  myrtles,  yet  it  carried  only  the  name  of 
Olives,  an  ancient  emblem  of  peace.     So  though  many  mercies  belong  unto  a 
Christian,  yet  all  are  comprised  ouder  this  one  little  word  which  ia  spelt  with  •  few 
letters,  peace.    {S.  Roaen.) 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01127  8068 


Date  Due 

U^ 

i^MWi*^ 

jjUB^^lHi 

^^ 

,, 

,-6—1— 

^ 

^flWTt— ■,, 

t 

'■'S  - 

■^WWS 

'4 

ft 

'^J 

'H 

^ 

'  rvv v]^  1  ! 

m  29  'A 

6 

in-'       ' 

r 

lA  1  0  '^0 

JA  A  7  DyJ 

f£13'5 

i. 

ifVlO'5'^ 

DE13*5A 

r^f^tfCTT 

■*• 

^ 

