Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 


Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google’s system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can’t offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book’s appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 


About Google Book Search 


Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world’s books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
ai[http: //books . google. com/| 


Harvard Divinity School 


ANDOVER-HARVARD THEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 


Purchased From The Income 
of The Bequest of 
MRS. LOUISA J. HALL 
Widow of Edward Brooks Hall 


THE FUNDAMENTAL DOCTRINES 
OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH 


THE 
FUNDAMENTAL DOCTRINES 
OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH 


BY 


R. A. TORREY 
Author of 
“How to Bring Men to Christ,” 
‘What the Bible Teaches,” etc., etc. 


NEW YORK 
GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY 


| vec ¢ 1910 
HARVARD 
YVINITY SCHOO 


H 4s, 608 


Copyright, 1918, 
By R. A Torrey 


3797 
TSS 
«S418 


Printed in the United States of America 


eww’ 


PREFACE 


The author of these sermons has had a feeling 
for a long time that the great need in our churches 
in this day is systematic indoctrination. He put 
his theory into practice last winter in his own 
church, and these sermons are the result. We 
were having a great many accessions to our 
church. In the two years of the church’s history 
we had had something like six hundred accessions 
to the church, and every month considerable num- 
bers of new members were being added. While 
many of these came by letter from other churches, 
many of them were new converts and had had 
practically no systematic instruction in the funda- 
mental truths of the Christian faith, so we an- 
nounced a series of sermons on The Fundamental 
Doctrines of the Christian Faith. There was im- 
mediately a large increase in the attendance at the 
services where these addresses were given, and 
this increase has kept up until on the last Lord’s 
Day we had much the largest attendance we have 
ever had, excepting on Easter Sunday. Many have 
testified to the blessing received from these ser- 
mons, and there has been a great demand that the 
sermons be printed for general circulation. This 
request has come from ministers of various de- 
nominations, Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Metb- 
odists, Baptists, and others. It is hoped that this 
volume will be useful to other pastors in suggest- 
ing lines of teaching in their regular pastoral 
work, and also that it may be used widely by pas- 

Vv 


vi Preface 


tors and others for circulation among Christians. 
We live in a day in which many of our church 
members are all at sea as to what they believe on 
the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith. 
These sermons have already helped many through 
their delivery. It is hoped they will reach and 
help far more in the printed form. 


R. A. Torrey. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 
I InsprraTion, oR To WHat EXrTent 18s THE BIBLE 
INSPIRED OF Gop? ...... . . dll 


II Tae Curistran Conception oF GOD, OR THE Gop 
OF THE BIBLE AS DISTINGUISHED FROM THE GOD 
OF CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND THE GOD oF MoDERN 


PHILOSOPHY . .. 38 

III Tae CarisTiIaAn Concurnion OF Goo—Tux Inrr 
NITE PERFECTION AND Unity orGop .. ._ 656 
IV Tue Derry or Jesus CurmistT ...... @ 
V Jesus CoristaA Rean Man ....... 98 
‘VI Tae Personauity or TrHE Hoty Spmir iw (‘(tsti.:SCid2 


VII Tse Derry or tue Hoty Sprerr ann Tue Distinc- 
TION BETWEEN THB FATHER, Son anp Hoty 
Sprnir. .. . oe @ el ele!) «C44 


VIII Tae ATONEMENT: Goo’ 8 Docramm OF THE ATONE- 
MENT vs. UNITARIAN AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 


DocTRINES OF THE ATONEMENT .. . . . 162 
IX Tse Distincrive Docrrine or PROTESTANTISM: 
JUSTIFICATION BY FairH ..... . . 186 
X Toe New Breve ........ . . 206 
XI SANCTIFICATION . . . . 1 se ee ele 228 
XII THe REesvuRRECTION OF THE Bopy OF JESUS AND 
or Our Bopms ....... .. . 246 
XIII Tue Devit . . 263 
XIV Is THere a LITERAL Hens? . . 284 
XV Is Furure PUNISHMENT EVERLASTING? 303 


vii 


THE FUNDAMENTAL DOCTRINES OF 
THE CHRISTIAN FAITH 


THE 


FUNDAMENTAL DOCTRINES 
OF THE 


CHRISTIAN FAITH 


I 


INSPIRATION, O8 TO WHat Extent Is tHe BIBLE 
InsPrReD oF Gop? 


‘‘For no prophecy ever came by the will of man, but men spake 
from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit.’’—2 Pet. 1:21. 

‘‘ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in right- 
eousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly fur- 
nished unto all good works.’’—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. 


UR subject this morning is ‘‘The Inspira- 
() tion of the Bible, or to What Extent Is the 
Bible Inspired of God?’’ The subject is 

of vital and fundamental importance. If we can 
make it clear that the writers of the various books 
of the Bible were inspired of God in a sense that 
no other men were ever inspired of God, that they 
were so gifted and taught and led and governed 
by the Holy Spirit in their utterances as recorded 
in the Bible, that they taught the truth and noth- 

11 


12 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ing but the truth, that their teachings were abso- | 


lutely without error,—then we have in the Bible 


a court of final appeal and of infallible wisdom to | 


which we can go to settle every question of doc- 
trine or duty. But:if the writers of the Bible 


were ‘‘inspired’’ only in the vague and uncertain 


sense that Shakespeare, Browning and many - 


other men of genius were inspired, only inspired 
to the extent that their minds were made more 
keen to see the truth than ordinary men, but still 
only in such a way that they made mistakes, or 
chose the wrong word to express their thought, 
so that we must recast their thought by discov- 
ering, if we may, what the inspired thought back 
of the uninspired words was, then we are all at 


sea, in hopeless confusion, so that each genera- , 


tion must settle for itself what the Holy Spirit 


meant to say through the blundering reporters; ; 


rr aun 


= 


and it is absolutely certain that no generation can | 


determine with anything approximating accuracy 
what the Spirit meant, and so no generation can 


arrive at the truth, but simply promulgate blun- . 
ders for the next and wiser generation to correct, - 


to be corrected in turn by the next generation 
that follows it. Thank God that this latter subtle 
but popular doctrine can be proven to be utterly 
untrue! 

There is great need of crystal clear teaching 
on this subject, because our colleges and semina- 
ries and pulpits and Sunday schools and religious 
papers are full of teaching that is vague, inac- 


Inspiration 13 


curate, misleading, un-Scriptural, and oftentimes 
grossly false. There are many in these days who 
say ‘‘I believe that the Bible is inspired’’ when 
by ‘‘inspired’’ they do not mean at all what you 
understand or what the mighty men of faith in 
the past meant by ‘‘inspired.’’ They often say 
that they ‘‘believe the Bible is the Word of God,”’’ 
when at the same time they believe it is full of 
errors. 

Now the Bible is as clear as crystal in its 
teachings and claims regarding itself, and either 
those claims are true, or else the Bible is the big- 
gest fraud in all the literature of the human race. 
The position held by so many to-day, that the 
Bible is a good book, perhaps the best book in 
the world, but at the same time it is full of errors 
that must be corrected by the higher wisdom of 
our day, 1s utterly illogical and absolutely ridicu- 
lous. If the Bible is not what it claims to be, it is 
a fraud—an outrageous fraud. 

What does the Bible teach and claim concern- 
ing itself? What does it teach and claim regard- 
ing the fact and extent of its own inspiration? 


I. THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN APOSTLES AND 
PROPHETS DIFFERENT IN CHARACTER FROM HIS 
WORK IN ALL OTHER PERSONS 


The first thing that the Bible teaches on this 
point and claims for itself is, that the work of the 
Holy Spirit m apostles and prophets, in the vart- 


14 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ous human authors of the different books of the 
Bible, differs from His work in other men, even 
in other beltevers mn Christ. It teaches that the 
Holy Spirit imparts to apostles and prophets an 
especial gift for an especial purpose. We find 


this clearly taught in 1 Cor. 12:4, 8-11, 28, 29, . 
where we read, ‘‘Now there are diversities of gifts, - 
but the same Spirit. ... (8) for to one is given | 
through the Spirit the word of wisdom; and to an- — 


other the word of knowledge, according to the 
same Spirit; (9) to another faith, in the same 


a ee ee 


Spirit; and to another gifts of healing, in the same | 
Spirit; (10) and to another workings of miracles ; 
(powers); and to another prophecy; and to an- : 
other discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds : 
of tongues, and to another the interpretation of ; 


tongues; (11) but all these worketh the one and 
the same Spirit, dividing to each one severally 
even as He will... . (28) And God hath set some 
in the church, first apostles, secondly prophets, 
thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts of heal- 
ings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues. 
(29) Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all 
teachers? are all workers of miracles?’’ This chap- 
ter is the fullest and clearest chapter in the Bible 
on the subject of the various gifts of the Holy 
Spirit. It_is the classical chapter on the whole 
subject, and the teaching of these verses is as 
plain as language can make it, and it states in 
terms, the meaning of which is unmistakable, that 
the gift bestowed on apostles and prophets dif- 


ae 


i rT wm Hw we NM wf 


Inspiration Is 


fered in kind from the gifts bestowed on other 
believers, even though those believers were filled 
with the Holy Spirit. Not only did the work of 
the Holy Spirit in the apostles and prophets dif- 
fer from His work in men of genius, but even 
from His work in other believers. These verses 


- Inake it as plain as day that the doctrine which 


has become so common and so popular in our day, 
that the work of the Holy Spirit in preachers and 
teachers and in ordinary believers, illuminating 
them and guiding them into the truth and into the 
understanding of the Word of God, is the same in 
kind and differs only in degree from the work of 
the Holy Spirit in Apostles and Prophets is thor- 
oughly unscriptural and untrue. This doctrine 
overlooks what is here so clearly stated and so 
earefully elucidated, that while there is ‘‘the same 
Spirit’’ ‘‘there are diversities of gifts’’ ‘‘diversi- 
ties of ministrations,’’ ‘‘diversities of workings’’ 
(1 Cor. 12:406 RV) and that not all are Prophets 
or Apostles. (1 Cor. 12:29.) 

Those who desire to minimise the difference 
between the work of the Holy Spirit in Apostles 
and Prophets, and His work in other men, often 
refer to the fact that the Bible itself says that 
Bezaleel, the architect of the tabernacle, was to be 
“filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in 
understanding, and in knowledge, and in all man- 
ner of workmanship,’’ ‘‘to devise the work of the 
tabernacle’’ (Ex. 31:1-11), as a proof that the in- 
Spiration of the Prophet does not differ in kind 


vi Preface 


tors and others for circulation among Christians. 
We live in a day in which many of our church 
members are all at sea as to what they believe on 
the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith. 
These sermons have already helped many through 
their delivery. It is hoped they will reach and 
help far more in the printed form. 


R. A. Torrey. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 


I 


IT 


Til 


INSPIRATION, OR To WHat Extent 18 THE BIBLE 
INSPIRED OF Gop? . 


THe CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION oF Gop, OR THE GoD 
OF THE BIBLE AS DISTINGUISHED FROM THE GoD 
or CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND THE Gop or MopERN 
PHILOSOPHY . 


Tuer CHRISTIAN ConcErTion OF Goo—Taz ier 
NITE PERFECTION AND UnttTy or Gop . 

Tue Derry or Jesus CHRIST ... . 

Jesus Curist A REAL Man 

THE PERSONALITY OF THE Hoty Sprrir 

Tue Derry or THE Hoty Spirit AND THE DISTINC- 


TION BETWEEN THE FATHER, Son anp Hoty 
SPIRIT . oe 


THe ATONEMENT: Gon’ 8 Doorn OF THE ATONE- 
MENT vs. UNITARIAN AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 
DOoOcTRINES OF THE ATONEMENT 


Tue DIstTiInctiIvE DocrrRINE OF PROTESTANTISM: 
JUSTIFICATION BY FArrH . 


Tae New Birra 
SANCTIFICATION 


THe RESURRECTION OF THE Bopy OF JESUS AND 
oF Our Bopigs . 


Tue Devi. . . 
Is THERE A LITERAL Herz? . 


Is Future PUNISHMENT EVERLASTING? 
vii 


PAGE 


11 


38 


56 
73 
93 
112 


144 


162 


186 
206 
225 


245 
263 
284 
303 


vi Preface 


tors and others for circulation among Christians. 
We live in a day in which many of our church 
members are all at sea as to what they believe on 
the fundamental doctrines of the Christian faith. 
These sermons have already helped many through 
their delivery. It is hoped they will reach and 
help far more in the printed form. 


R. A. Torrey. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 


I 


II 


II 
IV 
V 
‘VI 
Vil 
VIil 


1d.4 
».« 
XI 
XII 


XIII 


INSPIRATION, OR To WHat EXTENT Is THE BIBLE 
INSPIRED OF Gop? . 


THe CHRISTIAN CONCEPTION OF Gop, OR THE GOD 
OF THE BIBLE AS DISTINGUISHED FROM THE GOD 
or CHRISTIAN SCIENCE AND THE GOD OF MopDERN 
PHILOSOPHY . 


Tue CHRISTIAN ConcupTion OF Gov—Tas Invi 


NITE PERFECTION AND UNItTy or Gop 
Tue Derry oF Jesus CHRIST . .. . 
Jesus Carist A REAL Man 
THE PERSONALITY OF THE Hoty Spirit 
Tue Derry or THE HOLy Spirit AND THE DIsTINc- 


TION BETWEEN THE FATHER, Son anp Hoty 
SPIRIT . . 


Toe ATONEMENT: Gon sg Docranmm OF THE ATONE- 
MENT vs. UNITARIAN AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 
DoctTRINES OF THE ATONEMENT . 


Tse Di1stTinctIvE DocrrRInE OF PROTESTANTISM: 
JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH 


THe New BirtTa 
SANCTIFICATION 


THe RESURRECTION OF THE Bopy oF JESUS AND 
or Our Bopigs . . . 


Tue DeEvIL . . 
Is Taere A LITERAL Hen? . 


Is Future PUNISHMENT EVERLASTING? 
vii 


PAGE 


11 


38 


56 
73 
93 
112 


144 


162 


186 
206 
225 


245 
263 
284 
303 


20 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the Holy Spirit, the meaning of which they did 
not thoroughly comprehend, and _ that they 
themselves ‘‘sought and searched diligently”’ 
as to the meaning of this revelation which was 
made to them and which they recorded. The 
Spirit, through them testified beforehand the suf- 
ferings of Christ (e. g. in Isa. 53:3, Ps. 22) and 
the glories that should follow them. They re- 
corded what the Spirit testified, but what it meant 
they did not thoroughly understand. It was not 
merely that their minds were made keen to see 
things which they would not otherwise see, and 
which they therefore more or less accurately re- 
corded. No, there was a very definite revelation, 
arising not from thetr own minds at all, but from 
the Spirit of God Who made the revelation to 
them and this they recorded, but it was not of 
themselves to that extent that they themselves 
wondered as to what its meaning might be. What 
they recorded was not at all their own thought, it 
was the thought of the Holy Spirit who spoke 
through them. How utterly different this concep- 
tion is from that which is so persistently taught 
in many of our colleges and theological seminaries 
and pulpits,—how utterly different it is from the 
conception that was taught a week ago to-day in 
one of the pulpits of our own city. 


Inspiration 21 


Iv. NO PROPHETIC UTTERANCE WAS OF THE PROPH- 
ET’S OWN WILL, BUT THE PROPHET SPOKE FROM 
GOD AND THE PROPHET WAS CARRIED ALONG BY 
THE HOLY SPIRIT AND NOT BY HIS OWN IMPULSE 
OR REASONING IN WHAT HE SAID 


The fourth thing that the Bible makes perfectly 
clear is, that not one single prophetic utterance 
was of the prophet’s own will (1. e., 14 was not im 
any sense merely what he wished to say), but m 
every mstance the Prophet spoke from God, and 
the Prophet was carried along in the prophetic 
utterance by the Holy Spirit, regardless of his 
oun wil or thought. We find this stated practi- 
cally in so many words in 2 Pet. 1:21 where we 
read: ‘‘For no prophecy (literally, not a prophecy) 
ever came (literally, was brought) by the will of 
man; but men spake from God being moved (lit- 
erally, carried along, or borne) by the Holy 
Spirit.’’ There can be no honest mistaking of the 
meaning of this language. The Prophet never 
thought that there was something that needed to 
be said and therefore said it, but God took pos- 
session of the prophet, carried him along in his 
utterance, by the power of the Holy Spirit, and 
he spake, not from his own consciousness, and not 
from his own reasoning, nor from his own in- 
tuition, but ‘‘from God.’’ As God’s messenger 
he spoke what God told him to say. 


22 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Vv. THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS THE REAL SPEAKER WHO 
SPOKE IN THE PROPHETIC UTTERANCES 


The fifth thing that the Bible teaches regarding 
the Inspiration of the Prophets and the Apostles 
and their utterances, is that the Holy Spirit was 
the real speaker wm the prophetic utterances, that 
what was said or written was the Holy Spirit’s 
Word that was upon the Apostle’s tongue, and not 
the word of the Prophet or Apostle. This is said in 
the Bible in so many words, over and over again. 
For example, in Heb. 3:7 we read: ‘‘Wherefore, 
even as the Holy Spirit saith, To-day if ye shall 
hear His voice, harden not your hearts, etc.’’ The 
author of the epistle to the Hebrews is quoting Ps. 
_ 95:7, 8 and says that what the Psalmist is recorded 
as saying ‘‘the Holy Spirit saith.’’ Again in Heb. 
10:15, 16, we read:. ‘‘And the Holy Spirit also 
beareth witness to us; for after He had said, This 
is the covenant that I will make with them after 
those days, saith the Lord: I will put my laws on 
their heart, and upon their mind also will I write 
them.’’ Now the author of the Epistle to the He- 
brews is quoting Jer. 31:33, and he does not hesi- 
tate to say that the testimony that Jeremiah there 
bore is the testumony of the Holy Ghost, that the 
Holy Ghost was the real speaker. 

Again we read in Acts 28:25, 26 that Paul said, 
‘‘Well spake the Holy Spirit through Isaiah the 
prophet, unto your fathers, (26) saying, Go thou 
unto this people and say, By hearing ye shall hear 


Inspiration 23 


and shall in no wise understand; and seeing ye 
shall see, and shall in no wise perceive, etc.’’ 
Here Paul is quoting Isaiah’s words as recorded 
in the 6th chapter of Isaiah, the 9th and 10th 
verses, and he distinctly says that the real speaker 
was not Isaiah, but ‘‘the Holy Spirit’? who spoke 
‘through Isaiah the prophet.’’ 

Turning now to the old Testament we read in 
2 Sam. 23:2 this assertion by David regarding 
the things that he said and wrote: ‘‘The Spirit 
of Jehovah spake by me, and his word was upon 
my tongue.’’ There can be no mistaking the 
meaning of these words on the part of any one 
who goes to the Bible to find out what it really 
claims and teaches. The Holy Spirit was the real 
speaker in the prophetic utterance. It was the 
Holy Spirit’s utterance that was upon the proph- 
et’s tongue. The prophet was simply the mouth 
by which the Holy Spirit spoke. Merely as a man, 
except as the Holy Spirit taught him and used 
him, the prophet was fallible as other men are © 
fallible, but when the Spirit was upon him, when 
he was taken up and borne along by the Holy 
Spirit, then he became infallible in his teachings; 
for his teachings were not his, but the teachings 
of the Holy Spirit. It was God who was then 
speaking, not the Prophet. For example, Paul 
merely as a man, even as a Christian man, doubt- 
less had many mistaken notions on many things, 
and was more or less subject to the ideas and 
opinions of his time, but when he taught as an 


24 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Apostle, under the power of the Holy Spirit he 
was infallible, or rather the Spirit who taught 
through him was infallible, and the teachings 
that resulted from the Spirit’s teaching through 
him, were infallible, as infallible as God. Com- 
mon sense demands of us that we carefully dis- 
tinguish between what Paul may have thought as 
aman, and what he actually taught as an apostle. 
In the Bible we have the record of what he taught 
as an Apostle. Some one may cite as a possible | 
exception to this statement 1 Cor. 7:6, 25, where 
he says: ‘‘But this I say by way of concession, 
not of commandment. ... Now concerning vir- 
gins, I have no commandment of the Lord, but I 
give my judgment, as one that hath obtained 
mercy of the Lord to be trustworthy.’’ There are 
those who think that Paul does not seem to have 
been sure here that he had the word of the Lord 
in this particular matter, but that is not the 
meaning of the passage. The meaning of v. 6 is 
that his teaching which he had just given was by 
way of concession to their weakness, and not a 
commandment as to what they must do. And the 
teaching of v. 25 is that the Lord, during His 
earthly life, had given no commandment on this 
subject, but that Paul was giving his judgment; 
but he says distinctly that he was giving it as one 
who had obtamed mercy of the Lord to be trust- 
worthy and furthermore, wm the 40th verse of the 
chapter he distinctly says that in his judgment he 
had the Spirit of God. But even allowing that the 


Inspiration 25 


other interpretation of this passage is the correct 
one, and that Paul was not absolutely sure in this 
ease that he had the Word of the Lord and the 
mind of the Lord, that would only show that where 
Paul was not absolutely sure that he was teach- 
ing in the Holy Ghost he was careful to note the 
fact, and this would only give additional certainty 
to all other passages that he wrote. 

It is sometimes said that Paul taught in his 
earlier epistles that the Lord would return during 
his lifetime, and that in this matter he certainly 
was mistaken. But Paul never taught in his 
earlier epistles, or any other epistles, he never 
taught anywhere, that the Lord would return dur- 
ing his lifetime. This assertion is contrary to fact. 
He does say in 1 Thess. which was his first epistle, 
the 4th chapter and 17th verse: ‘‘Then we that 
are alive, that are left, shall together with them 
(i. e., the believers who had already fallen asleep) 
be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in 
the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord.’’ 
He does here put himself in the same class 
with those who were still alive when he wrote 
the words. He naturally and necessarily did not 
include himself with those who had already fallen 
asleep. In speaking of the Lord’s return he does 
not say nor hint that he will be still alive when 
the Lord returns. It is quite probable that Paul 
did believe at this time that he might be alive when 
the Lord returned but he never taught that he 
would be ahve. The attitude of expectancy is the 


26 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


true attitude in all ages for every believer. This 
was the attitude that Paul took until it was dis- 
tinctly revealed to him that he would depart be- 
fore the Lord came. I think it very probable that 
Paul in the earlier part of his ministry was in- © 
clined to believe that he would live until the com- 
ing of the Lord, but the Holy Ghost kept him from 
so teaching, and also kept him from all other er- 
rors in his teachings. 


VI. THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE APOSTLES GAVE NOT 
ONLY THE THOUGHT, BUT THE WORDS IN WHICH 
THE THOUGHT WAS TO BE EXPRESSED 


The 6th thing that the Bible makes clear as to 
the inspiration of the apostle and prophets is that, 
the Holy Spirit in the Prophets and Apostles gave 
not only the thought but also gave the words in 
which the thought was to be expressed. We find 
this very clearly stated in 1 Cor. 2:13: ‘*Which 
things also we speak, not in words which man’s 
wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Spirit teach- 
eth; combining spiritual things with spiritual 
words.’’ One of the most popular of the false 
theories of Inspiration in our day is that the Holy 
Spirit was the author of the thought, but that the 
Apostles were left to their own choice of words 
in the expression of the thought, and that there- 
fore in studying the Bible we cannot emphasise 
the exact meaning of the words, but must try to 
find the thought of God that was back of the words, 


Inspiration 27 


and which the writer has more or less inaccu- 
rately expressed. There are many teachers in our 
theological seminaries to-day, and in our pulpits, 
who speak very sneeringly and superciliously of 
those who believe in Verbal Inspiration,—i. e., 
those who believe that the Holy Spirit chose the 
very words in which the thought he was teaching 
was to be expressed, but however sneeringly they 
may speak of those who believe in Verbal Inspira- 
tion, certainly the Bible claims that it was verb- 
ally inspired. The passage which I have just read 
makes it as plain as language can possibly make 
it that the ‘‘words’’ in which the Apostle spoke 
were not ‘‘words which man’s wisdom teacheth, 
but which the Spirit teacheth.’’ Now if this is 
not the fact, if only the thought that was given to 
Paul was the thought of God, and he clothed the 
thought in his own words, then Paul was a thor- 
oughly deceived man on a fundamental point, in 
which case no dependence at all can be placed in 
his teachings on any point, or else he was a de- 
liberate fraud, in which case the quicker we burn 
up his books the better for us and all concerned. 
There is no possibility of finding any middle 
ground, and the attempts to find a middle ground 
have landed those who have tried it in all kinds 
of absurdities. If you have an exact and logical 
mind, you must take your choice between Verbal 
Inspiration and bald infidelity. Paul distinctly 
states that the words m which he conveyed to 
others the truth that was revealed to him were 


28 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the words which the Holy Spirit taught him. The 
Holy Spirit himself has anticipated all these mod- 
ern ingenious, but wholly unbiblical and utterly 
illogical and entirely false theories regarding his 
own work in the Apostles. The theory that ‘‘the 
concept’’ was inspired but the words in which the 
concept was expressed were not, was anticipated 
by the Holy Spirit Himself and exploded 1800 
years before our supposedly wise 19th century 
theological teachers conceived it, and attempted 
to foist it upon an unsuspecting public. It was ex- 
ploded eighteen centuries before it was exploited. 
Furthermore, the theory is absurd in itself. As 
the only way in which thought can be conveyed 
from one mind to another, from one man’s mind 
to another man’s mind, or from the mind of God 
to the mind of man is by words, therefore if the 
words are imperfect the thought expressed in 
those words is necessarily imperfect. The theory 
is an absurdity on its very face, and it is difficult 
to see how intelligent men could have ever de- 
ceived themselves into believing such a thoroughly 
illogical theory. If the words are not inspired the 
Bible is not inspired. Let us not deceive our- 
selves; let us face facts. 

Furthermore, the more carefully and minutely 
one studies the wording of the statements of this 
wonderful book—the Bible—the more he will be- 
come convinced of the marvellous accuracy of 
the very words used to express the thought. To 
a superficial thinker the doctrine of Verbal Inspi- 


Inspiration 29 


ration may appear questionable or even absurd, 
but any regenerate and Spirit-taught man who 
ponders the words of the Scripture day by day, 
and year after year, will become thoroughly and 
immovably convinced that the wisdom of God is in 
the very words used as well as in the thought 
which is expressed in the words. It is a signifi- 
cant and deeply impressive fact that our difficul- 
ties with the Bible rapidly disappear as we note 
the precise language used. The changing of a 
word or letter, or of a tense, case or number, would 
oftentimes land us in contradiction or untruth, but 
taking the words exactly as written, difficulties 
disappear and truth shines forth. Countless 
times people have come to me with apparent dif- 
ficulties and supposed contradictions in the Bible 
and asked a solution, and I have pointed them to 
the exact words used and the solution was found 
in taking the words exactly as written. It was 
because they changed in a slight degree the very 
words that God spoke that a difficulty had seemed 
to arise. The Divine origin of nature shines forth 
more and more clearly the more closely we ex- 
amine it under the microscope. As by the use of 
a powerful microscope we see the perfection of 
form and the adaptation of means to end in the 
minutest particles of matter, we are overwhelm- 
ingly convinced that God, a God of infinite wisdom 
and power, a wisdom extending down to the mi- 
nutest parts of matter, is the author of the ma- 
terial universe: so likewise the divine origin of 


30 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the Bible shines forth more and more clearly un- 
der the microscope. The more minutely we study 
the Bible the more we note the perfection with 
which the turn of a word reveals the absolute 
thought of God. 

An important question, and a question that has 
puzzled many writers at this point, is: If the Holy 
Spirit is the author of the very words of Scrip- 
ture how do we account for the variations in 
style and diction? How is it, for example, that 
Paul always used Pauline language, and John 
used Johannean language, and Peter used lan- 
guage that was characteristic of himself? The 
answer to this question is very simple and is two- 
fold: First, even though we could not account at 
all for this fact, it would have little weight against 
the explicit statement of God’s Word with any 
one who is humble enough and wise enough to 
recognise that there are a great many things which 
he cannot account for at all which could be easily 
accounted for if he knew a little more. It is only 
the man who has such amazing and stupendous 
conceit that he thinks he knows as much as God, 
in other words, that he is infinite in wisdom, who 
will give up an explicit statement of God’s Word 
simply because he sees a difficulty in the way of 
the acceptance of that statement, which he in his 
limited knowledge cannot solve. But there is a 
second answer, and an all-sufficient one, and that 
is this: these variations in style and diction are 
easily accounted for. The Holy Spirit is infinitely 


Inspiration 31 


wise. He Himself is the Creator of Man, and of 
man’s power of speech, and therefore he is quite 
wise enough and has quite enough facility in the 
use of language in revealing truth to and through 
any individual to use words, phrases and forms 
of expression that are in that person’s ordinary 

vocabulary and forms of thought, and He is also 
- quite wise enough to make use of that person’s 
peculiar individuality in revealing the truth 
through him. It is one of the marks of the Di- 
vine wisdom of this book that the same Divine 
truth is expressed with absolute accuracy in such 
widely variant forms of expression. 


VII. ALL SCRIPTURE IS INSPIRED OF GOD 


The seventh thing that the Bible makes plain re- 
garding the work of the Holy Spirit in the various 
writers of Scripture, is that all Scripture, that 1s 
everythmg contamed in all the books of the Old 
and New Testament, 1s inspired of God. We are 
distinctly taught this in 2 Tim. 3:16, 17. Here we 
read, ‘‘All Scripture (more exactly, every Scrip- 
ture) is given by inspiration of God (more liter- 
ally, God-breathed), and is profitable for doctrine, 
(or teaching), for reproof, for correction, for in- 
struction in righteousness (rather, instruction 
which is in righteousness), that the man of God 
may be perfect (rather, complete) thoroughly fur- 
nished (better, furnished completely) unto all 
_ good works (rather, every good work).’’ An at- 


32 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


tempt has been made to obscure the full force of 
these words by a revised translation given in both 
the English Revision and American Standard Ver- 
sion. In this revised translation, the words are 
rendered as follows: ‘‘Kivery Scripture inspired 
of God is also profitable for teaching, for reproof, 
for correction, for instruction which is in right- 
eousness; that the man of God may be complete, 
furnished completely unto every good work.’’ 
There is absolutely no warrant in the Greek text 
for changing ‘‘Eivery Scripture is given by in- 
spiration of God and is profitable for doctrine, 
etc.,’? into ‘‘Every Scripture inspired of God is 
also profitable for teaching, etc.’? ‘‘Every’’ is 
in the Greek. There is no ‘‘ts’’ in the Greek. It 
must be supplied, as is often the case in translat- 
ing from Greek into English. ‘‘Is’’ must be sup- 
plied somewhere, either before ‘‘given by inspira- 
tion’’ (or God-breathed), or else supplied after it, 
in the latter case necessitating the change of 
‘‘and’’ into ‘‘also”’ (a change which is possible, 
but very uncommon); and there is not a single 
instance in the New Testament outside of this in 
which two adjectives coupled by the simplest copu- 
lative ‘‘and (kai)’’ are ripped apart and the ‘‘is’’ 
placed between them and an ‘‘and’’ changed into 
‘‘also.’? The other construction, that of the Au- 
thorised Version, is not at all uncommon. The 
translation of the Revisers does violence to all 
customary usage of the Greek language. But we 
do not need to dwell upon that, for, even accept- 


Inspiration 33 


ing the changes given in the Revision, the thought 
is not essentially changed; for if Paul had said 
what the revisers make him say that ‘‘Every 
Scripture inspired of God is also profitable for 
teaching, etc.,’? there can be no question but by 
“every scripture inspired of God’’ he referred to 
every Scripture contained in the Old Testament. 


' Here, then, taking whichever translation you will, 


we have the plain teaching that every Scripture 
of the Old Testament is ‘‘God-breathed’’ or ‘‘in- 
spired of God.’’ Certainly if we can believe this 
about the Old Testament there is no difficulty in 
beheving it about the New, and there can be no 
question that Paul claimed for his own teaching 
an equal authority with the O. T. teaching. This 
we shall see clearly under the next head. And not 
only did Paul so claim, but the Apostle Peter also 
classes the teaching of Paul with the O. T. teach- 
ing as being ‘‘Scripture.’’ Peter says in 2 Pet. 
3:15, 16, ‘‘Even as our beloved brother Paul also, 
according to the wisdom given unto him, wrote 
unto you; (16) as also in all his epistles, speaking 
in them of these things, wherein are some things 
hard to be understood, which the ignorant and un- 
stedfast wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, 
unto their own destruction.’’ Here Peter clearly 
speaks of Paul’s epistles as being ‘‘Scripture.’’ 


34. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Vill. THE BIBLE IS THE WORD OF GOD 


The eighth thing that the Bible teaches concern- 
ing the extent of the inspiration of its writings is — 
that because of this inspiration of Prophets and — 
Apostles, the writers of the Bible, the whole Bible © 
as origmally given becomes the absolutely iner- 
rant Word of God. In the O. T. David says of his © 
own writings, in 2 Sam. 23:2, a passage already ~ 
referred to, ‘‘The Spirit of Jehovah spake by me, 
and His Word was upon my tongue.’’ In Mark |. 
7:13 Our Lord Jesus Himself calls the law of . 
Moses ‘‘the Word of God.’’ He says ‘‘making 
void the Word of God by your tradition, which ye 
have delivered.’’ In the verses immediately pre- 
ceding, He has been drawing a contrast between 
the teachings of the Mosaic law (not merely the 
teachings of the Ten Commandments, but other 
parts of the Mosaic law as well) and the traditions 
of the Scribes and Pharisees, and has shown how 
the traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees flatly 
contradicted the requirements of the law as given 
through Moses, and in summing up the matter he 
says in the verse just quoted, that the Scribes and 
Pharisees made void ‘‘the Word of God’’ by their 
traditions, thus calling the law of Moses ‘“‘the 
Word of God.’’ When I was in England a high 
dignitary and scholar in the Church of England 
in a private correspondence tried to call me down 
by saying that the Bible nowhere claimed to be 
‘‘the Word of God,’’ but I replied to him by show- 


Inspiration 35 


ing him that not only did the Bible claim it, but 
that the Lord Jesus Himself said in so many 
words that the law given through Moses was ‘‘the 
Word of God.’’ In1 Thess. 2:13 the Apostle Paul 
claims that his own epistles and teachings are 
“the Word of God.’’ He says: ‘‘And for this cause 
we also thank God without ceasing, that when ye 
received from us the word of the message, even 
the word of God, ye accepted it not as the word 
of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, 
which also worketh in you that believe.’’ Here 
the Apostle Paul claims for his own teaching in 
the most absolute way that the message that he 
gave was ‘‘the Word of God.’’ When we read the 
words that Jeremiah wrote and Isaiah wrote and 
Paul wrote and John wrote and James wrote and 
Jude wrote and the other Bible writers wrote, we 
are reading what God says. We are not listening 
to the voice of man, but we are listening to the 
voice of God. ‘‘The Word of God’’ which we have 
in the Old and New Testaments, as originally 
given, is absolutely inerrant down to the smallest 
word and smallest letter or part of a letter. Our 
Lord Jesus Himself says of the Pentateuch in 
Matt. 5:18: ‘‘For verily I say unto you, till heaven 
and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall in 
no wise pass away from the law till all things be 
accomplished.’’ Now a ‘‘jot’’ is the Hebrew 
character ‘‘yodh,’’ the smallest character in the 
Hebrew alphabet, less than half the size of any 
other letter in the Hebrew alphabet, and a ‘‘tittle’’ 


36 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


is a part of a letter, the little horn put on some 
of the Hebrew consonants, less than the cross we 
put on a ‘‘t,’? and here our Lord says that the 
law given through Moses was absolutely inerrant, 
down to its smallest letter or part of a letter. 
That certainly is verbal inspiration with a venge- 
ance. Again he said, as recorded in John 10:35, 
after having quoted from the 82nd Psalm and the 
6th verse, as conclusive proof of a point, ‘‘The 
Scripture CANNOT BE BROKEN,’’ thus asserting the 
absolute irrefragability or inerrancy and finality 
of the Scriptures. If the Scriptures as originally . 
given were not the inerrant Word of God, then 
not only is the Bible a fraud, but Jesus Christ 
Himself was utterly misled and is therefore ut- 
terly unreliable as a teacher. I have said that the 
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as 
origmally given were absolutely inerrant, and the 
question of course arises to what extent is the 
Authorized Version, or the Revised Version, the 
inerrant Word of God. The answer is simple; 
they are the inerrant Word of God just to that ex- 
tent that they are an accurate rendering of the 
Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments as 
originally given, and to all practical intents and 
purposes they are a thoroughly accurate render- 
ing of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testa- 
ments as originally given. There are, it is true, 
many variations in the many manuscripts we pos- 
sess, thousands of variations, but by a careful 
study of these very variations, we are able to find 


Inspiration 37 


with marvellous accuracy what the original manu- 
scripts said. A very large share of the variations 
are of no value whatever, as it is evident from a 
comparison of different manuscripts that they are 
mistakes of a transcriber. Many other variations 
simply concern the order of the words used, and 
in translating into English, in which the order of 
words is often different from what it is in the 
Greek, the variation is not translatable. Many 
other variations are of small Greek particles, 
many of which are not translatable into English 
any way. When all the variations of any signifi- 
cance have been reduced to the minimum to which 
it is possible to reduce them by a careful study 
of manuscripts, there is not one single variation 
left that affects any doctrine held by the evangeli- 
cal churches, and the Scriptures as we have them 
to-day translated into our English language, 
either in the A. V. or R. V., are to all practical in- 
tents and purposes the inerrant Word of God. 


IT 


Tue Curistran Conception oF Gop, ok THE Gop 
OF THE Brste aS DIsTINGUISHED FROM THE Gop 
oF CHrisTiIAN ScIENCE AND THE Gop or Mop- 
ERN PHILOSOPHY 


‘6God is Spirit.’’—John 4:24, 
‘¢God is Light.’’—1 John 1:5. 
‘6God is Love.’’—1 John 4:8, 16, 


UR subject this morning is ‘The Christian 
Conception of God, or The God of the Bible 
as Distinguished from the God of Chris- 

tian Science and the God ef Modern Philosophy.’’ 
I have three texts: John 4:24: ‘‘God is Spirit.’’ 
1 John 1:5: ‘‘God is Light.’’ 1 John 4:8, 16: 
‘‘God is Love.’’ These three texts give three of 
the most remarkable statements that were ever ut- 
tered and set before us in the clearest possible way 
the Christian conception of God as distinguished 
from every other conception of God. The Chris- 
tian Scientists constantly quote one of our texts: 
‘‘God is Love.’’ In fact they quote it more than 
almost any other passage in the Bible, but they do 
not mean at all by ‘‘God is Love’’ what 1 John 
4:8 or 1 John 4:16 evidently mean when taken 
in their connection. By ‘‘love’’ the Christian © 

38 


The Christian Conception of God 39 


Scientists do not mean a personal attribute of 
God, but an impersonal abstraction which is itself 
God. Mrs. Eddy frankly and flatly denies the 
personality of God. The Christian Scientists not 
only say, ‘‘God is love,’’ but they also say, ‘‘ Love 
is God.’’ They not only say, ‘‘God is good,’’ but 
they also say, ‘‘Good is God.’’ To say ‘‘Love is 
God’’ is an utterly different statement from say- 
ing, ‘‘God is love.’? You might just as well say 
‘‘Spirit is God,’’? because God says, ‘‘God is 
spirit,’’ but all spirit is not God. Or you might 
as well say, ‘‘Light is God,’’ because ‘‘God is 
light,?’ but light is not Ged and love is not God, 
though God is love and God is light and God is 
spirit. What is meant by ‘‘leve’’ in the inspired 
statement, ‘‘God is Love’’? What is meant by the 
statement, ‘‘God is Love,’’ is shown by the defi- 
nition or description of love given in the context 
and in the immediately preceding chapter—1 John 
3:13-18. These verses clearly show that by the. 
statement in 1 John 4:8 and 1 John 4:16, ‘‘God is 
Love’’ is not meant that God is an abstract qual- 
ity, ‘‘love,’’ and that the abstract quality of love 
is God, but what is meant is that God is a person 
whose whole being and conduct are dominated by 
the quality of love, that is, by a desire for and de- 
light in the highest welfare of others. This will 
be evident to you if I read from the immediately 
preceding chapter (1 John 3:13-17): ‘‘Marvel not, 
brethren, if the world hateth you. (14) We know 
that we have passed out of death into life, because 


40 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


we love the brethren. He that loveth not abideth in 
death. (15) Whosoever hateth his brother is a mur- 
derer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal] 
life abiding in him. (16) Hereby know we love, 
because he laid down his life for us: and we ought 
to lay down our lives for the brethren. (17) But 
whoso hath the world’s goods, and beholdeth his 
brother in need, and shutteth up his compassion 
from him, how doth the love of God abide in him? 
(18) My little children, let us not love in word, 
neither with the tongue; but in deed and truth.’’ 
And from this chapter (1 John 4:7-17): ‘‘Be- 
loved, let us love. one another: for love is of God; 
and every one that loveth is begotten of God, and _ 
knoweth God. (8) He that loveth not knoweth not | 
God; for God is love. (9) Herein was the love of 
God manifested in us, that God hath sent his only 
begotten Son into the world that we might live 
through him. (10) Herein is love, not that we 
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son 
to be the propitiation for our sins. (11) Beloved, 
if God so loved us, we also ought to love one an- 
other. (12) No man hath beheld God at any time: 
If we love one another, God abideth in us, and his 
love is perfected in us: (13) Hereby we know that 
we abide in him and he in us, because he hath 
given us of his spirit. (14) And we have beheld 
and bear witness that the father hath sent the Son 
to be the Saviour of the world. (15) Whosoever 
shall confess that Jesus is the son of God, God 
abideth in him, and he inGod. (16) And we know 


The Christian Conception of God 41 


and have believed the love which God hath in us. 
God is Love; and he that hath abideth in love 
abideth in God, and God abideth in him. (17) 
Herein is love made perfect with us, that we may 
have boldness in the day of judgment; because as 
he is, even so are we in this world.’’ 

The God of what is called ‘‘Modern Philoso- 
phy’’ is ‘‘The Absolute,’’ and by ‘‘The Absolute’’ 
is generally meant a cold abstraction and not a 
clear, definite and warm personality Who loves, 
grieves, suffers, and Who works intelligently for 
others. And oftentimes the God of modern phil- 
osophy is not only ‘‘in all things’’ but és all things 
and all things are God. Such a God is no God at 
all. Whereas the God of the Bible, as we shall see 
as we proceed, is a Divine Person who exists apart 
from the world which He has created and Who ex- 
isted before the world He created, Who bears 
definite relations to the world He has made and 
Who works along definite and clearly revealed 
lines. So we come face to face with the question, 
What sort of a Being is the God of the Bible, the 
real God, the one true God, the God of Christian- 
ity, the only God Whom we should worship and 
love and obey? The Kaiser also talks much about 
God and his followers are fond of saying, ‘‘Gott 
mit uns,’’ but if any one will carefully study the 
Kaiser’s utterances it becomes plain that he does 
not mean by God the God of the Bible, the Chris- 
tian God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 


42 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


I. GOD IS SPIRIT 


First of all ‘‘God is Spirit.’’ This we read in 
our first text: John 4:24, ‘‘God is Spirit.’’ 
You will note that in your Bible, both the 
Authorised and Revised Versions, you read, 
‘‘God is a Spirit.’’ But there is no indefi- 
nite article in the Greek language, and wher- 
ever it is necessary in the English translation to 
fit the English idiom, it has to be supplied, and it 
is supplied, in this case. But there is really no 
reason for supplying it here any more than there 
is for supplying it in 1 John 4:8 and translating, 
‘*God is a Love,’’ or in 1 John 1:5 and translating 
‘*God is a Light.’’ The preferable translation is 
as I have given it: ‘‘God is Spirit.’’ This is a 
definition of the essential nature of God. What 
-does if mean? Our Lord Jesus Himself has de- 
fined what is meant by ‘‘spirit’’ in Luke 24:39, 
where He is recorded as saying after His resur- 
rection: ‘‘See My hands and My feet, that it is I 
Myself; handle Me, and see, for a spirit not flesh 
and blood, as ye behold Me having.’’ It is evident 
from these words of our Lord that spirit is that 
which is contrasted to body. That is to say, spirit 
is incorporeal, invisible reality. To say, ‘‘God is 
Spirit’? is to say that God is essentially incor- 
poreal and invisible (cf. 1 Tim. 6:16), that God in 
His essential nature is not material but imma- 
terial and invisible, but none the less real. This 
thought is also found in the very heart of that 


The Christian Conception of God 43 


revelation of Himself which God made to Moses 
in the first division of the Old Testament. For 
example, we read in Deut. 4:15-18: ‘*Take ye 
therefore good heed unto yourselves; for ye saw 
no manner of form on the day that Jehovah spake 
unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire; 
(16) lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make you a 
graven image in the form of any figure, the like- 
ness of male or female, (17) the likeness of any 
beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any 
winged bird that flieth in the Heavens. (18) The 
likeness of anything that creepeth on the ground, 
the likeness of any fish that is in the water under 
the earth.’’ This is a plain declaration way back 
fifteen centuries before Christ, of the spirituality 
of God in His essential nature. God is essentially 
invisible spirit. 

But it is also clearly revealed in the Word of 
God that ‘‘spirit’? may be manifested in visible, 
bodily form. We read in John 1:32 these words 
of John the Baptist speaking about what his own 
eyes had seen: ‘‘And John bore witness, saying, 
I have beheld the Spirit descending as a dove out 
of heaven; and it abode upon him.’’ Here, then, 
we see Him who was essentially spirit manifest- 
ing Himself in a bodily, visible form. 

Furthermore in the Bible we are told that God 
has manifested Himself in visible form. We read 
in Ex. 24:9,10: ‘‘Then went up Moses, and Aaron, 
Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of 
Israel: (10) and they saw the God of Israel; and 


44 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


there was under his feet as it were a paved work 
of sapphire stone, and as it were the very heaven 
for clearness.’’ 

What they saw was not God in His essential 
nature as Spiritual Being. Indeed, what we see 
when we see one another is not our essential self, 
but the house we live in, and so John could say, 
as he does say in John 1:18: ‘‘No man hath seen 
God at any time.’’ And so I could say to you now 
that you do not seeme. Nevertheless, it was a real 
manifestation of God Himself that they saw, and 
so it could also be said, and said truthfully, that 
they had seen God, as it could be truthfully said, 
‘fvou see me.’’ 

Furthermore still, though God is essentially 
spirit, God has a visible form. This is taught in 
the most unmistakable terms in Phil. 2:6, where 
we are told of our Lord Jesus that He existed 
originally ‘‘in the form of God.’’ The Greek word 
which is translated ‘‘form’’ in this passage means 
‘‘visible form,’’ ‘‘the form by which a person or 
thing strikes the vision,’’ ‘‘the external appear- 
ance.’’ Jt cannot mean anything else. This is 
the definition given in the best Greek-English lexi- 
con of the New Testament, of the word here trans- 
lated ‘‘form.’’ Now as Jesus existed originally 
‘Sin the form of God,’’ it is evident that God Him- 
self must have a form, this form in which our 
Lord Jesus is said to have existed originally. 

That God in His external form, though not in 
His invisible essence, is seeable, is also clear from 


The Christian Conception of God 45 


Acts 7:55, 56, where we read: ‘‘But he (i. e., 
Stephen), being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up 
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, 
and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and 
said, Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son 
of man standing on the right hand of God.’’ Now 
if God has not a form that can be seen, then, of 
course, the Lord Jesus could not be seen standing 
upon the right hand of God. God is, as we shall 
see later, everywhere; but God is not everywhere 
in the same sense. There is a locality where God 
is visibly and manifestly present in a way in which 
He is not present anywhere else. There is a place 
where He is present visibly and manifests Him- 
self as He does not elsewhere. The place of God’s 
visible presence and full manifestation of Himself 
is Heaven, though in His spiritual presence He 
pervades the universe. This is evident from many 
passages in the Scriptures. For example, it is 
clear from the prayer that our Lord taught us— 
a portion of Scripture that many accept who re- 
ject most of the Bible. Our Lord began the prayer 
that He taught His disciples with these words 
“Our Father Which Art im Heaven.’’ If these 
words mean anything, they certainly mean that — 
God, our Father, is in heaven in a way in which 
He is not elsewhere. That was where God was 
when Jesus was addressing Him. We read again 
in Matt. 3:17: ‘‘Lo, a voice out of the heavens, 
saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
Pleased.’’ If these words mean anything, they 


46 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


mean that God was in heaven and that His voice 
came out of the heavens to the Lord Jesus who 
was here on earth. Again in John 14:28 Jesus is 
recorded as saying: 

‘*Ye heard how I said to you, I go away and I 
come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would 
have rejoiced, because I go unto the Father: for 
the Father is greater than I.’’ If these words mean 
anything, taken in the light of the events that were 
to follow on the next day and the days following, 
they mean that Jesus was going away from the 
place where He then was—earth—to another place 
where He was not when He spoke, i. e., heaven— 
and that in going to heaven he was going to where 
God was, from earth where God was not in the 
sense in which He was in heaven. Again we read 
in Acts 11:9: ‘‘A voice answered the second time 
out of heaven, What God hath cleansed make not 
thou common.’’ Here again God is represented as 
speaking from heaven where He was. Again our 
Lord Jesus Christ is recorded in John 20:17 as 
saying to Mary Magdalene after His resurrection: 
‘*Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the 
Father: but go unto my brethren and say to them, 
I ascend unto my father and to your father and my 
God and your God,’’ from which it is unmistak- 
ably evident that in the conception of our Lord 
Jesus after His resurrection there was a place 
where God was and to which He was going, and 
that place was up in heaven. There is no possi- 
bility of explaining this away by saying it is a 


The Christian Conception of God 47 


figure of speech, the whole passage loses its mean- 
ing by any such interpretation, and to attempt 
to so explain it is a trick and a subterfuge that 
will not bear close examination. Again the Apostle 
Paul tells us regarding our Lord Jesus Christ that 
God the Father ‘‘raised Him from the dead, and 
made Him to sit at His right hand in the heavenly 
places’’ (Eph. 1:20) which makes it as clear as 
language can make anything that there is a place, 
heaven, where God is in a sense that He is no- 
where else, and where one can be placed at His 
right hand. The same thing is evident from the 
verses that we have already quoted in another con- 
nection, Acts 7:55, 56, where we are told that 
Stephen ‘‘being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up 
steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God, 
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and 
said, Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son 
of man standing on the right hand of God.’’ The 
meaning of these words to anybody who wishes to 
know what words are intended to convey and not 
merely to distort them to fit his own conception, is 
that God is in heaven locally present. There is no 
escaping this by any fair, honest interpretation. 
Men who are skilful in the art of discrediting 
truth by giving it bad names, and names that 
sound very scholarly, may call this ‘‘anthropomor- 
phism,’’ and that sounds very learned. Neverthe- 
less, be it ‘‘anthropomorphism’’ or what not, this 
is the clear teaching of the Word of God in spite 
of this or any other frightful terms used to scare 


48 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


immature college boys and immature college girls. 
There is no mistaking that this is the teach- 
ing of the Bible, and we have already proven that 
the Bible is God’s Word, and is to be taken at its 
face value in spite of all the attempts that men, 
who ‘‘counting themselves wise, have become 
fools,’’ make to explain it away 


II. GOD IS A PERSON 


The next thing that the Bible teaches about God 
is that God is a person. That is to say He is a 
being who knows, feels, loves, hears prayer, 
speaks, acts, a being who acts intelligently upon 
us and upon whom we can act. | 

While God is in all things, He is a personality 
distinct from the persons and things in which. 
~ He is, which He has created. The Bible, both in 
the Old and New Testaments is full of this vital 
conception of ‘‘a living God’’ as distinguished 
from the mere cold abstraction of ‘‘The Abso- 
lute,’’ or ‘‘The Infinite,’’ or ‘‘The Supreme Be- 
ing,’’ or ‘‘The Great First Cause’’ of which 
‘‘Modern Philosophy’’ loves to prate. For ex- 
ample, we read in Jer. 10:10-16: ‘‘Rut Jehovah 
is the true God; he is the living God, ard an ever- 
lasting king: at his wrath the earth trembleth, and 
the nations are not able to abide his indignation.”’ 
(11) Thus shall ye say unto them, the gods that 
have not made the heaven and the earth, these 
shall perish from the earth, and from under the 


The Christian Conception of God 49 


heavens. (12) He hath made the earth by his 
power, he hath established the world by his wis- 
dom, and by his understanding hath he stretched 
out the heavens. (13) When he uttereth his voice, 
there is a tumult of waters in the heavens, and he 
causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the 
earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain, and 
bringeth forth the wind out of his treasuries. (14) 
Every man is become brutish and is without 
knowledge; every goldsmith is put to shame by his 
graven image; for his molten image is falsehood, 
and there is no breath in them. (15) They are 
vanity, a work of delusion; in the time of their 
visitation they shall perish. (16) The portion of 
Jacob is not like these; for he is the former of all 
things; and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance: 
Jehovah of hosts is his name.’’ In this passage 
God is distinguished from idols which are things 
and not persons, things which ‘‘speak not’’ ‘‘can- 
hot act,’’ ‘‘cannot do good neither is it in them 
to do evil’’; and we are told that Jehovah is 
wiser than ‘‘all the wise men.’’ Is ‘‘the living 
God,’’ ‘‘an everlasting King,’’ a being who hath 
‘‘wrath and indignation,’’ separate from His 
creatures—‘‘at His wrath the earth trembleth and 
the nations are not able to abide His indignation.”’ 

In Acts 14:15 we read: ‘‘Sirs, why do ye these 
things? We also are men of like passions with 
you, and bring you good tidings, that ye should 
turn from these things unto the living God, who 
made heaven and earth and sea, and all that in 


50 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


them is.’’ Here also we have the representation 
of God as a personal being distmct from Hts cre- 
ated work, and also to be clearly distinguished 
from the idols which are not living gods. In 1 
Thess. 1:9, the converts at Thessalonica are repre- 
sented as turning from dead gods, ‘‘idols, to serve 
the living and true God.’’ 

In 2 Chron. 16:9 we are told that ‘‘The eyes of 
Jehovah run to and fro throughout the whole 
earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them 
whose heart is perfect toward him,’’ and in Ps. 
94:9,10 we read: ‘‘He that planteth the ear, shall 
he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not 
see? He that punisheth nations, shall not he cor- 
rect? Even he that teacheth men knowledge?’’ 
This is clearly the representation of a personal 
God and not a mere abstraction like ‘‘The Abso- 
lute,’’ or ‘‘The Infinite,’’ or ‘‘The Supreme Be- 
ing.’’? The clear distinction between God, who 
is immanent in all things, and dwells in believers, 
and the beings and persons in whom He dwells, 
is brought out very clearly by our Lord Himself 
in John 14:10: ‘‘Believest thou not that I am in 
the Father and the Father in me? The words that 
I say unto you I speak not from myself: But the 
Father abiding in me doeth his work.’’ And again 
in the 24th verse of the same chapter where our 
Lord Jesus distinguishes between His own person- 
ality and that of the Father, who dwelt in Him, 
in these words: ‘‘He that loveth me not keepeth 
not my words: and the word which ye hear is not 


' The Christian Conception of God 51 


mine, but the Father’s who sent me.’’ This con- 
ception of God pervades the entire Bible. The view 
of. God’ ‘presented in the Bible is utterly differ- 
ent from the conception of Pantheism and Bhud- 
dliism and Theosophy and Christian Science. This 
conception is found in the opening words of the 
Bible, Gen. 1:1: ‘‘In the beginning God created 
the heaven and the earth.’’ Here the God of the 
Bible is clearly differentiated from the so-called 
God of Pantheism, and the God of Christian Sci- 
ence. And this same conception of God is found 
in the last chapter of the Bible, and it is found in 
every chapter of the Bible between the first and 
the last. The God of the Bible is a Personal Being 
Who, while He created all things and is in all 
things, is a distinct personality separate from the 
persons and things He has created. 


Il. GOD’S PRESENT RELATION TO THE WORLD AND 
TO MEN 


We turn now to a consideration of the present 
relation of this Personal God presented to us in 
the Bible, to the world He has created and to the 
tien whom He has created. 

'1;° In the first place we find that God sus- 
tains, governs and cares for the world He has cre- 
ated. He shapes the whole present history of the 
world. This comes out again. and again. A few 
illustrations must suffice. We read in Ps. 104:27- 
30::. ‘These wait all for thee, that thou mayest 


52 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


give them their food in due season. (28) Thou giv- 
est unto them, they gather; thou openest thy hand, 
they are satisfied with good. (29) Thou hidest 
thy face, they are troubled; thou takest away their 
breath, they die, and return to their dust. (30) 
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; 
and thou renewest the face of the ground.’’ And 
again in Ps. 75:6, 7: ‘‘For neither from the east, 
nor from the west, nor yet from the south, cometh 
lifting up. (7) But God is the judge: he putteth 
down one, and lifteth up another.’’ All these pas- 
sages and others that could be cited, set forth the 
same conception of God’s present relation to the 
world which He has created. They show, as we 
have said, that God sustains, governs and cares 
for the work He has created; that He shapes the 
whole present history of the world. 

2. Now let us look at His relation to the affairs 
of men. We will find that God has a present, per- 
sonal mterest and am active hand in the affairs 
of men; that He makes a path for His people and 
leads them; that He delivers, saves and punishes. 
Here four illustrations from the Bible must suf- 
fice. First of all Joshua 3:10: ‘‘And Joshua said, 
Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among 
you, and that he will without fail drive out from 
before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the 
Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and 
the Amorite, and the Jebusite.’’ Now turn to Dan. 
6:20-22, 26, 27. ‘‘And when he came near unto 
the den to Daniel, he cried with a lamentable voice; 


The Christian Conception of God 53 


the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, serv- 
ant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou serv- 
est continually, able to deliver thee from the lions? 
(21) Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live 
for ever. (22) My God hath sent his angel, and 
hath shut the lions’ mouths, and they have not 
hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was 
found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I 
done no hurt.’’ . . . ‘‘(26) I make a decree, that 
in all the dominion of my kingdom men tremble 
and fear before the God of Daniel; for he is the 
living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom 
that which shall not be destroyed and his dominion 
shall be even unto the end. (27) He delivereth and 
rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in 
heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel 
from the power of the lions.’’ Now turn to 1 Tim. 
4:10: ‘*For to this end we labour and strive, be- 
cause we have our hope set on the living God, 
who is the Saviour of all men, specially of them 
that believe,’’ and now turn to Heb. 10:28-31: 
‘A man that hath set at nought Moses’ law dieth 
without compassion on the word of two or three 
witnesses: (29) Of how much sorer punishment, 
think ye, shall he be judged worthy, who hath 
trodden under foot the Son of God? and hath 
counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he 
was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done de- 
spite unto the Spirit of grace? (30) For we know 
him that said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I 


54 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


will recompense. And again, The Lord shall judge 
his people. (31) It is a fearful thing to fall into 
the hands of the living God.’’ In all of these 
passages we have this same conception of God in 
His relation to man, viz., that God has a personal 
interest and an active hand in the affairs of men; 
that He makes a path for His people and leads 
them; that He delivers, saves and punishes them. 

The God of the Bible is to be clearly distin- 
guished not merely from the God of the Pantheists 
who has no existence separate from His creation, 
but also from the God of the Deists who has cre- 
ated the world and put into it all the necessary 
powers of self-government and development and 
set it going and left it to go of itself. The God of 
the Bible is a God who is personally and actively 
present in the affairs of the universe to-day. He 
sustains, governs, cares for the world He has cre- 
ated, He shapes the whole present history of the 
world. He has a present personal interest and an 
active hand in the affairs of men and He it is that 
is back of all the events that are occurring to-day. 
He reigns and makes even the wrath of men to 
praise Him, and the remainder of wrath doth He 
restrain. The Kaiser may rage, armies may clash, 
force and violence and outrage may seem trium- 
phant for the passing hour, but God stands back 
of all; and through all the confusion and the dis- 
cord and the turmoil and the agony and the ruin, 
through all the outrageous atrocities that are mak- 


The Christian Conception of God 55 


ing men’s hearts stand still with horror, He is 
carrying out His own purposes of love and making 
all things work together for good to those who 
love Him. 


III 


Tre Curistian Conception or Gop—TxHe Inrt- 
NITE PERFECTION AND Unity or Gop 


**God is Light.’’—1 John 1:5. 

‘‘God is Love.’’—1 John 4:8, 16. 

‘With God All Things are Possible.’’—Matt. 19:26. 
‘¢His Understanding is Infinite.’’—Ps, 147:5. 


E are to consider again to-day the Chris- 
tian conception of God. We saw a week 
ago to-day that God is Spirit, that God 

is a person and that God has a personal interest 

and an active hand in the affairs of men to-day, 
that He sustains, governs and cares for the world 

He has created and that He shapes the whole 

present history of the world. 


I, THE INFINITE PERFECTION OF GOD 


The next thing to be noted about the Christian 
conception of God is, that God is perfect and m- 
finite in all His intellectual and moral attributes 
and im power. | 

1. First of all, fix your attention upon our 
first text: ‘‘God is Light’’ (1 John 1:5). These 
three words form a marvellously beautiful and 
overwhelmingly impressive statement of the truth. 

56 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 57 


They set forth the Absolute Holiness and Perfect 
Wisdom of God. The words need rather to be 
meditated upon than to be expounded. ‘‘In Him 
is no darkness at all.’’ That is to say, in Him is 
no darkness of error, no darkness of ignorance, 
no darkness of sin, no darkness of moral imper- 
fection or intellectual imperfection of any kind. 
The three words, ‘‘God is Light,’’ form one of 
the most beautiful, one of the most striking and 
one of the most stupendous statements of truth 
that was ever penned. 

2. To come to things more specific, the God of 
the Bible 1s omnipotent. This great truth comes 
ouf again and again in the Word of God. One 
direct statement of this great truth especially 
striking because of the connection in which it 1s 
found, occurs in Jer. 32:17, 27: ‘‘Ah Lord Je- 
hovah! Behold, thou hast made the heavens and 
the earth by thy great power and by thine out- 
stretched arm: there is nothing too hard for thee.’’ 
Here it is Jeremiah who makes the statement, but 
in the 27th verse it is Jehovah Himself who says: 
‘‘Behold, I am Jehovah, the God of all flesh: is 
there anything too hard for me?’’ 

In Job 42:2 we read these words of Job, when 
at last he has been brought to see and to recognise 
the true nature of Jehovah: ‘‘I know that thou 
canst do all things and that no purpose of thine 
can be restrained.’’ In Matt. 19:26 our Lord Jesus 
says: ‘‘With God all things are possible.’”’ Tak- 
ing these passages together, we are plainly taught 


58 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


by our Lord Himself and by others that God can 
do all things, that nothing 1s too hard for Hum, 
that all things are possible with Him. In a word, 
that God is omnipotent. A very impressive pas- 
sage in the book of Psalms setting forth this same 
great truth is Ps. 33:6-9: ‘‘By the word of Je- 
hovah were the heavens made, and all the host of 
them by the breath of his mouth. (7) He gather- 
eth the waters of the sea together as a heap: he 
layeth up the deeps in storehouses. (8) Let all the 
earth fear Jehovah: let all the inhabitants of the 
world stand in awe of him. (9) For he spake, and 
it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.’’ 
Here we see God by the mere utterance of His 
voice bringing to pass anything that He desires to 
be brought to pass. We find this same lofty con- 
ception of God in the very first chapter of the 
Bible, that chapter that so many people who im- 
agine themselves scholarly are telling us is out- 
grown and not up to date, and yet which con- 
tains some of the sublimest utterances that were 
ever written, unmatched by anything that any 
philosopher or scientist or platform orator is say- 
ing to-day. The very first words of that chapter 
read: ‘‘In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth’’ (Gen. 1:1), a description of the 
origin of things that has never been matched for 
simplicity, sublimity and profundity; and two 
verses further down, in the third verse, we read: 
‘‘And God said, Let there be light: and light was.’’ 
These words need no comment. There is here a 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 59 


sublimity of thought in the setting forth of the 
emnipotence of God’s mere word before which 
any truly intelligent and alert soul will stand in 
wonder and awe. There is nothing in poetry or 
in philosophical dissertation, ancient or modern, 
that can for one moment be put in comparison 
with these sublime words. Over and over again 
the thought is brought out in the Word of God 
that all nature is absolutely subject to God’s will 
and word. Wesee this, for example, in Ps. 107 :25- 
29: ‘‘For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy 
wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. (26) 
They mount up to the heavens, they go down again 
to the depths: their soul melteth away because of 
trouble. (27) They reel to and fro, and stagger 
like a drunken man, and are at their wits’ end. 
(28) Then they cry unto Jehovah in their trouble, 
and he bringeth them out of their distresses. (29) 
He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves 
thereof are still.’’ Another description of a sim- 
ilar character is found in Nahum 1:3-6: ‘‘Je- 
hovah is slow to anger, and great in power, and 
will by no means clear the guilty: Jehovah hath 
his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and 
the clouds are the dust of his feet. (4) He rebuk- 
eth the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up all 
the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel and 
the flower of Lebanon languisheth. (5) The moun- 
tains quake at him, and the hills melt; and the 
earth is upheaved at his presence, yea, the world, 
and all that dwell therein. (6) Who can stand be- 


60 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


fore his indignation? and who can abide in the 
fierceness of his anger? His wrath is poured out 
like fire, and the rocks are broken asunder by 
him.’’ What a picture we have here of the omni- 
potence and awful majesty of God! 

Not only is nature represented as being abso- 
lutely subject to God’s will and word, but men 
also are represented as being absolutely subject 
to His will and word. For example, we read in 
Jas. 4:12-15: ‘‘One only is the lawgiver and 
judge, even he who is able to save and to destroy: 
But who art thou that judgest thy neighbour? (13) 
Come now, ye that say, to-day or to-morrow we 
will go into this city, and spend a year there, and 
trade, and get gain: (14) Whereas ye know not 
what shall be on the morrow. What is your life? 
For ye are a vapour that appeareth for a little 
time, and then vanisheth away. (15) For that ye 
ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall both live, 
and do this or that.’’ 

Happy is the man who voluntarily subjects him- 
self to God’s will and word, but whether we volun- 
tarily subject ourselves to God’s will and word or 
not, we are subject to His will and word whether 
orno. The angels also are subject to His will and 
word (Heb. 1:13, 14) and even Satan himself is, 
although entirely against his own will, absolutely 
subject to the will and word of God, as is evident 
from Job 1:12 and Job 2:6. 

The exercise of God’s omnipotence ts umited by 
His own wise and holy and lovimg will. God can 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 61 


do anything, but will do only that which infinite 
wisdom and holiness and love dictate. This comes 
out, for example, in Isa. 59:1, 2: ‘‘Behold, Je- 
hovah’s hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; _ 
neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: (2) 
But your iniquities have separated between you 
and your God, and your sins have hid his face 
from you, that he will not hear.’’ 

3. The God of the Bible is also omniscient. In 
1 John 3:20 we read: ‘‘God knoweth all things.’’ 
Turning to the Old Testament, in Ps. 147:5, we 
read: ‘‘Great is our Lord, and mighty in power; 
his understanding is infinite.’’ The literal trans- 
lation of the last clause of this passage is ‘‘Of his 
understanding there is no number.’’ In these 
passages it is plainly declared that ‘‘God know- 
eth all things’’ and that ‘‘His understanding is 
infinite.’? In Job 37:16 Elihu the messenger of 
God is represented as saying that Jehovah is ‘‘per- 
fect in knowledge.’’ Along the same line, in Acts 
15:18 we read: ‘‘Known unto God are all his 
works from the beginning of the world.’’ The Re- 
vised Version makes a change in the translation of 
this verse but this change does not alter the sense 
of the truth here set forth that God knows all His 
works and all things from the beginning of the 
world. Known to Him is everything from the 
most vast to the most mmute detail. In Ps. 147:4 
we are told that, ‘‘He telleth the number of the 
stars; he knoweth them all by name.’’ While in 
Matt. 10:29 we are told that not a sparrow falleth 


62 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


to the ground without Him. The stars in all their 
stupendous magnitude and the sparrows in all 
their insignificance are all equally in His mind. 
We are further told that everything has a part 
in His purpose and plan. In Acts 3:17, 18, the 
Apostle Peter says of the crucifixion of our Lord, 
the wickedest act in all the history of the human 
race: ‘‘And now, brethren, I wot that in igno- 
rance ye did it, as did also your rulers. But the 
things which God foreshowed by the mouth of all 
the prophets, that his Christ should suffer, he 
thus fulfilled.’’ In Acts 2:23 Peter declared on 
the day, of Pentecost (although the crucifixion of 
the Lord Jesus was the wickedest act in all his- 
tory) that nevertheless the Lord Jesus was ‘‘De- 
livered up by the determinate council and fore- 
knowledge of God.’’ According to the Psalmist 
(Ps. 76:10) God takes the acts of the wickedest 
men into His plans and makes the wrath of men 
to praise Him, and the remainder of wrath doth 
He restrain. Even the present war with all its 
horrors, with all its atrocities, with all its abomi- 
nations and all its nameless wickednesses, was 
foreknown of God and taken into His own gra- 
cious plan of the ages; and He will make every 
event in this present war, even the most shocking 
things, designed by the vilest conspiracy of un- 
principled men, utterly unhuman and beastly men 
and Devil inspired men, work together for good 
to those who love God, for those who are the 
called according to His purpose (Rom. 8:28). 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 63 


The whole plan of the ages, not merely of the 
centuries, but of the immeasurable ages of God, 
and every man’s part m tt, has been known to 
God from all eternity. This is made very clear 
in Eph. 1:9-12, where we read: ‘‘Having made 
known unto us the mystery of his will, according 
to his good pleasure which he purposed in him 
unto a dispensation of the fullness of the times, to 
sum up all things in Christ, the things in the 
heavens, and the things upon the earth; in him, I 
say, in whom also we were made a heritage, hav- 
ing been foreordained according to the purpose of 
him who worketh all things after the counsel of 
his will; to the end that we should be to the praise 
of his glory, we who before hoped in Christ.’’ 
And in Eph. 3:4-9, we read: ‘‘Wherefore when 
ye read, ye can perceive my understanding in the 
mystery of Christ; which in other generations was 
not made known unto the sons of men, as it is 
now revealed unto his holy prophets and apostles 
in the Spirit; to wit, that the Gentiles are fellow- 
heirs, and fellow-members of the body, and fellow- 
partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through 
the gospel, whereof I was made a minister, accord- 
ing to the gift of that grace of God which was 
given me according to the working of his power. 
Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, 
was this grace given, to preach unto the Gentiles 
the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all 
men see what is the dispensation of the mystery 
which from all ages has been hid in God who cre- 


64 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ated all things.’’ There are no after-thoughts with 
God. Everything is seen, known, purposed and 
planned for from the outset. Well may we ex- 
claim: ‘‘Oh, the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God: how unsearchable 
are his judgments and his ways past finding out.”’ 
(Rom. 11:33.) God knows from all eternity what 
He will do to all eternity. 

4. God ts also absolutely and infinitely holy. 
This is a point of central and fundamental impor- 
tance in the Bible conception of God. It comes out 
in our first text: ‘‘God is light, and in him is no 
darkness at all.’? John when he wrote these words 
gave them as the summary of ‘‘The message which 
we have heard from God.’’ (1 John 1:5.) In Isa. 
6:3 in the vision of Jehovah which was given to 
Isaiah in the year that King Uzziah died, the 
‘“seraphim,”’ or ‘‘burning ones,’’ burning in their 
own intense holiness, are represented as standing 
before Jehovah with covered faces and covered 
feet and constantly crying, ‘‘Holy, holy, holy, is 
Jehovah of Hosts.’’ And in 1 Pet. 1:16 God cries 
to us, ‘*Be ye holy, for I am holy.”’ 

This thought of the infinite and awe-inspiring 
holiness .of God pervades the entire Bible. It un- 
derlies everything in it. The entire Mosaic sys- 
tem is built upon and about this fundamental and 
central truth. Its system of washings; the di- 
visions of the tabernacle; the divisions of the peo- 
ple into ordinary Israelites, Levites, Priests and 
High Priests, who were permitted different de- 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 65 


grees of approach to God under strictly defined 
conditions, insistence upon sacrifices of blood as 
the necessary medium of approach to God; God’s 
directions to Moses in Ex. 3:5, to Joshua in Josh. 
9:15, the punishment of Uzziah in 2 Chron. 26 :16- 
26, the strict orders to Israel in regard to ap- 
proaching Sinai when Jehovah came down upon 
it; the doom of Korah, Dathan and Abiram in 
Num. 16 :1-33; and the destruction of Nadab and 
Abihu in Lev. 10:1-3: all these were intended to 
teach, emphasise and burn into the minds and 
hearts of the Israelites the fundamental truth 
that God is holy, unapproachably holy. The truth 
that God is holy is the fundamental truth of the 
Bible, of the Old Testament and the New Testa- 
ment, of the Jewish religion and the Christian re- 
ligion. It is the preéminent factor in the Chris- 
tian conception of God. There is no fact in the 
Christian Conception of God that needs more to 
be emphasised in our day than the fact of the ab- 
solute, unqualified and uncompromising holiness 
of God. That is the chief note that is lacking in 
Christian Science, Theosophy, Occultism, Bud- 
dhism, New Thought, the New Theology and all 
the base but boasted cults of the day. That great 
truth underlies those fundamental doctrines of 
the Bible,—the Atonement by Shed Blood and 
Justification by Faith. The doctrine of the holi- 
ness of God is the keystone in the arch of Chris- 
tian truth. 

5. God is also love. This truth is declared in 


66 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


one of our texts. The words ‘‘God is love’’ are 
found twice in the same chapter (1 John 4:8, 16). 
This truth is essentially the same truth as that 
‘‘God is light’’ and ‘‘God is holy,’’ for the very 
essence of trué holiness is love, and ‘‘light’’ ig 
‘“love’’ and ‘‘love’? is ‘‘light.’’ 

6. #urthermore, God is not only perfect in His 
intellectual and moral attributes and in power, 
He is also omnipresent. This thought of God 
comes out in both the Old Testament and the New. 
In Ps. 139:7-10 we read: ‘*‘Whither shall I go from 
thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy pres- 
ence? (8) If I ascend up into heaven, thou art 
there: If I make my bed in Sheol, behold thou 
art there. (9) If I take the wings of the morning, 
and dwell in the uttermost part of the sea; (10) 
Even there shal] thy hand lead me, and thy right 
hand shall hold me.’’ There is no place where one 
can flee from God’s presence, for God is every- 
where. This great truth is set forth in a remark- 
able wax in Jer. 23:23, 24: ‘‘&AmIa God at hand, 
saith Jehovah, and not a God afar off? (24) Can 
any hide himself in secret places that I shaH not 
see him? saith Jehovah. Do not I fill heaven and 
earth? saith Jehovah.’’ 

Last week we saw that God has a local habita- 
tion, that there is a place where He exists and 
manifests Himself in a way in which He does not 
manifest Himself everywhere; but while we insist 
upon that clearly revealed truth, we must also 
never lose sight of the fact that God is everywhere. 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 67 


We find this same truth set forth by Paul in his 
sermon to the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers 
on Mars Hill, Acts 17:24-28: ‘‘The God that made 
the world, and all things therein, he, being Lord 
of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made 
with hands: (25) Neither is served by men’s hands 
as though he needed anything, seeing he himself 
giveth to all life and breath and all things. (26) 
And he made of one every nation of men who dwell 
on all the face of the earth, having determined 
their appointed seasons, and the bounds of their 
habitations. (27) For in him we live, and move, 
and have our being; as certain even of your own 
poets have said, for we are also his offspring.”’ 

From these passages we see that God is every- 
where. He is in all parts of the universe and 
near each individual. In Him each individual 
lives and moves and has his being. He is in every 
rose and lily and blade of grass. 

7. There.is one other thought in the Christian 
conception of God that needs to be placed along- 
side of His omnipresence and that is His eternity. 
God is eternal. His existence had no beginning 
and will have no ending, He always was, always 
1s and always shall be. God is not only every- 
where present in space, He is everywhere present 
in time. This conception of God appears con- 
stantly in the Bible. We are told way back in 
Gen. 21:33 that Abraham called ‘‘On the name of 
Jehovah, the everlasting.God.’’ In Isa. 40:28 we 
read this description of Jehovah: ‘‘Hast thou 


68 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


not known? Hast thou not heard? The everlast- 
ing God, Jehovah, the creator of the ends of the 
earth, fainteth not, neither is weary; there is no 
searching of his understanding.’’ Here again He 
is called ‘‘The Everlasting God.’’ Habakkuk in 
Hab. 1:12 sets forth the same conception of God. 
He says, ‘‘Art not thou from everlasting, O Je- 
hovah my God, mine holy one?’’ The Psalmist 
gives us the same representation of God in Ps. 
90:2, 4: ‘‘Before the mountains were brought 
forth, or ever thou hast formed the earth and the 
world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou 
art God. (4) For a thousand years in thy sight 
are but as yesterday when it is passed, and as a 
watch in the night.’’ We have the same repre- 
sentation of God in the 102nd Ps., verses 24-27: 
‘*T said, O my God, take me not away in the midst 
of my days: Thy years are throughout all genera- 
tions. (25) Of old didst thou lay the foundation 
of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy 
hands. (26) They shall perish, but thou shalt 
endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a gar- 
ment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and 
they shall be changed; (27) But thou art the same, 
and thy years shall have no end.’’ 

The very name of God, His covenant name, Je- 
hovah, sets forth His eternity. He is the eternal 
‘‘T am,’’ the One who is, was and ever shall be. 
(Cf. Ex. 3:14, 15.) 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 69 


Il, THERE IS ONE GOD 


One more fact about the Christian conception of 
God remains to be mentioned and that is: There 
is but one God. The Unity of God comes out again 
and again in both the Old Testament and the 
New. For example, we read in Deut. 4:35: ‘‘Je- 
hovah he is God. There is none else beside him.’’ 
And in Dent. 6:4 we read: ‘‘Hear O Israel: Je- 
hovah our God is one Jehovah.’’ Turning to the 
New Testament in 1 Tim. 2:5 we read: ‘‘There 
is one God, one mediator also between God and 
man, himself man, Christ Jesus.’’ And in Mark 
12:29 our Lord Jesus Himself says: ‘‘Hear O 
Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.”’ 

But we must bear in mind the character of the 
Divine Unity. It is clearly revealed in the Bible 
that in this Divine Unity, in this one Godhead, 
there is a multiplicity of persons. This comes 
out in a variety of ways. 

1. First of all, the Hebrew word translated 
““One’’ m these various passages given denotes 
a compound wmty, not a simple unity. (Cf. 1 
Cor. 3:6-8; 1 Cor. 12:13; John 17:22, 23; Gal. 
328.) 

2. In the second place, the Old Testament word 
most frequently used for God its a plural noun. 
The Hebrew grammarians and lexicographers 
tried to explain this by saying that it was the 
‘‘nluralis majestatis,’’ but the very simple ex- 
planation is that the Hebrews, in spite of their in- 


cr 


70 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


tense monotheism, used a plural name for God be- 
cause there is a plurality of persons in the one 
Godhead. 

3. More striking yet, as a proof of the plural- 
ity of persons in the one Godhead, is the fact that 
God Himself uses plural pronouns in speaking of 
Himself. For example, in the first chapter of the 
Bible, Gen. 1:26, we read that God said: ‘‘Let us 
make man in our image, after our likeness.’’ And 
in Gen. 11:7, He is further recorded as saying: 
‘‘Go to, let us go down, and there confound their 
language, that they cannot understand one anoth- 
er’s speech.’’ In Gen. 3.22 we read: ‘‘And Jeho- 
vah God said, Behold, man is become as one of us 
to know good and evil.’’ And in that wonderful 
vision to which reference has already been made, 
in which Isaiah saw Jehovah, we read this state- 
ment of Isaiah’s in Isa. 6:8: ‘‘And I heard the 
voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and 
who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send 
me.’’ 7 
4. Another illustration of the plurality of per- 
sons in the one Godhead in the Old Testament 
conception of God is found in Zech. 2:10, 11; where 
Jehovah speaks of Himself as sent by Jehovah in 
these words: ‘‘Sing and rejoice, O daughter of 
Zion; for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst 
of thee, saith Jehovah. (11) And many nations 
shall join themselves to Jehovah in that day, and 
shall be my people and I will dwell in the midst of 
thee, and thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts 


Infinite Perfection and Unity of God 71 


hath sent me unto thee.’’ Here Jehovah clearly 
speaks of himself as sent by Jehovah, thus clearly 
indicating two persons in the Deity. ~wil 

5. Another indication of the plurality of per- 
sons in the Godhead in the Old Testament con- 
ception of God is found in the fact that ‘‘The 
Angel of Jehovah’’ in the Old Testament is at 
the same time distinguished from and identified 
with Jehovah. 

6. This same thought of the plurality of per- 
sons in the one Godhead is brought out in John 
1:1, where we reach the very climax of this 
thought. Here we are told in so many words: 
‘In the beginning was the word and the word 
was with God and the word was God.’’ We shall 
see later, when we come to study the Deity of 
Christ and the Personality and Deity of the Holy 
Spirit, that the Lord Jesus and the Holy Spirit 
are clearly designated as divine beings and at the 
same time distinguished from one another, and 
from God the Father. So it is clear that in the 
Christian conception of God while there is but 
one God there is a multiplicity of persons in the 
one Godhead. 

In these two sermons on ‘‘The Christian Con- 
ception of God’’ we have very inadequately stated 
that conception. This conception of God runs 
through the whole Bible from the first chapter of 
the book of Genesis to the last chapter of Revela- 
tion, and this is one of the many marvellous il- 
lustrations of the divine unity of the Book. How 


72, Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


wonderful is that Book, in that there is this unity 
of thought on this very profound doctrine pervad- 
ing the whole book! It is a clear indication that 
the Bible is the Word of God. There is in the 
Bible a profounder philosophy than is found in 
any human philosophy, ancient or modern, and the 
only way to account for it is that God Himself 
is the author of this incomparable philosophy. 
What a wondrous God we have! How we ought 
to meditate upon His person! With what awe and 
at the same time with what delight we should come 
into His presence and bow before Him in adoring 
contemplation of the wonder and beauty and maj- 
esty and glory of His being! 


IV 


Tre Derry or Jesus CuHrist 


‘*Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked 
them a question, saying, What think ye of the Christ? whose son 
is He?’ ’—Matt. 22:41, 42. 


HE question that our Lord Jesus here puts 
to the Pharisees is the most fundamental 
question concerning Christian thought and 

faith that can be put to anybody im any age. 
Jesus Christ Himself is the centre of Christian- 
ity, so the most fundamental questions of faith 
are those that concern the person of Christ. If 
a man really holds right views concerning the per- 
son of Jesus Christ he will sooner or later get 
right views on every other question. If he holds 
a wrong view concerning the person of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, he is pretty sure to go wrong on 
everything else sooner or later. What think ye 
of Christ? That is the great central question, that 
is the vital question. 

And the most fundamental question concerning 
the person of Christ is, is Jesus Christ really God? 
Not merely is He Divine, but is He actually God? 
When I was a boy, to say you believed in the 
Divinity of Christ, meant that you believed in the 

73 


74a. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


real Deity of Christ, that you believed that Jesus 
was actually a Divine person, that He was God. 
It no longer means that. The Devil is wise, 
shrewd, subtle, and he knows that the most ef- 
fectual way to instil error into the minds of the 
inexpert and unwary is to use old and precious 
words and put a new meaning into them. So when 
his messengers masquerading as ‘‘ministers of 
righteousness’’ seek to lead, if possible, the elect 
astray, they use the old precious words but with 
an entirely new and entirely different and entirely 
false meaning. They talk about ‘‘the Divinity of 
Christ,’’ but they do not mean at all by it what in- 
telligent Christians in former days meant by it. 
Just so they talk of ‘‘the atonement,’’ but they do 
not mean at all by the atonement the substitution- 
ary death of Jesus Christ in our place, by which 
eternal life is secured for us. And oftentimes 
when they talk about Christ they do not mean at 
all our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the actual 
historic Jesus of the four gospels, they mean an 
ideal Christ, or a Christ principle. So our sub- 
ject this morning is not the Divinity of Christ, 
but the Deity of Christ, and our question is not is 
Jesus Christ Divine, but is Jesus Christ God? 
Was that person who was born at Bethlehem nine- 
teen hundred and twenty-one years ago, and who 
lived thirty-three or thirty-four years here upon 
earth as recorded in the four gospels of Matthew, 
Mark, Luke and John, who was crucified on Cal- 
vary’s cross, who rose from the dead the third 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 75 


day, and was exalted from earth to heaven, to 
the right hand of the Father, was He God mani- 
fested in the flesh, was He God embodied in a 
hurnan being? Was He and is He a being worthy 
of our absolute faith, and supreme love, and our 
unhesitating obedience, and our whole-hearted 
worship, just as God the Father is worthy of our 
absolute faith and supreme love and unhesitat- 
ing obedience and our whole-hearted worship? 
Should all men honour Jesus Christ even as they 
honour God the Father (John 5:23)? Not merely 
is He an example that we can wisely follow, or a 
Master whom we can wisely serve, but is He a 
God Whom we can rightly worship? 

I presume that most of us do believe that He 
was God manifested in the flesh, and that He is 
God to-day at the right hand of the Father, but 
why do you believe so? Are you so intelligent in 
your faith, and therefore so well grounded in your 
faith, that no glib talker or reasoner, no Unitar- 
ian or Russellite or Christian Scientist or Theoso- 
phist, or other errorist can confuse you and upset 
you and lead you astray? It is important that we 
be thoroughly sound in our faith at this point, 
and thoroughly well-informed, wherever else we 
may be in ignorance or error, for we are distinctly 
told in John 20:31 that ‘‘These are written, that 
ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son 
of God; and that believing, ye may have life in His 
name.’’ It is evident from these words of the in- 
spired Apostle John that this question is not 


76 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


merely a matter of theoretical opinion, that it is 
a matter that concerns our salvation. It is to con- 
firm and instruct you in your blessed faith, your 
saving faith in Jesus Christ as a Divine person, 
that I speak this morning. When I studied the 
subject of the Divinity of Christ in the theological 
seminary I got the impression that there were a 
few proof-texts in the Bible that conclusively 
proved that He was Divine. Years later I found 
that there were not merely a few proof-texts that 
proved this, but that the Bible in many ways and 
in countless passages clearly taught that Jesus 
Christ was God manifest in the flesh. Indeed I 
found that the Doctrine of the Deity of Jesus 
Christ formed the very warp and woof of the 
Bible. 


I. DIVINE NAMES 


The first line of proof of the absolute Deity of 
our Lord Jesus is that many names and titles 
clearly implying Deity are used of Jesus Christ in 
the Bible, some of them over and over again, the 
total number of passages reaching far into the 
hundreds. Of course, I can give you only a few 
illustrations. Turn with me first of all to Rev. 
1:17, ‘‘And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as 
one dead. And he laid his right hand upon me 
saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last.’’ 
The context shows clearly that our Lord Jesus 
was the speaker, and here our Lord Jesus dis- 
tinctly calls Himself ‘‘the First and the Last.’’ 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 77 


Now this beyond a question is a Divine name, for 
in Isa. 44:6 we read, ‘‘Thus sayeth Jehovah, the 
king of Israel, and his redeemer, Jehovah of hosts: 
I am the first, and I am the last; and besides me 
there is no God.’’ In Rev. 22:12, 13, our Lord 
Jesus says that He is the Alpha and Omega. His 
words are, ‘‘Behold, I come quickly; and my re- 
ward is with me, to render to each man according 
as his work is. I am Alpha and Omega, the first 
and the last, the beginning and the end.’’ Now in 
this same book in the first chapter and the eighth 
verse the Lord God declares that He is the Alpha 
and the Omega. His words are, ‘‘I am the Alpha, 
and the Omega, saith the Lord God, which is and 
which was and which is to come, the Almighty.”’ 
In 1 Cor. 2:8, the Apostle Paul speaks of our cru- 
cified Lord Jesus as ‘‘the Lord of glory.’’ His 
exact words are, ‘‘Which none of the princes of 
this world knew: for had they known it, they 
would not have crucified the Lord of glory.’’ 
There can be no question that ‘‘the Lord of glory”’ 
is Jehovah God, for we read in Ps. 24:8-10, ‘*Who 
is this king of glory? Jehovah strong and mighty, 
Jehovah mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O 
ye gates; yea lift them up, ye everlasting doors, 
and the king of glory will come in. Who is the 
king of glory? Jehovah of hosts. He is the king 
of glory.’’ And we are told in the passage al- 
ready referred to that our crucified Lord Jesus 
was the King of Glory, therefore He must be Je 
hovah. In John 20:28 Thomas addressed the 


78 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Lord Jesus as his Lord and his God, ‘‘And Thomas 
answered and said unto him, My Lord and my 
God.’’ Unitarians have endeavoured to get around 
the force of this utterance of Thomas by saying 
that Thomas was excited and that he was not ad- 
dressing the Lord Jesus, but was saying ‘‘my 
Lord and my God’’ as an ejaculation of astonish- 
ment, just in the way that profane people some- 
times use these exclamations to-day, but this in- 
terpretation is impossible, and shows to what des- 
perate straits the Unitarians are driven; for Jesus 
Himself commended Thomas for seeing it and say- 
ing it. Our Lord Jesus’ words immediately fol- 
lowing those of Thomas are, ‘‘Because thou hast 
seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that 
have not seen, and yet have believed’’ (John 
20:29). In the correct translation of Titus 2:13, 
the translation given in the English revision, not 
in the American Standard Revision, our Lord 
Jesus is spoken of as, ‘‘our great God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ.’? In Rom. 9:5, Paul tells us that 
‘‘Christ is over all, God blessed forever.’’ The 
Unitarians have made desperate efforts to over- 
come the force of these words, but the only fair 
translation and interpretation of the words that 
Paul wrote in Greek are the translation and in- 
terpretation found in both our Authorised and 
Revised Versions. There can be no honest doubt 
to one who goes to the Bible to find out what it 
actually teaches, and not to read his own thought 
into it, that Jesus 1s spoken of by various names 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 79 


and titles that beyond a question imply Deity, 
and that He in so many words is called God. In 
Heb. 1:8 it is said in so many words, of the Son, 
‘But unto the Son he saith, thy throne, O God, is 
fer ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the 
sceptre of thy kingdom.’’ If we should go no fur- 
ther it is evidently the clear and often repeated 
teaching of the Bible that Jesus Christ was really 
God. 


II. DIVINE ATTRIBUTES 


But there is a second line of proof that Jesus 
Christ was God, a proof equally convincing, and 
that is, all the five distinctively Divine attributes 
are ascribed to Jesus Christ, and ‘‘all the fulness 
of the Godhead’’ is said to dwell in Him. There 
are five distinctively Divine attributes, that is five 
attributes that God alone possesses. These are 
Omnipotence, Omniscience, Omnipresence, Eter- 
nity, and Immutability. Each one of these distinc- 
tively Divine attributes are ascribed to Jesus 
Christ. First of all, omnipotence is ascribed to 
Jesus Christ. Not only are we taught that Jesus 
had power over disease and death and winds and 
sea and demons, that they were all subject to His 
word, and that He is far above all principality, 
and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named, not only in this world but 
also in the world to come (Eph. 1:20-23), but in 
Heb. 1:3 it is said in so many words that He 
‘Upholds all things by the word of his power.’’ 


80 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Omniscience is also ascribed to Him. We are 
taught in the Bible that Jesus knew men’s lives, 
even their secret history (John 4:16, 19), that He 
knew the secret thoughts of men, knew all men, 
knew what was in man (Mark 2:8; Luke 5:22; 
John 2:24, 25) which knowledge we are distinctly 
told in 2 Chron. 6:30 and Jer. 17:9, 10, God only 
possesses, but we are told in so many words in 
John 16:30 that Jesus knew ‘‘all things,’’ and in 
Col. 2:3 we are told that in Him ‘‘are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.’? Omni- 
presence is also ascribed to Him. We are told 
in Matt. 18:20 that where two or three are gath- 
ered together in His name, that He is in the midst 
of them, and in Matt. 28:20 that wherever His 
obedient disciples should go He would be with 
them, even unto the end of the age, and in John 
14:20 and 2 Cor. 13:5 we are told that He dwells 
in each believer, in all the millions of believers 
scattered over the earth. In Eph. 1:23 we are 
told in so many words that He ‘‘filleth all in all.’’ 
Eternity is also ascribed to Him. We are told in 
John 1:1 that ‘‘in the beginning was the Word, 
and the Word was with God, and the Word was 
God.’’ In John 8:57 Jesus Himself said, ‘‘ Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am.’’ 
Note that the Lord Jesus did not merely say that 
‘‘before Abraham was I was,’’ but that ‘‘before 
Abraham was, I am,’’ thus declaring Himself to be 
the eternal ‘‘I am.’’ Eiven in the Old Testament 
we have a declaration of the eternity of the Christ 


The Deity of Jesus Christ St 


who was to be born in Bethlehem. In Micah 5:2 
we read, ‘‘But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though 
thou be little among the thousands of Judah? Yet 
out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to 
be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been 
from of old, from everlasting.’’ And in Isa. 9:6 
we are told of the child that is to be born, ‘‘For 
unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given; and 
the government shall be upon his shoulder; and 
his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, 
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the 
Prince of Peace.’’ And in Heb. 13:8 we are told 
that ‘‘Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to- 
day, and for ever.’’ His immutability is also 
taught in the passage just quoted from Hebrews, 
and in the first chapter of the same book, the 
twelfth verse we are told that while even the 
heavens change, the Lord Jesus does not change. 
The exact words are, ‘‘They shall perish, but thou 
remainest: They all shall wax old as doth a gar- 
ment; and as a mantle shalt thou roll them up, as 
@ garment, and they shall be changed: but thou 
art the same. And thy years shall not fail.’’ So 
we see that each one of the five distinctly Divine 
attributes were ascribed to our Lord Jesus Christ. 
And in Col. 2:9 we are told in so many words, 
‘*In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead 
bodily’’ (i.e., in a bodily form). Here again we 
might rest our case, for what has been said under 
this head, even if taken alone, clearly proves the 
absolute Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ. It shows 


82 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


that He possessed every perfection of nature and 
character that God the Father possesses. 


Ill, DIVINE OFFICES 


But we do not need to rest the case here. There 
is a third unanswerable line of proof that Jesus 
Christ is God, namely, all the distinctively Divine 
offices are predicated of Jesus Christ. There are 
seven distinctively Divine offices. That is to say, 
there are seven things that God alone can do, and 
each one of these seven distinctively Divine offices 
are ascribed to Jesus Christ. The seven distinc- 
tively Divine offices are: Creation, Preservation, 
Forgiveness of Sin, the Raising of the Dead, the 
Transformation of Bodies, Judgment, and the Be- 
stowal of Eternal Life, and each of these is 
ascribed to Jesus Christ. Creation is ascribed to 
Him. In Heb. 1:10 these words are spoken to our 
Lord: ‘‘And thou, Lord, in the beginning hast 
laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens 
are the works of thy hands.’’ The context clearly, 
shows that that the Lord addressed is the Lord 
Jesus. In John 1:3 we are told that ‘‘All things 
were made through him; and without him was not 
anything made that was made.’’ Preservation of 
the universe and of everything is also ascribed to 
Him in Heb. 1:3 where it is said of the Lord Jesus, 
‘‘Who being the brightness of his glory, and the 
express image of his (i. e., God’s) substance and 
upholding all things by the word of his power, 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 83 


when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down 
on the right hand of the majesty on high.’’ The 
forgiveness of sin is ascribed to Him. He Himself 
says in Mark 2:5-10 when His power to forgive 
sins was questioned, because that was recognised 
as a Divine power, ‘‘That ye may know that the 
Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins.’’ 
The future raising of the dead is distinctly 
ascribed to Him in John 6:39, 44, ‘‘And this is the 
Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which 
He hath given me I should lose nothing, but should 
raise it up at the last day. No man can come to me, 
except the Father which hath sent me draw him: 
and I will raise him up at the last day.’’ The 
transformation of our bodies is ascribed to Him in 
Phil. 3:21, R. V. In 2 Tim. 4:1 judgment is as- 
cribed to Him: we are told that He shall ‘‘judge 
the quick and the dead.’’ Jesus Himself declared 
that He would be the judge of all mankind, and 
emphasised the fact of the Divine character of that 
office. In John 5:22, 23 He said, ‘‘For neither doth 
the Father judge any man, but He hath given all 
judgment unto the Son, that all men may honour 
the Son, even as they honour the Father.’’ The 
bestowal of eternal life is ascribed to Him time and 
time again. In John 10:28 He Himself says, ‘‘And 
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never 
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my 
hand.’’ And in John 17:1, 2, He says, ‘‘Father, 
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that the Son may 
glorify thee: even as thou gavest Him authority 


84 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


over all flesh, that to all whom thou hast given him, 
He should give eternal life.’’ Here then we have 
the seven distinctively Divine offices all predicated 
of Jesus Christ. This alone would prove that He 
is God, and we might rest the case here, but there 
are still other proofs of His absolute Deity. 


IV. STATEMENTS WHICH IN THE OLD TESTAMENT ARE 
MADE DISTINCTLY OF JEHOVAH, GOD, TAKEN IN 
THE NEW TESTAMENT TO REFER TO JESUS CHRIST 


The fourth line of proof of the absolute Deity 
of Jesus Christ is found in the fact that over and 
over again statements which in the Old Testament 
are made distinctly of Jehovah, God, are taken in 
the New Testament to refer to Jesus Christ. We 
have not time to illustrate this at length, but will 
give but one illustration where many might be 
given. In Jer. 11:20 the prophet says, ‘‘But, O 
Lord of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest 
the reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance 
on them: for unto thee have I revealed my cause.’’ 
Here the prophet distinctly says that it is Jehovah 
of Hosts who judgest and triest the reins and the 
heart. And in the 17th chapter and the tenth 
verse Jeremiah represents Jehovah Himself as 
saying the same thing in these words, ‘‘I, Jehovah, 
search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every 
man according to his ways, according to the fruit 
of his doings.’’ But in the New Testament in Rev. 
2 :23 the Lord Jesus says, ‘‘I am he which search- 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 85 


eth the reins and the hearts: and I will give unto 
every one of you according to your works.’’ We 
are distinctly told in the context that it is ‘‘The 
Son of God’? who is speaking here. So Jesus 
claims for Himself in the N. T. what Jehovah in 
the O. T. says is true of Himself and of Himself 
alone, and in very many other instances state- 
ments which in the Old Testament are made dis- 
tinctly of Jehovah, God, are taken in the N. T. to 
refer to Jesus Christ. This is to say, in New 
Testament thought and doctrine Jesus Christ oc- 
cupies the place that Jehovah occupies in Old 
Testament thought and doctrine. 


VY. THE WAY IN WHICH THE NAME OF GOD THE FA- 
THER AND JESUS CHRIST THE SON ARE COUPLED 
TOGETHER 


The fifth line of proof of the absolute Deity of 
our Lord is found in the way in which the name of 
Jesus Christ 1s coupled with that of God the Fa- 
ther. In numerous passages His name 1s coupled 
with the name of God the Father in a way in which 
at would be wmpossible to couple the name of any 
fimte bemg with that of the Deity. We have time 
for but a few of the many illustrations that might 
be given. A striking instance is in the words of 
our Lord Himself in John 14:23 where we read, 
‘‘ Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love 
me, he will keep my words: and my Father will 
love him, and he will come unto him, and make 


86 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


our abode with him.’’ Here our Lord Jesus does 
not hesitate to couple Himself with the Father in 
such a way as to say ‘‘we,’’ 1.e., God the Father 
and I will come and make our abode with him. 
In John 14:1 He says, ‘‘Let not your heart be 
troubled: Believe in God, believe also in me.’’ 
If Jesus Christ was not God this is shocking blas- 
phemy. There is absolutely no middle ground 
between admitting the Deity of Jesus Christ and 
charging Christ with the most daring and ap- 
palling blasphemy of which any man im all history 
was ever guilty. 


VI. DIVINE WORSHIP TO BE GIVEN TO JESUS CHRIST 


There is a sixth line of proof of the absolute 
Deity of our Lord Jesus. Those already given 
have been decisive, each one of the five has been 
decisive, but this, if possible, is the most decisive 
of them all, and that is, that we are taught wm so 
many words that Jesus Christ should be wor- 
shipped as God, both by angels and men. In nu- 
merous places in the gospels we see Jesus Christ 
accepting without hesitation a worship which good 
men and angels declined with fear, and which He 
Himself taught should be rendered only to God 
(Matt. 28:9; Luke 24:52; Mark 14:33; ef. Acts 
10 :25, 26; Rev. 22:8, 9, R. V.; Matt. 4:9,10). A 
curious and very misleading comment is made in 
the margin of the American Standard Revision 
upon the meaning of the word translated ‘‘ wor- 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 87 


ship’’ im these passages, and that is that ‘‘the 
Greek word translated worship denotes an act of 
reverence, whether paid to a creature or to the 
Creator.’’ Now this is true, but it is utterly mis- 
leading; for while this word is used to denote ‘‘an 
act of reverence paid to a creature’’ by idolators, 
our Lord Jesus Himself distinctly says, using ex- 
actly the same Greek word, ‘‘Thou shalt worship 
the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve,’’ 
and on the other hand He says in John 5:23 that 
‘All men should honour the Son even as they hon- 
our the Father.’’ And in Rev. 5:8, 9, 12, 13 the 
four living creatures and the four and twenty 
elders are represented as falling down before the 
Lamb and offering worship to Him just as wor- 
ship 1s offered to Him that sitteth upon the throne, 
1.e., God the Father. In Heb. 1:6 we are told in 
so many words, ‘‘And again, when he bringeth in 
the first begotten into the world, he saith, and let 
all the angels of God worship him.’’ One night 
in the inquiry room in Chicago I stepped up to 
an intelligent looking man at the back of the room 
and said to him, ‘‘Are you a Christian?’’ He re- 
plied, ‘‘I do not suppose you would consider me a 
Christian.’’ I said, ‘‘Why not?’’ He said, ‘‘I am 
a Unitarian.’’ I said, ‘‘What you mean then is 
that you do not think that Jesus Christ is a per- 
son who should be worshipped.’’ He replied, 
‘‘That is exactly what I think,’’ and added, ‘‘the 
Bible nowhere says we ought to worship Him.’’ 
I said, ‘‘Who told you that?’’ He replied, ‘‘My 


, 


88 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


pastor,’’ mentioning a prominent Unitarian min- 
ister in the City of Boston. I said, ‘‘Let me show 
you something,’’ and I opened my Bible to Heb. 
1:6 and read, ‘‘And again, when he bringeth in the 
first begotten into the world, he saith, and let all 
the angels of God worship him,’’ and he said, 
‘‘Does it say that?’’ I handed him the Bible and 
said, ‘‘Read it for yourself,’’ and he read it and 
said, ‘‘I did not know that was in the Bible.’’ I 
said, ‘‘Well it is there, isn’t it?’’ ‘‘Yes it is 
there.’’ Language could not make it plainer. The 
Bible clearly teaches that Jesus, the Son of God, 
is to be worshipped as God by angels and men, 
even as God the Father 1s worshipped. 


VII. INCIDENTAL PROOFS OF THE DEITY OF JESUS 
CHRIST 


The six lines of proof of the Deity of Jesus 
Christ which I have given you leave no possibil- 
ity of doubting that Jesus Christ is God, that 
Jesus of Nazareth is God manifest in a human 
person, that He is a being to be worshipped, even 
as God the Father is worshipped; but there are 
also incidental proofs of His absolute Deity which, 
if possible, are in some ways even more convinc- 
ing than the direct assertions of His Deity. 

1. Our Lord Jesus says in Matt. 11:28, ‘‘Come 
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest.’’ Now any one that makes 
a promise like that must either be God, or a luna- 


—— 


———s 


The Deity of Jesus Christ 89 


tic, or an impostor. No one can give rest to all who 
labour and are heavy laden who come to him un- 
less he is God, and yet Jesus Christ offers to do it. 
If He offers to do it and fails to do it when men 
come to Him, then He is either a lunatic or an im- 
postor. If He actually does it, then beyond a 
question He is God. And thousands can testify 
that He really does it. Thousands and tens of 
thousands who have laboured and were heavy 
laden and crushed, and for whom there was no 
help in man, have come to Jesus Christ and He 
actually has given them rest. Surely then He is 
not merely a great man, He is God. 

2. Again in John 14:1 Jesus Christ demands 
that we put the same faith in Him that we put m 
God the Father, and promises that in such faith 
we will find a cure for all trouble and anxiety of 
heart. His words are, ‘‘Let not your heart be 
troubled; believe in God, believe also in me.’’ It 
is clear that He demands that the same absolute 
faith be put in Himself that is to be put in God Al- 
mighty. Now in Jer. 17:5, scripture with which 
our Lord Jesus was perfectly familiar, we read 
‘‘Thus saith Jehovah: Cursed is the man that 
trusteth in man,’’ and yet with this clear curse 
pronounced upon all who trust in man, Jesus 
Christ demands that we put trust in Him just as 
we put trust in God. It is the strongest possible 
assertion of Deity on His part. No one but God 
has a right to make such a demand, and Jesus 
Christ, when He makes this demand, must either 


go Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


be God or an impostor, but thousands and tens 
of thousands have found that when they did be- 
lieve in Him just as they believe in God, their 
hearts were delivered from trouble no matter what 
their bereavement or circumstances might be. 

3. Again, the Lord Jesus demanded supreme 
and absolute love for Himself. It is clear as day 
that no one but God has a right to demand such a 
love, but there can be no question that Jesus did 
demand it. In Matt. 10:37 He said to His dis- 
ciples, ‘‘He that loveth father or mother more 
than me is not worthy of me; and he that loveth 
son or daughter more than me is not worthy of 
me.’’ And in Luke 14:26, 33, He says, ‘‘If any 
man cometh unto me, and hateth not his own fa- 
ther, and mother, and wife, and children, and 
brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he 
cannot be my disciple. ... So therefore whoso- 
ever he be of you that renounceth not all that he 
hath, he cannot be my disciple.’’ There can be no 
question that this is a demand on Jesus part of 
supreme and absolute love to Himself, a love that 
puts even the dearest relations of life in an en- 
tirely secondary place. No one but God has a 
right to make any. such demand, but our Lord 
Jesus made it, and, therefore, He must be God. 

4. In John 10:30 the Lord Jesus claimed abso- 
lute equality with the Father. He said, ‘‘I and the 
Father are one.’’ 

5. In John 14:9 our Lord Jesus went so far as 
to say, ‘‘He that hath seen me, hath seen the Fa- 


The Deity of Jesus Christ gI 


ther.’’ He claims here to be so absolutely God 
that to see Him is to see the Father Who dwelleth 
in Him. 

6. In John 17:3 He says, ‘‘And this is eternal 
life, to know thee, the only true God, and him 
whom thou didst send, even Jesus Christ.’’ In 
other words, he claims that the knowledge of Him- 
self 1s as essential a part of eternal life as knowl- 
edge of God the Father. 

Conclusion: There is no room left to doubt the 
absolute Deity of Jesus Christ. It is a glorious 
truth. The Saviour in whom we believe is God, 
a Saviour for whom nothing is too hard, a Saviour 
who can save from the uttermost and save to the 
uttermost. Oh, how we should rejoice that we 
have no merely human Saviour, but a Saviour that 
is absolutely God. On the other hand, how black 
is the guilt of rejecting such a Saviour as this! 
Whoever refuses to accept Jesus as his Divine 
Saviour and Lord is guilty of the enormous sin 
of rejecting a Saviour Who is God. Many a man 
thinks he is good because he never stole, or com- 
mitted murder, or cheated. ‘‘Of what great sin 
am I guilty?’’ he complacently asks. Have you 
ever accepted Jesus Christ? ‘‘No.’’ Well, then 
you are guilty of the awful and damning sin of re- 
jecting a Saviour Who is God. ‘‘But,’’ you an- 
swer, ‘‘I do not believe that He is God.’’ That 
does not change the fact nor lessen your guilt. 
Questioning a fact or denying a fact never changes 
it, regardless of what Mary Baker Eddy may say 


‘oe 


92 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


to the contrary. Suppose a man had a wife 
who was one of the noblest, purest, truest women 
that ever lived, would her husband’s questioning 
her purity and nobility change the fact? It would 
not. It would simply make that husband guilty 
of awful slander, it would simply prove that man 
to be an outrageous scoundrel. So denying the 
Deity of Jesus Christ, does not make his Deity 
any less a fact, but it does make the denier of 
His Deity guilty of awful, incredible, blasphemous 
slander. It does prove you who deny His Deity 
to be ——. I leave your own conscience to finish 
the sentence. 


Vv 


Jesus Curist a Reat Man 


‘*And the word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we be- 
held his glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father), 
full of grace and truth.’’—John 1:14. 

‘“Who, existing in the form of God, counted not the being on 
an equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied him- 
self, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of 
man; and being found in fashion as man, he emptied himself, be- 
coming obedient even unto death, yea the death of the cross.’’— 
Phil. 2:6-8. 

‘‘There is one God, one mediator also between God and men, 
himself man, Christ Jesus.’’—1 Tim. 2:5. 


UR subject in this chapter is ‘‘ Jesus Christ 

a Real Man.’’ I have three texts, and the 
substance of all that I shall say is these 

three texts. The first text is John 1:14: ‘‘And 
the word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and 
we beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten. 
from the Father), full of grace and truth.’’ The 
second text is Phil. 2:6-8: ‘‘Who, existing in the 
form of God, counted not the being on an equality 
with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied him- 
self, taking the form of a servant, being made in 
the likeness of man; and being found in fashion as 
a man, he emptied himself, becoming obedient 
even unto death, yea the death of the cross.’’ And 

93 


94 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the third text is 1 Tim. 2:5: ‘‘There is one God, 
one mediator also between God and man, himself 
man, Christ Jesus.’’ 

We saw in the preceding chapter that Jesus 
Christ was God, that in Him dwelt all the fullness 
of the Godhead bodily, that He possessed all the 
distinctively divine attributes, that He exercised 
all the distinctively divine functions, that He oc- 
cupied the position in New Testament thought 
that Jehovah occupied in Old Testament thought, 
that He was a being worthy of our absolute faith, 
our supreme love, our unhesitating obedience, and 
our whole-hearted worship, that He was God and 
is God. But in the passages which we have taken 
for our texts to-day, we are told that this Divine 
One, who had existed from all eternity with God, 
the Father, and who was God, became a man. In 
becoming a man, He did not cease to be God; but 
the Word, the Eternal Word, which was with God 
and was God, took human nature upon Himself. 
While He was very God of very God, He was real 
man, as truly and completely a man as any man 
who ever walkéd on this earth. The doctrine of 
the real humanity of Christ is as essential a part 
of the Christian faith as the doctrine of His real 
Deity. There is one very large class of people 
who do not see the real Deity of Jesus Christ. 
They are in fundamental error. There is another 
large class of people who see only His Deity, and 
who do not see the reality of His manhood. They 
also are in error. A doctrine of a Saviour who is 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 95 


only man is false doctrine; and a doctrine of a 
Saviour who is only God is equally false doctrine. 
The doctrine of the Bible is that, One Who from 
all eternity was God in the person of Jesus of 
Nazareth became man. There are many passages 
in the Bible which set forth the Deity of our Lord 
Jesus in a way that is unmistakable and inescap- 
able. There are many other passages in the Bible 
which set forth the complete humanity of our 
Lord Jesus in a way which is equally unmistak- 
able and inescapable. It is with the doctrine of 
His real humanity, i.e., that He was a real man, 
that we are concerned this morning. 


I. THE HUMAN PARENTAGE OF JESUS CHRIST 


First of all, the Bible teaches us that Jesus 
Christ had a human parentage. We read in Luke 
2:7, ‘‘And she (i.e., Mary) brought forth her first 
born Son; and she wrapped him in swaddling 
clothes, and laid him in a manger, because there 
was no room for them in the inn.’’ Here we are 
told that our Lord Jesus Christ, though super- 
naturally conceived, was Mary’s Son, Mary was 
as truly His mother as God was His Father. He 
had a human parentage as truly as He had a di- 
vine parentage. In the first chapter of this same 
Gospel of Luke, in the 35th verse, we read, ‘‘And 
the angel answered and said unto her (i.e., Mary), 
the Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the 
power of the Most High shall overshadow thee: 


, 


96 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


wherefore also the holy thing, which is begotten 
shall be called the Son of God.’’ He was called 
the Son of God because He was begotten directly 
by the power of the Holy Spirit; but the Holy 
Spirit came upon Mary and she became the mother 
of this One who was to be called the ‘‘Son of God.’’ 
Not only was He descended from Mary and in that 
way. of human parentage, we are clearly told also 
in Rom. 1:3 that God’s Son ‘‘Was born of the seed 
of David according to the flesh.’’ And in Acts 
2:30 we are told that He was ‘‘The fruit of his 
(i.e., David’s) loins, according to the flesh.’’ And 
in Hebrews 7:14, we are told that ‘‘Our Lord 
sprang out of Judah.’’ While we are told in Gal. 
4:4 that ‘‘When the fulness of the time came, God 
sent forth His Son,’’ we are also told with equal 
plainness in the same verse that this Son of God 
was ‘‘Born of a woman.’’ The human parentage 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ was just as 
real and just as essential a part of His personality 
as His divine parentage. 


I. THE HUMAN PHYSICAL NATURE OF JESUS CHRIST 


But not only did Jesus Christ have a human 
parentage, He had a human physical nature, a hu- 
man body. This comes out in the first of our 
texts, ‘‘The Word Became Flesh,’’ and in Hebrews 
2:14 we are taught ‘‘Since then the children are 
sharers in flesh and blood, he also (i.e, our Lord 
Jesus also) himself in like manner partook of the 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 97 


same; that through death he might bring to 
naught him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil.’’ Words could not make it plainer that 
our Lord Jesus had a real human body, a real bu- 
man physical nature. Indeed, the Apostle John 
teaches us in 1 John 4:2, 3, that not to believe in 
the actuality of His human body, is a mark of the 
Anti-Christ. He says, ‘‘Hereby know ye the Spirit. 
of God: every spirit that confesseth that Jesus 
Christ is come in the flesh is of God: and every 
spirit that confesseth not Jesus is not of God: and 
this is the spirit of the anti-Christ, whereof ye 
have heard that it cometh; and now it is in the 
world already.’’ There were those in John’s day 
who denied the reality of Jesus’ human nature, 
who asserted that His body. was only a seeming or 
apparent body, that it was an illusion, or as the 
Christian Scientists now put it, ‘‘mortal thought,’’ 
and John, speaking in the wisdom and power of 
the Holy Ghost, asserts that this doctrine is a 
mark of the Anti-Christ. It is the one supreme 
mark to-day, that ‘‘Christian Science’’ is of the 
Anti-Christ. 

Jesus Christ not only had a human body during 
His life here upon earth, but after His resurrec- 
tion He still had a human body. The Millennial 
Dawnists (Pastor-Russellites) teach us that this. 
is not so; that, whereas before His incarnation He 
was wholly a spiritual being, that at His incarna- 
tion He became wholly a human being, and that 
since His death and resurrection He is wholly a 


98 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


divine being: all of which is not Scriptural, and 
therefore is not true. He himself said after His 
resurrection, ‘‘See my hands and my feet, that it 
is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath 
not flesh and bones, as ye behold me have. And 
when he said this, he showed them his hands and 
his feet’’ (Luke 24:39, 40). And to Thomas in 
John 20:27, after Thomas had doubted the reality 
of His resurrection, He said, ‘‘Reach hither thy 
finger, and see my hands; and reach hither thy 
hand, and put it into my side: and be not faithless 
but believing.’’ Not only after His resurrection 
while stil] here on earth did He have a real hu- 
man body, but He still has a human body in the 
glory. In that wonderful view into heaven that 
was given to Stephen at the time he was stoned 
and killed we read in Acts 7:55, 56, ‘‘But he, being 
full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into 
heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus 
standing on the right hand of God, and said, Be- 
hold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man 
standing on the right hand of God.’’ And when 
He comes again to take His rightful authority on 
this earth, He shall come with a human body, com- 
ing as ‘‘the Son of Man.’’ He Himself said to the 
High Priest when He stood before him on trial, in 
Matt. 26:64, ‘‘Nevertheless I say unto you, hence- 
forth ye shall see the son of man standing at the 
right hand of power and coming in the clouds of 
heaven.’’ In this utterance of our Lord we have 
a declaration of His Deity, but an equally clear 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 99 


declaration that He was a real man, and that He 
will come again as a man with a human, though 
glorified body. Indeed, we are told in Phil. 1:20, 
21 that when He does thus come, He 1s going to 
transform these our present human bodies, the 
bodies of our present humiliation, into the likeness 
of His own glorious body, His glorified human 
body. 


OI. SUBJECT TO HUMAN LIMITATIONS 


But the reality and completeness of our Lord’s 
human nature comes out not only in the fact that 
He had a human parentage and a human body: we 
are also clearly taught that, while as God he pos- 
sessed all the attributes and exercised all the of- 
fices of Deity, as a man He was subject to human 
limitations. 

1. He was subject to the physical limitations 
which are essential to humanity. In John 4:6 we 
read that Jesus Christ was weary. The words 

e ‘‘Jesus, therefore, being wearied with his 
journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about 
the sixth hour.’’ But God is never weary. We 
read explicitly in Isa. 40:28 ‘‘Hast thou not 
known? Hast thou not heard? The everlasting 
God, Jehovah, the creator of the ends of the earth, 
fainteth not, neither is weary.’’ 

We are told in Matt. 8:24 that Jesus Christ 
slept. But God never sleeps. We read in Ps. 
121:4, 5, ‘‘Behold he that keepeth Israel shall 


100 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


neither slumber nor sleep. Jehovah is thy keeper: 
Jehovah is thy shade upon thy right hand.’’ By. 
comparison of these two verses, we see distinctly 
that Jehovah never sleeps. Yet Jesus did sleep, 
so while He was Jehovah, He was not Jehovah 
only. He was man as truly as He was God. 

In Matt. 21:18 we read that Jesus Christ hum- 
gered; in John 19:28 we read that Jesus Christ 
thirsted; in Luke 22:44 we read that Jesus Christ 
suffered physical agony, His agony was so great 
that He was on the point of dying with agony; 
and in 1 Cor. 15:3 we read that ‘‘Christ died,’’ 
that His death is an essential part of the Gospel. 
Paul says in this passage, ‘‘For I delivered unto 
you first of all that which I received, how that 
Christ died for our sins according to the scrip- 
tures.’’ It was no merely apparent death, it was 
a real death. It was no ‘‘illusion.’’ Our salva- 
tion depends on the reality of His death. ‘‘Chris- 
tian Science’’ cuts the very heart out of the Gos- 
pel. We are oftentimes asked was it the human 
nature of Jesus Christ that died or was it the di- 
vine nature that died. It was neither the one nor 
the other, natures do not die, a person dies. It 
was Jesus who died, the Person who was at once 
God and man. We are told in so many words in 
1 Cor. 2:8, that they ‘‘Crucified the Lord of glory,’’ 
and we saw in the last chapter that the ‘‘Lord of 
Glory’’ is unquestionably a divine title. It was 
the one Person Jesus who was.at once human and 
divine, who died upon the cross of Calvary. 


Jesus Christ a Real Man IOI 


2. He was also, as a man subject to wtellec- 
tual and moral lumitations. 

We read in Luke 2:52, ‘‘Jesus advanced in wis- 
dom and stature and in favour with God and man.’’ 
As we are told here that He grew in wisdom, He 
must have been more perfect in wisdom after He 
grew than He was before He grew, and as He grew 
in favour with God and man, He must have at- 
tained to a higher type of moral perfection when 
He grew than He had attained to before He grew. 
While in the Babe of Bethlehem God was incar- 
nate, nevertheless He was a real babe and grew 
not only in stature, but in wisdom and in favour 
with God and man. As a man He was limited in 
knowledge, He Himself says in Mark 13:32, ‘‘But 
of that day and that hour (i.e, the day and the 
hour of His own return) knoweth no man; no, not 
the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son 
but the Father.’’ Of course, His knowledge was 
self-limited: to set an example for you and me to 
follow in His steps, He voluntarily as man put 
away His knowledge of the time of His own re- 
turn. 

Furthermore still, we are definitely and ex- 
plicitly taught in Heb. 4:15 that Jesus Christ was 
‘‘In all points tempted like as we are.’’ But in 
bearing this in mind as being clear and complete 
proof of the reality of His humanity, not only 
physical but mental and moral, we should also 
bear in mind what is stated in the same verse, 
that He was tempted ‘‘ Apart from Sin,’’ ie., that. 


102 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


there was not the slightest taint or tinge of sin in 
His temptation, not one moment’s yielding to it 
in thought or desire or act. Nevertheless, He was 
tempted and overcame temptation in the same 
way that we may overcome it, by the Word of God 
and prayer. He Himself voluntarily placed Him- 
self under the essential moral limitations that man 
is under in order to redeem man. 

3. He was also, as aman, subject to imitations 
an the way in which He obtained power and m 
which He exercised power. Jesus Christ obtained 
the power for the Divine work that He did while 
here upon earth, not by His incarnate Deity, but 
by prayer. We read in Mark 1:35, ‘‘And in the 
morning, a great while before day, he rose up and 
went out, and departed unto a desert place, and 
there prayed.’’ And we read also that before He 
raised Lazarus from the dead, called him forth 
from the tomb by His Word, that He lifted up His 
eyes to God and said, ‘‘Father, I thank thee that 
thou heardest me,’’ showing conclusively that the 
power by which He raised Lazarus from the dead 
was not His inherent, inborn, Divine power, but 
was power obtained by prayer. It 1s mentioned 
not less than twenty-five times that He prayed. 
He obtained power for work and for moral victory 
as other men do, by prayer. He was subject to 
human conditions for obtaining what He desired. 
He obtained power for the divine works and mir- 
acles which he wrought by the anointing of the 
Holy Spirit. We read in Acts 10:38, that ‘‘God 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 103 


anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost . 
and with power: who went about doing good, and 
healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for 
God was with him.’’ And we are taught, further- 
more, that He was subject during the days of His 
humiliation to limitations in the exercise of power. 
He himself said just before His crucifixion and 
subsequent glorification, in John 14:12, ‘‘Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me, the 
works that I do shall he do also; and greater works 
than these shall he do; for I go unto my Father,’’ 
the evident meaning of which is, that during the 
days of His flesh there was a limitation to His ex- 
ercise of power, but after His glorification, when 
He was glorified with the Father with the glory 
which He had with Him since the world was, there 
would be no limitations to the exercise of His 
pewer, and therefore, that we, being united, not 
to our Lord Jesus in His humiliation, but in His 
exaltation and restoration to His divine glory, 
will do greater works than he did during the 
days of His humiliation. 


Iv. THE HUMAN RELATION OF JESUS CHRIST TO GOD 


The completeness of the humanity of Jesus 
Christ comes out in still another matter, and that 
is, the relation that He bore to God as a man was 
the relation of a man, so that God was His God. 
He himself says to Mary in John 20:17, ‘Touch 
me not; for I am not yet ascended unto the father: 


104 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


but go unto my brethren, and say to them, I as- 
cend unto my Father and your Father, and my God 
and your God.’’ The evident meaning of this is 
that Jesus Christ’s relation to God, the Father, 
was the relation of man. He speaks of God the 
Father as ‘‘My God.’’ Though possessed of all 
the attributes and exercising all the functions of 
Deity, Jesus Christ the Son was subordinate to 
the Father. This explains utterances of our Lord 
which have puzzled many who believe in His Deity, 
such utterances, for example, as that in John 14:28, 
where Jesus says, ‘‘Ye have heard how I said unto 
you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye 
loved me ye would rejoice, because I said, I go 
unto the Father: For my Father is greater than I.’’ 
The question is often asked, ‘‘If Jesus Christ is 
God, how could the Father be greater than He?’’ 
The very simple answer to which is; that He, as 
the Son, was subordinate to the Father, equal to 
the Father in the possession of all the distinctive- 
ly Divine attributes and exercising all the Divine 
offices, and as an object of our wholehearted wor- 
ship, but subordinate to the Father in His office. 
Jesus Christ’s relation to the Father is like the 
relation of the wife to the husband in this respect, 
that the wife may be fully the equal of the hus- 
band, but nevertheless, the ‘‘Head of the Woman 
is the Man,’’ she is subordinate to the man, just 
as we are told in the same verse (1 Cor. 11:12) 
‘‘The head of Christ is God,’’ i.e., Jesus Christ 
the Son is subordinate to the Father. 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 106 


It is evident from what we have read from God’s 
Word, that Jesus Christ in every respect was a 
true man, a real man, a complete man. He was 
made ‘‘In all things’’ ‘‘like unto his brethren’’ 
(cf. Heb. 2:17). He was subject to all the physi- 
cal, mental and moral conditions of existence es- 
sential to human nature. He was in every respect 
a real man. He became so voluntarily in order to 
redeem men. From all eternity He had existed 
‘‘in the form of God’’ and could have remained 
‘in the form of God,’’ but if He had so remained, 
we would have been lost. Therefore, out of love to 
us, the fallen race, as we are taught in one of our 
texts (Phil. 2:5-8), He ‘‘Counted not the being on 
an equality with God a thing to be grasped, but 
emptied himself, taking the form of a.servant, be- 
ing made in the likeness of man; and being found 
in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, becoming 
obedient even unto death, yea, the death of the 
cross.’’ Oh, wondrous love! that out of love to us 
He should take our nature upon Him, turning His 
back upon the glory that had been His from all 
eternity and taking upon Himself all the shame 
and suffering that was involved in our redemp- 
tion, and becoming one of us that He might die for 
us and redeem us! Oh, how wondrous the ‘‘Grace 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was rich 
yet for our sakes He became poor, that we through 
his poverty might becomerich.’’ (2Cor.8:9.) He 
partook of human nature that we might become 
partakers of the Divine nature. The philosophy 


| 


106 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


of the divine and human natures of Christ, the 
philosophy of the New Testament, is a most won- 
derful philosophy, the most wonderful philosophy 
the world ever heard, and thank God it is a true 
philosophy. 

But some one may ask, ‘‘ How shall we reconcile 
the Bible doctrine of the true Deity of Jesus 
Christ with the Bible doctrine of the real human 
nature of Jesus Christ, the doctrine that He was 
real God with the doctrine that He was equally 
truly man?’’ The answer to this is very simple. 
Reconciling doctrines is not our main business. 
Our first business is to find out what the various 
passages in the Bible mean, taken in their natural, 
grammatical interpretation. Then, if we can rec- 
oncile them, well and good; if not, we should still 
believe them both and leave the reconciliation of 
the two apparently conflicting doctrines to our 
increasing knowledge as we go on communing 
with God and studying His Word. It is an utterly 
foolish and vicious principle of Biblical interpre-. 
tation that we must interpret every passage of the 
Bible so that we can readily reconcile it with every 
other passage. It is this principle of interpreta- 
tion that gives rise to a one-sided, and therefore 
untrue, theology. One man, for example, takes 
the Calvinistic passages in the Bible and believes 
them and twists and distorts the other passages; 
that teach the freedom of man, to make them fit 
with those that teach the sovereignty of God, and 
he becomes a one-sided Calvinist. Another man 


Jesus Christ a Real Man ____ 107 


sees only those passages that clearly teach man’s 
power of self-determination and seeks to twist all 
that teach the sovereignty of God and the fore- 
ordaining wisdom and will of God to fit into his 
ideas, and he becomes a one-sided Arminian, and 
so on through the whole gamut of doctrine. It is 
utter foolishness, to say nothing of presumption, 
to thus handle the Word of God deceitfully. Our 
business is to find out the plainly intended sense 
of a passage that we are studying, as determined 
by the usage of words, grammatical construction 
and context; and when we have found out the 
plainly intended meaning, believe it whether we 
can reconcile it with something else that we have 
found out and believe, or not. We should always 
remember that in many cases two truths, both 
clearly true, that at one time seemed utterly irre- 
concilable or flatly contradictory to one another, 
are now, with our increased knowledge seen to 
beautifully harmenise. So we should have no dif- 
ficulty in recognising the fact that truths that still 
seem to us to be contradictory, do now perfectly 
harmonise in the infinite wisdom of God, and will 
some day perfectly harmonise to our minds when 
we approach more nearly to God’s omniscience. 
The Bible, in the most fearless way, puts the ab- 
solute Deity of Jesus Christ in closest juxtaposi- 
tion with the real manhood of Jesus Christ. For 
example, we read in Matt. 8:24, ‘‘And behold, 
there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch 
that the boat was covered with the waves; but He 


108 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


(Jesus) was asleep.’’ Here we have a plain state- 
ment of the real manhood of our Lord, but two 
verses later, in the 26th verse, we read, ‘‘And He 
saith unto them, why are ye fearful, O ye of little 
faith? Then He arose, and rebuked the winds and 
the sea, and there was a great calm.’’ Here we 
have a clear shining forth of His Deity, even the 
winds and the waves subject to His word. No 
wonder the disciples asked one another, ‘‘'What 
manner of man is this that even the winds and the 
sea obey him?’’ (Matt. 8:27). The answer is plain: 
a Divine Man. 

Again we read in Luke 3:21, ‘‘Now it came to 
pass, when all the people were baptised, that Jesus 
also having been baptised, and praying,.. .’’ 
Here we see Jesus in His humanity, baptised and 
praying. Surely this is a man. But in the re- 
mainder of the verse and in the next verse we read, 
‘*And the heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit 
descended in a bodily form, as a dove, upon him, 
and @ voice came out of heaven, Thou art my be- 
loved Son; in thee I am well pleased.’’ Here God 
with an audible voice declares Him to be Divine, 
to be His Son. Again in John 11:38 we read, 
‘‘ Jesus, therefore, again groaning in himself com- 
eth to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone 
laid against it.’’ Here we see Jesus in His hu- 
manity, but four verses further down, the 43rd 
and 44th verses, we read, ‘‘And when He had thus 
spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 109 


forth. And he that was dead came forth.’’ Here 
again his Deity shines forth. 

In Luke 9:28 we read, ‘‘And it came to pass 
about eight days after these sayings, that he took 
with him Peter and John and James, and went up 
into the mountain to pray.’’ Here we very clearly 
see His humanity, His limitation, His dependence 
upon God; but in the very next verse, the 29th 
verse, we read, ‘‘And as He was praying the fash- 
ion of his countenance was altered and His rai- 
ment became white and glistering.’’ Here we see 
His Divinity shining forth, and then again in the 
35th verse, we read of the voice coming out of the 
cloud, saying, ‘‘This is my son, my chosen; hear 
ye him.’’ Here His Deity unmistakably is seen 
again. | 

In Matt. 16:16, 17, we read, ‘‘And Simon Peter 
answered and said, thou art the Christ, the son of 
the living God. And Jesus answered and said 
unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for 
flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but 
my father who is in heaven.’’ Here is a clear 
declaration by Jesus Himself of His Deity. But 
four verses further down in the chapter, the 24th 
verse, we read, ‘‘From that time began Jesus to 
show unto his disciples that he must go up unto 
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders 
and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the 
third day rise from the dead.’’ Here we have the 
clearest declaration of the reality and complete- 
ness of His humanity. 


110 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


In Heb. 1:6, we read of our Lord Jesus, ‘‘And 
when He (i.e., God the Father) again bringeth in 
the first-begotten into the world he saith, and let 
all the angels of God worship him.’’ Here is a 
most unmistakable and inescapable declaration 
that Jesus Christ is a Divine Person, to be wor- 
shipped as God by angels as well as men, and two 
verses further down we read this further decla- 
ration of His absolute Deity, ‘‘But of the son he 
saith, Thy throne O God, is for ever and ever.’’ 
Here again the Son is declared in so many words 
to be God, He is called God. But in the very next 
chapter, Heb. 2:18, we read, ‘‘For in that He him- 
self hath suffered being tempted, He is able to suc- 
cor them that are tempted.’’ Here we have the 
clearest possible declaration of the reality of His 
human nature. 

In Heb. 4:14 we read, ‘‘Having then a great high 
priest, who hath passed through the heavens, Jesus 
the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession.’’ 
Here we have a plain declaration of His Deity; 
but in the very next verse, we read, ‘‘For we have 
not an high priest that cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities; but one that hath 
been in all points tempted like as we are, yet with- 
out sin.’’ One of the plainest declarations of the 
fullness and completeness of His humanity to be 
found in the Bible. 

The doctrine of the Deity of Jesus Christ and 
the doctrine that Jesus Christ was a real man, go 
hand in hand in the Bible. What kind of a 


Jesus Christ a Real Man 6 


Saviour, what kind of a Lord Jesus, do you believe © 
in? Do you believe in a Saviour that is a man 
and man only? Then you do not believe in the 
Saviour that is presented in the Bible. On the 
other hand, do you believe in a Saviour that is 
God and God only? Then you do not believe in 
the Saviour of the Bible. The Lord Jesus, our 
Lord and Saviour, presented to us in the Bible, 
is very God of very God and at the same time He 
is our brother, our fellowman, and is not ashamed 
to call us brethren. Oh, I thank God that I have 
a Saviour that is God, possessed of all the at- 
tributes and powers of Deity, all the perfections 
of Deity, a Saviour for whom nothing is too hard. 
I thank God that my Saviour is One who made 
the heavens and the earth, and who holds all the 
powers of nature and of history in His control; 
but I equally thank God that my Saviour is my 
brother man, One who was tempted in all points 
like as I am, One who is in a position to bear my 
sins, on the one hand because He is God, on the 
other hand because He is man. A merely di- 
vine Saviour could not be a Saviour for me. A 
merely human Saviour could not be a Saviour 
for me. But a Saviour in whom Deity and hu- 
manity meet; a Saviour who is at once God and 
man, is just the Saviour I need, and the Saviour 
that you need, a Saviour that is able to save to 
the uttermost all that come unto God through 
Him. 


VI 


THe PrersonaLiry oF THE Hoty Sprait 


‘“The Communion of the Holy Ghost.’’—2 Cor. 13:14. 


UR subject this morning is ‘‘The Person- 

ality of the Holy Spirit.’’ No series of 

sermons upon the Fundamentals of our 
Christian faith would be complete without a ser- 
mon on the Personality and Deity of the Holy 
Spirit. The doctrine of the Personality of the 
Holy Spirit is both fundamental and vital. Any 
one who does not know the Holy Spirit as a per- 
son has not attained to a complete and well-round- 
ed Christian experience. Any one who knows God 
the Father and God the Son, but who does not 
know God the Holy Spirit has not attained unto 
the Christian conception of God, nor to a fully 
Christian experience. It may seem to you at first 
thought as if the doctrine of the Personality of 
the Holy Spirit were a purely technical and ap- 
parently impractical doctrine, but it is not so. As 
we shall see shortly, the doctrine of the Person- 
ality of the Holy Spirit is a doctrine of the very 
first practical importance. 

112 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 113 


I. THE IMPORTANCE OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE PER- 
SONALITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 


1. The Doctrine of the Personality of the Holy 
Spirit 1s of the highest vmportance from the stand- 
pont of worshp. If the Holy Spirit is a person 
and a Divine Person, and He is, and if we do not 
know Him as such, if we think of the Holy Spirit 
only as an impersonal influence or power, then we 
are robbing a Divine Person of the worship which 
is His due, and the love which is His due, and 
the confidence and surrender and obedience which 
are His due. And may I stop at this point to ask 
each one of you, ‘‘Do you worship the Holy 
Spirit?’’ Theoretically we all do, every time we 
sing the long metre Doxology, 


‘<Praise God from whom all blessings flow, 
Praise Him all creatures here below. 
Praise Him above, ye heavenly hosts, 
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.’’ 


Theoretically we all do every time we sing the 
Gloria Patri: ‘‘Glory be to the Father and to 
the Son and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in the 
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world with- 
out end. Amen.’’ But it is one thing to do a 
thing theoretically and quite another thing to ac- 
tually do it. It is one thing to sing words, quite 
another thing to realise the meaning and the force 
of the words that you sing. I had a striking illus- 


114 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


tration of this some years ago. I was going to 
a Bible Conference in New York State. I had to 
pass through a city four miles from the grounds 
where the Conference was held. I had a relative 
living in that city and on the way to the Confer- 
ence stopped to call upon my relative, who went 
with me to the Conference. This relative was a 
Christian, she was much older than I, had been a 
Christian much longer than I, a member of the 
Presbyterian Church, brought up on the Shorter 
Catechism, and thoroughly orthodox. I spoke 
that morning at the Conference on the Personality 
of the Holy Spirit. When the address was over, 
we were waiting on the veranda of the hotel for 
the trolley to take us back to the city. My rela- 
tive turned to me and said, ‘‘Archie, I never 
thought of zt before as a person.’’ Well, I had 
never thought of 1t as a person, but thank God I 
had come to know Him as a person. 

2. In the second place, it is of the highest wm- 
portance from. a practical standpomt that we 
know the Holy Spirit as a person. If you think 
of the Holy Spirit, as so many even among Chris- 
tian people do, as a mere influence or power, then 
your thought will be, ‘‘How can I get hold of the 
Holy Spirit and use it.’’ But if you think of Him 
in the Biblical way as a Divine person, your 
thought will be, ‘‘How can the Holy Spirit get 
hold of me and use me?’’ Is there no difference 
between the thought of man, the worm, using God 
to thresh the mountain, or God using man, the 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 115 


worm, to thresh the mountain? The former con- 
ception is heathenish, it does not differ essen- 
tially from the conception of the African fetich 
worshipper who uses his god. The latter con- 
ception, of God the Holy Ghost getting hold of 
and using us, is lofty and Christian. If you 
think of the Holy Spirit merely as an influence or 
power, your thought will be, ‘‘How can I get more 
of the Holy Spirit?’’ But if you think of Him in 
the Biblical way as a person, your thought will be, 
‘‘How can the Holy Spirit get more of me?’’ The 
former conception, the conception of the Holy 
Spirit as a mere influence or power, inevitably 
leads to self-confidence, to self-exaltation, to the 
parade of self. If you think of the Holy Spirit 
as an influence or power and then fancy that you 
have received the Holy Spirit, the inevitable re- 
sult will be that you will strut around as if you be- 
longed to a superior order of Christians. I re- 
member a woman who came to me one afternoon 
at the Northfield Bible Conference at the close of 
an address and said to me, ‘‘Brother Torrey, I 
want to ask you a question; but before I do, I 
want you to understand that I am a Holy Ghost 
woman.’’ It made me shudder. It did not sound 
like it. But on the other hand, if you think of the 
Holy Spirit in the Biblical way as a Divine Per- 
son of infinite majesty, who comes to dwell in our 
hearts and take possession of us and use us, it 
leads to self-renunciation, self-abnegation, self-hu- 
miliation. I know of no thought that is more cal- 


116 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


culated to put one in the dust and keep one in the 
dust than this great Biblical truth of the Holy 
Ghost as a Divine Person coming to take up His 
dwelling in our hearts, and to take possession 
of our lives and to use us. 

3. The doctrine of the personality of the Holy 
Spirit is of the highest umportance from the stand- 
point of experience. Thousands and tens of thou- 
sands of Christian men and women can testify to 
an entire transformation of their experience 
through coming to know the Holy Spirit as a per- 
son. In fact, this address upon the Personality of 
the Holy Spirit which, for substance, I have given 
in almost every city in which I have ever held a 
series of meetings, is in some respects apparently 
the most abstruse and technical subject that I ever 
attempted to handle before a popular audience, 
and yet, notwithstanding that fact, more men and 
women have come to me at the close of the ad- 
dress and more have written to me, testifying of 
personal blessing received, than of any other ad- 
dress which God has permitted me to give. 


II, FOUR LINES OF PROOF OF THE PERSONALITY OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT 


There are four separate and distinct lines of 
proof of the Personality of the Holy Spirit. 

1. The first line of proof of the Personality of 
the Holy Spirit is that all the distinctive marks or 
characteristics of personality are ascribed to the 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 117 


Holy Spirit in the Bible. What are the distinc- 
tive characteristics of personality? Knowledge, 
feeling and will. Any being who knows and feels 
and wills is a person. Oftentimes when you say 
that the Holy Spirit is a person, people under- 
stand you to mean that the Holy Spirit has hands 
and feet and fingers and toes and eyes and ears 
and nose and mouth, and so on. But these are not 
the marks of personality, these are the marks of 
corporeity. Any being who knows, thinks and 
wills is a person whether he have a body or not. 
Now all these characteristics of personality are 
ascribed to the Holy Spirit in the Bible. 

(1) Turn in your Bibles to 1 Cor. 2:11. ‘‘For 
what man knoweth the things of a man, save the 
spirit of man which isin him? Even so the things 
of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.’’ 
Here knowledge is ascribed to the Holy Spirit, 
The Holy Spirit in other words, is not a mere illu- 
mination that comes to your mind and mine where- 
by our minds are cleared and strengthened to see 
truth that they would not otherwise discover. The 
Holy Spirit is a Person who Himself knows the 
things of God and reveals to us what He Himself 
knows. 

(2) Now turn to 1 Cor. 12:11: ‘‘But all these 
worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing 
to every man severally as He will.’’ Here will is 
ascribed to the Holy Spirit. The thought clearly 
is that the Holy Spirit is not a divine power that 
we get hold of and use according to our will, but 


118 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


that the Holy Spirit is a person who gets hold of 
us and uses us according to His will. This is one 
of the most fundamental facts in regard to the 
Holy Spirit that we must bear in mind if we are to 
get into right relations to Him. More people are 
going astray at this point than almost any other. 
They are trying to get hold of some divine power 
which they can use according to their will. I do 
thank God that there is no divine power that I 
can get hold of and use according to my will. 
What could I, in my foolishness and ignorance, 
do with a divine power, what evil I might work! 
But on the other hand, I am still more glad that 
while there is no divine power that I can get hold 
of and use according to my foolish will, there is 
a Divine Person who can get hold of me and use 
me according to His infinitely wise and loving 

(3) Turn now to Rom. 8:27. ‘‘And he that 
searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of 
the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the 
saints according to the will of God.’’ What I wish 
you to notice here is expression, ‘‘the mind of the 
Spirit.’’ The Greek word here translated ‘‘mind’’ 
is a comprehensive word that has in it the ideas 
of both thought and purpose. It is the same word 
which is used in the 7th verse of the chapter where 
we read, ‘‘The mind of the flesh is enmity against 
God,’’ where the thought is that not merely the 
thought of the flesh is against God, but the whole 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 119 


moral and intellectual life of the flesh is enmity 
against God. 

(4) We now turn to a most remarkable pass- 
age—Rom. 15:30. ‘‘Now I beseech you, brethren, 
for the Lord Jesus Christ’s sake, and for the love 
of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in 
your prayers to God for me.’’ What I wish you to 
notice in this verse are the words ‘‘ The love of the 
Spirit.’’ It is a wonderful thought. It teaches 
us that the Holy Spirit is not a mere blind influ- 
ence or power, no matter how beneficent, that 
comes into our hearts and lives, but that He is a 
Divine Person, loving us with the tenderest love. 
I wonder how many of us have ever thought much 
regarding ‘‘the love of the Spirit.’’ I wonder 
how many of us ministers who are here to-day 
have ever preached a sermon on the love of the 
Spirit. I wonder how many of you have ever 
heard a sermon on the love of the Spirit. Every 
day of your life you kneel down before God the 
Father, at least I hope you do, and say, ‘‘ Heavenly 
Father, I thank thee for thy great love that led 
thee to give thy Son to come down to this world 
and die upon the cross of Calvary in my place.’’ 
Every day of your life you kneel down and look 
up into the face of Jesus Christ the Son and say, 
‘<Thou blessed Son of God, I thank thee for that 
great love of thine that led thee to come down to 
this world in obedience to the Father and die in 
my place upon the cross of Calvary.’’ But did 
you ever kneel down and look up to the Holy 


120 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Spirit and say to him, ‘‘Holy Spirit, I thank thee 
for that great love of thine’? And yet we owe 
our salvation as truly to the love of the Holy 
Spirit as we do to the love of the Father and the 
love of the Son. If it had not been for the love 
of God the Father to me, looking down upon me 
in my lost estate, yes, anticipating my fall and 
ruin and sending His Son down to this world to 
die upon the cross, to die in my place, I would 
have been in hell to-day. If it had not been for 
the love of Jesus Christ, the Son, coming down to 
this world in obedience to the Father to lay down 
His life, a perfect atoning sacrifice on the cross 
of Cavalry in my stead, I would have been in 
hell to-day. But if it had not been for the love of 
the Holy Spirit to me, coming down to this world 
in obedience to the Father and the Son, seeking 
me out in my lost condition, following me day 
after day, and week after week, and month after 
month, and year after year, when 1 would not 
listen to Him, when I deliberately turned my back 
upon Him, when I insulted Him, following me 
into places where it must have been agony for 
One so holy to go, following me day after day, 
week after week, month after month, year after 
year, until at last He succeeded in bringing me to 
my senses and bringing me to realise my utterly 
lost condition and revealed the Lord Jesus to me 
as just the Saviour I needed and induced me and 
enabled me to receive the Lord Jesus as my Sa- 
viour and my Lord; if it had not been for this 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 121 


patient, long-suffering, never-wearying love of the 
Spirit of God to me, I would have been in hell to- 
day. 

(5) Turn now to a passage in the Old Testa- 
ment. Neh. 9:20. ‘‘Thou gavest also thy good 
Spirit to instruct them, and withheldest not thy 
manna from their mouth, and gavest them water 
for their thirst.’’ Here both intelligence and good- 
ness are ascribed to the Holy Spirit. This pas- 
sage does not add anything to the thought that we 
have already had: I brought it in simply because 
it is from the Old Testament. There are those 
who say that the doctrine of the Personality of 
the Holy Spirit is in the New Testament, but is 
not in the Old Testament; but here we find it as 
clearly in the Old Testament as in the New. Of 
course, we do not find it as frequently in the Old 
Testament as in the New, for this is the dispensa- 
tion of the Holy Spirit: but the doctrine of the 
Personality of the Holy Spirit is there in the Old 
Testament. There are many who say that the doc- 
trine of the Trinity is not in the Old Testament, 
that while it is in the New, it is not in the Old. 
But it is in the Old, in the very first chapter of the 
Bible. In Gen. 1:26 we read, ‘‘And God said, let 
us make man in our image, after our likeness.’’ 
Here the plurality of the persons in the Godhead 
comes out clearly. God did not say, ‘‘Z will’’ or 
‘‘Let me make man in my image.’’ He said, ‘‘ Let 
us Make man in owr image, after our like- 
ness.’’ The three persons of the Trinity are found 


122 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


in the first three verses of the Bible: ‘‘In the be- 
ginning God created the heaven and the earth.’’ 
‘here you have God the Father. ‘‘And the earth 
was without form and void; and darkness was 
upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God 
moved upon the face of the waters.’’ There you 
have the Holy Spirit. ‘‘And God said,’’ there you 
have the Word, ‘‘Let there be light: and there 
was light.’’ Here we have the three persons of 
the Trinity in the first three verses of the Bible. 
In fact the doctrine of the Trinity is found hun- 
dreds of times in the Old Testament. In the He- 
brew Bible it occurs in every. place where you 
find the word God in your English Bible, for the 
Hebrew word for God is a plural noun. Literally 
translated, it would be ‘‘Gods’’ and not God. In 
the very passage to which the Unitarians and the 
Jews, who reject the Deity of Christ, refer so often 
as proving conclusively that the Deity of Christ 
cannot be true, namely Deut. 6:4, the very doc- 
trine that they are seeking to disprove is found; 
for Deut. 6:4 literally translated would read 
‘‘Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our Gods is one Je- 
hovah,’’ Why did the Hebrews with their intense 
monotheism, use a plural name for God? This 
was the question that puzzled the Hebrew gram- 
marians and lexicographers, and the best explana- 
tion they could arrive at was that the plural for 
God here used was the pluralis majestatis, the 
plural of majesty. The explanation is entirely in- 
adequate, to say nothing of the fact that the 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 123 


pluralis majestatis in the Old Testament is a fig- 
ure of very doubtful validity. There is another 
explanation far nearer at hand, and far more ade- 
quate and satisfactory, and that is that the He- 
brew inspired writers use a plural name for God 
in spite of their intense monotheism, because there 
is a plurality of persons in the one Godhead. 

(6) Now turn to Eph. 4:30. ‘‘And grieve not 
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed un- 
to the day of redemption.’’ Here grief is ascribed 
to the Holy Spirit. In other words, the Holy 
Spirit is not a mere blind impersonal influence or 
power that comes to dwell in your heart and mine, 
but a person, a person who loves us, a person who 
is holy and intensely sensitive against sin, a per- 
son who recoils from sin in what we call its slight- 
est forms as the holiest woman of earth never 
recoiled from sin in its grossest and most repul- 
sive forms. And He sees whatever we do, He 
hears whatever we say, He sees our very thoughts, 
not a vagrant fancy is allowed a moment’s lodg- 
ment in our mind but what He sees it. And if 
there is anything impure, unholy, immodest, un- 
true, false, censorious, or unChristlike in any way, 
He is grieved beyong expression. This is a won- 
derful thought and it is to me the mightiest incen- 
tive that I know to a Christian walk. How many 
a young man is kept back from doing things that 
he would otherwise do, by the thought that, if he 
did do that, his mother might hear of it and it 
would grieve her beyond expression. How many 


124 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


a young man has come to the great city and in 
some hour of temptation has been about to go into 
a place that no self-respecting man ought ever to 
enter, but just as his hand is on the doorknob 
and he is about to open the door, the thought 
comes to him, ‘‘If I should enter there mother 
might hear of it, and if she did, it would nearly 
kill her,’’? and he has turned away without en- 
tering; but there is One holier than the holiest 
mother that any of us ever knew, One who loves 
us with a tenderer love than our own mother loves 
us, and Who sees everything we do, not only in 
the daylight but under the cover of night; Who 
hears every word we utter, every careless word 
that escapes our lips; Who sees every thought we 
entertain, yes, Who sees every fleeting fancy that 
we allow a moment’s lodgment in our mind; and 
if there is anything unholy, impure, immodest, in- 
decorous, unkind, harsh, censorious or unchrist- 
like in any way in act or word or thought, He sees 
it and is grieved beyond expression. Oh, how 
often there has come into my mind some thought 
or imagination, I know not from what source, but. 
that I ought not to entertain, and just as I was 
about to give it lodgment, the thought has come, 
‘“The Holy Spirit sees that and will be grieved 
by it,’’ and the thought has gone. Bearing this 
thought of the Holy Spirit in our mind will help 
us to solve all the questions that perplex the young 
believer to-day. For example, the question, 
‘Ought I as a Christian go to the theatre or the 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 125 


movies?’’ Well, if you go the Holy Spirit will 
go; for He dwells in the heart of every believer 
and goes wherever the believer goes. Were you 
ever at a theatre or at a moving picture show in 
your life where you thought the atmosphere of 
the place would be congenial to the Holy Spirit? 
If not, don’t go. Ought I as a Christian go to 
the dance? Well, here again, if you go, the Holy 
Spirit will surely go. Were you ever at a dance 
in your life where you believed the atmosphere of 
the place would be congenial to the Holy Spirit? 
Shall I as a Christian play cards? Were you 
ever at a card party in all your life, even the most 
select little neighbourhood gathering, or even a 
home gathering to play cards, where you thought 
the atmosphere of the place would be congenial 
to the Holy Spirit? If not, don’t play. So with 
all the questions that come up and that some of 
us find so hard to settle, this thought of the Holy 
Spirit will help you to settle them all, and to set- 
tle them right, if you really desire to settle them 
right and not merely to do the thing that pleases 
yourself, 

2. The second line of proof of the personality 
of the Holy Spirit is that, many actions are 
ascribed to the Holy Spirit that only a person can 
perform. There are many illustrations of this in 
the Bible; but I will limit our consideration this 
morning to three instances. 

(1) Turn again to the 2nd chapter of 1 Corin- 
thians. In the 10th verse, we read, ‘‘But unto us, 


126 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


God revealed them through the Spirit: for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things 
of God.’’ Here the Holy Spirit is represented as 
searching the deep things of God. In other words, 
as we said under our previous heading, the Holy 
Spirit is not a mere illumination whereby our 
minds are made clear and strong to apprehend 
truth that they would not otherwise discover, but 
the Holy Spirit is a person Who Himself searches 
into the deep things of God and reveals to us the 
things which He discovers. Such words could only 
be spoken of a person. 

(2) Now turn to Rom. 8:26 ‘‘And in like man- 
ner the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity: for we 
know not how to pray as we ought but the spirit 
himself maketh intercession for us with groanings 
that cannot be uttered.’’ Here the Holy Spirit is 
represented as doing what only a person can do, 
praying. The Holy Spirit is not a mere influence 
that comes to impel us to prayer, and not a mere 
guidance to us in offering our prayers. He is a 
person who Himself prays. Every believer in 
Christ has two Divine Persons praying for Him. 
First, the Son, our Advocate with the Father, who 
ever liveth to make intercession for us up yonder 
at the right hand of God in the place of power 
(John 2:1 and Heb. 7:25). Second, the Holy 
Spirit who prays through us down here. Oh, what 
a wonderful thought, that we have these two 
divine persons praying for us every day. What 
a sense it gives us of our security. 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 127 


(3) Now turn to two other closely related 
passages. John 14:26. ‘‘But the comforter, even 
the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my 
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring to 
your remembrance all that I have said unto you.’’ 
Here the Holy Spirit is represented as doing what 
only a person could do, namely, teaching. We have 
the same thought in John 16:12-14. I have yet 
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now. Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, 
is come, He shall guide you into all the truth: for 
He shall not speak from Himself; but what things 
soever He shall hear, these shall He speak: and He 
shall declare unto you the things that are to come. 
He shall glorify me; for He shall take of mine, and 
shall declare it unto you.’’ Here again the Holy 
Spirit is represented as a living personal teacher. 
It is our privilege to have the Holy Spirit as a 
living person to-day as our teacher. Every time 
we study our Bibles, it is possible for us to have 
this Divine Person the author of the Book, to in- 
terpret it to us and to teach us its meaning. It 
is a precious thought. How many of us have often 
thought when we heard some great human teacher 
whom God has especially blessed to us, ‘‘Oh, if I 
could only hear that man every day, then I might 
make some progress in my Christian life,’’ but we 
can have a teacher more competent by far than the 
greatest human teacher that ever spoke for our 
teacher every day, the Holy Spirit. 

3. The third line of proof of the personality 


128 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


of the Holy Spirit is that an office is predicated of 
the Holy Spirit that could only be predicated of a 
person. Look for example at John 14:16, 17. 
Here we read, ‘‘And I will pray the Father, and 
He shall give you another Comforter, that He may 
abide with you forever, even the Spirit of truth: 
whom the world cannot receive; for it seeth him 
not. Neither knoweth him: ye know him; for He 
abideth with you, and shall be in you.’’ Here the 
Holy Spirit is represented as another Comforter 
who is coming to take the place of our Lord Jesus. 
Up to this time our Lord Jesus had been the friend 
always at hand to help them in every emergency 
‘that arose. But now He was going and their 
hearts were filled with consternation, and He tells 
them that while He is going, another is coming to 
take His place. Can you imagine our Lord Jesus 
saying this if the other that was coming to take 
His place was a mere impersonal influence or 
power? Can you imagine our Lord Jesus saying 
what He says in John 16:7, ‘‘Nevertheless I tell 
you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go 
away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not 
come unto you; but if I go, I will send him unto 
you,’’ if that which was coming to take His place 
was not another person but a mere influence or 
power. In that case, is it for a moment conceiv- 
able that our Lord could say that it was expedient 
for Him, a Divine Person, to go and a mere influ- 
ence or power, no matter how divine, come to 
take His place? No! No! What our Lord said 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 129 


was that He, one Divine Person, was going, but 
that another Person, just as Divine, was coming 
to take His place. This promise is to me one of 
the most precious promises in the whole Word of 
God for this present dispensation, the thought that 
during the absence of my Lord, until that glad day 
when He shall come back again, another Person, 
just as divine as He, is by my side, yes, dwells in 
- moy heart every moment to commune with me and 
to help me in every emergency that can possibly 
arise. I suppose you know that the Greek word 
translated Comforter in these verses means more 
than Comforter. It means Comforter plus a whole 
lot beside. The Greek word so translated is para- 
kletos. This word is a compound word, com- 
pounded of the word para which means along- 
side, and kletos, one called, ‘‘One called to 
stand alongside another’’ to take his part and help 
him im every emergency that arises. It is the 
same word that is translated ‘‘advocate’’ in 1 
John 2:1, ‘‘If any man sin, we have an advocate 
(parakleton) with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
righteous.’’ But the word ‘‘Advocate’’ does not 
give the full force of the word. Etymologically it 
means about the same. Advocate is a Latin word 
transliterated into the English. The word is com- 
' pounded of two words, ad, meaning to, and vo- 
catus, one called, that 1s to say, one called to 
another to take his part, or to help him. But in 
our English usage it has obtained a restricted 
sense. The Greek word, as already said, means 


130 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


‘‘one called alongside another,’’ and the thought 
is of a helper always at hand with his counsel and 
his strength and any form of help needed. Up to 
this time the Lord Jesus Himself had been their 
Paraclete, or friend always at hand to help. 
Whenever they got into any trouble they simply 
turned to Him. For example, on one occasion they 
were perplexed on the subject of prayer and they 
said to the Lord, ‘‘Lord teach us to pray.’’ And 
He taught them to pray. On another occasion 
when Jesus was coming to them walking on the 
water, when their first fear was over and He had 
said, ‘‘It is I, be not afraid,’’ then Peter said to 
Him, ‘‘Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee 
upon the water.’’ And the Lord said, ‘‘Come.”’ 
Then Peter clambered over the side of the fishing 
smack and commenced to go to Jesus walking on 
the water. Seemingly he turned around, took his 
eyes off the Lord and looked at the fishing smack 
to see if the other disciples, John and James, and 
the rest, were noticing how well he was getting 
on, but no sooner had he got his eyes off the Lord 
than he began to sink, and he cried out saying, 
‘‘Lord, save me,’’ and Jesus reached out His hand 
and held him up. Just so, when they got into any 
other emergency they turned to the Lord and He 
delivered them. But now He was going, and con- ° 
gsternation filled their hearts, and the Lord said 
to them, ‘‘Yes, I am going but another just as 
divine, just as able to help, is coming to take my 
place,’’ and this other Paraclete is with us wher- 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 131 


ever we go, every hour of the day or night. He is 
always by our side. If this thought gets into your 
heart and stays there, you will never have another 
moment of fear no matter how long you live. How 
can we fear in any circumstances, if He is by our 
side? You may be surrounded by a howling mob. 
But what of it if He walks between you and the 
mob? That thought will banish all fear. I had a 
striking illustration of this in my own experience 
some years ago. I was speaking at a Bible Con- 
ference on Lake Kenka in New York State. I 
had a cousin who had a cottage four miles up the 
lake and I went up there and spent my rest day 
with him. The next day he brought me down in 
his steam launch to the pier where the Confer- 
ence was held. As I stepped off the launch onto 
the pier he said to me, ‘‘Come back again to-night 
and spend the night with us,’’ and I promised him 
that I would; but I did not realise what I was 
promising. That night, when the address was 
over as I went out of the hotel and started on my 
walk, I found that I had undertaken a large con- 
tract. The cottage was four miles away, but a 
four mile walk or an eight mile walk was nothing 
under ordinary circumstances, but a storm was 
coming up, the whole heaven was overcast. The 
path led along a bluff bordering the lake, the path 
was near the edge of the bluff. Sometimes the 
lake was perhaps not more than ten or twelve 
feet below, at other times some thirty or forty feet 
below. I had never gone over the path before and 


132 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


as there was no starlight, I couldn’t see the path 
at all. Furthermore, there had already been a 
storm that had gulleyed out deep ditches across 
the path into which one might fall and break his 
leg. I couldn’t see these ditches except when there 
would be a sudden flash of lightning, and then I 
would see one and then it would be darker and I 
blinder than ever. As I walked along this path, so 
near the edge of the bluff with all the furrows cut 
through it, 1 felt it was perilous to take the walk 
and thought of going back; and then the thought 
came to me, ‘‘You promised that you would come 
to-night and they may be sitting up waiting for 
you.’’ Sol felt that I must go on. But it seemed 
creepy and uncanny to walk along the edge of that 
bluff on such an uncertain path that I couldn’t see, 
and could only hear the sobbing and wailing and 
the moaning of the lake at the foot of the bluff as 
it rose in the fast approaching storm. Then the 
thought came to me, what was it you told the peo- 
ple there at the conference about the Holy Spirit 
being a Person always by our side? And I at once 
realised that the Holy Spirit walked between me 
and the edge of the bluff; and that four miles 
through the dark was four miles without a fear, 
a gladsome instead of a fearsome walk. I once 
threw this thought out in the Royal Albert Hall in 
London, one dark dismal February afternoon. 
There was a young lady in the audience who was 
very much afraid of the dark. It simply seemed 
impossible for her to go into a dark room alone. 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 133 


After the meeting was over she hurried home and 
rushed in to the room where her mother was sit- 
ting and cried, ‘‘O mother, I have heard the most 
wonderful address this afternoon about the Holy 
Spirit always being by our side as our ever-pres- 
ent helper and protector. I shall never be afraid 
of the dark again.’’ Her mother was a practical 
English woman and said to her, ‘‘ Well, let us see 
how real that is. Now go upstairs to the top 
floor, into the dark room, and shut the door and 
stay in there alone in the dark.’’ The daughter 
went bounding up the stairs, went into the dark 
room, closed the door and it was pitch dark, and 
‘‘Oh,’’ she wrote me the next day, ‘‘it was dark, 
utterly dark, but that room was bright and glor- 
ious with the presence of the Holy Spirit.’’ 

In this thought is also the cure for insomnia. 
Did any of you ever have insomia? I did. For 
two dark, awful years. Night after night, I would 
go to bed, almost dead, as it seemed to me, for 
sleep, and I thought I would certainly sleep as I 
could scarcely keep awake; but scarcely had my 
head touched the pillow when 1 knew I wouldn’t 
sleep and I would hear the clock strike twelve, one, 
two, three, four, five, six, and then it was time 
to get up. It seemed as though I didn’t sleep at 
all, though I have no doubt I did: for I believe 
that people who suffer from insomnia sleep more 
than they think they do, else we would die: but it 
seemed as if I didn’t sleep at all, and this went 
on for two whole years, until I thought that if I 


, a 


134 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


couldn’t get sleep I would lose my mind. And 
then I got deliverance. For years I would retire 
and fall asleep about as soon as my head touched 
the pillow. But one night I went to bed in the 
Bible Institute in Chicago where I was then stop- 
ping. I expected to fall asleep almost immediate- 
ly, as had become my custom, but scarcely had 
my head touched the pillow when I knew I was not 
going to sleep. Insomnia was back. If you have 
ever had him you will always recognise him. It 
seemed as if Insomnia was sitting on the foot- 
board looking like an imp, grinning at me and 
saying ‘‘I am back for two more years.’’ ‘‘Oh,’’ I 
thought, ‘‘two more years of this awful insomnia.’’ 
But that very morning I had been teaching the 
students in the lecture room on the floor below 
on the Personality of the Holy Spirit, and the 
thought came to me almost immediately, ‘‘ What 
was that you were telling the students down 
stairs this morning about the Holy Spirit being 
always with us?’’ And I said, ‘‘Why don’t you 
practice what you preach?’’ And I looked up and 
said, ‘‘O thou blessed Holy Spirit of God, thou art 
here, if thou hast anything to say to me, I will 
listen.’’ And He opened to me some of the sweet 
and precious things about Jesus Christ, filling my 
soul with calm and peace and joy, and the next 
thing I knew I was asleep and the next thing I 
knew it was to-morrow morning; and whenever 
Insomnia has come around since and sat on my 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 135 


footboard, I have done the same thing and it has 
never failed. ; 
In this thought also is a cure for all loneliness. 
If the thought of the Holy Spirit as an Ever-pres- 
ent F'riend always at hand, once enters your heart 
and stays there, you will never have another lone- 
ly moment as long as you live. My life for the 
larger part of the last sixteen years has been a 
lonely life. I have often been separated from all 
my family for months at a time. I have not seen 
my wife sometimes for two or three months at a 
time and for eighteen months I did not see any 
member of my family but my wife. One night I 
was walking the deck of a steamer in the South 
Seas between New Zealand and Tasmania. It 
was a stormy night. Most of the other passengers 
were below sick, none of the officers nor sailors 
could walk with me for they had their hands full 
looking after the boat. I had to walk the deck 
alone. Four of the five other members of my 
family were on the other side of the globe, seven- 
teen thousand miles away by the nearest route 
that I could get to them, and the one member of 
my family who was nearer was not with me that 
night. As I walked the deck alone I got to think- 
ing of the four children seventeen thousand miles 
away and was about to get lonesome, when the 
thought came to me of the Holy Spirit by my 
side, and that as I walked He took every step with 
me, and all loneliness was gone. I gave expression 
to this thought some years ago in the city of St. 


136 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Paul, and at the close of the address a physician 
came to me and said, ‘‘1 wish to thank you for that 
thought. I am often called at night to go out alone 
through darkness and storm far into the country, 
and I have been very lonely, but I will never be 
lonely again, for I will know that every step of 
the way the Holy Spirit is beside me in my doc 
tor’s gig.’’ 

In this same precious truth there is a cure for 
a broken heart. Oh, how many broken-hearted 
people there are in the world to-day, especially in 
these days of war and bloodshed and death! Many 
of us here have lost loved ones. Many more of 
us in all probability will during the months that 
are just ahead of us. But we need not have a mo- 
ment’s heartache if we only know the communion 
of the Holy Ghost. There is perhaps here to-day 
some woman who a year ago, or a few months ago, 
or a few weeks ago, or a few days ago, had by her 
side a man whom she dearly loved, a man so strong 
and wise that she was freed from all sense of re- 
sponsibility and care; for all the burdens were 
upon him, and how bright and happy life was in 
his companionship! But the dark day came when 
that loved one was taken away, and how lonely 
and empty and barren, and full of burden and 
care, life is to-day! Listen! There is One who 
walks right by your side, wiser and stronger and 
more loving than the wisest and strongest and 
most loving husband that ever lived, ready to bear 
all the burdens and responsibilities of life, yes, 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 137 


ready to do far more: to come in and dwell in 
your heart and fill every nook and corner of your 
empty, aching heart, and thus banish all loneli- 
ness and heartache forever. I said this one after- 
noon in Saint Andrews Hall in Glasgow. At the 
close of the address, when I passed out into the 
reception room, a lady who had hurried along to 
meet me, approached me. She wore a widow’s 
bonnet, her face bore the marks of deep sorrow, 
but now there was a happy look in her face. She 
hurried to me and said, ‘‘Doctor Torrey, this is 
the anniversary of my dear husband’s death’’ 
(her husband was one of the most highly esteemed 
Christian men in Glasgow) ‘‘and I came to Saint 
Andrews Hall to-day saying to myself, ‘Doctor 
Torrey will have something to say that will help 
me.’ Qh,’’ she continued, ‘‘you have said just 
the right word! I will never be lonesome again, 
never have a heartache again. I will let the Holy 
Spirit come in and fill every aching corner of my 
heart.’’ Eighteen months passed; I was in Scot- 
land again, taking a short vacation on the lochs 
of the Clyde on the private yacht of afriend. One 
day we stopped off a point, a little boat put off 
from the point and came alongside the steam 
yacht. The first one who clambered up the side 
of the yacht and onto the deck was this widow. 
Seeing me standing on the deck, she hurried across 
and took my hand in both of hers and with a ra- 
diant smile on her face she said, ‘‘Oh, Doctor Tor- 
rey, the thought you gave me in Saint Andrews 


138 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Hall that afternoon stays with me still and I have 
not had a lonely or sad hour from that day to 
this.’’ 

But it is in our Christian work that the thought 
comes to us with greatest power and helpfulness. 
Take my own experience. I became a minister 
simply because I had to, or be forever lost. I 
do not mean that I am saved by preaching the 
Gospel; I am saved simply on the ground of 
Christ’s atoning blood and that alone; but my 
becoming a Christian and accepting Him as my 
Saviour turned upon my preaching the Gospel. 
For six years I refused to come out as a Chris- 
tian because I was unwilling to preach, and I felt 
that if I became a Christian I must preach. The 
night that I was converted I did not say, ‘‘I will 
accept Christ’’ or ‘‘I will give up my sins’’; I 
said, ‘‘I will preach.’’ But if there was ever @ 
man who by natural temperament was unfitted to 
preach, it was I. I was one of these abnormally 
bashful boys. A stranger could scarcely speak to 
me without my blushing to the roots of my hair. 
Of all the tortures I endured at school there was 
none so great as that of reciting a piece. To stand 
up on the platform and have all the scholars look- 
ing at me, I could scarcely endure it, and when I 
had to recite and my own mother and father asked 
me to recite the piece before I went to school, I 
simply could not recite it before my own father 
and mother. Think of a man like that going into 
the ministry. Even after I was in Yale College, 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 139 


when I would go home on a vacation and my 
mother would have callers and send-for me to 
come in and meet them, I couldn’t say a word. 
After they were gone my mother would say to 
me, ‘‘Archie, why didn’t you say something to 
Mrs. S. or Mrs. D.?’’ and I would say, ‘‘ Why, 
mother, I did!’’ and she would reply, ‘‘ You didn’t 
utter a sound.’’ I thought I did, but it would 
come no further than my throat and there be 
smothered. I was so bashful that I never even 
spoke in a church prayer meeting until after I 
entered the theological seminary. Then I thought, 
if I was to be a preacher I must at least be able 
to speak in my own church prayer meeting. I 
made up my mind I would. I learned a piece by 
heart. I remember some of it now. I think I for- 
got some of it when I got up to speak that night. 
As soon as the meeting was thrown open I grasped 
the back of the settee in front of me and pulled 
myself up to my feet and held on to it lest I should 
fall. One Niagara went rushing up one side and 
another down the other, and I tremblingly re- 
peated as much of my little piece as I could re- 
member and then dropped back into the seat. At 
the close of the meeting a dear old maid, a lovely 
Christian woman, came to me and cheeringly said, 
‘‘Oh, Mr. Torrey, I want to thank you for what 
you said to-night. It did me so much good. You 
spoke with so much feeling.’’ Feeling! The only 
feeling I had was that 1 was scared nearly to 
death. Think of a man like that going into the 


140 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ministry. My first years in the ministry were 
torture. JI preached three times a day. I com- 
mitted my sermons to memory and then I stood 
up and twisted the top button of my coat until I 
had twisted the sermon out and then when 
the third sermon was preached and finished, I 
dropped back into the haircloth settee back of 
the pulpit with a great sense of relief that that 
was over for another week. And then the thought 
would take possession of me, Well you have to 
begin to-morrow morning to get ready for next 
Sunday! But a glad day came when the thought 
I am trying to teach you this morning took pos- 
session of me, viz., that when I stood up to preach, 
that, though people saw me, that there was Anoth- 
er who stood by my side whom they did not see, but 
upon whom was all the responsibility for the 
meeting, and all that I had to do was to get as far 
back out of sight as possible and let Him do the 
preaching. From that day preaching has been 
the joy of my life. I would rather preach than 
eat. Sometimes when I rise to preach, before I 
have uttered a word, the thought of Him, standing 
beside me, able and willing to take charge of the 
whole meeting and do whatever needs to be done, 
has so filled my heart with exultant joy that I 
have felt like shouting. Just so in your Sunday 
School teaching. Some of you worry about your 
Sunday School classes for fear that you will say 
something that ought not to be said, or leave un- 
said something that ought to be said, and the 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 141 


thought of the burden and responsibility almost 
crushes you. Listen! Always remember this as 
you sit there teaching your class: there is One 
right beside you Who knows just what ought to 
be said and just what ought to be done. Instead 
of carrying the responsibility of the class, let Him 
carry it, let Him do the teaching. One Monday 
morning I met one of the most faithful laymen I 
ever knew and a very gifted Bible teacher. He 
was deep in the blues, over his failure with his 
class the day before—at least, what he regarded 
as failure. He unburdened his heart to me. I 
said to him, ‘‘Mr. Dyer, did you not ask God to 
give you wisdom as you went before that class?”’ 
He said, ‘‘I did.’’ I said, ‘‘Did you not expect 
Him to give it?’’ He said, ‘‘I did.’’ Then I said, 
‘“What right have you to doubt that He did?’’ He 
replied, ‘‘I never thought of that before. I will 
never worry about my class again.’’ Just so in 
personal work. When I or some one else urges 
you at the close of the meeting to go and speak to 
some one else, oh, how many of you want to go, 
but you don’t stir. You think to yourself, ‘‘I 
might say the wrong thing.’’ You will, if you 
say it. You will certainly say the wrong thing; 
but trust the Holy Spirit, He will say the right 
thing. Let Him have your lips to speak through. 
It may not appear the right thing at the time, but 
some time you will find out that it was just the 
right thing. One night in Launceston, Tasmania, 
as Mrs. Torrey and I came away from the meet- 


142 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ing, my wife said to me, ‘‘Archie, I wasted my 
whole evening. I have been talking to the most 
frivolous girl. I don’t think that she has a seri- 
ous thought in her head.’’ I replied, ‘‘Clara, how 
do you know? Did you not trust God to guide 
you?’’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘* Well, leave it with Him.’’ The 
very next night at the close of the meeting the 
same seemingly utterly frivolous young woman 
came up to Mrs. Torrey, leading her mother by 
the hand, and said, ‘‘Mrs. Torrey, won’t you 
speak to my mother? You led me to Christ last 
night, now please lead my mother to Christ.’ 

4, But I must close. There is another line of 
proof of the personality of the Holy Spirit, but 
we have no time to dwell upon it. This line of 
proof is that a treatment is predicated of the 
Holy Spirit that could only be predicated of a 
person. In Isa. 63:10 we are taught that the 
Holy Spirit is rebelled against and grieved. You 
cannot rebel against or grieve a mere influence 
or power. Only a person can be rebelled against 
and grieved. In Heb. 10:29 we are taught that 
the Holy Spirit is ‘done despite unto,’’ or 
‘‘treated with contumely,’’ insulted. You cannot 
treat an influence or power with contumely; only 
a person. In Acts 5:3 we are taught that the Holy 
Spirit is lied to. You can only lie to a person. In 
Matt. 12:31 we are taught that the Holy Spirit is 
blasphemed against. We are told that the blas- 
phemy against the Holy Ghost is more serious 
than the blasphemy against the Lord Jesus, and 


ee ee —_— 


The Personality of the Holy Spirit 143 


this certainly could only be said of a person and a 
Divine Person. 

To sum it all up, the Holy Spirit is a Person. 
Theoretically we probably all believed this before, 
but do we in our real thought of Him, in our prac- 
tical attitude toward Him, treat Him as a person? 
Do we really regard Him as real a person as Jesus 
Christ 1s, as loving, as wise, as strong, as worthy 
of our confidence and love, and surrender as He? 
A Divine Person always by our side? The Holy 
Spirit came into this world to be to the disciples 
of our Lord after our Lord’s own departure, and 
to be to us, what Jesus Christ had been to them 
during the days of His personal companionship 
with them. Is He that to you to-day? Do you 
know the ‘‘communion of the Holy Spirit?’’ the 
companionship of the Holy Spirit, the partnership 
of the Holy Spirit, the fellowship of the Holy 
Spirit, the comradeship of the Holy Spirit? To 
put it into a single word, the whole object of this 
address this morning, I say it reverently, is to 
introduce you to my Friend, the Holy Spirit. 


vil 


Tse Derry oF THE Hoty Sprit AND THE DistTINC- 
TION BETWEEN THE F'atHER, SON AND 
Hoty Sprit 


SPOKE in a previous chapter on the per- 

sonality of the Holy Spirit. We saw clearly 

that the Holy Spirit was a person. Incident- 
ally I referred to His Deity in passing, but did not 
dwell upon it, so the question remains, Is the Holy 
Spirit a Divine person? and still another question, 
If the Holy Spirit is a Divine person, is He a 
separate and distinct personality from the Father 
and the Son? We shall consider this morning 
what the Bible teaches upon these points. 


I, THE DEITY OF THE HOLY SPIRIT 


We take up first the question of the Deity of 
the Holy Spirit. The fact that the Holy Spirit is 
a person does not prove that He is divine. There 
are spirits who are persons but who are not God. 
There are five distinct lines of proof of the Deity 
of the Holy Spirit, that the Holy Spirit is God. 

1. The first line of proof of the Deity of the 
Holy Spirit is that each of the four distinctively 

144 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 145 


Divine attributes are ascribed to the Holy Spirit 
in the Bible. There are four distinctively divine 
attributes; that is to say, there are four attributes 
which God alone possesses, and any person who 
has these attributes must therefore be God. The 
four distinctively divine attributes are omnipo- 
tence, omniscience, omnipresence and eternity. 

(1) First of all, omnipotence ts ascribed to the 
Holy Spirit, for example, in Luke 1:35: ‘‘And 
the ange] answered and said unto her, the Holy 
Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the 
most high shall overshadow thee: wherefore also 
that which is to be born shall be called holy, 
the Son of God.’’ This passage plainly declares 
that the Holy Spirit has the power of the Most 
High, that He is omnipotent. 

(2) In the next place, omniscience is ascribed 
‘to the Holy Spirit. This is done, for example, in 
I Corinthians 2:10, 11: ‘‘But unto us God re- 
vealed them through the Spirit: for the Spirit 
searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God. 
For who among men knoweth the things of a man, 
save the Spirit of the man, which is in him? Even 
so the things of God none knoweth, save the Spirit 
of God.’’ Here we are distinctly told that the 
Holy Spirit searcheth all things and knoweth alt 
things, even the deep things of God. We find the 
same thought again in John 14:26: ‘‘But the 
Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the Father 
will send in my name, He shall teach you all things, 
and bring to your remembrance all that I said 


146 Fundamental! Doctrines of Christian Faith 


unto you.’’ Here we are distinctly told that the 
Holy Spirit teaches all things, and therefore must 
know all things. This is stated even more explic- 
itly in John 16:12-13: ‘‘I have yet many things 
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 
Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come, He 
shall guide you into all the truth.’’ In all these 
passages it is either directly declared or unmis- 
takably implied that the Holy Spirit knows all 
things, that He is omniscient. 

(3) In the third place, omnipresence is as- 
cribed to the Holy Spirit. We find this in Psalms 
139:7-10: ‘‘Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? 
or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I as- 
cend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my 
bed in Sheol, behold, thou art there. If I take the 
wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost 
parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, 
and thy right hand shall hold me.’’ Here we are 
told in the most explicit and unmistakable way 
that the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit, is every- 
where; that there is no place in heaven, earth or 
hades whither we can go from His presence. 

(4) Eternity 1s also ascribed to the Holy 
Spirit. This we find in Hebrews 9:14, where we 
read: ‘‘How much more shall the blood of Christ, 
who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself 
without blemish unto God, cleanse your conscience 
from dead works to serve the living God?’’ Here 
we find the words ‘‘the Eternal Spirit’’ just as 
elsewhere we find the words ‘‘the Eternal God’’ 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 147 


(e.g., Deut. 33:27): Putting these different pas- 
sages together, we see clearly that each of the 
four distinctively divine attributes, the four at- 
tributes that no one but God possesses, are as- 
cribed to the Holy Spirit. 

2. The second line of proof of the true Deity 
of the Holy Spirit is found in the fact that three 
distinctively divine works are ascribed to the Holy 
Spirit—that ts to say, the Holy Spirit is said to 
do three things which God alone can do. 

(1) The first of these distinctively divine 
works that are ascribed to the Holy Spirit is the 
work which we always think of first when we think 
of God and His work—that is to say, the work of 
creation. We find creation ascribed to the Holy 
Spirit in Job 33:4: ‘*The Spirit of God hath made 
me, and the breath of the Almighty giveth me 
life.’’ We find the same thing implied in Psalms 
104:30: ‘‘Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are 
created; and thou renewest the face of the 
ground.’’ In these two passages creation, the 
most distinctively divine of all works, is ascribed 
to the Holy Spirit. 

(2) The empartation of life is ascribed to the 
Holy Spirit. This we find, for example, in John 
6:63: ‘‘It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh 
profiteth nothing.’’ We find the same thing again 
in Romans 8:11: ‘‘But if the Spirit of him that 
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He 
that raised up Christ from the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that 


148 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


dwelleth in you.’’ In this passage we have not 
merely impartation of life to the spirit of man, 
but the impartation of life to the body in the res- 
urrection of the body ascribed to the Holy Spirit. 
Man’s creation and the impartation of life to man 
are ascribed to the operation of the Holy Spirit in 
the first book in the Bible, where we read in Gen- 
esis 2:7: ‘‘And Jehovah God formed man of the 
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils 
the breath of life; and man became a living soul.’’ 
Here we are told that man was created and became 
a living soul through God’s breathing into him 
the breath of life. This clearly implies that it 
was through the instrumentality of the Holy 
Spirit; for the Holy Spirit is the breath of God 
going out in a personal way. 

(3) The third divine work ascribed to the Holy 
Spirit 1s the authorship of divine prophecies. We 
find this, for example, in II Peter 1:21: ‘‘For no 
prophecy ever came by the will of man: but men 
spake from God, being moved by the Holy Spirit.’’ 
Here we are distinctly told that it was through 
the operation of the Holy Spirit that men were 
made the mouthpiece of God and uttered God’s 
truth. We find this same thought also in the Old 
Testament in IT Samuel 23:2, 3: ‘‘The Spirit of 
Jehovah spake by me, and His word was upon my 
tongue. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Is- 
rael spake to me.’’ In this passage, also, the au- 
thorship of God’s prophecies is ascribed to the 
Holy Spirit. Taking these passages together, we 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 149 


see that three distinctively divine works are as- 
cribed to the Holy Spirit. 

3. The third line of proof of the Deity of the 
Holy Spirit is found in the fact that passages 
which refer to Jehovah wn the Old Testament are 
taken to refer to the Holy Spirit in the New Tes- 
tament. There are numerous instances of this, 
not as numerous as in the case of Jesus Christ, the 
Son, and yet enough to make it perfectly clear 
that the Holy Spirit occupies the same place in 
New Testament thought which Jehovah occupies 
in Old Testament thought. 

(1) A striking illustration of this is found in 
Isaiah 6:8-10; ef. Acts 28:25-27. In Isaiah 6:8-10, 
we read: ‘‘And I heard the voice of the Lord, 
saying, whom shall I send, and who will go for us? | 
Then I said, here am I; send me. And he said, go, 
and tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand 
not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make 
the heart of this people fat, and make their ears 
heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their 
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand 
with their heart, and turn again, and be healed.”’ 
Here we are distinctly told it is the ‘‘Lord,’’ and 
the context shows that the Lord is the Lord Je- 
hovah who is speaking, but when we turn to Acts 
28 :25-27, we read these words: ‘‘And when they 
agreed not among themselves, they departed after 
that Paul had spoken one word, well spake the 
Holy Spirit through Isaiah the prophet unto your 
fathers’’ (notice that in the passage in Isaiah we 


150 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


are told it is the Lord Jehovah who spoke, and 
here we are told by Paul that it is the Holy Spirit 
who spake through the prophet), ‘‘saying, go thou 
unto this people, and say, by hearing ye shall hear, 
and shall in no wise understand; and seeing ye 
shall see, and shall in no wise perceive: for this 
people’s heart is waxed gross, and their ears are 
dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; 
lest haply they should perceive with their eyes, 
and hear with their ears, and understand with 
their heart, and should turn again, and I should 
heal them.’’ In the one place, the place in the Old 
Testament, we are told that the Lord Jehovah is 
the speaker; in the other place, in the New Testa- 
ment, we are told that the Holy Spirit is the 
speaker; that is to say, the Holy Spirit occupies 
the place in New Testament thought that the Lord 
Jehovah occupies in Old Testament thought. It 
is noticeable that this same passage in another 
place is applied to Jesus Christ (John 12:39-41). 
May it not be that in the threefold ‘‘Holy’’ in the 
seraphic cry recorded in this chapter in Isaiah 
(Isaiah 6:3) we have a hint of the tri-personality 
of Jehovah of Hosts, and hence the propriety of 
the threefold application of the vision? 

(2) Another illustration of a statement, which 
in the Old Testament is given as referring to 
Jehovah, being applied to the Holy Spirit in the 
New Testament, is found by a comparison of 
Exodus 16:7 with Hebrews 3:7-9. In Exodus 
16:7 we read: ‘‘And in the morning, then shall 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit ISI 


ye see the glory of Jehovah; for that he heareth 
your murmurings against Jehovah: and what are 
we, that ye murmur against us?’’ Here we are 
told that the murmuring and provocation of the 
children of Israel in the wilderness were against 
Jehovah, but in Hebrews 3:7-9, we read: ‘‘Where- 
fore, even as the Holy Spirit saith, to-day if ye 
shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as 
in the provocation, like as in the day of the trial 
in the wilderness, where your fathers tried me by 
proving me, and saw my works forty years.’’ 
In this New Testament passage we are told that 
it was the Holy Spirit that they provoked in the 
wilderness, making it clear that the Holy Spirit 
occupies here in New Testament thought the posi- 
tion Jehovah occupied in Old Testament thought 
in Exodus 16:7. 

To sum up the passages under this head, we see 
that statements which in the Old Testament dis- 
tinctly name the Lord, God or Jehovah, as their 
subject, are applied to the Holy Spirit in the New 
Testament. That is to say, the Holy Spirit occu- 
pies the position of Deity in New Testament 
thought. 

4, The fourth way in which the Deity of the 
Holy Spirit is clearly taught in the New Testament 
is that the name of the Holy Spirit 1s coupled with 
that of God the Father in a way that tt would be 
impossible for a reverent and thoughtful mud to 
couple the name of any finite being with that of 


152 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Deity. There are numerous illustrations of this. 
Three will answer for our present purpose. 

(1) We read, for example, in I Corinthians 
12:4-6: ‘‘Now there are diversities of gifts, but 
the same Spirit. And there are diversities of min- 
istrations, and the same Lord. And there are di- 
versities of workings, but the same God, who work- 
eth all things in all.’’ In this passage we see the 
name of the Holy Spirit coupled with that of God 
and of the Lord in a way in which it would be im- 
possible for an intelligent worshipper of God to 
couple the name of any finite being with that of 
the Deity. 

(2) We see the same thing again in Matthew 
28:19: ‘‘Go ye therefore, and make disciples of 
all the nations, baptising them into the name of 
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.’’ 
If the Holy Spirit is not God, it would be shocking 
to couple His name in this way. with that of God, 
the Father, and of the Lord Jesus, His Son. 

(3) Another striking illustration of this is 
found in II Corinthians 13:14: ‘‘The grace of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the 
communion of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.’’ 
Here the name of the Holy Spirit is coupled on a 
ground of equality with that of the Father and of 
the Son. In all these passages, the name of the 
Holy Spirit is coupled with that of God in a way 
in which it would be impossible for a reverent, 
thoughtful mind to couple the name of any finite 
being with that of Deity. 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 153 


5. The fifth and last, and, if possible, more de- 
cisive way in which the Deity of the Holy Spirit is 
taught m the Bible is that the Holy Spirit m so 
many words 1s called God. This we find in Acts 
5:3, 4: ‘‘But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan 
filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to 
keep back part of the price of the land? While it 
remained, did it not remain thine own? And after 
it was sold, was it not in thy power? How is it 
that thou hast conceived this thing in thy heart? 
Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God.’’ In 
the third verse we are distinctly told that it was to 
the Holy Spirit to Whom Ananias lied, and in the 
fourth verse we are told that it was to God that 
Ananias lied. Putting the two statements to- 
gether, it is evident that the Holy Spirit is God. 

To sum up all that we have said under the head 
of the Deity of the Holy Spirit, we see that by the 
ascription of all the distinctiwely divine attributes, 
and several distinctively diwine works, by refer- 
ring statements which in the Old Testament dis- 
tinctly named Jehovah, the Lord or God, as ther 
subject, to the Holy Spirit wn the New Testament, 
by coupling the name of the Holy Spirit with that 
of God ina way in which t¢ would be wmpossible to 
couple the name of any finite being with that of 
Deity, by calung the Holy Spirit ‘‘God,’’ wm all 
these unmistakable ways God in His Word dis- 
tinctly proclaims that the Holy Spirit 1s a Divine 
Person. It is absolutely impossible for any one to 
go to the Bible to find out what it actually teaches, 


154 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


and not merely to twist and distort it to fit into 
his own preconceived notions, and come to any 


other conclusion but that the Holy Spirit is a | 


Divine Person, that He is God. 


II, THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE FATHER, THE SON | 


AND THE HOLY SPIRIT 


But now we come to the question, Is the Holy 


= —», 


a 


Spirit a distinct personality from the Father and - 
from the Son? He might be a person, as we have © 
clearly seen that He is, and He might be a divine | 
person, as we have just seen that He is, and at . 


the same time He might be only the same person 
who manifested Himself at times as the Father 
and at other times as the Son, and in that case 
there would not be three divine Persons in the 
Godhead, but one divine Person, who variously 
manifested Himself as Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit. So the question that now confronts us is, 
Is the Holy Spirit a distinct personality separate 
and distinct from the Father and from the Son? 
This question is plainly answered in various pas- 
sages in the New Testament. 

1. We find this question answered in the first 
place m John 14:26 and John 15:26. In John 14:26 
we read: ‘‘But the Comforter, even the Holy 
Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, He 
shall teach you all things, and bring to your re- 
membrance all that I said unto you.’’ In John 
15:26 we read: ‘‘But when the Comforter is come, 


a 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 155 


whom I will send unto you from the Father, even 
the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the 
Father, he shall bear witness of me.’’ In both of © 
these passages we are told that the Holy Spirit is 
an entirely distinct personality from the Father 
and the Son, that He is sent from the Father by 
the Son. We are elsewhere taught that Jesus 
Christ was sent by the Father (John 6:29; 8:29, 
42). Itis as clear as language can make it in these 
passages that Father, Son and Holy Spirit are not 
one and the same Person manifesting Himself in 
three different forms, but that they are three dis- 
tinct personalities. . 

2. We find clear proof that the Father, Son and 
Holy Spirit are three distinct personalities in John 
16:13, where we read: ‘‘Howbeit when He, the 
Spirit of Truth, is come, he shall guide you into 
all the truth: for He shall not speak from Himself; 
but what things soever He shall hear, these shall 
He speak: and He shall declare unto you the things 
that are to come.’’ In this passage the clearest 
possible distinction is drawn between the Holy 
Spirit who speaks and the One from whom He 
speaks, and we are told in so many words that 
this One from whom He speaks is not Himself, 
but another. 

3. In the next verse the same thought is 
brought out in still another way. In this verse, 
John 16:14, we read: ‘‘He shall glorify me: for 
He shall take of mine, and shall declare it unto 
you.’’ Here the clearest distinction is drawn be- 


156 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


tween He, the Holy Spirit, and Me, Jesus Christ. 
It is the work of the Holy Spirit not to glorify 
Himself, but another, and this Other is Jesus 
Christ, and He takes what belongs to another; that 
is, to Christ, and declares it unto believers. It 
would be impossible to express in human language 
a distinction between two personalities more plain- 
ly than the distinction between the Son and the 
Holy Ghost is expressed in this verse. 

4. The distinction between the Father and the 
Son and the Holy Spirit is very clearly brought 
out in Luke 3:21, 22: ‘‘Now it came to pass, when 
all the people were baptised, that, Jesus also hav- 


ing been baptised, and praying, the heaven was | 


opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily 
form, as a dove, upon him, and a voice came out of 
heaven, thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well 
pleased.’’ Here a clear distinction 1s drawn be- 
tween Jesus Christ who was on the earth, and the 
Father who spake to Him from heaven, and the 


Holy Spirit who descended in bodily form as a — 


dove from the Father upon the Son. 


| 


5. Still another striking illustration is found | 
in Matthew 28:19: ‘‘Go ye therefore, and make | 


disciples of all the nations, baptising them into the | 
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy | 


Spirit.’’ Here a clear distinction 1s drawn be- | 
tween the name ‘‘of the Father,’’ and the name | 


‘‘of the Son,’’ and the name “‘of the Holy Spirit.” 


6. A very striking setting forth.of a clear dis- | 


tinction between the Father, Son and Holy Spirit 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 167 


is found in John 14:16, 17: ‘‘And I will pray the 
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter 
that He may be with you for ever, even the Spirit 
of truth.’’ Here the clearest possible distinction 
is drawn between the Son who prays, and the 
Father to whom He prays, and “‘another Com- 
‘forter,’? who is given in answer to His prayer. 
Nothing could possibly be plainer than the dis- 
tinction that Jesus Christ draws in this passage 
between Himself and the Father and the Holy 
Spirit. 

7. We find the same thing again in John 16:7: 
‘*Nevertheless I tell you the truth: it is expedient 
for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the 
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go, I 
will send Him unto you.’’ Here the Lord Jesus 
Himself draws a clear distinction between Him- 
self, who 1s about to go away, and the Holy Spirit, 
the other Comforter who ts coming to take Hts 
place after He has gone away. 

8. The same thing is brought out again in 
Peter’s sermon on the day of Pentecost in Acts 
2:33, where Peter is recorded as saying: ‘‘Being 
therefore by the right hand of God exalted, and 
having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Spirit, He hath poured forth this, which ye 
see and hear.’’ Here a clear distinction is drawn 
between the Son exalted to the right hand of the 
Father, and the Father Himself, and the Holy 
Spirit whom the Son recewes from the Father, 


158 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


and sheds upon the Church. To sum up all under 
this head: again and again the Bible draws the 
clearest possible distinction between the Holy 
Spirit, and the Father, and the Son. They are 
three separate personalities, having mutual rela- 
tions to one another, acting upon one another, 
speaking of or to one another, applying the pro- 
nouns of the second and third persons to one an- 
other. 

We have seen that the Bible makes it plain that 
the Holy Spirit is a Divine Person and that He is 
an entirely separate personality from the Father 
and from the Son. In other words, that there are 


three divine Persons in the Godhead. It has | 


oftentimes been said that the doctrine of the Trin- 
ity is not taught in the Bible. It is true that the 
doctrine of the Trinity is not directly taught in 
the Bible in so many words, but the doctrine of the 


Trinity is simply the putting together of truths — 


that are clearly and unmistakably taught in the 


Bible. It is clearly taught in the Bible that there | 


is but one God (Deuteronomy 6:4). But it is | 


taught with equal clearness, as we have seen to- [ 
day, that there are three Divine Persons, the | 
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; and the doc- |: 
trine of the Trinity is the putting together of these | 


truths which are taught with equal plainness. 


But, some one may ask, How can God be three } 
and one at the same time? The answer to this }- 
question 1s very simple and easily understandable. F 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 159 


Ie cannot be three im one in the same sense, nor 
oes the Bible teach that He is. But in what sense 
an He be one and three? A perfectly satisfactory 
nswer to this question is manifestly impossible 
rom the very nature of the case—first, because 
tod is Spirit and numbers belong primarily to 
he physical world, and difficulty must always 
rise when we attempt to concewe of spir- 
‘ual being im the forms of physical thought. In 
he second place, a perfectly satisfactory answer 
>» the question is impossible because God is in- 
nite and we are finite. ‘‘God dwells in the light 
hat no man can approach unto,’’ and our attempts 
t @ philosophical explanation of the Trimty of 
tod 1s an attempt to put the facts of infinite beng 
nto the forms of finite thought, and of necessity 
uch an attempt can at the very best be only par- 
ially successful. This much we know, that God is 
ssentially one, and also that there are three Per- 
ons in this one Godhead. There is but one God, 
ut this one God makes Himself known to us as 
hree distinct Persons—Father, Son and Holy 
‘pirtt. There is one God, eternally existing, and 
aanifesting Himself in three Persons—Father, 
ion and Holy Spirit. If we were to go into the 
ealm of philosophy, it could be shown that from 
he very necessities of the case, that if God were to 
e God, there must be in the eternal Godhead be- 
ore the creation of finite beings a multiplicity of 
rersons; for otherwise God could not love, for 


160 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


there would be no one to love, and therefore God 
could not be God. The ease with which one can 
grasp the Unitarian conception of God is not in 
its favour but against it. Any god who could be 
thoroughly comprehended by a finite mind would 
not be an infinite God. It would be impossible for 
a thoroughly intelligent mind to really worship a 
god whom he could thoroughly understand. If 
God is to be really God, He must be beyond our 
complete understanding. 

The doctrine of the Trinity is not merely a spec- 
ulative doctrine. It is a doctrine of tremendous 
daily practical importance. It enters into the very 
warp and woof of our experience, if our experience 
is a truly Christian experience. For example, in 
our prayer we need God, the Father, to Whom we 
pray, we need God, the Son, through Whom we 
pray, and we need God, the Holy Spirit, in Whom 
we pray. So also in our worship we need God, 
the Father, the very centre of our worship, we 
need the Son, through Whom we approach Him in 
our worship, and we need to worship by the Holy 
Spirit. But all three—Father, Son and Holy 
Spirit—are the objects of our worship. The long 
metre doxology is thoroughly Christian in its 
worship when it sings: 


‘‘Praise God from whom all blessings flow, 
Praise Him all creatures here below, 
Praise Him above, ye heavenly hosts, 
Praise Father, Son and Holy Ghost.’? 


—___——. 
oe ——o Ae 


The Deity of the Holy Spirit 161 


And so, also, is the Gloria Patri, the words of 
which we so often sing, but the thought of which 
we so seldom grasp: 

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to 
the Holy Ghost, as it was in the beginning, is now, 
and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. 


vir 


THe ATONEMENT: Gopb’s DocTRINE oF THE ATONE- 
MENT Vs. UNITARIAN AND CHRISTIAN SCIENCE 
DoctTRINES OF THE ATONEMENT 


‘¢Apart from the shedding of blood there is no remission.’ ’— 
Hebrews 9:22. 


trine of the Atonement vs. the Unitarian 

and Christian Science Doctrines of the 
Atonement.’’ One of the most fundamental, cen- 
tral and vital doctrines of the Christian faith is 
the Christian doctrine of the Atonement. With- 
out the Bible Doctrine of the Atonement you have 
no Christianity, but the Devil’s substitute for 
Christianity. Without the Bible Doctrine of the 
Atonement you have no real gospel, but an utterly 
false and soul-destroying philosophy. In speak- 
ing on the doctrine of the Deity of Christ I said: 
‘‘Tf a man really holds to right views concerning 
the person of Jesus Christ he will sooner or later 
get right views on every other question, but if he 
holds a wrong view concerning the person of the 
Lord Jesus Christ he is pretty sure to go wrong 
on everything else sooner or later.’’ The same is 

162 


() UR subject in this chapter is ‘‘God’s Doc- 


The Atonement 163 


true regarding the doctrine of the Atonement: If 
a man really holds to right views concerning the 
Atonement made by our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ on the Cross of Calvary, he will sooner or 
later get right on every other question; but if he 
holds a wrong view regarding the Atonement made 
by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, he is pretty 
sure to go wrong on everything else sooner or 
later. There is a great need in this day of teach- 
ing on this subject that is definite, clear, accurate, 
exact, complete; because not only in Unitarian and 
Christian Science circles, but also in circles that 
are nominally orthodox, in professedly Christian 
colleges, seminaries, pulpits, Sunday School 
classes, and religious papers, Magazines, pamph- 
lets, books, there is much teaching to-day that is 
vague, inaccurate, misleading, unscriptural, and 
oftentimes utterly false and devilish, teaching 
that is essentially Unitarian or Eddyistic. Men 
and women use the old words with a new meaning; 
so as to deceive, if it were possible, the very elect. 
Even the Christian Scientist will tell you he be- 
eves in the Atonement, and that Mrs. Eddy 
taught the Atonement. But when you begin to 
ask direct and pointed questions regarding his be- 
lief and teaching you will find that by Atonement . 
he meant, and that Mrs. Eddy meant, something 
utterly different from what you mean and what 
the Bible teaches. Paul tells us that the Devil 
camouflages as an angel of light (II Cor. 11:14), 
but never has he done it more successfully and 


164 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


dangerously than in the teaching regarding the 
Atonement which he has inspired in Mrs. Eddy 
and in Unitarian teachers, and also in the teachers 
in many supposedly orthodox pulpits, in many 
Congregational pulpits, in some Methodist pul- 
pits, in many Baptist pulpits, and even in some 
Presbyterian pulpits. Some years ago in teach- 
ing a Bible class in Minneapolis, attended by peo- 
ple from all the churches, I remarked incidentally 
that Christian Science denied the doctrine of the 
Atonement through the shed blood of Jesus Christ. 
A very intelligent lady, a lady perfect in her man- 
ners, came to me at the close of the class and said: 
‘‘Mr. Torrey, you ought not to have said what you 
said to-day about Christian Science; for you do 
not understand its teachings. They do teach the 
Atonement.’’ I replied: ‘‘I said that Christian 
Science denies the Doctrine of the Atonement 
through the shed blood of Jesus Christ. Do you 
believe that Jesus Christ bore your sins in His 
own body on the cross?’’ She answered: ‘‘I think 
Christian Science is a beautiful system of teach- 
ing.’”’ I said: ‘‘That is not what I asked you. 
Do you believe that Jesus Christ bore your sins in 
His own body on the cross?’’ She replied: 
‘‘Christian Science has done me a great deal of 
good.’’ ‘‘That is not what I asked you. Do you 
believe that Jesus Christ bore your sins in His 
own body on the cross?’’ ‘‘I think that Jesus 
Christ’s life was the most beautiful life ever lived 
here on earth.’’ ‘‘That is not what I asked you. 


The Atonement 165 


Do you believe Jesus Christ bore your sins in His 
own body on the cross?”’ ‘‘The Christian Scien- 
tists are lovely people.’’ ‘‘That is not what I 
asked you. Do you believe that Jesus Christ bore 
your sins in His own body on the cross?’’ ‘‘I be- 
heve in following the Lord Jesus Christ.’’ ‘‘Do 
you believe that Jesus Christ bore your sins in His 
own body on the cross?’’ ‘‘Oh,’’ she said, ‘‘that 
is a doctrinal question.’’ ‘‘Now,’’ I said, ‘‘you 
are yourself an illustration of the truth of the very 
thing I said. You do not believe in the Atonement 
through the shed blood of Jesus Christ.’’ The 
Christian Scientist uses the word ‘‘atonement,’’ 
but he means something entirely different from 
what the Bible teaches regarding the atoning death 
of Jesus Christ. So does the Unitarian. So do 
many of the ministers supposedly of orthodox de- 
nominations. The pastor of a Congregational 
church in this city said recently: ‘‘I have 
my own kind of religion; it answers for me, 
but I hope I have sense enough to see that it would 
not answer for everybody. I imagine the Salva- 
tion Army captain preaching my kind of religious 
doctrine, without a devil, without a hell, without an 
atonement of blood and recompense, without an 
infallible Bible—and I see his audience melting 
away like snow in the rain. Is his doctrine truer 
than mine, or is mine truer than his? Why, 
neither; his is true for him and mine for me—that 
is all—each after his own kind.’’ Now this may 
sound tolerant and lovely, but it is utter non- 


166 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


sense. Any doctrine which is not true for every- 
body is not for anybody true, and any doc- 
trine which is true is true for everybody. If a 
doctrine that leaves out ‘‘an atonement of blood’’ 
is not true for the Salvation Army—and it cer- 
tainly is not—it is not trwe for anybody else. 
Truth is not relative; it is absolute. What is 
true is true, and what is false is false. So we 
come face to face with the question, What does 
the Bible teach on this great fundamental doc- 
trine? 


I. THE NECESSITY AND IMPORTANCE OF HIS DEATH 


The first thing that the Bible plainly teaches on 
this question is the absolute necessity and funda- 
mental wmportance of the death of Jesus Christ, 
the absolute necessity and fundamental impor- 
tance of the shedding of His blood. The tendency 
of our day in Unitarian circles, and in orthodox 
circles that have been leavened by the corrupting 
leaven of Unitarianism, is to minimise the impor- 
tance of the death of our Lord Jesus Christ. The 
tendency is to make His life and character, His 
teaching and leadership, the main thing. Chris- 
tian Science even goes so far as to deny the fact 
of His death. To them His supposed death is ‘‘an 
illusion,’’ it is ‘‘only mortal thought,’’ but the 
Bible puts the emphasis upon His atoning death. 

1. The death of Jesus Christ is mentioned dt- — 
rectly more than 175 tumes in the New Testament. 


The Atonement 167 


Besides this there are very many prophetic and 
typical references to the death of Jesus Christ in 
the Old Testament. When Mr. Alexander and I 
were holding our meetings in the Royal Albert 
Hall in London, some one took away one of our 
hymn books and went through it and cut out every 
reference to the blood, and then sent it back to me 
through the mail, saying, ‘‘I have gone through 
your hymn book and cut out every reference to the 
blood. These references to the blood are foolish. 
Now sing your hymns with the blood left out and 
there will be some sense in them.’’ If any of you 
should take your Bible and go through it in that 
way and cut out of the New Testament and the Old 
Testament every passage that referred to the 
death of Christ, or to His atoning blood, you would 
have only a sadly torn and tattered Bible left, a 
Bible without a heart and a Gospel without saving 
power. If I were a member of a church where the 
pastor said that he preached a system of ‘‘re- 
ligious doctrine, without a devil, without a hell, 
without an atonement of blood and recompense, 
without an infallible Bible,’’ to use his own lan- 
guage, he would see his audience ‘‘melting away 
hike snow in the rain’’ as far as I was concerned. 
I would either take my hat and get out of that 
church, or else the pastor would take his hat and 
get out of the pulpit; for I should know that he 
was not preaching God’s pure, saving gospel, but 
the Devil’s poisonous substitute for the gospel. — 

2. Not only are the references to the death of 


168 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Christ so numerous in Old Testament and New 
Testament, but we are taught distinctly in He- 
brews 2:14 that Jesus Christ became a man for 
the specific purpose of dying, that He became a 
partaker of flesh and blood in order that He might 
die. In this passage we read, ‘‘For as much as 
the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He 
also Himself likewise took part of the same; that 
through death He might destroy him that had the 
power of death, that is the Devil’’ (Heb. 2:14). 
The meaning of these words is as plain as day. 
They tell us that the incarnation was for the pur- 
pose of the death. They tell us that Jesus Christ’s 
death was not a mere accident or incident of His 
human life (as many would have us believe), but 
that zt was the supreme purpose of tt. He became 
man in order that He might die as man and for 
man. This is the doctrine of the Bible, and it is 
true for anybody and for everybody. 

3. Furthermore, He died for a specific purpose, 
asaransom for us. He Himself said so. In Matt. 
20:28 He says, ‘‘The Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His 
life a ransom for many.’’ 

4. One of the most remarkable scenes recorded 
in the New Testament is that of the transfigura- 
tion, when Moses and Elijah came back from the 
_ other world to commune with Jesus. And what 
did they talk about in that great moment of human 
history? Luke tells us in the 9th chapter of his 
Gospel, the 30th and 31st verses, ‘‘And behold, 


The Atonement 169 


there talked with Him (i.e., with Jesus) two men, 
which were Moses and Elijah: who appeared in 
glory, and spake of His decease which He was 
about to accomplish at Jerusalem.’’ His atoning 
death was the one subject that engrossed the at- 
tention of these two who came back from the glory 
world. We are also told in I Peter 1:10-12 that 
the death of Jesus Christ is a subject of intensest 
interest and earnest inquiry on the part of the 
angels. | : 

o. The death of Christ is the central theme of 
heaven’s song. Rev. 5:8-12 gives us a picture of 
heaven with its wonderful choir of ten thousand 
times ten thousand and thousands of thousands, 
and this is the description of the song they sing: 
‘‘And when he had taken the book, the four living 
creatures and the four and twenty elders fell down 
before the Lamb, having each one a harp, and 
golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers 
of the saints. And they sing a new song, saying, 
Worthy art thou to take the book and to open the 
seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and didst pur- 
chase unto God with thy blood men of every tribe, 
and tongue, and people, and nation, and madest 
them to be unto our God a kingdom and priests; 
and they reign upon the earth. And I saw, and I 
heard a voice of many angels round about the 
throne and the living creatures and elders; and 
the number of them was ten thousand times ten 
thousand, and thousands of thousands; saying 
with a great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was 


170 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


slain to receive the power, and riches, and wisdom, 
and might, and honour, and glory, and blessing. 
And every created thing which is in the heaven, 
and on the earth, and under the earth, and on the 
sea, and all things that are in them, heard I say- 
ing, Unto him that sitteth on the throne, and unto 
the Lamb, be the blessing, and the honour, and the 
glory, and the dominion, for ever and ever’’ (Rev. 
9:8-12). So it is evident that the great central 
theme of heaven’s song is the atoning death of 
Jesus Christ, and the shed ‘‘blood’’ by which He 
redeemed ‘‘men of every tribe, and tongue, and 
nation.’’ If the Unitarian or the Christian Scien- 
tist or the New Theologian should get to heaven 
they would have no song to sing. The glorious 
song of that wondrous choir would sound to him 
like a song ‘‘of the shambles.’’ He would be very 
lonesome and feel that he had got into the wrong 
pew. 


i. THE PURPOSE OF THE DEATH OF JESUS CHRIST 


So much for the fundamental and central im- 
portance of His death, or of the shedding of His 
blood. But what was the purpose of the shedding 
of His blood? 

1. First of all, the Bible distinctly and repeat- 
edly tells us by direct statement, and by countless 
typical reference in the Old Testament, that He 
died as a vicarious offering for sin; that 1s, that 
He, an absolutely perfect, righteous one, who de- 


The Atonement I7I 


served to lwe, died in the place of unjust men who 
deserved to die. For example, we read in Isa. 
53:5, ‘‘But He was wounded for our transgres- 
sions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the chas- 
tisement of our peace was upon Him; and with 
His stripes we are healed.’’ And in the eighth 
verse we read, ‘‘By oppression and judgment He 
was taken away; and as for His generation, who 
among them considered that He was cut off out of 
the land of the living for the transgression of my 
people to whom the stroke was due?’’ And in the 
11th and 12th verses we read, ‘‘He shall see of the 
travail of His soul, and shall be satisfied: by the 
knowledge of Himself shall my righteous servant 
justify many; and He shall bear their iniquities. — 
Therefore will I divide Him a portion with the 
great, and He shall divide the spoil with the 
strong; because He poured out His soul unto death, 
and was numbered with the transgressors: yet He 
bare the sin of many. And made intercession for 
the transgressors.’’ In I Peter, 3:18 we read, 
‘‘Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous 
for the unrighteous, that He might bring us t» 
God; being put to death in the flesh, but made 
alive in the spirit.’’ And in 1 Peter 2:24 we read, 
‘‘Who His own self bare our sins in His own body 
upon the tree, that we, having died unto sins, 
might live unto righteousness; by whose stripes 
ye were healed.’’ Now the meaning of these verses 
and many other verses, is inescapable. They teach 
in language the meaning of which no one can mis- 


172 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


understand (unless he is determined not to see) 
that the death of Jesus Christ was a vicarious 
atonement, that is, a just one, who deserved to live, 
dying in the place of unjust ones who deserved to 
die. It was, to use the language of the Los Angeles 
minister who denied his belief in it, ‘‘an atonement 
of blood and recompense.’’ This is God’s doc- 
trine of the Atonement versus the Unitarian and 
Christian Science doctrine of the Atonement. 

2. But this is not all. We are further taught 
that He died as a ransom, that is, His death was 
the price paid to redeem others from death. He 
Himself says so. His own words are, ‘*The Son 
of man came not to be ministered unto, but to min- 
ister, and to give his life a ransom for many.’’ 
If His life was not a ransom, that is to say, if He 
did not redeem others from death by dying in their 
place, then He was the greatest fool in the whole 
history of this universe. Was He a fool or was 
He aransom? No one who in any real sense can 
be said to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ can 
hesitate as to his answer. 

3. But even this is not all. The Bible distinct- 
ly tells us that He died as a sim offering, 2. e., tt 
was on the ground of His death, and on this 
ground alone, that forgiveness of sin is made pos- 
sible for and offered to sinners. This we are told 
in the 53rd chapter of Isaiah, to which reference 
has already been made. In the 10th verse it is 
written, ‘‘Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him; 
He (i.e., Jehovah) hath put him to grief (literally, 


The Atonement 173 


made him sick) : when thou shalt make his soul an 
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall pro- 
long his days, and the pleasure of Jehovah shall 
prosper in his hand.’’ Now the meaning of ‘‘of- 
fering for sm’’ is unquestionable to any one who 
has studied the Old Testament offerings. An ‘‘of- 
fering for sin’’ or a ‘‘guilt offering,’’ which is the 
exact force of the Hebrew word translated ‘‘an 
offering for sin,’’ was a death of a sacrificial vic- 
tim on the ground of which pardon was offered to 
sinners (Lev. 6:6-10, R. V.). The Holy Spirit says 
expressly in Heb. 9:22, in words the meaning of 
which is unmistakable, and the force of which is 
inescapable, ‘‘ Apart from sheddimg of blood there 
is no remission,’’ and the whole context in which 
the passage is found shows that the blood, to which 
all the blood of the Old Testament types as sacri- 
fices pointed forward, was the blood of Jesus 
Christ. So then the Word of God declares that 
apart from the shedding of the blood of Jesus 
Christ there is absolutely no pardon for sin. 
There is absolutely no forgiveness outside the 
atoning blood of Christ. Without Christ’s aton- 
ing blood every member of the human race must 
have perished forever. 

4. Fourth and further yet, the Bible teaches 
' that Jesus Christ died as a propitiation for our 
sins. God the Father gave Christ the Son to be 
a propitiation by His blood. That is to say that 
Jesus Christ, through the shedding of His blood, 
1s that by which God’s holy wrath at sin ts ap- 


174 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


peased. We read in 1 John 4:10, ‘‘Herein is love, 
not that we loved God, but that He loved us, and 
sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins.’’ 
And we read in Rom. 3:25, 26, ‘‘Whom God set 
forth to be a propitiation, through faith, in His 
blood, to show His righteousness because of the 
passing over of the sins done aforetime, in the 
forbearance of God; (26) for the showing, I say, 
of His righteousness at this present season: that 
He might Himself be just, and the justifier of Him 
that hath faith in Jesus.’’ The meaning of these 
words also is as plain as day. The two Greek 
words in these two passages are not exactly the 
same words (hilasmos and hilasterion) but are 
from the same root. The word used in 1 John 4:10 
is hilasmos and the word used in Rom. 3:25 is 
hilasterion. The definition given of the first in 
Thayer’s Dictionary of New Testament Greek, the 
standard work, is ‘‘a means of appeasing.’’ The 
definition given in the same lexicon of the second 
word is ‘‘an expiatory sacrifice.’’ So the thought 
that is in both passages is that the death of Jesus 
Christ was a ‘‘propitiation,’’ ‘‘an expiatory sacri- 
fice,’? the ‘‘means of appeasing’’ God’s holy 
wrath at sin, or in other words, that Jesus, through 
the shedding of His blood, 1s that by which the 
wrath of God against us as sinners 1s appeased. 
God’s holiness and consequent hatred of sin, like 
every other attribute of His character, is real and 
must manifest itself. His wrath at sin must strike 
somewhere, either on the sinner himself or upon 


The Atonement 175 


a lawful substitute. It struck upon Jesus Christ, 
a lawful substitute. As we read in Isa. 53:6, ‘‘ All 
we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned 
every one to his own way; and Jehovah hath laid 
on Hum the iniquity of us all.’? The word trans- © 
lated ‘‘hath laid,’’ according to the margin of the 
Revised Version, means literally, ‘‘hath made to 
light.’’ More literally still it means, ‘‘hath made - 
to strike.’’ Reading it this way, what God says 
is, ‘‘ All we like sheep have gone astray; we have 
turned every one to his own way; and Jehovah 
hath made to strike on him (i. e., on the Lord 
Jesus) the iniquity of us all.’’ And in the eighth 
verse of the same chapter we are taught that ‘‘the 
stroke due’’ to others fell upon Him, and He was 
consequently ‘‘cut off out of the land of the liv- 
ing.’? The death of Jesus Christ has its first 
cause in the demands of God’s holiness. This is 
the Bible doctrine versus the Unitarian and Chris- 
tian Science doctrine of atonement. The doctrine 
is often misrepresented and caricatured as being 
that ‘‘God, a holy first person, took the sins of 
man, the guilty second person, and put them on 
Jesus Christ, an innocent third person,’’ and it 
is objected that this would not be just. No; this 
would not be just, and it is not for a moment 
the doctrine of the Bible, for the Bible clearly 
teaches that Jesus Christ was not ‘‘a third per- 
son,’’ but was Himself God, and that He was Him- 
self man, so He is not a third person at all, but 
both the first person and the second person, and 


176 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the doctrine is that God Himself, the offended first 
person, substitutes His atoning action whereby 
He expresses His hatred against sin, for His puni- 
tive action whereby He would express the same 
thing; that God, instead of visiting the sins of 
the sinner upon the sinner, takes the punishment 
upon Himself. This certainly is something more 
than just, it is wondrous love. 

>. Further yet, the Bible teaches us that Jesus 
Christ died to redeem us from the curse of the 
law by bearing that curse Himself. We read in 
Gal. 3:10, ‘‘As many as are of the works of the 
law are under a curse, for it is written: Cursed is 
every one who continueth not in all things that 
are written in the Book of the Law, to do them.’’ 
So then, every one of us is under the curse of the 
broken law, for not one of us has continued ‘‘in 
all things that are written in the book of the law, 
to do them.’’ But we read in the 13th verse, 
‘‘Chrisb redeemed us from the curse of the law, 
having become a curse for us (literally, in our be- 
half): for it is written, Cursed is every one that 
hangeth on a tree.’’ By His death by crucifixion 
He redeemed us from the curse which we deserved 
by taking that curse upon Himself. This certain- 
ly is ‘‘an atonement of blood and recompense.’’ 

6. The Bible puts essentially the same truth 
in still another form, viz., that Jesus Christ died 
as our Passover sacrifice—that is, that His shed 
blood might serve as a ground upon which God 
would pass over and spare us. We read in 1 Cor. 


The Atonement 177 


5:7, ‘For our passover also hath been sacrificed, 
even Christ.’’ Now what a passover sacrifice was 
and signified we learn from Ex. 12:12, 13, where 
our Lord told the children of Israel at the inau- 
guration of the passover, ‘‘For I will go through 
the land of Egypt in that night, and will smite all 
the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and 
beast; and against all the Gods of Egypt I will 
execute judgment: I am Jehovah, and the blood 
shall be to you for a token upon the houses where 
ye are: and when I see the blood, I will pass over 
you, and there shall be no plague upon you to 
destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.’’ 
And again we read in the 23rd verse of the same 
chapter, ‘‘For Jehovah will pass through to smite 
the Egyptians; and when He seeth the blood upon 
the lintel, and on the two side-posts, Jehovah will 
pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroy- 
er to come in unto your houses to smite you.’’ 
Paul wrote his words with all this in mind, and 
in saying that Christ is our Passover sacrifice be- 
yond a question he meant that the shed blood of 
Jesus Christ serves as a ground, and the only 
ground, upon which God passes over and spares 
US. 


I. THE RESULTS OF THE ATONING DEATH 


We have seen then the gracious and glorious 
purposes of the Atoning Death of Jesus Christ. 
What are the results of that death? They are 


178 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


even more glorious. I can speak of them this 
morning only in part. 

1. The first result of the atoning death of Jesus 
Christ is that a propitiation 1s provided for the 
whole world. We read in 1 John 2:2, ‘‘He is the 
propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, 
but also for the whole world.’’ This plainly means 
that by the death of Jesus Christ a basis is pro- 
vided upon which God can deal in mercy and does 
deal m mercy with the whole world. All of God’s 
dealings in mercy with any man are on the ground 
of Christ’s death. Only on the ground of Christ’s 
death could God deal in mercy with any man. 
God’s dealings in mercy with the rankest blas- 
phemer or the most blatant atheist is on the 
ground of the atoning death of Jesus Christ. 

2. In the second place through the atoning 
death of Jesus Christ all men obtam resurrection 
from the dead. We read in Rom. 5:18, ‘‘So then 
as through one trespass (i. e., the trespass of 
Adam) the judgment came unto all men to con- 
demnation; even so through one act of righteous- 
ness (i. e., through Christ’s righteous act in dying 
on the cross in obedience to the will of God) the 
free gift came unto all men to justification of 
life.’’ And we are told in 1 Cor. 15:22, ‘‘As in 
Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made 
alive.’’ The Apostle Paul in the whole chapter is 
speaking about the resurrection of the body, not 
about eternal life, and he here distinctly teaches 
that as every child of Adam loses life (physical 


The Atonement 179 


life—see Gen. 3:19) in the first Adam, so also in 
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, he obtains resur- 
rection from the dead, through the atoning death 
of Jesus Christ. Every man, the rankest infidel as 
well as the most devout believer, will some day be 
raised from the dead because Christ died in his 
place. Whether the resurrection which he obtains 
through the death of Jesus Christ shall be a ‘‘res- 
urrection of life’’ or a ‘‘resurrection of condem- 
nation,’’ ‘‘shame and everlasting contempt’’ 
(John 5:28, 29; Dan. 12:2) depends entirely upon 
what attitude the individual takes toward the 
Christ in whom he gets the resurrection. 

3. By the atoning death of Jesus Christ all 
believers nm Jesus Christ have forgiveness of all 
their sins. We read in Eph. 1:7, ‘‘In whom (i.e., 
in Jesus Christ) we have our redemption through 
His blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, ac- 
cording to the riches of His grace.’’ Because 
Jesus Christ died as a full satisfaction for our 
sins, forgiveness of sin is not something which 
believers are to do something to secure, it is some. 
thing which the blood of Jesus Christ has already 
secured and which our faith has already appro- 
priated to ourselves; ‘‘we have forgiveness,’’ we 
are forgiven. Every believer in Jesus Christ is 
forgiven every sin he ever committed or ever shall 
commit, because Jesus Christ shed His blood in his 
place. Through Christ’s atoning death all believ- 
ers in Him, although they once ‘‘were enemies,’’ 
are now ‘‘reconciled to God by the death of His 


180 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Son.’’ As we read in Rom. 5:10, ‘‘While we were 
enemies, we were reconciled to God through the 
death of His Son.’’ That is to say, the enmity be- 
tween God and the sinner is done away with, or, as 
Paul puts it in Col. 1:20, Christ has ‘‘made peace 
through the blood of His cross,’’ or, as he puts 
it in the next verse but one, Col. 1:22, Christ “‘ hath 
reconciled’’ believers ‘‘in the body of His flesh 
through death.’’ The story is told of a faithful 
vicar in England who was told that one of his par- 
ishioners was dying. She was a good woman, but 
he hurried to her side to talk with her. As he sat 
down by the side of the dying woman he said to 
her very gently but solemnly, ‘‘They tell me you 
have not long to live.’’ ‘‘No,’’ she replied, ‘‘I 
know I have not.’’ ‘‘They tell me you will prob- 
ably not live through the night.’’ ‘‘No,’’ she re- 
plied, ‘‘I do not expect to live through the night.”’ 
Then he said very earnestly, ‘‘Have you made 
your peace with God?’’ She replied, ‘‘No, I have 
not.’’ ‘‘And are you not afraid to meet God 
without having made your peace with Him?’’ 
‘‘No, not at all,’’ she calmly replied. Again he 
_ gaid to her, ‘‘Do you understand what I am say- 
ing? Do you realise that you are at the point of 
death’’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘Do you realise you will prob- 
ably not live through the night?’’ ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘And 
you have not made your peace with God?”’ ‘‘No.”’ 
‘‘And you are not afraid to meet God?’’ ‘‘No, 
not at all.’’ There was something about the 
woman’s manner that made him feel thcre was 


The Atonement 181 


something back of her words, and he said to her, 
‘‘What do you mean?’’ She replied, ‘‘I know I 
am dying. I know I am very near death. I know 
I shall not live through the night. I know I must 
soon meet God, and I am not at all disturbed, for 
I know that I did not need to make my peace with 
God, because Jesus Christ made peace with God 
for me more than eighteen hundred years ago by 
His death on the cross of Calvary, and I am rest- 
ing in the peace that Jesus Christ has already 
made.’’ The woman was right: no man needs to 
make his peace with God, Jesus Christ has already 
made peace by His atoning death, and all we have 
to do is to enter into the peace which Jesus Christ 
has made for us, and we enter into that peace 
by simply believing in the One who made peace by 
His death upon the cross. Jesus Christ’s work 
was a complete and perfect work. There is noth- 
ing to be added to it. We cannot add anything to 
it, and we do not need to add anything to it. Jesus 
Christ has ‘‘made peace through the blood of His 
cross.”’ 

4. The fourth result of the atoning death of 
Jesus Christ is that because of the atoning death 
of Jesus Christ all believers mn Hum are justified. 
We read in Rom. 5:9, ‘‘Being now justified by His 
blood.’’ Justification is more than forgiveness. 
Forgiveness is negative, the putting away of our 
sins, manifested in God’s treating us as if we 
never had sinned. Justification is positive, the 
reckoning of us positively righteous, the imputing 


182 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


to us the perfect righteousness of God in Jesus 
Christ, not merely the treating us as if we had 
never sinned, but the reckoning us clothed upon 
with perfect righteousness. By reason of Jesus 
Christ’s atoning death there is an absolute inter- 
change of position between Jesus Christ and His 
people. In His death upon the cross Jesus Christ 
took our place of condemnation before God, and 
the moment we accept Him we step into His place 
of perfect acceptance before God. As Paul puts 
it in 2 Cor. 5:21, ‘‘Him who knew no sin He made 
to be sin on our behalf; that we might become the 
righteousness of God in Him.’’ Jesus Christ 
stepped into our place in the curse and rejection, 
and the moment we accept Him we step into His 
place of perfect acceptance, or as it has been ex- 
pressed by another: 


‘‘Near, so very near to God, 
Nearer I cannot be; 

For in the person of His Son, 
I’m just as near as He. 


Dear, so very dear to God, 
Dearer I cannot be; 

For in the person of His Son, 
I’m just as dear as He.’’ 


5. Furthermore, because of the full atonement 
that Jesus Christ has made by the shedding of 
His blood, by His atoning death on the cross, every 
believer in Hum can enter boldly into the holy 


The Atonement 183 


place, into the very presence of God. As it is put 
in Heb. 10:19, 20, ‘‘Having therefore, brethren, 
boldness to enter into the holy place (i. e., into 
the very presence of God) by the blood of Jesus, 
by the way which He dedicated for us, a new and 
living way, through the veil, that is to say, His 
flesh; and having a great priest over the house of 
God; let us draw near with a true heart in fullness 
of faith.’’ Oh, how some of us hesitate to come 
into the presence of God when we think of the 
greatness and the number of our sins, and when 
we think how holy God is, how the very seraphim 
(the ‘‘burning ones,’’ burning in their own in- 
tense holiness) veil their faces and feet in His 
presence and unceasingly ery ‘‘Holy, holy, holy, 
is Jehovah of Hosts’’ (Isa. 6:2, 3). ‘‘God is 
Holy,’’ we think. ‘‘Yes.’’ ‘‘And I am a sinner.’’ 
‘“Yes.’? But by the wondrous offering of Christ 
‘Conce for all’’ I am ‘‘perfected forever,’’ and on — 
the ground of that blood so precious and so suf- 
ficient unto God, I can march boldly into the very 
presence of God, look up with unveiled face into 
His face and call Him ‘‘Father,’’ and pour out 
before Him every desire of my heart. Oh, won- 
drous blood! . 

6. But this is not all. Because of the atonng 
death of Jesus Christ those who believe in Hum 
shall ever live with Him. How plainly Paul puts 
it in 1 Thess. 5:10, ‘‘Who died for us, that, wheth- 
er we wake or sleep, (i. e., at His coming), we 
should live together with Him.’’ 


184 Iundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


7. Further yet, because of the atoning death 
of Jesus Christ, all those who believe on Him 
recewe the promise of the eternal wmheritance. 
This is what we are told in Heb. 9:15, ‘‘And for 
this cause He is the mediator of a new covenant, 
that a death having taken place for the redemp- 
tion of the transgressions that were under the first 
covenant, they that have been called may receive 
the promise of the eternal inheritance.’’ I wish 
I had time to dwell upon that. 

8. There are other results of the atoning death 
of Jesus Christ as regards the Devil and his 
angels, into which we have no time to go. Just 
one more thing as regards the results of the aton- 
ing death of Jesus Christ as it relates to the mate- 
rial universe. God teaches us that through the 
death of Jesus Christ the material universe—‘all 
things, whether they be things in earth, or things 
in heaven’’—is reconciled unto God. These are 
His words, ‘‘For it was the good pleasure of the 
Father that in Him (i. e., in Jesus Christ) should 
all the fullness dwell and, having made peace 
through the blood of His cross, by Him to recon- 
cile all things unto Himself; by Him, I say, whether 
they be things in earth, or things in Heaven’’ 
(Col. 1:19, 20). These are wonderful words. They 
tell us that the death of Jesus Christ has a rela- 
tion to the material universe, to things on earth 
and to things in heaven, as well as to us and our 
sins. The material universe has fallen away from 
God in connection with sin (Rom. 8:20, R. V.; Gen. 


The Atonement 185 


3:18). Not only earth but heaven has been invaded 
and polluted by sin (Eph. 6:12, R. V.; Heb. 9:23, 
24). Through the death of Jesus Christ this pol- 
lution is put away. Just as the blood of the Old 
Testament sacrifice was taken into the most holy 
place, the type of heaven, so Christ has taken the 
blood of the better sacrifice into heaven itself and 
cleansed it. ‘‘All things... whether they be 
things in earth or things in heaven’’ are now rec- 
onciled to God. ‘‘The creation itself also shall be 
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the 
liberty of the glory of the children of God’’ (Rom. 
8:21). ‘‘We look for new heavens and a new 
earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness’ (2 Peter — 
3:13). The atonement of Jesus Christ has an im- 
mense sweep—far beyond the reach of our human 
philosophies. We have just begun to understand 
what the blood that was spilled on Calvary means. 
Sin is a far more awful, ruinous, and far-reaching 
evil than we have been wont to think, but the 
blood of Christ has a power and efficiency, the 
fullness of which only eternity will disclose. 


TX 


Tue Distinctive DoctRInE oF PROTESTANTISM : 
JUSTIFICATION BY FaITH 


‘*Be it known unto you therefore, brethren, that through this 
man is proclaimed unto you, remission of sins: and by him every 
one that believeth is justified from all things, from which he 
could not be justified by the law of Moses.’’—Acts 13:38, 39. 

‘*But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that 
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness. ’’— 
Rom. 4:5. 


HESE are two remarkable passages and 
this chapter will be occupied with 
an exposition of them. Our subject this 

morning is, The Distinctive Doctrine of Protest- 
antism: Justification by Faith. The doctrine of 
Justification by Faith was the doctrine that made 
the Reformation. It is to-day one of the cardinal 
doctrines of the Evangelical Faith. This doctrine, 
though first fully expounded and constantly em- 
phasised by Paul, runs throughout the entire Bible 
from Genesis to Revelation. It is in the first book 
of the Bible, the book of Genesis, that we read, 
‘‘Abraham believed in the Lord; and he counted 
it to him for righteousness.’’ (Gen. 15:6.) In 
these words in the very first book in the Bible we 
186 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 187 


have the germ of the whole gracious and precious 
doctrine of Justification by Faith. - 


I. WHAT IS JUSTIFICATION ? 


The first thing for us to understand clearly is 
just what justification is. It is at this point that 
many go astray in their study of this great truth. 
There are two fundamentally different definitions 
of the meaning of the words ‘‘justify’’ and ‘‘justi- 
fication.’’ The one definition of Justify is, to make 
righteous, and of Justification, the being made 
righteous. The other definition of ‘‘justify’’ is, to 
reckon, declare, or show to be righteous, and of 
‘‘Justification,’’ the bemg declared or reckoned 
righteous. On these two different definitions two 
different schools of thought depart from one 
another. Which is the true definition? The way 
to settle the meaning of any word in the Bible is 
by an examination of all the passages in which 
that word and its derivatives is found. If any one 
will go through the Bible, the Old Testament and 
the New, and carefully study all the passages in 
which the word ‘‘justify’’ and its derivatives is 
found, he will discover that beyond a question, m 
Biblical usage, to ‘‘justify’’ means, not to make 
righteous, but to reckon righteousness, declare 
righteous, or show to be righteous. A mantis justi- 
fied before God when God reckons hum righteous. 
This appears, for example, in the fourth chapter 
of Romans, 2nd to 8th verses, R. V. ‘‘For if Abra- 


188 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ham was justified by works, he hath whereof to 
glory; but not toward God. For what saith the 
scripture? And Abraham believed God and it was 
reckoned unto him for righteousness. Now to him 
that worketh, the reward is not reckoned as of 
grace, but as of debt. But to him that worketh 
not, but believeth on him that justifieth the un- 
godly, his faith is reckoned for righteousness even 
as David also pronounced blessing upon the man 
unto whom God reckoneth righteousness apart 
from works, saying, blessed are they whose in- 
iquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, 
blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not 
reckon sin.’’ It is plain from this passage, as 
from many other passages, that a man is justified 
when God reckons him righteous, no matter what 
his principles of character and of conduct may 
have been. We shall see later that justification 
means more than mere forgiveness 


II. HOW ARE MEN JUSTIFIED? 


We come now to the second question, and the 
all-important question, How are men justified? 
In general there are two opposing views of justi- 
fication: one that men are justified by their own 
works, 1.e., on the ground of something which they 
do themselves. This view may be variously ex- 
pressed. The good works that men speak of as a 
ground of their justification may be their good 
moral conduct, or their keeping the Golden Rule, 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 189 


or something of that sort. Or they may be works 
of religion, such as doing penance, saying pray- 
ers, Joining the church, going to church, being bap- 
tised, or partaking of the Lord’s Supper, or the 
performance of some other religious duties. But 
these all amount to the same thing: it is something 
that we ourselves do that brings justification, some 
works of our own, some works that we do, are 
taken as the ground of our justification. The other 
view of justification is that we are justified, not 
by our own works in any sense, but entirely by 
the work of another, i.e., by the atoning death of 
Jesus Christ on the cross of Calvary, that our 
own works have nothing to do with our justifica- 
tion, but that we are justified entirely by Christ’s 
finished and complete work of atonement, by His 
death for us on the Cross, and that all that we 
have to do with our justification is merely to ap- 
propriate it to ourselves by simply trusting in Him 
who made the atonement. Which is the correct 
view? We shall go directly to the Bible for the 
answer to this all-important question. 

1. The first part of the answer we will find in 
Rom. 3:20, ‘‘Therefore by the deeds of the law 
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for 
through the law cometh the knowledge of sin.’’ 
It is here very plainly stated that we are not justi- 
fied by keeping the law of God, either the Mosaic 
law or any other law, and that the law is given, not 
to bring us justification, but to bring us a knowl- 
edge of sin, i.e., to bring us to the realisation of 


190 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


our need of justification by grace. It is plainly 
stated here that no man 1s justified by works of 
the law. The same great truth is found in Gal. 
2:16: ‘‘Knowing that a man is not justified by 
the works of the law, save through faitb ‘in Jesus 
Christ, even we believed on Christ Jesus, that we 
might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by 
the works of the law: for by the works of the law 
shall no flesh be justified.’’ Justification by any 
works of our own is an impossibility. It is an im- 
possibility because to be justified by works of the 
law, or by anything we can do, we must perfectly 
keep the law of God. The law demands perfect 
obedience as a ground of justification. It says, 
‘‘Cursed is every one that continueth not in all 
things that are written in the book of the law to 
do them.’’ (Gal. 3:10.). But not one of us has 
perfectly kept the law of God, and the moment we 
break the law of God at any point, justification by 
works becomes an absolute impossibility. So as 
far as the law of God is concerned, every one of 
us is ‘‘under the curse,’’ and if we are justified at 
all we must find some other way of justification 
than by keeping the law of God. God did not give 
man the law with the expectation or intention that 
he would keep it and be justified thereby. He gave 
them the law to produce conviction of sin, to stop 
men’s mouths, and to lead them to Christ. Or, as 
Paul puts it in Rom. 3:19, 20, ‘‘Now ye know that 
what things soever the law saith, it speaketh to 
them that are under the law; that every mouth 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 191 


may be stopped, and all the world may be brought 
under the judgment of God: because by the works 
of the law shall no flesh be justified in his sight: 
for through the law cometh the knowledge of sin.’’ 
As plain as these words of God are, strangely 
enough there are many to-day who are preaching 
the law as a way of salvation. But when they so 
preach they are preaching another way of salva- 
tion than that laid down in God’s own word. 

2. The second part of the answer to the ques- 
tion as to how we are justified we find in Rom. 
3:24, ‘‘Being justified freely by his grace through 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.’’ The 
word translated ‘‘freely’’ in this passage means, 
as a free gift, and the verse tells us that men are 
justified as a free gift by God’s grace (i.e., God’s 
unmerited favour) through (i.e., on the ground of) 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. In other 
words, justification is not on the ground of any 
desert there is in us, not on the ground of any- 
thing that we have done, we are not justified by 
our own doing nor by our own character. Justi 
fication is a free gift that God bestows absolutely 
without pay. The channel through which this free 
gift is bestowed is the redempfion that is in Christ 
Jesus. .. We shall see later that this means through 
the purchase price that Christ paid for our re- 
demption, i.e., the shedding of His blood on the 
cross of Calvary. 

3. This leads us to the third part of the answer 
to the question, how men are justified. We find 


192 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


this third part of the answer in Rom. 5:9, ‘‘Much 
more then, being now justified by his blood, shall 
we be saved from the wrath of God through 
Him.’’ Here we are told in so many words 
that we are justified, or counted righteous 
‘“by,’? or more literally, ‘‘in,’’ Christ’s blood,’’ 
le, on the ground of Christ’s propitia- 
tory death. We were all under the curse of the 
broken law of God, for we had all broken it, but 
by dying in our stead on the cross of Calvary our 
Lord Jesus ‘‘Christ redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, having become a curse for us; for it is 
written, cursed is every one that hangeth on a 
tree.’’ (Gal. 3:13.) Or, as Peter puts it in 1 Pet. 
2:24, ‘*Who his own self bare our sins in his own 
body upon the tree.’’ Or as Paul puts it again in 
2 Cor. 5:21, ‘‘Him who knew no sin he (God) 
made to be sin on our behalf; that we might be- 
come the righteousness of God in Him.’’ We shall 
have occasion to come back to this passage later. 
All that I wish you to notice in it at this time is 
that it is on the ground of Jesus Christ becoming 
a substitute for us, on the ground of His taking the 
place we deserved; on the cross, that we are reck- 
oned righteous. THE ONE AND ONLY GROUND OF 
JUSTIFICATION IS THE SHED BLOOD OF JESUS CHRIST. 
Of course, this doctrine is entirely different from 
the teaching of Christian Science, and entirely dif- 


ferent from the teaching of much that is called | 


New Theology, and entirely different from the 
teaching of New Thought and Theosophy, and en- 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 193 


tirely different from the teaching of Unitarianism, 
but it is the teaching of the Word of God. We 
find this same teaching clearly given by the 
prophet Isaiah seven hundred years before our 
Lord was born, in Isaiah 53:6, where he says, 
‘‘All we like sheep have gone astray; we have 
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord 
hath laid (literally, made to strike) on him (i.e., 
on the Lord Jesus) the iniquity of us all.’’ Get 
this point clearly settled in your mind, that the 
sole but all-suficient ground upon which men are 
justified before God is the shed blood of Jesus 
Christ, offered by Jesus Christ as an atonement 
for our sins and accepted by God the Father as 
an all-sufficient atonement. 

4. The fourth part of the answer to the ques- 
tion how men are justified we find in Rom. 3:26, 
‘‘For the showing, I say, of his (i.e., God’s) 
righteousness at this present season: that he (i.e., 
God) might himself be just, and the justifier of 
him that hath faith in Jesus.’’ Here we are taught 
that men are justified on the condition of faith in 
Jesus. If possible, Rom. 4:5 makes this even more 
plain, ‘‘But to him that worketh not but believeth 
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is 
reckoned for righteousness.’’ Here the Holy 
Spirit, speaking through the Apostle Paul, tells us 
that to those who: believe in Jesus their faith is 
counted for righteousness. In other words, fash 
makes ours the shed blood which is the ground 
of justification, and we are justified when we be- 


194. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


lieve. All men are potentially justified by the 
death of Christ on the cross, but believers are 
actually justified by appropriating to themselves 
what there is of justifying value in the shed blood 
of Christ by simple faith in Him. In other words, 
the shed blood of Christ is the sole and all-suffi- 
cient ground of justification: simple faith in Jesus 
Christ who shed the blood is the sole condition of 
justification. God asks nothing else of the sinner 
than that he should believe on His Son, Jesus 
Christ, and when he does thus believe he ts justi- 
fied. When we believe we are justified, whether we 
have any works to offer or not; or, as Paul puts 
it in Rom. 3:28, ‘‘We reckon therefore that a man 
is justified by faith apart from works of the law.’’ 
Or, as it is put in the verse already quoted, Rom. 
4:5, ‘*But to him that worketh not, but believeth 
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is 
reckoned for righteousness.’’ A man is justified 
entirely apart from works of the law, 1.e., he is 
justified on condition that he believes on Jesus 
Christ, even though he has no works to offer as the 
ground upon which to claim justification. When 
we cease to work for justification and simply ‘‘be- 
lieve on Him who justifieth the ungodly,’’ that 
faith is reckoned to us for righteousness, and 
therefore we are counted righteous. The question 
then is not, have you any works to offer, but do 
you believe on Him who justifies the ungodly. 
Works have nothing to do with justification except 
ito hinder it when we trust in them. The blood of 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 195 


Jesus Christ secures it, faith in Jesus Christ ap- 
propriates it. We are justified not by our works, 
but by His work. We are justified upon the sim- 
ple and single ground of His shed blood and upon 
the simple and single condition of our faith in Him 
Who shed the blood. So great is the pride of the 
natural heart that it is exceedingly difficult to hold 
men to this doctrine of justification by faith alone 
apart from works of law. We are constantly seek- 
ing to bring in our works somewhere. 

5. But we have not as yet completely an- 
swered the question of how men are Justified. 
There is another side to the truth and if our doc- 
trine of justification is to be complete and well- 
balanced, we must look at that other side. You 
will find part of this other side in Rom. 10:8, 10, 
‘‘If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as 
Lord, and shalt believe in thy heart that God 
raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved; 
for with the heart man believeth unto righteous- 
ness; and with the mouth confession is made unto 
salvation.’’ God here tells us that the faith that 
appropriates justification is a faith with the heart, 
1.e., a faith that is not a mere notion, or opinion, 
but a faith that leads to action along the line of 
that faith, and it is therefore a faith that leads 
to open confession with the mouth, of Jesus as our 
Lord. If some one has some kind of faith, or 
what he calls faith, that does not lead him‘to an 
open confession of Christ, he has a faith that does 
not justify; for it is not a faith with the heart. 


196 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself tells us that heart 
faith leads to open confession; for He says in 
Matt. 12:34, ‘‘Out of the abundance of the heart 
the mouth speaketh.’’ Faith in Jesus Christ in 
the heart leads inevitably to a confession of Jesus 
as Lord with the mouth, and if you are not con- 
fessing Jesus as your Lord with your mouth you 
have not justifying faith and you are not justified. 

6. The rest of the other side of the truth about 
being justified by faith, you will find in Jas. 2:14, 
18-24, R. V. ‘‘What doth it profit, my brethren, if 
a man say he hath faith but have not works? Can 
that faith save him?’’ We see here that a faith 
that a man merely says he has, but that does not 
lead to works along the line of that which he claims 
to believe, cannot justify, but to go on, verses 18- 
24, ‘‘Yea, a man will say, thou hast faith, and I 
have works: show me thy faith apart from thy 
works, and I by my works will show thee my faith. 
Thou believest that God is one; thou doest well: 
the devils also believe and shudder. But wilt thow 
know, O vain man, that faith apart from works 
is barren? Was not Abraham our father justified 
by works, in that he offered up Isaac his son, upon 
the altar? Thou seest that faith wrought with his 
works, and by works was faith made perfect (i.e., 
in the works to which Abraham’s faith led, faith 
had its perfect manifestation) ; and the scripture 
was fulfilled which saith, and Abraham believed 
God, and it was reckoned unto him for righteous- 
ness; and he was called the friend of God. Ye see 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 197 


that by works a man is justified, and not only by 
faith.’’ Some see in these words a contradiction 
between the teaching of James and the teaching of 
Paul, but there is no contradiction whatever. But 
James here teaches us an important truth, namely, 
that the faith that one says he has, but which does 
not manifest itself mn action along the line of the 
faith professed, will not justify. The fartth that 
justifies 1s real faith that leads to action accordant 
with the truth we profess to beheve. It is true 
that we are justified simply upon faith apart from 
the works of the law, but 1¢ must be a real fasth, 
otherwise it does not justify. As some one has 
put it, ‘‘We are justified by faith without works, 
but we are not justified by a faith that is without 
works.’’ The faith which God sees and upon 
which He justifies, leads inevitably to works which 
men can see. God saw the faith of Abraham the 
moment Abraham believed, and before there was 
any opportunity to work, and counted that faith 
to Abraham for righteousness. But the faith that 
God saw was a real faith and led Abraham to 
works that all could see, and these works proved 
the reality of his faith. The proof to us of the 
faith is the works, and we know that he that does 
not work has not justifying faith. 

We must not lose sight on the one side of the 
truth which Paul emphasises against legalism, 
namely, that we are justified on the single and 
simple condition of a real faith in Christ; but on 
the other side we must not lose sight of the truth 


198 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


which James emphasises against antinomianism, 
namely, that it is only a real faith that proves its 
genuineness by works, that justifies. To the legal- 
ist who is seeking to do something to merit justi- 
fication we must say, ‘‘Stop working and believe 
on Him that justifieth the ungodly’’ (Rom. 4:5). 
To the antinomian, i.e., to the one who thinks he 
can live a lawless, careless, unseparated, sinful 
life and still be justified, the one who boasts that 
he has faith and is justified by it, but who does 
not show his faith by his works, we must say, 
‘‘What doth it profit, if a man say he have faith, 
but have not works? Can that faith save him? 
(Jas. 2:14, R. V.) Weare justified by faith alone, 
but we are not justified by a faith that is alone, but 
a faith that is accompanied by works. 


lil. THE EXTENT OF JUSTIFICATION 


I think we have made it plain just how one is 
justified, and now we come to another question 
and that is, the extent of justification. To what 
extent is a man who believes in the Lord Jesus 
justified? This question is very plainly answered 
and wonderfully answered, and gloriously an- 
swered in Acts 13:38, 39, ‘‘Be it known unto you 
therefore, brethren, that through this man is pro- 
claimed unto you remission of sins: and by him 
every one that believeth is justified from all 
things, from which he could not be justified by the 
law of Moses.’’ These words very plainly declare 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 199 


to us that every believer in Jesus Christ is justi- 
fied ‘‘from all things.’’ In other words, the old ac- 
count against the believer is all wiped out. No 
matter how bad and how black the account is, the 
moment a man believes in Jesus Christ, the ac- 
count is wiped out. God has absolutely nothing 
which He reckons against the one who believes in 
Jesus Christ. Even though he is still a very im- 
perfect believer, a very young man and immature 
Christian, he is perfectly justified. As Paul puts 
it in Rom. 8:1, ‘‘There is therefore now no condem- 
nation to them that are in Christ Jesus.’’ Or, as he 
puts it further down in the chapter, verses 33, 34, 
‘“Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s 
elect? It is God that justifieth; who is he that 
shall condemn? It is Christ Jesus that died, yea 
rather, that was raised from the dead, who is at 
the right hand of God, who also maketh interces- 
sion for us.’’ If the vilest murderer or sinner of 
any kind on earth should come in here this morn- 
ing and right here now, hearing the gospel of 
God’s grace, should believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, put confidence in Him as his Saviour, and 
accept Him as such, surrendering to Him and con- 
fessing Him as His Lord, the moment he did it 
every sin he ever committed would be blotted out 
and his record would be as white in God’s sight as 
that of the purest angel in heaven. God has abso- 
lutely nothing that He reckons against the believer 
in Jesus Christ. But even that is not all. Paul 
goes even beyond this in 2 Cor. 5:21, ‘‘He who 


200 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


knew no sin he (God) made to be sin on our be- 
half; that we might become the righteousness of 
God in him.’’ Here we are explicitly told that the 
believer in Jesus Christ is made the righteousness 
of God in Christ. In Phil. 3:9, R. V. we are told 
that when one is in Christ he has a righteousness 
not of his own, but a ‘righteousness which is of 
God upon faith.’’ In other words, there is an abso- 
lute interchange of positions between Christ and 
the justified believer. Christ took our place, the 
place of the curse on the cross (Gal. 3:13). He 
was ‘‘made to be sin on our behalf’? (2 Cor. 
5:21). God reckoned Him a sinner and dealt with 
Him as a sinner, so that in the sinner’s place, as 
He died, He cried, ‘‘My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me?’’ And when we are justified 
we step into His place, the place of perfect accept- 
ance before God, or to use the exact words of 
Scripture, we ‘‘Become the righteousness of God 
in him.’’ To be justified is more than to be for- 
given! Forgiveness is negative, the putting away 
of sin; Justification is positive, the reckoning of 
positive and perfect righteousness to the one jus- 
tified. Jesus Christ is so united to the believer in 
Him that God reckons our sins to Him. The be- 
liever, on the other hand, is so united to Christ 
that God reckons His righteousness to us. God 
sees us, not as we are in ourselves, but as we are 
in Him and reckons us as righteous as He is. 
When Christ’s work im us is completed we shall 
be in actual fact what we are already in God’s 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 201 


reckoning, but the moment one believes, as far 
_ as God’s reckoning is concerned, he is as abso- 
lutely perfect as he ever shall be. Our present 
standing before God is absolutely perfect, though 
our present state may be very imperfect. To use 
again the familiar couplet: 


‘‘Near, so very near to God, 
Nearer I cannot be; 

For in the person of His Son, 
IT am just as near as He. 


Dear, so very dear to God, 
Dearer I cannot be; 

For in the person of His Son, 
I am just as dear as He.”’ 


IV. THE TIME OF JUSTIFICATION 


There remains one question still to consider, 
though we have really answered it in what has 
already been said, and that is, the time of justifi- 
cation, or when a believer is justified. When is a 
believer justified? This question is answered 
plainly in one of our texts, Acts 13:39, ‘‘And by 
him every one that believeth is justified from all 
things, from which he could not be justified by the 
law of Moses.’’ What I wish you to notice par- 
ticularly now in this verse is the word Is, ‘‘ Every- 
one that believeth 2s justified from all things.’’ 
This answers plainly the question as to when a 
believer is justified. In Christ Jesus every be- 


202 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


liever in Him is justified from all things the 
moment he believes. The moment a man believes 
in Jesus Christ that moment he becomes united to 
Christ, and that moment God reckons the right- 
eousness of God to him. I repeat again, if the 
vilest murderer or sinner of any kind in the world 
should come into this room this morning while I 
am preaching and should here and now believe in 
the Lord Jesus Christ, the moment that he did it, 
not only would every sin he ever committed be 
blotted out, but all the perfect righteousness of 
God in Christ would be put to his account, and his 
standing before God would be as perfect as it will 
be when he has been in heaven ten million years. 
Let me repeat to you again the incident I told you 
one Sunday night some weeks ago. I was preach- 
ing one Sunday morning in the Moody church in 
Chicago on Kom. 8:1, ‘‘There is therefore now no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,’’ 
and in the course of my preaching I said, ‘‘If the 
vilest woman there is in Chicago should come into 
the Chicago Avenue church this morning, and 
should here and now accept Jesus Christ as her 
Saviour, the moment she did it every sin she ever 
committed would be blotted out and her record 
would be as white in God’s sight as that of the 
purest woman in the room.’’ Unknown to me, 
one of the members of my congregation that very 
morning had gone down into a low den of iniquity 
near the river and had invited a woman who was 
an outcast to come and hear me preach. The 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 203 


woman replied, ‘‘I never go to church. Church is 
not for the likes of me. I would not be welcome at 
the church if I did go.’’? The woman who was a 
saint replied, ‘‘You would be welcome at our 
church,’’ which, thank God, was true. But, ‘‘No,’’ 
the woman urged, ‘‘it would not do for me to go 
to church, church is not for the likes of me.’’ But 
the woman who was a saint urged the woman who 
was a sinner to go. She offered to accompany her 
to the church, but the other said, ‘‘No, that would 
never do. The policemen know me and the boys 
on the street know me and sometimes throw stones 
at me, and if they saw you going up the street 
with me they would think you such as I am.’’ But 
the woman who was a saint had the Spirit of the 
Master and said, ‘‘I don’t care what they think 
of me. If you will accompany me to hear Mr. — 
Torrey preach I will go along with you.’’ The 
other woman refused. But the saved woman was 
so insistent that the woman who was an outcast 
finally said, ‘‘If you will go up the street a few 
steps ahead I will follow you up the street.’’ So 
up La Salle Avenue they came, the woman who 
was a saint a few steps ahead and the woman who 
was a sinner a few steps behind. Block after 
block they came until they reached the corner of 
La Salle and Chicago Avenues. The woman who 
was a Saint entered the tower door at the corner, 
went up the steps, entered the church, and the 
woman who was a sinner followed her. On reach- 
ing the door the woman who was a sinner looked 


204. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


in, saw a vacant seat under the gallery in the very 
last row at the back, and slipped into it, and scarce- 
ly had she taken the seat when I made the remark 
that I just quoted, ‘‘If the vilest woman there is in 
Chicago should come into the Chicago Avenue 
church this morning and should here and now ac- 
cept Jesus Christ as her personal Saviour, the 
moment she did it every sin she ever committed 
would be blotted out and her record would be as 
white in God’s sight as that of the purest woman 
in the room.’’ My words went floating down over 
the audience and dropped into the heart of the 
woman who was asinner. She believed it, she be- 
lieved that Jesus died for her, she believed that 
by the shedding of His blood she could be saved, 
she believed, and found pardon and peace and 
justification then and there. And when the meet- 
ing was over she came up the aisle to the front as 
I stepped down from the pulpit, tears streaming 
down her face, and thanked me for the blessing 
that she had received. And I repeat it here this 
morning, not knowing who may be here, not know- 
ing what may be the secret life of any one of you 
who is here, not knowing what may be the sins 
that may be hidden in your heart, if the vilest man 
or woman on earth should come into the Church of 
the Open Door this morning and should here and 
now put their trust in Jesus Christ, the moment 
you did it every sin you ever committed would be 
blotted out and in an instant your record would be 
as white in God’s sight, not only as that of the 


The Distinctive Doctrine of Protestantism 208 


purest woman in the room, but as that of the 
purest angel in heaven, and not only that, but all 
the perfect righteousness of God that clothed our 
Lord Jesus Christ would be put to your account 
and you would be just as near and just as dear 
to God as the Lord Jesus Christ Himself is. That 
is the doctrine of justification by faith. Won- 
drous doctrine! Glorious doctrine! 


D4 


Tse New Brre 


‘¢ Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto 
thee, except a man be born anew, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God. . . . Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a 
man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of God.’’—John 3:3, 5. 


UR subject in this chapter is Regeneration, 

or the New Birth. I spoke on this subject 

a year or so ago, but I am going to treat 

it in an entirely different way in this chapter and 

furthermore no course of sermons on the F'unda- 

mental Doctrines of the Christian Faith would be 

complete without a sermon on the New Birth. 

What we have to say in this chapter will come un- 

der four heads: I. What Is the New Birth? ILI. 

The Results of the New Birth, III. The Necessity 
of the New Birth, IV. How One Is Born Again. 


I. Wuat is tHe New Brrr? 


The first question that confronts us is, What is 
the New Birth? Many speak of the New Birth 
or of Regeneration without any definite concep- 
tion of Just what the New Birth is, and so are 

206 


The New Birth 207 


never sure whether they themselves have been 
born again or not. 

As plain and clear a definition of the New Birth 
as we can find in the Word of God is given in 2 
Pet. 1:4, ‘‘Whereby he hath granted unto us his 
precious and exceeding great promises; that 
through these ye may become partakers of the 
divine nature, having escaped from the corruption 
that is in the world by lust.’’ From these words 
of Peter it is evident that the New Birth is the im- 
partation to the one who is born again, of a new 
nature, God’s own nature. By being born again 
we become actual partakers of the Divine nature. 
We are all born into this world with a corrupted 
intellectual and moral nature. The natural man, 
or unregenerate man, is intellectually blind, blind 
to the truth of God, ‘‘the things of the Spirit’’ 
he cannot see or receive. ‘‘They are foolishness 
unto him, and he cannot know them’’ (1 Cor. 2: 
14). His affections are corrupt, he loves the 
things he ought to hate and hates the things he 
ought to love. A definite description of the af- 
fections and tastes and desires of the unregenerate 
man is found in Gal. 5:19, 20, 21. He is also per- 
verse in his will, as Paul puts it in Rom. 8:7, 
‘‘The mind of the flesh is enmity against God; 
for it is not st. ject to the law of God, neither in- 
deed can be.’’ This state of intellectual spiritual 
blindness and moral corruption is the condition of 
every unregenerate man. No matter how cultured 
or refined or moral he may be outwardly, his inner 


208 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


life is radically wrong. In the New Birth God im- 
parts to the one who is born again His own wise 
and holy nature, a nature that thinks as God thinks 
(He is renewed in knowledge after the image of 
him that created him’’—Col. 3:10); he feels as 
God feels, loves the things that God loves, hates 
the things that God hates, wills as God wills (1 
John 3:14; 4:7, 8). It is evident then that regen- 
eration is a deep thorough-going change in the 
deepest springs of thought, feeling and action. A 
change so thorough-going that Paul says in 2 Cor. 
5:17, ‘‘If any man is in Christ, he is a new crea- 
ture (more exactly, Creation): the old things are 
passed away; behold they are become new.’’ To 
use the inspired language of the Apostle John, re- 
generation is a passing ‘‘out of death into life.”’ 
John says in 1 John 3:14, ‘“We know that we have 
passed out of death into life.’’ Until we are thus 
born again we are in a condition of moral and 
spiritual death. When we are born again we are 
‘‘quickened’’ (or made alive), we who ‘‘were dead 
through our trespasses and sins.’’ (Eph. 2:1). 
There is a profound contrast between regenera- 
tion and mere conversion. Conversion is an out- 
ward thing, a turning around. One is faced the 
wrong way, faced away from God; he turns around 
and faces toward God. That is conversion. But 
regeneration is not a mere outward change, but a 
thorough-going change in the deepest depths of 
one’s being, that leads to a genuine conversion or 
genuine outward change. Many an apparently 


The New Birth 209 


thorough conversion is a temporary thing because. 
it did not go deep enough, but regeneration is a 
permanent thing. When God imparts His nature 
to a man, that nature abides in the man. When 
he is born again he cannot be unborn, or as John 
puts it in 1 John 3:9, ‘“Whosoever is begotten of 
God doth no sin, because his (God’s) seed abideth. 
in him.’’ A man may be converted a thousand. 
times, he can be regenerated but once. 


II RESULTS OF THE NEW BIRTH 


We now come to the second question, closely 
related to the first, and it will help us to under-. 
stand even more clearly what the New Birth is. 
What are the results that follow when one 1s born. 
agawm? They are numerous. 

1. The first of these results is found in 1 Cor. 
6:19, where we read: ‘‘Know ye not that your: 
body is a temple of the Holy Ghost which is in 
you, which ye have from God?’’ These words were 
spoken to believers, to regenerated men, and they 
plainly tell us that when one ts born again, the 
Holy Spirit comes to take up His permanent dwell-. 
ng m the man and that the man who is born. 
agam thus becomes a temple of the Holy Spirit. 
It is true that we may not always be conscious of 
this indwelling of the Holy Spirit, nevertheless He 
dwells in us. 

2. The second result of the New Birth is found 
in Rom. 8:2-4, where we read: ‘‘For the law of 


210 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free 
from the law of sin and of death. For what the 
law could not do, in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God, sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh and as an offering for sin, condemned 
sin in the flesh: that the ordinance of the law might 
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but 
after the Spirit.’’ In the 7th chapter of Romans, 
we have a picture of the man who is awakened by 
the law of God which he approves after the in- 
ward man, which he sees ‘‘is holy and just and 
good,’’ which he tries to keep in his own strength, 
but utterly fails to keep, until at last he comes to 
an end of himself and is filled with despair of ever 
being able to keep the law of God outside of him, 
because of the law of sin and death inside him, 
which law of sin and death says, ‘‘the good which 
you would do you cannot do, and the evil which 
you hate and would not do, you must keep on do- 
ing.’? When a man is thus brought to a con- 
sciousness of his own utter helplessness and turns 
to God and accepts Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, 
whom Jesus Christ gives to him who dwells in 
him, sets him free from this law of sin and death 
so that by the power of the indwelling Spirit he is 
enabled to obey the law of God and to get the vic- 
tory over the evil things that he would not do and 
to do the things which he would do. Whereas in 
a man merely awakened by the law of God, ‘‘the 
law of sin and death’’ gets a perpetual victory, in 
a regenerate man, the ‘‘law of the Spirit of life 


The New Birth 211 


in Christ Jesus’’ gets the perpetual victory. 
Doubtless many of you here to-day are still strug- 
gling to keep the law of God and utterly failing 
in your attempt to do so. What you need is to be 
born again, and thus have the Holy Spirit come 
to dwell in you, and then to walk by the Spirit, 
and by the power of this indwelling Spirit to get 
victory every day and hour over the law of sin 
and death that wars in your members against the 
law of God. 

3. The third result of the New Birth is found 
in Rom. 12:2, where we read, ‘‘And be not fash- 
ioned according to this world: but be ye trans- 
formed by the renewing of your mind.’’ From this 
it appears that the third result of the New Birth 
is in outward transformation of our lives by the 
enward renewing of our minds so that we no long- 
er are fashioned accordmg to this world. Of 
course the regenerated man does not at once mani- 
fest perfectly that of which he has the germ in 
himself. He begins the new life just as we begin 
our natural lives, as a babe, and he must grow. 
As Peter puts it in 1 Pet. 2:2, we must ‘‘As new 
born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, 
that we may grow thereby.’’ This new life must 
be fed and developed. It is irrational, and unwar- 
ranted by the Word of God, to expect one who has 
just been born again, and who is consequently 
a babe in Christ, to be as perfect in character as 
one who was born years ago and who has grown 
to maturity. But the moment we are born again 


212 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


we receive in germ all the moral perfection that 
is to be ours when this germ is fully developed 
within us and comes to its perfect manifestation. 

4. The fourth result of the New Birth we find 
in 1 John 5:1, ‘Whosoever believeth that Jesus is 
the Christ is begotten of God.’’ The fourth re- 
sult of bemg born agam is that the regenerated 
man believes that Jesus is the Christ. Of course 
this faith that comes from the New Birth is a real 
faith. The faith that John here speaks of is not 
a faith that is a mere opinion, but that real faith 
that Jesus is the anointed of God that leads us to 
enthrone Jesus as King in our lives. If you are 
not making Jesus King in your heart and life you 
have not been born again. But if you are making 
Jesus King in your heart and life and absolute 
ruler of your thoughts and conduct, then you are 
born again, for ‘‘Whosoever believeth that Jesus 
is Christ is begotten of God.’’ 

5. The fifth result of being born again we find 
three verses further down in this same chapter, 
1 John 5:4: ‘‘For whatsoever is begotten of God 
overcometh the world.’’ The fifth result of being 
born of God is that the one thus born again over- 
comes the world. The world is at variance with 
God, ‘‘The whole world lieth in the Evil One’’ (1 
John 5:19). It is under the dominion of the Evil 
One, ruled by his ambitions and ideas. The world 
is at variance with God in its commercial life, 
social life, domestic life, and all the phases of in- 
tellectual life and educational life, and is constant- 


The New Birth 213 


ly exercising a power over each of us to draw us 
into disobedience to God (see 1 John 5:3); but 
the one born of God by the power of the faith that 
comes through being born again, gets the victory 
over the world. He gets the victory over the 
world’s ideas, purposes, plans, ambitions. He 
gets the victory over the world in his personal 
life, domestic life, commercial life, political life, 
intellectual life every day. 

6. The sixth result of being born of God is 
found in 1 John 3:9, R. V., ‘‘Whosoever is begot- 
ten of God doeth no sin; because his (i.e., God’s) 
seed abideth in him: and he cannot sin (rather, 
cannot be sinning), because he is begotten of God.’’ 
The sixth result, then, of bemg born of God is 
that wm the one born of God the seed of God re- 
mains; and, therefore, the one born of God ts not 
making a practice of sm. Some one will ask, just 
what does this mean? It means exactly what it 
says, if we look carefully at the exact force of 
the words used and give due emphasis to the tense 
of the verbs used. First of all, let us look at the 
exact force of the word translated ‘‘Sin.’’? What 
does sin mean? John himself has been careful to 
define it in the verse itself and in the context in 
which our verse is found. The first thing that is 
evident from 1 John 3:9 is that sin is a something 
done, not merely a something left undone, and not 
merely sinful thoughts and desires. What kind 
of a something done it is defined five verses back 
in verse 4. ‘‘Everyone that doeth sin doeth also 


214 Fundamental! Doctrines of Christian Faith 


lawlessness; and sin is lawlessness.’’ Sin here 
by John’s own definition (and we have no right 
to bring the definition of any one else into the 
verse we are studying) is “‘lawlessness,’’ 1.e., such 
acts as reveal conscious disregard for the will of 
God as revealed in His word. So we see that 
gm, as used here, means, a conscious intentional 
violation of the law of God. The regenerate man 
will not be dowg that which he knows to be con- 
trary to the will of God. He may do that which 
is contrary to God’s will, but which he does not 
know to be contrary to God’s will. It is not there- 
fore ‘‘lawlessness.’? Perhaps he ought to have 
known that it was contrary to God’s will and when 
he is led to see that it is, he will confess his guilt to 
God. Furthermore, we should note the tense of 
the verb used in this verse. It is the present tense 
which denotes progressive or continuous action. 
A literal translation of the passage would be, 
‘‘Kiveryone begotten out of God, sin is not dowmg. 
because His (God’s) seed in him is remaining; 
and he cannot be sinning, because out of God he 
is begotten.’’ It is not taught here that one born 
of God never sins in a single act, but it is taught 
that he is not going on sinning, not making a prac- 
tice of sin. Of what he is making a practice ap- 
pears in 1 John 2:29, ‘‘If ye know that he is right- 
eous, ye know that everyone also that doeth 
righteousness is begotten of him.’’ The result, 
then, of being born agam 1s that the one begotten 
again does not go on consctously day after day 


Lhe New Birth 215 


downg that which he knows to be contrary to the 
will of God, but he does make a practice of ‘‘ doing 
righteousness,’’ t.e., doing that which 1s conformed 
to the will of God as revealed in His Word. The 
new nature imparted in regeneration renders the 
continuous practice of sin impossible and renders 
the practice of righteousness inevitable. 

7. The seventh result of the New Birth is 
found in 1 John 3:14, R. V., ‘‘We know that we 
have passed out of death into life, because we love 
the brethren. He that loveth not abideth in 
death.’’ The seventh result of being born again 
ws that we love the brethren. We should note care- 
fully what the thought of ‘‘love’’ is as brought out 
in the context. It is not love as a mere sentiment. 
It is love in that higher and deeper sense of a de- 
sire for and delight in the welfare of others, the 
sort of love that leads us to make sacrifices for 
those we love, or as we read further down in this 
same chapter, verses 16-18, ‘‘Hereby know we the 
love of God, because he laid down his life for us 
and we ought to lay down our lives for the breth- 
ren. But whoso hath this world’s goods, and be- 
hold his brother in need, and shutteth up his com- 
passion from him, how doth the love of God abide 
in him? My little children, let us not love in word 
neither with the tongue; but in deed and truth.’’ 
This makes it very evident that what the Holy 
Spirit here means by love is not a mere affection 
or fondness for others, not a mere delight in their 
society ; it means that deep and genuine interest in 


216 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


their welfare that leads us to go down into our 
pockets when they are in need and supply their 
need; it leads us to sacrifice our own interest for 
the sake of their interests even to the point of lay- 
ing down our lives for them. The objects of this 
love are ‘‘the brethren,’’ i.e., all those who are 
begotten of God, as we read in 1 John 5:1, ‘*Who- 
soever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is begot- 
ten of God: and whosoever loveth him that begat 
loveth him also that is begotten of him.’’ <Any 
man who is born again will love every other man 
who ts begotten of God. The other one who is be- 
gotten of God may be an American or a German, 
or an Englishman, or a negro, or a Chinaman, or 
an Indian. He may be educated or uneducated; 
but he is a child of God and a brother, and as such 
if you are born of God, he will be the object of 
your love. This is a searching test of whether or 
not one is born of God. 

8. The final result of being born of God that 
we will consider this morning is found in 2 Cor. 
5:17, R. V., ‘“Wherefore if any man is in Christ, 
he is a new creature (creation): the old things are 
passed away, behold, they are become new.’’ The 
ninth result of being born again, including all the 
other results that we have been considering, is 
that wn the regenerate man, old things are passed 
away, they are become new. In the place of the 
old ideas, old affection, old purposes, old choices, 
are new wdeas, new affections, new purposes, new 
choices. 


The New Birth 217 


lil. THE NECESSITY OF THE NEW BIRTH 


For just a few moments let us look at the ne- 
eessity of the New Birth. This is set forth in one 
of our texts and in the verses following, 1 John 
3:5, 6: ‘‘Verily, Verily, I say unto you, except a 
man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God. That which is born 
of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the 
Spirit is Spirit.’’ We see here that the New Birth 
is a universal necessity, and we see why it is a 
necessity. The words translated, ‘‘ Except a man 
be born,’’ etc. more literally translated would be, 
‘If any man be not born out of water and Spirit, 
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.’’ And 
why he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God the 
following verse says, and that is because all that 
one gets by natural generation is ‘‘Flesh’’ and 
the Kingdom of God is spiritual, and, therefore, 
to enter it one must be born of the Spirit. No 
matter how refined and intelligent our ancestry, 
no matter how godly our fathers and mothers may 
have been, we do not get the Holy Spirit from 
them. All we get is ‘‘flesh.’’ It may be refined 
flesh, moral flesh, upright and very attractive 
flesh, but it is flesh; and ‘‘they that are in the 
flesh cannot please God,’’ nor ‘‘inherit the king- 
dom of God.’’ The flesh is incapable of improve- 
ment. No more ‘‘can the Ethiopian change his 
skin, or the leopard his spots’’ than can a man 


218 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


who is unregenerate attain to a life pleasing to 
God. (See Jer. 13:23.) He must be born again. 
The necessity 1s also absolute and wmperative, so 
absolute and imperative that Jesus said to Nico- 
demus, though he was a man of most exemplary 
morality, a man of high moral and spiritual edu- 
cation, a teacher of Israel, a leader in the reli- 
gious life of Israel, ‘‘You must be born again.”’ 
(John 3:7.) Nothing else will take the place of 
the New Birth. Men are trying to substitute edu- 
cation, morality, religion, orthodoxy, baptism, out- 
ward reform, ‘‘new thought,’’ ‘‘theosophy’’ or 
the knowledge of God, and other such things, for 
the New Birth; but none of these, or all of them 
together, are sufficient, you must be born again. 
There is absolutely no exception to this rule. As 
Jesus says in John 3:3, ‘‘Verily, verily, I say unto 
thee, except any man be born from above, he can- 
not see the kingdom of God.’’ 


Iv. HOW CAN ONE BE BORN AGAIN? 


The question, therefore, confronts each one of 
you, Have you been born again? There is no more 
important question that you could possibly face. 
Face it in these pages and don’t dodge it. And 
that brings us to the immediately practical ques- 
tion, How are men born again, or what must any 
one here to-day, who is not born again, do in order 
to be born again right here this morning? This 
question also is plainly answered in the Word of 


The New Birth 219 


God; and I can give you the. answer in a very 
few minutes and give it so that any one here can 
understand it. There are three parts to the an- 
swer. | 

1. The first part of the answer you will find in 
Titus 3:4, ‘‘Not by works done in righteousness, 
which we did ourselves, but according to his 
mercy, he (i.e., God) saved us through the wash- 
ing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost.’’ These words tell us very plainly that i 
as God who regenerates and that He does it 
through the power of His Holy Spirit. The same 
thought is found in our text, John 3:5, 6: ‘‘Jesus 
answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except 
@ man be born of water and the Spirit he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God. That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born 
of the Spirit is Spirit.’’ Regeneration 1s God’s 
work; wrought by Him by the power of His Holy 
Spirit working in the mind, feelings and will of 
the one born again, in your heart and mine. 

2. Some one might infer from the fact that 
regeneration is God’s work, which He works in 
our hearts by His Holy Spirit, that all we have to 
do is to wait until God sees fit to work; but we 
see plainly from other passages in the Word that 
this is not true. We are taught the second thing 
about how regeneration is wrought in James 1:18, 
‘‘Of His own will he brought us forth by the word 
of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits 
of His creatures.’’ Here we are taught that the 


220 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Word of Truth, the Word of God, is the instru- 
ment that God uses m regeneration. The same 
thought is found in 1 Pet. 1:23, ‘‘Having been be- 
gotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of in- 
corruptible, through the word of God, which liveth 
and abideth.’’ And Paul gives voice to the same 
great thought in 1 Cor. 4:15, where he says: ‘‘For 
though ye should have ten thousand tutors in 
Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ 
Jesus I begat you through the gospel.’’ From 
these passages it is evident that the New Burth is 
wrought by God through the wmstrumentality of 
His Word. It is God who works it through the 
power of His Holy Spirit, but the Holy Spirit 
works through the Word, and thus God begets men 
anew by ‘‘The Word of Truth,’’ or the ‘‘ Word of 
God,’’ i.e., the Word which is preached by ‘‘the 
Gospel.’’ So then, if you or I wish to be born 
again we should get in contact with the Word of 
God by studying the Bible and asking God that 
the Holy Spirit may make that Word which we 
are studying a living thing in our own hearts. 
We should get in contact especially with that part 
of God’s Word which is found in the Gospel of 
John, for John tells us in John 20:31 that ‘‘ These 
(i.e., these things in the Gospel of John) are writ- 
ten, that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ 
the Son of God; and that believing ye may have 
life in his name.’’ If we wish to see others born 
again we should bring the Word of God to bear 
upon their minds and hearts either by preaching 


The New Birth 221 


the Word, or by teaching it, or in personal work; 
and we should look to the Holy Spirit to quicken 
that Word in the hearts of men as we sow it in 
their hearts, and in this way the New Birth will 
result. 

3. The third and last and decisive truth as to 
how we are born again is found in Gal. 3:26 and 
John 1:12, 13. In Gal. 3:26 we read, ‘‘For ye are 
all sons of God, through faith, in Christ Jesus.’’ 
This tells us plainly that we become born again 
through putting our faith in Christ Jesus. This 
is even more explicitly stated in John 1:12, 13: 
‘‘But as many as received him (i.e. the Lord 
Jesus), to them gave He the right to become chil- 
dren of God, even to them that believe on His 
name: which were born not of blood, nor of the 
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of 
God.’’ Here we are told that the decisive thing 
an our becoming children of God is that we believe 
wm, or receive, Jesus Christ. Any one who receives 
Jesus Christ as his personal Saviour and trusts 
God to forgive him because Jesus Christ died in 
his place and receives him as his Lord and King, 
and surrenders his thoughts to His absolute con- 
trol as his Lord and his life to His absolute con- 
trol as his King and confesses Jesus Christ as 
Lord before the world, such a one immediately be- 
comes a child of God, is immediately born again, 
is immediately made a partaker of the Divine na- 
ture. The same thought is illustrated by Jesus 
Himself in John 3:14, 15, where our Lord Jesus 


222 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


is recorded as saying, ‘‘And as Moses lifted up 
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the 
Son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth 
in Him may have eternal life.’’ The reference is 
to the story of the Israelites in the Old Testament 
when they were bitten by fiery serpents. As the 
dying Israelite with the poison of the fiery serpent 
coursing through his veins, was saved by simply 
looking at the brazen serpent on the pole, a ser- 
pent made in the likeness of the one that had 
bitten him, and had new life coursing through his 
veins as soon as he looked, so we dying men, with 
the poison of sin coursing through our veins, are 
saved by looking at Jesus Christ ‘‘Made in the 
likeness of sinful flesh,’’ lifted up on the cross, 
and have new life coursing through our veins the 
moment we look. All we have to do with our re- 
generation is to receive Christ as He is presented 
to us in the Word, by which we are born again. 
Therefore, ‘‘If any man be in Christ he is a new 
creature (creation). The old things are passed 
away, behold all things are become new.’’ 

In the New Birth the Word of God is the seed; 
the human heart is the soil; the preacher of the 
Word is the sower, and drops the seed of the 
Word of God into the soil of the human heart; God 
by His Spirit opens the heart to receive the seed 
(Acts 16:14); the hearer believes; the Spirit | 
quickens the seed into life in the receptive heart; 
the heart closes around the seed by faith; the new 


The New Birth 223 


nature, the Divine Nature springs up out of the 
Divine Word; the believer is ‘‘born again,’’ ‘‘cre- 
ated anew,’’ ‘‘made alive,’’ ‘‘passed out of death 
into life.’’ 

Conclusion. 

Have you been born again? I put this question 
to every man and woman here. I do not ask you 
whether you are a church member. I do not ask 
if you have been baptised. I do not ask, have you 
gone regularly to the communion. I do not ask, 
have you turned over a new leaf. I do not ask, 
are you an amiable, cultured, intelligent, moral, 
socially delightful gentleman or lady. I ask you, 
have you been born again? If not, you are out- 
side of the Kingdom of God and you are bound 
for an everlasting hell unless you are born again... 
But if you are not already born again you may 
be born again to-day, you may be born again be- 
fore you leave this building, you may be born 
again right now; for the Word of God says, 
‘‘As many as received him, to them gave he the 
right to become children of God, even to them that 
believe on his name: which were born, not of 
blood, nor of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of 
God.’’ And it says again in Rom. 10:9, 10, ‘‘If 
thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord 
and shalt believe in thy heart that God raised 
him from the dead, thou shalt be saved: for with 
the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.’’ 


224 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


These verses make it plain as day just what you 
must do right here and now to become a child of 
God. It is up to you to say whether or not you 
will do it. 


XT 


SANCTIFICATION 


‘“And the God of peace himself sanctify you wholly; and may 
your spirit and soul and body be preserved entire, without blame 
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’—1 Thess. 5:23. 


UR subject now before us is Sanctification. 

The subject is one of great importance. 

Not only is there much ignorance and er- 

ror and misconception about the subject, but there 
is, strange to say, most bitter controversy over 
the subject. So bitter is the controversy over the 
subject that some years ago there were two rival 
‘‘holiness conventions’’ held at the same time in 
Chicago at different hours of the day, in the same 
church, and the animosity between these two com- 
panies of ‘‘holiness brethren’’ was so intense that 
on one occasion they came near to having blows 
at the altar of the church. The subject of Sanc- 
tification has given rise to such bitterness and 
such extravagances in some quarters that many 
even dread the use of the word ‘‘Sanctification.’’ 
But the word is not only a Bible word, but a 
deeply significant word, a word full of precious 
meaning; and it would not be the part of wisdom 
on our part to give up this good Bible word sim- 

225 


226 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ply because the word is so often abused. On one 
occasion a man said to me in the Bible Institute 
of Chicago, ‘‘Are you not afraid of holiness?’’ 
Of course what the man meant was, was I not 
afraid of certain phases of ‘‘holiness doctrine’’ 
so-called. I replied that I was not nearly as much 
afraid of holiness as I was of unholiness. The 
teaching of the Bible on the subject is very plain 
and very precious. What we have to say this 
morning will come under three headings. First, 
What Sanctification Is: 2. How to be Sanctified ; 
3. When Sanctification Takes Place. 


I, WHAT SANCTIFICATION IS 


First, then, let us consider what Sanctification 
18. 

1. In the first place let me make it clear that, 
Sanctification ts not the ‘‘ Baptism with the Holy 
Spirit.”’ The two are constantly confused. There 
is an intimate relation between the two, but they 
are not at all one and the same thing; and only 
confusion and misconception can arise from con- 
founding two experiences which God keeps sepa- 
rate. That Sanctification is not the baptism with 
the Holy Spirit and that the baptism with the 
Holy Spirit is not Sanctification, will become 
clear as we proceed and find out from a study of 

the Bible just what Sanctification is. 
2. In the second place, let me say that Sanctifi- 
catton is not the eradication of the carnal nature. 


Sanctification 227 


We will see this when we come to examine God’s 
definition of Sanctification; for God has very 
clearly defined what Sanctification is and when it 
takes place. Those who teach ‘‘the eradication 
of the carnal nature’’ are grasping after a great 
and precious truth, but they have expressed that 
truth in a very inaccurate, unfortunate, and un- 
scriptural way, and this way of stating it leads 
to grave misapprehensions and errors and abuses. 
The whole controversy about ‘‘the eradication of 
the carnal nature’’ arises from a misapprehension 
and from using terms for which there is no war- 
rant in the Bible. The Bible nowhere speaks 
about ‘‘the carnal nature,’’ and so certainly not 
about ‘‘the eradication of the carnal nature.’’ 
There is such a thing as a carnal nature, but it 
is not a material thing, not a substance, not a 
something that can be eradicated as you pull a 
tooth or remove the vermiform appendix. ‘‘A car- 
nal nature’’ is a nature controlled by the flesh. . 
Certainly it is a believer’s privilege not to have 
his nature governed by the flesh. Our nature 
should be and may be under the control of the 
Holy Spirit, and then it is not a carnal nature; 
but one nature has not been eradicated and an- 
other nature put in its place, but our nature is 
taken out from under the control of the flesh and 
put under the control of the Holy Spirit. Fur- 
thermore, while it is our privilege to have our 
nature under the control of the Holy Spirit and 
delivered from the control of the flesh, we still 


228 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


have ‘‘the flesh,’’ and shall have the flesh as long 
as we are in this body. But if we ‘‘walk by the 
Spirit’? we do not ‘‘fulfil the lusts of the flesh’’ 
(Gal. 5:16). The 8th chapter of Romans describes 
the life of victory, just as the 7th chapter, 9-24 
verse describes the life of defeat, when men are 
‘carnal, sold under sin,’’ but it is in the 8th chap- 
ter where life ‘‘in the Spirit’’ is described (Rom. 
8:9) that we are told that we still have the flesh, 
but that vt 1s our privilege not to ‘‘live after the 
flesh,’’ but ‘‘by the Spirit,’’ to ‘‘put to death the 
deeds of the body.’’ So we see that the body is 
there, but in the power of the Spirit we do, day 
by day and (if we live up to our privilege) every 
day and every hour and every minute, continu- 
ously ‘‘put to death the deeds of the body.’’ 

3. So much as to what Sanctification is not. We 
will see exactly what it is if we look at God’s 
definition of Sanctification. We shall find that 
the word Sanctification is used in the Bible in a 
two-fold sense. 

(1) The first meaning of Sanctification we will 
find in Lev. 8:10-12, ‘‘And Moses took the anoint- 
ing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that 
was therein, and sanctified them. And he sprinkled 
thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed 
the altar and all its vessels, and the laver and its 
base, to sanctify them. And he poured of the 
anointing oil upon Aaron’s head and anointed him 
to sanctify him.’’ Now it is perfectly clear in this 
passage that to sanctify means to separate or set 


Sanctification 229 


apart for God, and that Sanctification is the pro- 
cess of setting apart or state of being set apart 
for God. The word Sanctify is used in this sense 
over and over again. Another illustration is Lev. 
27:14, 17. ‘‘And when a man shall sanctify his 
house to be holy unto God, then the priest shall 
estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the 
priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand... and 
if a man shall sanctify unto Jehovah part of a 
field of his possession, then the estimation shall be. 
according to the sowing thereof.’’ Here again it 
is plain that to sanctify means to separate or set 
apart for God, and that Sanctification is the pro- 
cess of setting apart or state of being set apart for 
God. Still another illustration of this same use of 
the word sanctify is found in Num. 8:17, ‘‘For 
all the firstborn among the children of Israel are 
mine, both man and beast: on the day that I smote 
all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified 
them for myself.’’ This, of course, does not mean 
that God, at the time that He smote the firstborn 
in Egypt, eradicated the carnal nature from the 
first-born of Israel. It does mean that He set apart 
all the first-born to be peculiarly His own. Anoth- 
er very suggestive illustration of the same usage 
of the word is found in the case of Jeremiah as 
stated by himself in Jer. 1:4, 5, ‘‘Now the word of 
Jehovah came unto me saying, before I formed 
thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou 
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee: I 
have appointed thee a prophet unto the nations.’’ 


230 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


This plainly means that before his birth God set 
Jeremiah apart for Himself. There would still be 
much imperfection and infirmity in him, but he 
was set apart for God. Another suggestive illus- 
tration of the same use of the word Sanctify is 
found in Matt. 23:27, in the words of our Lord 
Jesus Himself: ‘‘Ye fools and blind; for which is 
greater, the gold, or the temple that hath sancti- 
fied the gold?’’ But perhaps the most striking 
illustration of all is in what our Lord says about 
His own sanctification in John 17:19, ‘‘And for 
their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves 
also may be sanctified in truth.’’ Here the plain 
meaning is that our Lord Jesus set Himself apart 
for this work for God and He did it in order that 
believers might be set apart for God ‘‘in truth,”’’ 
or ‘‘in the truth.’’ This is the most frequent use 
of the word sanctify. There are numerous illus- 
trations of it in the Bible. So to sanctify means 
to separate or set apart for God; and Sanctzifica- 
tion 1s the process of setting apart or the state of 
being set apart for God. This is the primary 
meaning of the words. . 

(2) But the word as used in the Bible has also 
a secondary signification closely related to this 
primary meaning. An illustration of this sec- 
ondary meaning will be found in II Chron. 29:5, 
*‘Hear me, ye Levites; now sanciify yourselves, 
and sanctify the house of Jehovah, the God of 
your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of 
the holy place.’’ Bearing in mind the ‘‘parallel- 


Sanctification 231 


ism’’ which is the chief characteristic of Hebrew 
poetry, it is plain that to sanctify here is synony- 
mous with the ‘‘Carry forth the filthiness out of 
the holy places’’ found in the last part of the 
verse. So to sanctify here means to separate from 
ceremonial or moral defilement, to cleanse; and 
Sanctification 1s the process of separating, or 
state of being separated from ceremonial or moral 
defilement. The same use of the word is found in 
Lev. 11:44, ‘‘For I am Jehovah thy God: sanctify 
yourselves therefore, and be ye holy; for I am 
holy: neither shall ye defile yourselves with any 
manner of creeping thing that moveth upon the 
earth.’’ Here again it is clear that ‘‘sanctify 
yourselves’’ is synonymous with ‘‘be ye holy’’ and 
is contrasted with ‘‘defile yourselves’’ and means 
to separate from ceremonial or moral defilement, 
to cleanse; and Sanctification is the process of 
separating or state of being separated from cere- 
monial or moral defilement. The same meaning 
of sanctification is found in the New Testament 
in I Thess. 5:23, ‘‘And the God of Peace, Himself 
sanctify you wholly and may your Spirit and soul 
and body be preserved entire, without blame at 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ Here we 
see the close relation between entire sanctification 
and preserving wholly, without blame, and to sanc- 
tify here clearly means to separate from moral 
defilement, and sanctification here again is the 
process of separating or state of being separated 
from moral defilement. The same thing is evident 


232 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


from the 4th chapter of this same epistle in the 
7th verse (I Thess. 4:7), ‘‘For God called us not 
for uncleanness, but in sanctification.’’ Our 
‘‘Sanctification’’ is here set in direct contrast with 
*“yncleanness,’’ and hence it is evident that sanc- 
tification here means the state of being separated 
from all moral defilement. The same thing is evi- 
dent from the 3rd verse of this same chapter, 
‘*For this 1s the will of God, even your sanctifica- 
tion, that ye abstain from fornication.’’ Here 
again it is evident that Sanctification means sep- 
aration from impurity or moral defilement. The 
two meanings, then, of Sanctification are: the pro- 
cess of separating or setting apart, or state of be- 
ing separated or set apart, for God; and the pro- 
cess of separating or state of being separated 
from ceremonial or moral defilement. These two 
meanings of the word are closely allied—one can- 
not be truly separated to God without being sep- 
arated from sin. 


II. HOW MEN ARE SANCTIFIED 


We come now to the second question, How are 
men sanctified? There are several parts to the 
complete answer of this question. 

1. The first part of the answer is found in our 
text of this chapter, I Thess. 5:23, ‘‘And the God 
of Peace himself sanctify you wholly and may your 
Spirit and soul and body be preserved entire, with- 
out blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ 


Sanctification 233 


It appears from this verse that God sanctifies men, 
and Sanctification 1s God’s work. Both the sep- 
aration of men from sin and their separation unto 
God, is God’s work. As it was God who in the old 
dispensation set apart the first-born of Israel unto 
Himself, so it is God who in the new dispensation 
sets apart the believer unto Himself and separates 
him from sin. Sanctification is primarily not our 
work but God’s. 

2. The second part of the answer is found in 
Eph. 5 :25, 26, ‘‘Husbands love your wives, even as 
Christ also loved the church, and gave himself up 
for it; that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it 
by the washing of water by the word.’’ Here we 
are taught that Christ sancitfies the church and 
that Sanctification is Christ’s work. The ques- 
tion, of course, arises, in what sense does Christ 
sanctify the church. The answer is found in Heb. 
10:10, ‘‘By which will we have been sanctified 
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ 
once for all.’’ Here it appears that Jesus Christ 
sanctifies the church by giving Himself up a sac- 
rifice for it. By thus giving Himself up for it as 
a sacrifice Christ sets the Church apart for God. 
Just as the blood of the Passover Lamb in the 11th 
and 12th chapters of Exodus set a difference be- 
tween Israel and the Egyptians, so our Lord Jesus 
by the offering of His own body has forever put 
a difference between the believer in Himself and 
the world, and has forever set every believer apart 
for God. The Cross of Christ stands between the 


234. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


believer and the world. The shed blood of Christ 
separates the believer from the world, purchases 
him to God and thus makes him to belong to God. 

3. The third part of the answer to the ques- 
tion, how men are sanctified, is found in 2 Thess. 
2:13 and in other passages, ‘‘But we are bound to 
give thanks always to God for you, brethren be- 
loved of the Lord, for that God chose you from the 
beginning unto salvation through sanctification of 
the Spirit and belief of the truth.’’ It appears 
from this passage, as from other passages in the 
Bible, that zt 2s the Holy Spirit who sanctifies the 
believer, and that Sanctification ts the Holy Syr- 
1t’s work. Here the question arises, In what sense 
does the Holy Spirit sanctify the believer? In 
this sense, just as in the Old Testament type, 
tabernacle, altar and priest were set apart for 
God by the anointing oil (Lev. 8:10-12), so in the 
New Testament anti-type, the believer, who is both 
tabernacle and priest, is set apart for God by 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit. Further than 
that, it is the Holy Spirit’s work in the heart that 
overcomes the flesh and its defilements, and thus 
separates the believer from sin and clothes him 
with divine graces of character, and makes him 
fit to be God’s own. As Paul puts it in Gal. 5:22, 
23, ‘‘But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faith, meekness, 
self-control.’’ In opposition to this work of the 
Holy Spirit, we read in the immediately preceding 
verses what ‘‘the works of the flesh’’ are, an awful 


Sanctification 235 


catalogue of vileness and sin, and we are told in 
the 16th verse, ‘‘Walk in the Spirit and ye shall 
not fulfil the lust of the flesh.’’ 

4, The fourth part of the answer to the ques- 
tion how we are sanctified is found in Heb. 13:12, 
‘‘Wherefore, Jesus also, that he might sanctify 
the people through his own blood suffered without 
the gate.’’ It is plain from this passage that be- 
lievers are sanctified through the blood of Jesus 
Christ. Here the question arises, In what sense 
does the blood of Jesus sanctify? The answer is 
plain: The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from 
all the guilt of sim, and thus separates us from 
the mass of men under the curse of the broken law, 
and sets us apart for God (cf. 1 John 1:7, 9). In 
the Old Testament dispensation the blood of the 
sacrifice cleansed the Israelites from the guilt of 
ceremonial offenses and set them apart for God; 
in the New Testament anti-type the blood of 
Christ cleanseth the believer from the guilt of 
moral offenses and sets him apart for God. 

5. The fifth part of the answer to the question, 
how men are sanctified, is found in John 17:17, 
‘*‘Sanctify them in the truth: thy word is truth.’’ 
Here our Lord Jesus in His prayer indicates that 
we are sanctified in the truth, and that the truth 
is the Word of God. In what sense does the Word 
of God sanctify? This question is plainly an- 
swered in different parts of the Word of God, 
where we are taught that the Word of God 
cleanses from the presence of sin, and thus sep- 


236 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


arates us from it and sets us apart to God. (Ps. 
119 :9, 11; John 15:3.) As we bring our lives into 
daily contact with the Word, the sins and imper- 
fections of our lives and hearts are disclosed and 
put away, and thus we are more and more sep- 
arated from sin unto God. (c. John 13:10.) 

6. The sixth part of the answer to the ques- 
tion, how men are sanctified, is found in 1 Cor. 
1:30, ‘‘But of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who was 
made unto us wisdom from God, and righteous- 
ness, and sanctification, and redemption.’’ In this 
passage we are taught that Jesus Christ was made 
unto us from God sanctification. Just what does 
that mean? Simply this: that separation from 
sin and separation to God are provided for us in 
Christ Jesus and by the appropriation of Jesus 
Christ we obtain this sanctification thus provided. 
The more completely we appropriate Christ the 
more completely are we sanctified. But perfect 
sanctification is provided for us in Him, just as 
_ perfect wisdom is provided in Him (Col. 2:3). 
We appropriate either wisdom or sanctification or 
anything else that is provided for us in Christ in 
ever-increasing measure. Through the indwelling 
Christ presented to us by the Spirit in the Word, 
we are made Christlike and bear fruit. 

7. The seventh part of the answer to the ques- 
tion of how men are sanctified is found in Heb. 
12:14, ‘‘Follow after peace with all men, and the 
sanctification without which no man shall see the 
Lord.’’ Here we are taught that we have our 


Sanctification 237 


own part in sanctification, and that if we are to 
be sanctified in the fullest sense, sancttfication 1s 
something that we must pursue, or seek earnestly, 
af we are to obtam wt. While sanctification is . 
God’s work, we have our part in it, viz., to make 
it the object of our earnest desire and eager pur- 
suit. 

8. The eighth part of the answer to the ques- 
tion of how we are sanctified is found in Rom. 
6:19, 22, ‘‘As ye presented your members as serv- 
ants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, 
even so present your members as servants to right- 
eousness unto sanctification. ... But now being 
made free from sin, and become servants to God, 
ye have your fruit unto sanctification.’’ The 
meaning of these words is plain, and the teaching 
important and practical. We are here taught that 
we attain unto sanctification through presenting 
our members as servants (bondservants, or slaves) 
to righteousness and becoming ourselves bond- 
servants unto God. In other words, if we wish to 
attain unto sanctification we should present our 
whole body and every member of it to God, to be 
His servants, belonging wholly unto Him, and we 
should present ourselves to God as His servants, 
to be His absolute property. This is the practical 
method of attaining unto sanctification, a method 
that is open to each one of us here to-day, no mat- 
ter how weak we are in ourselves. 

9. The ninth and final part of the answer to 
the question of how we are sanctified, is found in 


238 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Acts 26:18, ‘‘To open their eyes, that they may 
turn from darkness to light and from the power of 
Satan unto God, that they may receive remission 
of sins and an inheritance among them that are 
sanctified by faith in Me.’’ Here we are told that 
we are sanctified by faith in Christ. Sanctifica- 
tion, just as justification, regeneration, and adop- 
tion, is conditioned upon faith. Faith is the hand 
that appropriates to ourselves the blessing of 
sanctification that God has provided for us through 
His Son Jesus Christ by His death on the cross, 
and through the power of the Holy Spirit working 
in us. And we claim sanctification by simple faith 
in Him who shed His blood and by surrendering 
ourselves to the control of the Holy Spirit, Whom 
Jesus Christ gives. 


Til, WHEN DOES SANCTIFICATION TAKE PLACE 


We now come to the question about which there 
has been the most discussion, the most differences 
of opinion, the most controversy. When does 
sanctification take place? If we will go to our 
Bibles to get the answer to the question there need 
be no difference of opinion. There are three parts 
to the answer. 

1. The first part of the answer is found in I 
Cor. 1:2, ‘‘Unto the Church of God, which is at 
Corinth, even them that are sanctified in Christ 
Jesus, called to be saints, with all that call upon 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, 


Sanctification 239 


their Lord and ours. Here the Holy Spirit 
speaking through the Apostle Paul, plainly de- 
clares that all the members of the church of God 
are already sanctified in Christ Jesus. Sanctifica- 
tion in this sense is not something that we are to 
look for in the future, it is something that has al- 
ready taken place. The moment any one becomes 
a member of the Church of God by simple faith 
in Christ Jesus, for all who have faith in Christ 
Jesus are members of the Church of God, that mo- 
ment that person 2s sanctified. Every saved man 
and woman in this building this morning, every 
one who has living faith in Jesus Christ, 1s sancti- 
fied. Our sanctification is involved in our salva- 
tion. But in what sense are we, that is, all believ- 
ers, already sanctified? The answer to this ques- 
tion is found in a passage of Scripture to which 
we have already referred, Heb. 10:10, 14, ‘‘By 
which will we have been sanctified through the 
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. 
. . . For by one offering He hath perfected forever 
them that are sanctified.’’ The meaning is plain. 
By the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once 
for all on the Cross of Calvary as a perfect atone- 
ment for sin, every believer is cleansed forever 
from the guilt of sin. We are ‘‘ perfected forever’’ 
as far as our standing before God 1s concerned, 
and are set apart for God. The sacrifice of Christ 
does not need to be repeated as were the Jewish 
sacrifices (V. 1). The work is done once for all, 
sin is put away, and forever put away (Heb. 9:26 


240 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ef. Gal. 3:13), and we are set apart forever as 
God’s peculiar and eternal possession. If any one 
asks you if you are sanctified; if you are a believer 
in Jesus Christ, i.e., if you have a living faith in 
Jesus Christ, you have a right to say, ‘‘I am.’’ 
Every believer in Christ 1s a saint, a saint not in 
the sense in which that word is oftentimes used 
in modern usage, but in the Bible sense, as being 
set apart for God and belonging to God and being 
God’s peculiar property. But there is another 
sense in which every believer may be fully sancti- 
fied to-day. This is found in Rom. 12:1, ‘‘I be- 
seech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of 
God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, 
acceptable to God, which is your spiritual serv- 
ice.’’ In this passage we see that it is the beltev- 
er’s present and blessed privilege, and wmportant 
and solemn duty, to present his body to God a 
living sacrifice—not some part or parts of the 
body, but the whole body with tts every member 
and every faculty. And when we do thus present 
our whole body to God a ling sacrifice, then we 
are wholly sanctified. Such an offering is well- 
pleasing to God. As God in the Old Testament 
showed His pleasure in the offering by sending 
down fire to take it to Himself, so when the whole 
body is thus offered to God, God will send down 
fire again, the fire of the Holy Ghost, and take to 
Himself what is thus presented. The moment a 
believer does thus present himself a living sacri- 
fice to God, then, so far as his will, the governing 


Sanctification 241 


purpose of his life, the very centre of his being, is 
concerned, he is wholly God’s, or ‘‘perfectly sanc- 
tified.’’ He may still, and will still, daily discover, 
as he studies the Word of God and is illumined by 
the Holy Spirit, acts of his, habits of life, forms 
of feeling, speech and action, that are not in con- 
formity with this central purpose of his will, and 
these must be confessed to God as blameworthy 
and put away, and this department of his being 
and life brought, by God’s Spirit and the indwell- 
ing Christ, into conformity with God’s will as re- 
vealed in His Word. The victory in this newly 
discovered and unclaimed territory may be in- 
stantaneous. For example, I may discover in my- 
self an irritability of temper that is manifestly 
displeasing to God. I can go to God, confess it, 
renounce it and then instantly, not by my own 
strength, but by looking to Jesus and claiming His 
patience and gentleness, overcome it and never 
have another failure in that direction. And so it 
is with every other sin and weakness in my life 
that I am brought to see is displeasing to God. 

2. But this is not the whole answer to the 
question of when‘we are sanctified. The second 
part of the answer is found in I Thess. 3:12, ‘‘And 
the Lord make you to increase and abound in love 
one toward another, and toward all men, even as. 
we also do towards you.’’ And the 4th chapter of 
this same epistle, the 1st and 10th verses, ‘‘Finally 
then, brethren, we beseech you and exhort you in 
the Lord Jesus, that as you received of us how ye 


242 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


ought to walk and to please God, even as ye do 
walk, that ye abound more and more. . . . For in- 
deed ye do it toward all the brethren that are in 
all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brethren, that 
ye abound more and more.’’ And in IT Pet. 3:18, 
‘‘Grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ.’’ And II Cor. 3:18, 
R. V., ‘‘But we all, with unveiled face reflecting as 
@ mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed 
into the same image from glory to glory, and even 
as from the Lord the Spirit.’’ And in Eph. 4:15, 
16, ‘‘But speaking truth in love, may grow up in 
all things unto him, who is the head, even Christ; 
from whom all the body fitly framed and knit to- 
gether through that which every joint supplieth, 
according to the working in due measure of each 
several part, maketh the increase of the body unto 
the building up of itself in love.’’ From these 
passages we see that there 1s a progressive work 
of Sanctification, an increasing in love, an abound- 
ang more and more in a godly walk and in pleasing 
God, a growing in the grace and the knowledge of 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, a being trans- 
formed wmto the wnage of our Lord from glory 
unto glory, each new gaze at Him making us more 
like Him; a growing up into Christ in all things, 
until we attain unto a full-grown man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. 
Here we see there is a progressive work of Sane- 
tification. 

3. But we have not found the whole answer to 


Sanctification 243 


the question of When Men are Sanctified, even yet. 
We find the remainder of the answer to the ques- 
tion in our text, 1 Thess. 5:23 accurately trans- 
lated as it is in the Revised Version, ‘‘And the 
God of peace himself sanctify you wholly; and 
may your spirit and soul and body be preserved 
entire, without blame at the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.’’ Here we are plainly told that the 
complete sanctification of believers, complete m 
the fullest sense, 1s something to be sought for un 
prayer and that ts to be accomplished by God in 
the future and perfected at the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The same thought is found in 
this same book, the 3rd chapter and 12th and 13th 
verses, ‘‘And the Lord make you to increase and 
abound in love one toward another, and toward all 
- men, even as we do toward you, to the end that he 
may establish your hearts unblamable in holiness 
before our God and Father, at the coming of our 
Lord Jesus with his saints.’’ It is ‘‘at the coming 
of our Lord Jesus with all His saints’’ that He is 
to establish our hearts unblamable in holiness be- 
fore our God and Father and that our spirit and 
soul and body are to be preserved entire without 
blame. The same thought is found in I John 3:2, 
‘‘Beloved, now are we children of God, it is not 
yet made manifest what we shall be. We know 
that, if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him, 
for we shall see him as he is.’’ Jt is not in the life 
that now 1s, and it 1s not at death, that we are en- 
tirely sanctified, spirit, soul, and body. It 1s at 


244 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is one 
of the many reasons why the well-instructed be- 
hever constantly cries, ‘‘Even so, come, Lord 
Jesus. Come quickly.’’ 


XIT 


THe RESURRECTION OF THE Bopy or JESUS AND OF 
Our Boptes 


‘‘Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David, was raised 
from the dead, according to my gospel.’’—2 Tim. 2:8. 

‘For I delivered unto you first of all that which also I received, 
how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; 
and that he was buried; and that he hath been raised on the third 
day according to the scriptures, ’’—1 Cor. 15:3, 4. 

‘““Now, if Christ is preached that he hath been raised from the 
dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the 
dead? But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither hath 
Christ been raised: and if Christ hath not been raised, then is our 
preaching vain, your faith also is vain. Yea, and we are found 
false witnesses of God, because we witnessed of God that he hath 
raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that he did not 
rise. But if the dead are not raised; neither hath Christ been 
raised: and if Christ hath not been raised, your faith is vain; ye 
are yet in your sins. Then they also that are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, 
we are of all men most pitiable.’’—1 Cor. 15:12-19. 


of Christ from the dead. We shall see 
that the resurrection of Christ was a 
resurrection of the body of Christ, that it was not 
merely the indwelling Spirit of Jesus Christ, 
clothed upon with a new and entirely different 
body, that appeared to the disciples on the first 


aoawm 


W YE commemorate to-day the resurrection 


246 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


resurrection day, but that it was the body that 
was buried, raised again, and that this involves 
for us not merely the immortality of our souls, 
but the resurrection and eternal continuance of 
our bodies. Yet there are many who call them- 
selves Christians and who say that they believe 
in the Bible, and who consider themselves per- 
fectly orthodox Christians, who do not believe in 
the Resurrection of the Body, they merely believe 
in the immortality of the soul. 


I. THE FACT OF THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY OF 
CHRIST AND OF OUB BODIES 


We shall consider first the fact of the resur- 
rection of the body of Jesus Christ and of our 
bodies. 

1. Turn first, please, to II Tim. 2:8, ‘‘Remem- 
ber that Jesus Christ of the seed of David, was 
raised from the dead, according to my gospel:”’ 
Here Paul explicitly declares that Jesus Christ 
was raised from the dead according to the gospel 
which he preached. Now what was raised? Cer- 
tainly not His soul. That did not die. Turning to 
Acts 2:27-31, we find that the soul of the Lord 
Jesus went into Hades, the abode of the dead. 
These are Peter’s words, spoken on the day of 
Pentecost, there recorded, ‘‘Because thou wilt not 
leave my soul unto Hades, neither wilt thou give 
thy holy one to see corruption (i.e., in His body). 
Thou madest known unto me the ways of life; 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 247 


thou shalt make me full of gladness with thy coun- 
tenance. Brethren, I may say unto you freely of 
the patriarch David, that he both died and was 
buried, and his tomb is with us unto this day. Be- 
ing therefore a prophet, and knowing that God 
has sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of 
his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up 
Christ to sit on his throne; he foreseeing this spake 
of the resurrection of Christ, that neither was he 
left unto Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption. 
This Jesus did God raise up, whereof we ali are 
witnesses.’’ Peter here declares that the soul of 
Jesus went to Hades and that it was ‘‘ His flesh,’’ 
1.e., His body, that was kept from corruption and 
afterwards raised. Turning now to I Cor. 15:3, 4, 
we read these words of Paul: ‘‘For we delivered 
unto you first of all that which also I received, how 
that Christ died for our sins according to the 
scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he 
hath been raised on the third day according to the 
scriptures.’’ Paul here declares that Jesus Christ 
died and was buried and was raised. What was 
raised? Paul says, that that which ‘‘was buried’’ 
was raised. But what was buried? Not the soul 
of the Lord Jesus, but His body. Peter makes 
this even plainer, if possible, in I Pet. 3:18-20: 
‘*Because Christ also suffered for our sins once, 
the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might 
bring us to God; being put to death in the flesh, 
but quickened in the spirit; in which also he went 
and preached to the spirits in prison; which afore- 


248 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


time were disobedient, when the longsuffering of 
God waited in the days of Noah.’’ These words 
clearly mean that it was the body of Jesus that 
was put to death, but that the spirit still lived 
and went into Hades; so it was the body that was 
raised and to which the spirit that had not died 
or become unconscious came back. I Cor. 15 :12-19 
removes all possibility of doubt on this point on 
the part of any man who goes to the Bible to find 
out what it actually teaches and not merely to see 
how he can twist and distort it to fit it into his 
own preconceived opinions. Paul’s Spirit-given 
words here read, ‘‘Now if Christ be preached that 
he hath been raised from the dead, how say some 
among you that there is no resurrection of the 
dead? (Mark, not no immortality of the soul, but 
no resurrection of the dead.) But if there is no 
resurrection of the dead neither hath Christ been 
raised: and if Christ hath not been raised, then is 
our preaching vain, your faith also is vain. Yea, 
and we are found false witnesses of God; because 
we witness of God that he raised up Christ: whom 
he raised not up if so be that the dead are not 
raised. For if the dead are not raised neither hath 
Christ been raised: and if Christ hath not been 
raised, your faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. 
Then they also that have fallen asleep in Christ 
have perished. If in this life only we have hoped 
in Christ, we are of all men most pitiable.’’ There 
is no honest mistaking the plain meaning of these 
words: by the ‘‘resurrection of the dead’’ Paul 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 249 


plainly means a resurrection of the body; and in 
the whole chapter, beyond an honest doubt, he is 
not talking about the immortality of the soul, but 
the resurrection of the body. The whole argument 
turns on that, and Paul here clearly says if the 
body of Jesus was not ratsed, then the whole 
Christian system is a sham and our faith vain and 
that we Christians of all men are most to be pitied. 
For if the body of Jesus was not raised, and if our 
bodies are not to be raised, then we Christians are 
making tremendous sacrifices for a lie. Paul says 
further that 7f our bodies are not to be raised, 
then Christ’s body has not been raised and Chris- 
tianity is a humbug. Christianity as taught in 
the New Testament stands or falls with the resur- 
rection of the body of Jesus and the resurrection 
of our bodies. There is no room in this argument 
of Paul’s for ‘‘Pastor’’ Russell’s doctrine, that 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ was not a resur- 
rection of the body that was laid in the grave, the 
body that was crucified, and that the body of Jesus 
Christ, the body that was laid in the sepulchre, 
was carried away and preserved somewhere, or 
else dissolved into gases. Paul says here, if the 
body that was laid in the sepulchre was not rased, 
“‘then is our preaching vain’’ and your “‘ faith also 
es vam.’’ 

In Luke 24:5, 6, the angels at the tomb from 
which the body of Jesus had disappeared are re- 
corded as saying to the women who were seeking 
the body of Jesus to embalm it, ‘‘Why seek ye the 


250 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


living among the dead? He is not here but is 
risen.’’ Now what were the women seeking? The 
body of Jesus to embalm it, and the angels say 
that what they were seeking was not there but was 
risen, had been raised. Furthermore, in the re- 
mainder of the 6th verse and verse 7, they say: 
‘‘Remember how he spake unto you when he was 
yet in Galilee, saying that the Son of Man must 
be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and 
be crucified, and the third day rise again.’’ Here 
they told the women plainly that what was cruci- 
fied, which of course was the body of Jesus, was 
raised. If the actual, literal body of Jesus had 
not been raised, then these angels were liars. Do 
you believe that? These are only a few of the 
very Many passages in which it is very clearly 
taught that the very body of Jesus was raised 
from the dead. The body of Jesus was raised 
from the dead and our bodies shall be raised from 
the dead, else Christianity is a lie from start to 
finish. But Christ was raised from the dead and 
we Shall be raised. Or, as Paul puts it in the 20th 
verse of this same chapter, ‘‘But now hath Christ 
been raised from the dead, the first fruits of them 
that are asleep.’’ Our resurrection, the resurrec- 
tion of our bodies, will be the harvest that follows 
the resurrection of the body of Christ, which was 
*‘the first fruits.”’ 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 251 


Tl. THE CHARACTER OF OUR RESURRECTION BODIES 


Having clearly settled the fact of the resurrec- 
tion of the body of Jesus Christ and of our bodies, 
let us next consider the character of our resur- 
rection bodies. 

1. First of all, we know that the body which is 
raised will not be exactly the same body that at 
was when it was laid m the grave. This appears 
from I Cor. 15:35-38: But some will say, how are 
the dead raised? And with what manner of body 
do they come? Thou foolish one, that which thou 
thyself sowest is not quickened, except it die: and 
that which thou sowest, thou sowest not in the 
body that shall be, but a bare grain, it may chance 
of wheat, or of some other kind; but God giveth it 
a body even as it pleased him, and to each seed a 
body of its own.’’ Here we are told that our 
bodies when they are raised will not be exactly 
the same as our bodies when they are buried, any 
more than the wheat that springs from the kernel 
of wheat that is planted is the same as the kernel 
that was planted. But just as what grows from 
the seed comes from the seed and bears the most 
intimate relation to the seed, so our resurrection 
bodies come from the body that is buried and bear 
the most intimate relation to it. The resurrection 
body is the outcome of the body that is buried. 
It is the old body quickened and transformed; or, 
as Paul puts it in Phil. 3:20, 21: ‘‘Jesus Christ 


252 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


. .. Shall fashion anew the body of our humilia- 
tion, that it may be conformed to the body of his 
glory, according to the working whereby he is able 
even to subject all things unto himself.’’ 

2. The next thing that the Bible teaches about 
our resurrection bodies is that they are like the 
glorified body of Jesus Christ. This appears from 
the verses just quoted, Phil. 3:20, 21: ‘‘The Lord 
Jesus Christ ... shall fashion anew the body of 
our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the 
body of his glory, according to the work whereby 
he is able even to subject all things unto himself.”’ 
Christ’s resurrection body was not the same body 
that was laid in the sepulchre. It was the old body 
transformed and delivered from the limitations of 
the body that He had while living here among men, 
and new qualities imparted to it, and our bodies 
will also be transformed into the likeness of this 
glorious body of Christ and thus delivered from 
the limitations to which they are subjected now, 
and new qualities imparted to them. It will bea 
transformed body; the character of its transfor- 
mation is indicated by the transformation that 
took place in the body of Jesus Christ. Some 
suggestion as to what that transformed body of 
Jesus Christ was like is found in that anticipa- 
tion of His resurrection which was seen by Peter, 
James and John on the mount of transfiguration. 
Matthew in his description of the appearance of 
Jesus at His transfiguration, tells us that ‘‘His 
face did shine as the sun, and his garments be- 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 253 


came white as the light’’ (Matt. 17:2). Luke tells 
us that ‘‘the fashion of his countenance was al- 
tered and His raiment became white and dazzling’’ 
(Luke 9:29). Mark tells us that ‘‘He was trans- 
figured before them: and his garments became glis- 
tering, exceeding white; so as no fuller on earth 
can whiten them’’ (Mark 9:2, 3). 

3. The next thing that we are told about our 
resurrection bodies is that they will not be flesh 
and blood. InI Cor. 15:50, 51 we read, ‘‘Now this 
I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the kingdom of God.’’ Paul is here talking about 
our resurrection bodies. It is in the resurrection 
chapter he says this, and he distinctly. tells us 
that our resurrection bodies will not be ‘‘flesh and 
blood.”’ 

4. But while our resurrection bodies will not 
be ‘‘flesh and blood,’’ they will have ‘‘flesh and 
bones.’’ This appears from what our Lord Him- 
self says about His own resurrection body in Luke 
24:39. Here we read that Jesus said: ‘‘See my 
hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, 
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as ye 
behold me having.’’ As our resurrection bodies 
are to be transformed into the likeness of His, we 
also must have ‘‘flesh and bones’’ in our resurrec- 
tion bodies. Some have fancied that they saw a 
contradiction between what our Lord says here 
and what Paul says in the passage quoted above 
(I Cor. 15:50, 51), but there is no contradiction. 
‘*F'lesh’’ we shall have, but not ‘‘flesh and blood,’’ 


254 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


i.e., not flesh, the animating principle of which is — 


blood. The question arises, What takes the place 
of the blood in our resurrection bodies? The an- 
swer seems to be that in the present life, ‘‘blood is 
the life’’ of the natural body, but in the life to 
come our bodies are to be, as we are told elsewhere 
in this same chapter, ‘‘spiritual bodies,’’ i.e. 
bodies, the animating principle of which is the 
Spirit of God, not our own blood. Our not having 
‘‘blood’’ in our resurrection bodies involves many 
great and glorious possibilities, upon which we 
cannot dwell now. 

5. In the fifth place (and closely connected 
with 3 and 4), our resurrection bodies will be w- 
corruptible. We read in I Cor. 15:42: ‘‘So also is 
the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corrup- 
tion; it is raised in incorruption.’’ The thought of 
this word ‘‘incorruption’’ is that the body is not 
subject to decay, it is imperishable. Our present 
bodies are decaying all the time. We are perish- 
ing every day and every minute. My present body 
is disintegrating while I talk to you. But the 
bodies that we shall receive in the resurrection will 
be absolutely free from the liability to corruption 
or decay. They cannot disintegrate or suffer de- 
cay or deterioration of any kind. 

6. The next thing that we are taught about 
the resurrection body is that it ts a glorious body. 
This comes out in the first part of the following 
verse, I Cor. 15:43, ‘‘It is sown in dishonour; it is 


nna ne 


a a 


raised in glory.’’ Some idea of the glory, the ‘ 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 255 


glorious beauty, of that body is suggested by the 
representation of our glorified Lord that we have 
in Rev. 1:13-17: ‘‘And in the midst of the can- 
dliesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed 
with a garment down to the foot and girt about 
the breasts with a golden girdle. And his head 
and his hair were white as white wool, white as 
snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire and his 
feet like unto burnished brass, as if it had been re- 
fined in a furnace, and his voice as the voice of 
many waters. And he had in his right hand seven 
stars: and out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two- 
edged sword: and his countenance was as the sun | 
shineth in his strength. And when I saw him, I 
fell at his feet as one dead, and he laid his right 
hand upon me saying, Fear not; I am the first and 
the last.’’ Our resurrection bodies will be like 
that. 

7. Furthermore, our resurrection bodies will 
be powerful, or as we read in the last half of this 
same verse (1 Cor. 15:43), ‘‘It is sown in weak- 
ness, it is raised in power.’’ Then all our weari- 
ness and weakness will be forever at an end. In 
our present bodies our bodies are oftentimes a 
hindrance to our highest aspirations, they thwart 
the carrying out of our loftiest purposes, we can- 
not put into execution our loftiest purposes, ‘‘the 
spirit is willing but the flesh is weak.’’ But in 
our resurrection bodies the body will be able to 
accomplish all that the spirit purposes. The re- 
deemed, body will be a perfect counterpart of the 


256 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


redeemed spirit that inhabits it. No deafness, 
dimsightedness nor blindness, no tired hands and 
feet, no maimed soldier boys coming home from 
the war. : 

8. It will be a heavenly body. This appears 
from the 47th to the 49th verses of this same 
chapter. ‘‘The first man is of (literally, out of) 
the earth, earthy: the second man is of (literally, 
out of) heaven: as is the earth, such are they also 
that are earthy: and as is the heavenly such are 
they also that are heavenly. And as we have 
borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear 
the image of the heavenly.’’ The thought plainly. 
is that our present bodies are of an earthly’ origin 
and an earthly character, but that the transformed 
body will be of a heavenly character. Paul ex- 
plains it at length in 2 Cor. 5:1-4 where he says, 
‘‘For we know that if the earthly house of our 
tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building from 
God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in the 
heavens. For verily in this (i.e., in this present 
earthly house, earthy body) we groan, longing to 
be clothed upon with our habitation which is from 
heaven (i.e., our heavenly body) : if so be that be- 
ing clothed we shall not be found naked. For in- 
deed we that are in this tabernacle (i.e., in the 
present earthy body) groan, being burdened; not 
for that we would be unclothed, but that we would 
be clothed upon (i.e., with our heavenly body), 
that what is mortal may be swallowed up of life.”’ 

9. Our transformed bodies will be luminous, 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 257 


shining, dazzling, bright like the sun. This is seen 
in many passages. For example, Matt. 13:43, 
‘‘Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun 
in the kingdom of their Father.’’ This is to be 
taken literally for it is in the interpretation of the 
parable and not in the parable. This suggests 
what we have already seen about the transfigured 
body of Jesus in Matt. 17:2, where we are told 
that ‘‘His face did shine as the sun, and his gar- 
ments became white as the light.’’ We have the 
same thought also in the Old Testament in Dan. 
12:3, where we are told, ‘‘And they that are wise 
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; 
and they that turn many to righteousness as the 
stars forever and ever.’’ They shall shine liter- 
ally as well as figuratively. Some suggestion of 
what the luminous glory of our faces and forms 
in our resurrection bodies will be is seen in the 
light that Paul tells us that he saw beaming from 
the person of Jesus when the glorified Jesus met 
him on the Damascus road. In Paul’s description 
of what he saw on that occasion, as given in Acts 
26 :12, 13, we read, ‘‘Whereupon as I journeyed to 
Damascus with the authority and commission of 
the chief priests, at midday, O king, I saw on the 
way a light from heaven, above the brightness of 
the sun, shining around about me and them that 
journeyed with me.’’ The light that Saul saw, 
as is evident from the whole account, was the light 
that shone from the person of our glorified Lord, 


258 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


and in our resurrection bodies we shall be like 
Him. 

10. Three interesting facts regardimg our 
resurrection bodies are stated in Matt. 22:30 and 
Luke 20:35, 36. In Matt. 22:30 we read: ‘‘For 
in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are 
given in marriage, but are as angels in heaven.”’ 
In Luke 20:35, 36 we read: ‘‘But they that are 
counted worthy to attain to that world, and the 
resurrection of the dead, neither marry, nor are 
given in marriage: for neither can they die any 
more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are 
sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.’’ Tak- 
ing these two passages together, we learn that our 
resurrection bodies are like the angels, that we do 
not marry in our resurrection bodies and that 
these bodies cannot die any more. 

11. Though all these resurrection bodtes are 
glorious, they differ from one another, each one 
having its own peculiar glory. This appears from 
1 Cor. 15:41, 42: ‘‘There is one glory of the sun, 
and another glory of the moon, and another glory 
of the stars; for one star differeth from another 
star in glory. So also is the resurrection from the 
dead.’’ Glorious as all our bodies shall be, there 
will be no tiresome uniformity even of glory in 
the world of resurrection bodies. Hach body will 
have its own peculiar glory. 

12. Let us say finally in regard to the char- 
acter of our resurrection body, that the resurrec- 
tion of our body will be the consummation of our 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 259 


adoption, i.e., of our placing as sons, our manifes- 
tations as sons of God. In Rom. 8:23 we read: 
‘‘We, which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even 
we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for 
our adoption (i.e., our placing as sons), to wit, the 
redemption of our body.’’ The resurrection body 
will be the consummation of our placing as sons, 
i.e., in the resurrection body it will be outwardly 
manifested that we are sons of God. Before His 
incarnation Christ was ‘‘in the form of God.”’’ 
(Phil. 2:6), i.e., in the visible appearance of God. 
So shall we also be in the resurrection, for our 
bodies shall be like His. This throws light upon 
what Paul meant when he said in Col. 3:4: ‘‘When 
Christ, who is our life, shall be manifested, then 
shall we also with him be manifested in glory.”’’ 
And also it throws light on what John meant when 
he says in I John 3:2, R. V.: ‘‘Beloved, now are 
we the children of God, and it is not yet made 
manifest what we shall be. We know that, if he 
shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we 
shall see him as he is.’’ 


lM. WHEN WILL THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY 
TAKE PLACE? 


There remains but one question to be considered 
and we can deal with that very briefly. That 
question is, when will the resurrection of the body 
take place? This question is plainly answered 
time and again in the Bible. For example, it is 


260 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


answered in Phil. 3:20, 21: ‘‘For our citizenship 
is in heaven; from whence also we wait for a 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall fashion 
anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be 
conformed to the body of his glory, according to 
the working whereby he is able even to subject all 
things unto himself.’’ Here it is plainly declared 
that the transformation of our bodies nto the ltke- 
ness of the glorious body of Christ will take place 
when the Lord Jesus whom we are awaitvng shall 
appear from heaven. The same thought is given 
in I Thess. 4:16, 17: ‘‘For the Lord Himself shall 
descend from heaven, with a shout, with the voice 
of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and 
the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which 
are alive, that are left, shall together with them be 
caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the 
air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.’’ The 
question will arise in some of our minds, what 
about us in the meantime if we chance to die be- 
fore the coming of the Lord? This question also 
is plainly answered in II Cor. 5:1-8: ‘‘For we 
know that if the earthly house of our tabernacle 
(our present bodies) be dissolved (die and decay) 
we have a building from God, a house not made 
with hands (our resurrection body that we are to 
get at the coming of the Lord), eternal, in the 
heavens. For verily in this (i.e., while living in 
this present body) we groan, longing to be clothed 
upon with our habitation which is from heaven 
(our resurrection body) if so be that being clothed 


The Resurrection of the Body of Jesus 261 


we shall not be found naked. For indeed we that 
are in this tabernacle (this present earthy body) 
do groan, being burdened; not for that we would 
be unclothed (i.e., not that we would merely get 
rid of our present bodies), but that we would be 
clothed upon (i.e, that we would receive our 
resurrection bodies) that what is mortal may be 
swallowed up of life. Now he that wrought us 
for this very thing is God, who gave unto us the 
earnest of the Spirit (i.e., the Holy Ghost, whom 
we have received as the earnest of the full re- 
demption in our resurrection bodies which are to 
be obtained at the coming of the Lord). Being 
therefore always of good courage and knowing 
that, whilst we are at home in the body (i.e., while 
we are still in our earthly life in this present 
earthly body) we are absent from the Lord (for 
we walk by faith not by sight); we are of good 
courage, I say, and are willing rather to be ab- 
sent from the body (i.e., to have our present earth- 
ly body die even before we get our resurrection 
bodies, which we shall not get until the return of 
the Lord), and to be at home with the Lord.’’ The 
teaching of this plainly is that if we die before the 
return of the Lord and therefore before we obtain 
our resurrection body, our spirits are unclothed, 
i.e., they are unclothed from this present body and 
not yet clothed upon with the resurrection body, 
but that we are ‘‘at home with the Lord’’ in con- 
scious blessedness, in a condition that is far bet- 
ter than that that we are in in this present life (see 


262 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Phil, 1:23, R. V.), but not so perfect as that 
condition which shall be when our redeemed spirits 
are clothed upon with our resurrection bodies. 
It will be at the return of the Lord Jesus that we 
‘get our full redemption. That is one reason why 
‘we wait’’ (literally, assiduously wait) for Him 
(Phil. 3:20, 21, see Greek). That is one reason 
why we long for the return of the Lord. There 
are many reasons why we long for the return of 
our Lord. All the great problems that are con- 
fronting us at this present time in national and 
international life, in social, commercial and po- 
litical life, will be solved when He comes, and will 
never be solved until He comes; and for these rea- 
sons we long for Him. But we long for Him also 
because while this present body serves many a 
useful purpose for the redeemed spirit that in- 
habits it, it is often a hindrance. It is often sub- 
ject to aches and pains, to frailties, and it is a 
constant temptation to folly. But when our Lord 
Jesus comes again He will transform this present 
body of our humiliation into the likeness of His 
own glorious body and at that time we shall know 
what ‘‘full salvation’’ means, when we shall shine 
forth as the sun in the kingdom of our Father. 


XTIT 


THE DEVIL 


‘¢The Devil... .is.’’—John 8:44. 
‘¢The Devil Sinneth.’’—1 John 3:8, 


INTRODUCTION 


UR subject in this chapter is The Devil. I 
() have two texts—John 8:44: ‘‘The Devil 
... 18,” 3 
The second text is 1 John 3:8: ‘‘The Devil 
Sinneth.’’ The Bible doctrine concerning the 
Devil, his Existence, Nature, Character, Work and 
Destiny is a fundamental doctrine of the Christian 
faith, and is of vital importance. The teaching 
of the Bible on this subject is not a mere matter 
of theory or dogma. It is a matter of most prac- 
tical every day importance. Experience shows 
that if men are in error in regard to this subject, 
they are pretty sure to be in error on other ques- 
tions that are fundamental. When men and 
women begin to question the existence of a per- 
sonal Devil it is pretty sure that before long they 
will be questioning a good many other things re- 
garding which a true child of God should have no 
questions. Doubt of the existence of a personal 
263 


264 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Devil is widespread to-day. Many preachers in 
supposedly orthodox pulpits do not hesitate to 
say, ‘‘I do not believe in the existence of a per- 
sonal Devil.’’ Denial of the existence of a per- 
sonal Devil is one of the main points in the sys- 
tem which is so widespread to-day, and which is 
doing so much evil, that with considerable rea- 
son it has been called ‘‘The Devil’s Masterpiece”’ 
-—Christian Science. A well-known and popular 
pastor in this city some months ago proclaimed 
to his people that he was going to preach to them 
a gospel ‘‘without an atonement of blood, without 
an infallible Bible, without hell, and without a 
personal Devil.’’ If he does preach to them a sys- 
tem of doctrine without any of these he will preach 
some other system of doctrine than that which is 
contained in the book, which our Lord Jesus Christ 
has endorsed as the Word of God, i.e., the Bible. 


I, THERE IS A DEVIL 


The first point to make clear is that there ts a 
Devil. This is plain from our first text, Jno. 8:44: 
‘*The Devil. ...is.’?> The whole verse reads: ‘*Ye 
are of your father, the devil, and the lusts of your 
father it is your will to do: He was a murderer 
from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, be- 
cause there is no truth in him. When he speak- 
eth a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, 
and the father thereof.’’ These are the words of 
Jesus Christ. With any one who has any 


The Devil 265 


right to call himself a Christian, the words 
of Jesus Christ have infinitely more weight 
than the words of Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy or 
any one else, or all others together, and Jesus 
here says, ‘‘The Devil....is.’’ But this is not 
the only passage by any means in which our Lord 
Jesus asserts in the most emphatic and most un- 
mistakable terms the existence of the Devil. Turn 
to Matt. 13:19, and you will read these words: 
‘*When any one heareth the word of God, and 
understandeth it not, then cometh the evil one and 
snatcheth away that which has been sown in his 
heart.’’ These words are found in the interpre- 
tation of a parable—the Parable of the Sower. It 
is impossible to say that these words are figura- 
tive. In parables we have figures, in the explana- 
tion of the parables we have the literal facts that 
the figures symbolise, and these words are not 
taken from the parable, but from our Lord’s own 
explanation of the parable, and here we are dis- 
tinetly told that there is a@ person, who is here 
called ‘‘The Evil One,’’ whose business it is to 
snatch away the Word of God when it has been 
sown in hearts that do not understand and heed 
it. If evil is only impersonal and our Lord had 
ohly referred to impersonal influences, or human 
influences, as taking away the Word out of the 
hearts where it had been sown, these words of His 
would be utterly without meaning. That Jesus 
Christ believed that there was a person of whom 
He here speaks as ‘‘The Evil One’’ and of whom 


266 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


He elsewhere speaks, as we shall see directly, as 
‘<The Devil,’’ admits of no doubt if we grant that 
the Lord Jesus was an honest man. We musi, 
therefore, if we believe in the Lord Jesus, belreve 
that there ts a Devil. We can deny his existence 
only by questioning either the honesty or the w- 
telligence of our Lord. He certainly taught that 
there was a Devil. It would be easy to show from 
the teachings of Peter (1 Pet. 5:8, 9; Acts 5:3) 
and from the teachings of John (John 13:2) and 
from the teachings of Paul (Eph. 6:10-12) also 
that there is a Devil; but that is unnecessary for 
any one who has any right to call himself a Chris- 
tian, for if the Lord says so, that settles it, and 
the Lord Jesus does say ‘‘The devil... .is.’’ If 
there is no Devil, then our Lord Jesus was either 
a fool or a fraud. The question of believing in 
the personality of the Devil involves the honour of 
our Lord Jesus. If His teaching is not to be 
trusted on this point, it is not to be trusted on 
any other point, and the denial of a personal 
Devil involves the trustworthiness of the Lord 
Jesus as a Teacher and a Saviour at every point. 
So we see that the question of the existence of the 
Devil is fundamental and of vital importance. 


II. THE NATURE OF THE DEVIL 


Having settled it that there is a Devil, we now 
face the question as to the nature of the Devil. 
1. First of all, the Bible teaches us that the 


The Devil 267 


Devil is a person. This comes out in our second 
text, 1 Jno. 3:8: ‘‘The devil sinneth.’’ Only a 
person can sin.. When we say that the Devil is 
a person we do not mean that necessarily he has 
a body, certainly not such a body as he is pic- 
tured as having in various paintings and engrav- 
ings that are supposed to represent the Devil. A 
person is any being who knows and feels and 
wills. When we say that the Devil is a person we 
mean that he is a being who has intelligence, feel- 
ing and will, that he is not a mere principle of 
evil. The personality of the Devil is taught over 
and over again in the Bible. Just a few illustra- 
tions in addition to our texts. Turn again to 
Matt. 13:19: ‘*When any one heareth the word 
of God, and understandeth it not, then cometh the 
evil one, and snatcheth away that which hath been 
sown in his heart.’’ The representation of this 
passage is the representation of a person. He is 
called ‘‘The Evil One,’’ not merely ‘‘evil,’’ but 
‘<The Evil One,’’ which of course is the represen- 
tation of a person. If evil is only impersonal, or 
if it only works through human beings, these 
words of our Lord Jesus would be without mean- 
ing. The personality of the Devil comes out again 
very clearly and very forcibly in Eph. 6:10-12: 
‘*Finally, brethren, be strong in the Lord and the 
strength of his might. (11) Put on the whole ar- 
mour of God, that ye may be able to stand against 
the wiles of the devil. (12) For our wrestling is 
not against flesh and blood, but against the prin- 


268 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


cipalities, against the powers, against the world 
rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness in the heavenly places.’’ Here Paul 
distinctly tells us that the great reason why we 


need to be strong in the Lord and in the strength | 


of His might and why we need to put on the 
whole armour of God, is because there is a being 
of great cunning, subtlety and power, a person 
named ‘‘The Devil,’’ and that this being has un- 
der him a multitude of other personalities of such 
dignity and power as to be called by the titles: 
‘‘yrincipalities,’’ ‘‘powers,’’ ‘‘world rulers,”’ 
‘‘spiritual hosts of wickedness.’’ Beyond a ques- 
tion our Lord Jesus, and the Apostle Peter and 
the Apostle John and the Apostle Paul believed 
in and taught the existence of a personal Devil. 
If there is not a personal Devil we may as well 
give up our Bible, for in that case it is a book that 
is full of folly and of fraud. If there is not a 
personal Devil we must give up our belief in the 
inspired authority of the Apostle Paul, the Apostle 


Peter, the Apostle John, and we must give up our 


faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. No intelligent 
student of the Bible can retain his faith in the in- 
spiration and authority of that Book, or his faith 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, if he gives up belief in 
the existence of a personal Devil. As intelligent 
men and women, we must take our choice between 
believing in the existence of a personal Devil or 
giving up our faith in Jesus Christ and Chris- 
tianity. Any system of doctrine that demes the 


—_ 


The Devil 269 


existence of a personal Devil is radically unchris- 
tian whatever name tt may arrogate to tiself. 

2. The second thing that the Bible teaches as 
to the nature of the Devil, is that, the Devil ts a 
being of very great power and authority. This 
comes out in the verses we have just read, Eph. 
6:10, 11: ‘‘Finally be strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of his might. (11) Put on the whole 
armour of God, that ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil.’’ These words make 
it clear that the Devil is so mighty that the people 
of God cannot resist his cunning wiles without 
having on the whole armour of God, and it is also 
evident from the 10th verse that we cannot resist 
his power unless we are strengthened with the 
strength of God. And this is not all: in the 12th 
verse we read: (12) ‘‘For our wrestling is not 
against flesh and blood, but against the princi- 
palities, against the powers, against the world 
rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness in the heavenly places.’’ These are 
tremendous words. If they mean anything, they 
certainly mean that there are beings of great au- 
thority and dignity who are under the leadership 
of the one supreme being of evil, the Devil. The 
conflict that we have on hand as believers in Christ 
is terrific. The conflict that the Allies have on 
hand with the mighty military forces of the Kaiser 
is nothing to the battle we have on hand with the 
Devil and his hosts. We are fools if we under- 
estimate the battle. On the other hand, we must 


270 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


not over-estimate it. While our conflict is with 
the Devil, and while our wrestling is against ‘‘the 
principalities,’? against ‘‘the powers,’’ against 
‘‘the world-rulers,’’ against ‘‘the spiritual hosts 
of wickedness,’’ nevertheless He that is for us is 
far mightier than they. The Devil is mighty but 
our Saviour is almighty. It is quite possible for 


me 


one to become morbid over this subject of the - 


Devil, and to become utterly discouraged and even 
deranged. That is entirely unnecessary and un- 
warranted. While our conflict is with the Devil 
and his mighty hosts, God has provided for us a 
strength and an armour whereby we may ‘‘be 
able to quench all the fiery darts of the Evil One” 
and to ‘‘withstand in the evil day, and having done 
all to stand’’ (v. 13). 

3. The third thing that the Bible teaches us as 
to the Nature of the Devil is that, the Devil is 
a being of great majesty and dignity of position. 
Turn to Jude 8, 9: ‘‘Yet in like manner these 
also in their dreamings defile the flesh, and set 
at nought dominion, and rail at dignities (the lit- 
eral translation of the Greek word rendered dig- 
nities is ‘‘glories’’). (9) But Michael the Arch- 
angel, when contending with the devil he dis- 
puted about the body of Moses, durst not bring 
against him a railing judgment, but said, The Lord 
rebuke thee.’’ From these words it is evident that 
the position of the Devil was so exalted that even 
Michael the archangel did not dare to bring a rail- 
ang judgment against him. The context seems to 


7 - ate et 


The Devil 271 


imply that the position of the Devil was more ex- 
alted than that of Michael the archangel himself. 
The Devil of the Bible is not at all the Devil of 
common thought. He is not a being hideous in 
appearance, with hoofs and horns and tail. He is 
not even the being pictured by Milton or Bunyan. 
He is a being of very great original majesty and 
dignity, a being of great wisdom and power. When 
people talk lightly and contemptuously about the 
Devil they display gross ignorance of what the 
Bible teaches about him. It is true that he is 
evil in character and therefore called ‘‘The Evil 
One”’ (John 5:19, R. V.). It is true he is a liar 
and a murderer (John 8:44), it is true that he is 
full of malignity (II Cor. 4:4): but he is a being 
of great dignity and majesty, so that even Michael 
the archangel durst not bring against him a rail- 
ing accusation. 

4. The Bible teaches furthermore that the 
Devil is ‘‘the prince of this world.’’ Our Lord 
Jesus Himself taught this. He says in John 12:31: 
‘‘Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the 
prince of this world be cast out.’’ The Greek 
word translated ‘‘world’’ in this passage is kos- 
mos, and the thought is of the present world or- 
der, and our Lord’s teaching is that the Devil is 
the prince of this present world order. We have 
the same teaching of our Lord in John 14:30, 
where we read: ‘‘I will no more speak much with 
you, for the prince of the world cometh: and he 
hath nothing in me.’’ These words of our Lord 


272 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian. Faith 


are found in what many regard as the most pre- 
cious chapter in the Bible, the 14th chapter of 
John, and if we give up this teaching of our 
Lord regarding Satan we must give up, not merely 
the Bible as a whole, but this most precious chap- 


ter in the Bible. We find the Lord teaching the , 
same thing again on that same night, the night . 


before His crucifixion, in John 16:11 where he 
says: ‘‘The prince of this world is judged’’—the 
evident reference being to Satan. 

How the Devil came to be Prince of this world 


it may be impossible for us to say, but that he - 
is so admits of no question, if we are to accept | 
the teaching of Jesus Christ, and any one who | 


will study the ruling principles of commercial 
life, of political life, of social life, and above all 
of international relations, to such an one it will 
become perfectly evident that the Devil is the one 
who is master of the present order of things. If 
we ever doubted before that there was a Devil, 


eee 


and just such a Devil as the Bible pictures, we - 


can scarcely doubt it now, when we consider the 
action of the rulers of the earth in this present 
mad world war. How could beings so intelligent 
in matters of science and philosophy and eco- 
nomics as the present rulers of Germany are, ever 
be guilty of plunging the nations of the earth into 
this mad war? There is but one reasonable an- 
swer: because there is a Devil who rules the pres- 
ent Kosmos, or world order, and he controls the 
Kaisers and the Reichstags of the world and will 


The Devil 273 


until the true Prince comes, the Prince of Peace, 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 


It. THE CHARACTER OF THE DEVIL 


1. As to the character of the Devil, the Bible 
teaches us that he 1s a being absolutely wicked. 
In Matt. 13:19 he is called, ‘‘The Wicked One.’’ 
That is to say, he is one who is the personal em- 
bodiment of absolute wickedness. In I John 5:19 
R.V. also he is called ‘‘The Wicked One.’’ God 
is ‘‘The Holy One,’’ that is to say the One who is 
the personal embodiment of perfect holiness. The 
Devil is Just His opposite, the personal embodi- 
ment of consummate wickedness. 

2. The Devil is to evil what God is to good. In 
I John 3:8, we read: ‘‘He that doeth sin is of the 
devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. 
To this end was the son of God manifested, that he 
might destroy the works of the devil.’’ This does 
not mean that the Devil sinned from the very or- 
igin of all things and that he was created sinful, 
for we learn from Ezek. 28:15 that the Devil was 
created upright. The verse does mean, however, 
that Satan is the original smner. The expres- 
sion ‘‘from the beginning”’’ is characteristic of the 
epistle from which these words are taken and does 
not necessarily mean from the origin of things 
(see for example verse 11). In a similar way we 
are told in one of our texts—John 8:44—that the 
Devil was a murderer from the beginning and 


274. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


that he is ‘‘A liar and the father of it.’’ There is 
absolutely ‘‘no truth in him.’’ So much for the 
nature and character of the Devil. 


IV. THE WORK OF THE DEVIL 


We come now to the question of the Work of 
the Devil, or How the Devil Manifests Himself, 
and What He Does. 

1. In the first place we are taught that the 
Devil tempts men to sin. We have a most strik- 
ing illustration of this in his temptation of our 
Lord. We have in the Bible three accounts of this 
temptation. We will look at Matthew’s account. 
Matt. 4:1-9: ‘*Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit 
into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. (2) 
And when he had fasted forty days and forty 
nights, he afterward hungered. (3) And the temp- 
ter came and said unto him, If thou art the son 
of God, command that these stones become bread. 
(4) But he answered and said, It is written, man 
shall not live by bread alone, but by every word 
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. (5) 
Then the devil taketh him into the Holy City; and 
he set him on the pinnacle of the temple. (6) And 
saith unto Him, If thou art the Son of God, cast 
thyself down: for it is written, he shall give his 
angels charge concerning thee: and, on their hands 
they shall bear thee up, lest haply thou dash thy 
foot against a stone. (7) Jesus said unto him, 
Again it is written, thou shalt not make trial of 


The Devil 275 


the Lord thy God. (8) Again, the devil taketh 
him unto an exceeding high mountain, and show- 
eth him all the kingdoms of the world, and the 
glory of them; (9) And He said unto him, All these 
things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and 
worship me.’’ Of course we have not time this 
morning to go into the whole question of our 
Lord’s temptation, but this much is certainly plain, 
that the Devil is represented as the tempter, 
tempting our Lord. If there is no personal Devil, 
as so many would have us believe, or tf he 1s not 
the tempter, there would be absolutely no reason 
for bringing him into this account. As the Devil 
tempted our Lord, so he tempts us to-day. And 
it is to be noticed that he does not tempt us mere- 
ly to gross animal lusts and vile sins, but with 
subtle spiritual temptations, and above all he 
tempts us to doubt God’s Word. It was with this 
form of temptation that he first assaulted our 
Lord. God had just said to the Lord Jesus at His 
baptism, ‘‘Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am 
well pleased’’ (Luke 3:22), and Satan came insin- 
uating doubt of God’s Word by beginning his 
temptation with these words: ‘‘If thou art the 
Son of God,’’ and again further down in the temp- 
tation, he repeats the doubt, saying to the Lord 
Jesus again: ‘‘If thou art the Son of God.’’ In 
just the same way Satan began his assault upon 
Eve in the Garden of Eden, by insinuating a doubt 
of God’s Word and of God’s goodness. He began 


276 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


by saying: ‘‘Yea, hath God said....?’’ (Gen. 
3:2), and further on when Eve stated exactly what 
God had said, the Devil flatly contradicted and 
said: ‘‘Ye shall not surely die’’ (literally, Dying, 
thow shalt not die) when God had said: ‘‘Thou 
shalt surely die’’ (Dying, thou shalt die). This is 
Satan’s favourite method of attack to-day. He gets 
us to doubt God’s Word. Satan’s most effective 
mode of work is by leading men into doubt and 
into error on fundamental points. The saloons 
and the gambling hells and the brothels are not 
the chief spheres of Satan’s activities, but the 
schools and colleges and theological seminaries 
where he is inducing men and women, and callow 
youths and maidens, to doubt the truth of God’s 
Word, and to reject the fundamental truths of 
God’s word and accept Satan’s errors in their 
place. Satan knows well; that, if he can get men 
to doubting God’s Word, it is easy to lead them 
into the vilest sins. False doctrine has been a 
more prolific source of the vilest sins than even 
the saloons. 

2. But Satan not merely tempts men to sin by 
insinuating doubts of God’s Word, he also has his 
synagogues and ministers among men to do his 
work. Turn to Rev. 3:9: ‘‘Behold, I give of the 
synagogue of Satan, of them that say they are 
Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will make 
them to come and worship before thy feet, and to 
know that I have loved thee.’’ What I wish you 


The Devil 277 


to notice here are the words, ‘‘The synagogue of 
Satan.’’ In this case it was a Jewish synagogue, 
but now-a-days, it is often a so-called Christian 
ehureh. In II Cor. 11: 14, 15 we have an even more 
remarkable passage: ‘‘For even Satan fashioneth 
himself into an angel of light. (15) It is no great 
thing therefore if his ministers also fashion them- 
selves as ministers of righteousness; whose end 
shall be according to their works.’’ Here we are 
told that Satan has his ministers. They do not ad- 
vertise themselves as ministers of Satan, often- 
times they are not even conscious that they are; 
but they put themselves forward as ‘‘ministers of 
righteousness.’’ They advocate ‘ethical culture,’’ 
a system of salvation without atoning blood. They 
are frequently men of very attractive personality 
and great intellectual brilliance and ability, but 
they are doing the Devil’s work. Satan is never 
so dangerous as when he ‘‘ F'ashioneth himself into 
an angel of light,’’ and no other ministers of his 
are so dangerous as the men and women of attrac- 
tive personality and brilliant intellectual gifts who 
are undermining the faith of God’s children, or 
who are teaching various forms of seductive 
and alluring error, ‘‘Christian Science,’’ ‘‘New 
‘“Thought,’’ ‘‘Theosophy,’’ ‘‘Oceultism’’ (Spirit- 
ualism), and all that species of cults. 

3. We have not time to speak here of Satan’s 
work as the author of sickness (Acts 10:38; Luke 
13:16), and as the one who has the power of 
death (Heb. 2:14). 


278 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


4. But we must also speak of another work of 
the Devil. It is set forth in If Cor. 4:3, 4, RB. V.: 
‘‘And even if our gospel is veiled, it 1s veiled in 
them that perish: (4) In whom the god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of the unbelieving, 
that the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, 
who is the image of God should nob dawn upon 
them.’’ We read here that it is the work of Satan 
to blind the minds of unbelievers in order ‘‘That 
the light of the gospel of the glory of Christ, who 
is the image of God, should not dawn upon them.”’ 
It is evident then that the Devil is the author of 
false views, especially false views of the person of 
Christ. He is the author of Unitarianism, and the 
denial of the Deity of our Lord in all its forms. 
He so blinds the minds of men who submit to his © 
blinding that the Divine ‘‘Glory of Christ,’’ ‘“who 
is the very image of God,’’ is hidden from them. 
This explains why it.is that Unitarianism in alt 
its various forms persists even after its folly has 
been so often exposed. Satan’s work along this 
line is to culminate at the appearing of the Anti- 
Christ, ‘‘Even he, whose coming is according to 
the working of Satan with all power, and signs 
and lying wonders, and with all deceit of unright- 
eousness for them that perish; because they re- 
ceived not the love of the truth, that they might 
be saved.’’ (II Thess. 2:9, 10, R. V.) 


The Devil 279 


Vv. THE DEVIL’S DESTINY 


We come now to the fifth general division of our 
subject—The Devil’s Destiny. 

1. Turn in the first place to Rev. 20:1-3: ‘‘And 
I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, hav- 
ing the keys of the abyss and a great chain in his 
hand. And he laid hold of the dragon, the old ser- 
pent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him 
for a thousand years, and cast him into the abyss, 
and shut it, and sealed it over him, that he should 
deceive the nations no more, until the thousand 
years should be finished: After this he must be 
loosed for a little time.’’ We are here taught that 
at the Second Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
Satan shall be bound with a great chain and cast 
unto the abyss for a thousand years. The abyss, 
or as it is translated in the Authorised Version, 
‘“bottomless pit,’’ does not mean hell. Satan, as 
we Shall see further on,.shall be cast into hell later. 

2. Turn now to Rev. 20:7, 8: ‘‘And when the 
thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed 
out of his prison, and shall come forth to deceive 
the nations which are in the four corners of the 
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to 
the war: The number of whom is as the sand of 
the sea.’’ We are here taught that at the end of 
the Millennium, the thousand years, Satan shall 
be loosed for a ltttle season from the abyss into 
which he has been cast chained, and that he shalt 


280 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


come forth to decewe the nations. But the time 
of his power then will be very brief. 

3. In Rev. 20:10 we find the ultimate destiny 
of the Devil: ‘‘And the devil that deceived them 
was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where 
are also the beast and the false prophet; and they 
shall be tormented day and night for ever and 
ever.”’ Here is one of the points at which the 
theories of the ‘‘Reconciliation’’ people and ‘‘ Uni- 
versalists’’ generally break down. The argument 
of the Reconciliationists and Universalists, by 
which they attempt to prove that all men must ulti- 
mately be saved, carried to its logical issue, if it 
proved anything, would prove the salvation of 
Satan also, and this many of them do teach. They 
say plainly that the Devil will ultimately be 
brought to repentance and saved. Indeed that is 
what I believed and taught in my early ministry. 
But this passage which we have just read shows 
the impossibility of this being true. ‘‘The lake 
of fire’’ was ‘‘prepared for the Devil and his 
angels.’’? Our Lord Himself says in Matt. 25:41 
that when He comes back to judge this world He 
will say to those on His left hand: ‘‘Depart from 
me, ye cursed into the eternal fire, which is pre- 
pared for the devil and his angels.’’ Hell was 
not prepared for men, but for the Devil and his 
angels. If any man goes there it will be because 
he has chosen to cast in his lot with the Devil 
rather than with God. Therefore they go where 


The Devil 281 


the Devil goes. Every one who rejects Jesus 
Christ is throwing in his lot with the Devil. 


VI. HOW TO GET VICTOBY OVER THE DEVIL 


Now just for a few moments let me show you 
from the Word of God, how, in practical every day 
life, to get the victory over the Devil. There are 
four things to be borne in mind. 

1. Read first, James 4:7, ‘‘Be subject there- 
fore unto God: but resist the devil, and he will 
flee from you.’’ This teaches us that, we are first 
of all to surrender to God and then to resist the 
Devil and that, «f we do resist hum, for all hs 
cunning and power, he will flee from us. Although 
the Devil is strong, it is ours in God’s strength to 
withstand him and overcome him. 

2. Now turn tol John 2:14: ‘‘T have written 
unto you, fathers, because ye know him which is 
from the beginning. I have written unto you young 
men, because ye are strong, and the word of God 
abideth in you, and ye have overcome the evil 
one.’’ This passage teaches us that, it 1s when we 
feed upon the Word of God and store the Word of 
God wm our hearts, thus having it abiding wm us, 
that we shall be able to overcome the Devil. If 
we neglect the study of the Bible for a single day, 
we leave an open door for the Devil to enter. I 
have been a Christian for forty-three years, but I 
would not dare to neglect the study of God’s word 
for one single day. Why not? Because there is a 


282 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Devil; and, if I neglect the study of the Word 
of God for a single day, I leave a window open 
for him to enter and leave myself too weak to 
cope with him and conquer him. But if we will © 
feed upon the Word of God daily, and trust in 
God, we can resist the devil at every point. 
Though the Devil is cunning and strong, God is 
stronger, and God twmparts His strength to us 
through His written word. 

3. Turn now to Eph. 6:11: ‘‘Put on the whole 
armour of God, that ye may be able to stand 
against the wiles of the devil.’’ Here we are taught 
that, in order ‘‘to stand against the wiles of the 
Devil’’ we must ‘‘Put on the whole armour of 
God.’’ What that armour is, is found in the verses 
that immediately follow. This armour, this whole 
armour, this ‘‘panoply of God,’’ is at our dis- 
posal. The fact that there is a Devil, that he is 
a being of such majesty, dignity, cunning, and 
power, that he is so incessantly plotting our ruin 
and to undermine our faith, is no reason for fear 
or discouragement. By taking ‘‘the shield of 
faith’’ we shall be ‘‘able to quench all the fiery | 
darts of the evil one,’’ by taking ‘‘the helmet of 
salvation,’’ and the ‘‘sword of the Spirit which is 
the Word of God,’’ and by ‘‘praying always with 
all prayer and supplication in the Spirit,’’ it is our 
privilege to have victory over the Devil every day 
of our lives, every hour of the day, and every 
minute of the hour. 

4. The final step in the way to get victory 


The Devil 283 


over Satan is found in Eph. 6:10: ‘‘Finally, be 
strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his 
might.’’ The way to get victory over Satan is to 
give up all confidence in our own strength and be- 
lieve in the almighty strength of Jesus Christ and 
claim that strength for ourselves. It is in the 
strength of Jesus Christ’s might that we shall get 
the victory over ‘‘the evil one.’’ In the strength 
of His might, as we have already said, it is our 
privilege to have victory over the Devil every day 
of our lives, every hour of the day and every min- 
ute in the hour. Hallelujah! 


XIV 


Is THere a LireraL Hew? 
“In danger of the hell of fire.”’—Matt. 5:22. 


Y subject is ‘‘Is There a Literal Hell?” 

I wish that the things that I am go- 

ing to preach to you were not true. 

God wishes so, too, ‘‘The Lord is longsuffer- 
ing to usward, not wishing that any should perish, 
but that all should come to repentance’’ (2 Peter 
3:9). But God has made us in His own image, 
with a moral nature, with a capacity for self-deter- 
mination, with a power of choice; and men can if 
they will choose darkness instead of light. They 
can choose to trample God’s saving love under 
foot. They can choose to reject the One who was 
wounded for their transgressions and bruised for 
their iniquities, and upon whom the chastisement 
of their peace was laid; and some will so choose. 
I am sorry that they will. I would be willing to 
die to save them. The Lord Jesus did die to save 
them. But they spurn Him. So these things that }, 
I am to speak to-night are true and I am going to |; 
preach them in order that you may know them, |, 
and in order that you may be sure of them. I am 

284 


Is There a Literal Hell? 285 


going to preach about hell to keep as many of you 
as possible from going there. 

Is There a Literal Hell? Almost all intelli- 
gent people who believe that there is a future life 
at all, believe that men and women who sin in the 
present life and who die impenitent and unsaved 
will be punished to some extent at least in the 
life that is to come. They believe that whoever 
sins must suffer, and that the suffering which 
sin causes will not be limited to this present 
life. But, while almost all intelligent people 
who believe in a future life at all believe that 
there is some kind of future punishment, there 
are many that do not believe in a literal 
hell, that is, in a place of awful and unutter- 
able torment. Is there a hell? Is there a place 
to which impenitent men and women will go some 
time after death and suffer agonies far beyond 
those that any one suffers here on earth? Some 
say, ‘‘yes,’’ there is a hell. Many, even including 
not a few supposedly orthodox preachers, say, 
‘“No, the only hell is the inward hell in a man’s 
heart.’’? How are we to settle this question? How 
are we to determine who is right? We cannot 
settle it as some are trying to settle it by ‘‘count- 
ing noses.’’ Majorities are not always right. Hs- 
pecially is it true that majorities are not always 
right in science and in philosophy and in theology. 
What the majority of scientists firmly believed a 
century ago the majority of scientists laugh at to- 
day. What the majority of philosophers once be- 


286 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith | 


lieved, the majority of philosophers to-day regard 
as ridiculous. So majorities cannot always be 
right. And, therefore, we cannot settle this ques- 
tion by asking what the majority believe. 

We cannot settle the question by reasoning as 
to what such a being as God must do, for how can 
finite and foolish man judge what an infinitely 
holy and infmitely wise God would do? Man 
never appears more foolish than when he tries | 
to reason out what an infinite God must do. All | 
these arguments about hell by reasoning as to |. 
what God must, or must not, do are stupid. A |, 
child of seven cannot reason infalhbly as to what 
a wise and good man of fifty will do, much less |. 
can puny creatures of the dust (such as you and | 
I are, such as the most learned philosophers and 
theologians are) reason infallibly as to what an |. 
infmitely wise and infinitely holy God must do. | 
It is, however, far easier to believe in a literal hell, | 
and an everlasting hell, from the standpoint of 
pure reasoning to-day than it was three years 
and a half ago. Nevertheless, we cannot settle | 
the question as to whether there is a literal hell 
by reasoning even to-day as to what such a being |: 
as God must do. 

There is only one way to settle this question 
right, that is by going to the Bible and finding 
out what it says, and taking our stand firmly and 
unhesitatingly upon that. We have seen the last |. 
three Sunday nights that the Bible is beyond an |, 
honest question God’s word, so whatever the Bible 


Is There a Literal Hell? 287 


says on this subject, or any other subject, is true 
and is sure. Especially is it true that we must go 
to the Bible and find what it says in the matter of 
future punishment and future blessedness. All 
we know about the future is what the Bible tells 
us. All reasoning about the future outside of 
what the Bible tells us is pure guessing, it is a 
waste of time. We know nothing about heaven 
but what the Bible tells us, and we know noth- 
ing about hell but what the Bible tells us. Ona 
subject like this one ounce of God’s revelation is 
worth a thousand tons of man’s speculation. The 
whole question is what does the Bible say about 
Hell? But while we are dependent entirely upon 
the Bible, the Bible clearly reveals all that we 
need to know. The Bible tells us a great deal — 
about heaven, and it tells us still more about hell, 
and it is an interesting fact that the Lord Jesus 
Himself, whose authority many are ready to ac- 
cept who do not accept the authority of the rest 
of the Bible, is the One Who tells us the most 
about hell, and the most clearly about hell. In- 
leed, all that I am going to show you is 
what the Lord Jesus Himself says on this sub- 
ect. 


I, HELL AND HADES ARE NOT THE SAME 


First of all, in order to clear the way for the 
study of what Jesus says on this subject, let me 
2all your attention to the fact that Hell and Hades 


288 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


are not the same. There are numerous places in 
the Authorised Version where we find the word 
‘‘Hell’’ but where that word does not occur in the 
Revised Version, and where the word ‘‘Hades”’ 
is substituted for the word ‘‘Hell.’’? The Revised 
Version is right at that poimt, as every Greek 
scholar knows. Hades is not Hell. ‘‘Hades’’ is 
the Greek equivalent of the Old Testament He- 
brew word ‘‘Sheol.’’ This Hebrew word ‘‘Sheol’’ 
is frequently translated in the Authorised Ver- 
sion of the Old Testament by the English word 
‘‘Grave.’’ It ought never to be so translated, as 
it never means ‘‘Grave.’’ I have taken the pains 
to look up every passage where this Hebrew word 
is used and in not a single instance does it mean 
‘‘Grave.’’ There is an entirely different Hebrew 
word which can properly be translated in that 
way. ‘‘Sheol,’’? or New Testament ‘‘Hades,”’ 
means the place of departed spirits. Sheol (or 
Hades) before the coming, life, death, resurrec- 
tion, and ascension of our Lord, was the place 
where all the spirits of the dead, good and bad, 
went. Before the ascension of Christ, in Hades 
was Paradise, the place of the blessed dead, and 
Tartaros, the place of the wicked dead. At His 
ascension Christ emptied the Paradise of Hades, 
and took it up to Heaven with Him, as we read in 
Eiph. 4:8, ‘‘When he ascended on high, he led 
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.’’ Be- |, 
fore Christ ascended Paradise was down, now it |, 
is up. Christ said to the repentant thief on the/, 


Is There a Literal Hell? 289 


cross, ‘‘Verily I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou 
be with me in Paradise,’’ and Jesus Himself taught 
us He went down into ‘‘the heart of the earth’’ 
(Luke 12:40) and the dying thief went down with 
Him into this subterranean Paradise. I think 
Jesus Himself went also into that part of Hades 
where the lost spirits were (1 Peter 3:18-20), but 
that is another story that we will consider later. 
All that is important now is that the repentant, 
dying thief went down into Paradise, but after 
the ascension of the Lord, when Paul went to 
Paradise, he was ‘‘caught up even to the third 
heaven into Paradise’’ (II Cor. 12 :2-4). No blessed 
dead are now left in Hades, and ultimately 
‘‘death’’ and ‘‘Hades,’’ 1. e., all that are dead 
who have not yet been raised, or caught up into 
the Celestial Paradise, all who are still in Hades, 
shall be ‘‘cast into the lake of fire’’ (Rev. 20:14). 
This ‘‘lake of fire’’ into which death and Hades 
are to be cast, is the true and ultimate Hell. 


If, THERE IS TO BE A LITERAL HELL 


Having cleared the way by removing the misap- 
prehension so common in the minds of people to- 
day, that Hades and Hell are the same, now let us 
say next that there is to be a Hell. The Bible says 
so, Jesus says in Matt. 5:22, ‘‘but I say unto you, 
that every one who is angry with his brother, 
shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger 


290 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


of the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou 
fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire.’’ In 
the 29th verse of the same chapter the Lord Jesus 
says: ‘‘And if thy right eye causeth thee to stum- 
ble pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is 
profitable for thee that one of thy members should 
perish, and not that thy whole body should be 
cast into hell.’’ And in the 30th verse He says: 
‘‘And if thy right hand causeth thee to stumble, 
cut it off, and cast it from thee; for it is profitable 
for thee that one of thy members should perish, 
and not that thy whole body should be cast into 
hell.’’ We read again what our Lord Jesus said 
in Mark 9:45-48, ‘‘and if thy foot causeth thee to 
stumble, cut it off; it is good for thee to enter - 
into life halt, rather than having thy two feet to 
be cast into hell. And if thine eye causeth thee 
to stumble, cast it out; it is good for thee to enter 
into the kingdom of God with one eye, rather 
than having two eyes to be cast into hell; where 
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not 
quenched.’’ Some one may say that these 
words of our Lord are figurative. There is 
not the slightest suggestion that they are figura- 
tive. The whole context is against their being taken 
figuratively. It is indeed wrong to interpret fig- 
urative language as if it were literal, but it is just 
as unwarranted and just as wrong to interpret 
literal language as if it were figurative. Of 
course, the word ‘‘Gehenna,’’ which is translated 
‘*Hell’’ is derived from the valley of Hinnom, 


Is There a Literal Helle 291 


where in ancient times human sacrifices were of- 
fered, but the wse of the word is literal through- 
out the New Testament, though its derwation is 
figurative. Many words that are figurative in 
their derivation are literal in their use, and the 
meaning of words is never determined by deriva- 
tion, but by usage. For example, our word 
‘‘eclipse’’ is a figure of speech. According to the 
figure it is a leaving or failing or fainting of the 
moon or sun, whichever it may be that is eclipsed. 
But though it is figurative in its derivation, the 
ordinary usage of it is literal. The universal use 
in the New Testament of ‘‘Gehenna”’ or ‘‘ Hell’? 
is literal. The word here translated ‘‘Hell’’ is 
found twelve times in the New Testament, eleven 
of these twelve times it is used by our Lord Jesus 
Himself, and He uniformly uses it, as in the pas- 
sages which I have just read, of a literal hell. 
If there is no literal hell, then our Lord Jesus 
was either a fool or a fraud. He certainly meant 
to convey the impression that there was a lit- 
eral hell. There can be no doubt of that, if we 
go to His words to find out what is the natural 
meaning of them. If there is no literal hell then 
either Jesus thought there was one when there 
was not, in which case He was a fool; or else He 
knew that there was not, but tried to make men 
think that there was, in which case He was a 
fraud. There is no other alternative but either 
to believe that there is a literal hell or else to be- 
lieve that Jesus of Nazareth, our Lord and Sa- 


292 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


viour, was a fool or a fraud. I know that Jesus 
was not a fool. I know that He was the only be- | 
gotten Son of God, that in Him dwelt all the | 
fullness of the Godhead bodily, that He and the 
Father are one, that all men should honour the 
Son even as they honour the Father. I know that 
He spoke the very words of God, therefore I 
know that there is a literal hell, for He said so. 
It is worthy of note, furthermore, that most of 
these words about hell that I have read you to- 
night are taken from the Sermon on the Mount, 
the one part of the Bible that pretty much all men 
claim to believe. There are many who say they 
do not know about the Bible as a whole, but they 
do accept the Sermon on the Mount. Well, these 
passages are for the most part from the Sermon 
on the Mount. Either accept this part of the Ser- 
mon on the Mount or else throw the whole thing 
overboard as the utterance of a fool or a fraud. 
There is no other ground possible for any man 
who is willing to think things through. 


Il. IS THE FIRE OF HELL LITERAL FIRE? 


The next question that confronts us is, Is the 
fire of hell mentioned in some of the passages we 
have read, literal fire? This is not so vital a ques- 
tion as the question, is there a literal hell, but 
nevertheless it is an important question, and I be- 
lieve the question is plainly answered in the Bible, 
and plainly answered by Jesus Christ Himself. 


Is There a Literal Hell? 293 


To turn again to the passage already referred to, 
Matt. 5:22, we read: ‘‘But I say unto you, that 
every one who is angry with his brother shall be 
in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall 
say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of 
the council; and whosoever shall say, Thou fool, 
shall be in danger of the hell of fire.’’ These are 
Christ’s own words. He not only speaks of hell, 
but a ‘‘hell of fire,’’ and this too is from the Ser- 
mon on the Mount. In Matt. 18:9 the Lord Jesus 
says again, ‘‘And if thine eye cause thee to stum- 
ble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; it is good 
for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than 
having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire.’’ 
And again in Mark 9:43-49, the passage read a 
few moments ago, we read, ‘‘And if thy hand 
cause thee to stumble, cut it off; it is good for 
thee to enter into life maimed, rather than having 
thy two hands to go into hell, into the unquench- 
able fire. And if thy foot cause thee to stumble, 
cut it off; it is good for thee to enter into life halt, 
rather than having thy two feet to be cast into 
hell. And if thine eye cause thee to stumble, cast 
it out; it is good for thee to enter into the king- 
dom of God with one eye, rather than having two 
eyes to be cast into hell, where the worm dieth 
not, and the fire is not quenched.’’ Here again 
some may say the fire is figurative. Turn to Matt. 
13:30, 41, 42, we read these words: ‘‘Let both 
grow together until the harvest; and in the time 
of harvest I will say to the reapers, gather up first 


294 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn then; 
but gather the wheat into my barn.’’ Now here 
is a parable and we have figures and there would 
be warrant, if this were all that we had, for say- 
ing that the fire was figurative, as other things = 
in the verse are figurative; but in the 4lst and 
42nd verses of the same chapter we read, ‘‘The 
Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they 
shall gather out of His kingdom all things that 
cause stumbling, and they that do iniquity, and 
shall cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall 
be the weeping and gnashing of teeth.’’ Here we 
have the wmterpretation of the parable. Now in 
parables, as already said, we have figures, but 
in the interpretation of parables we have the lit- 
eral facts which the figures represent, but we see 
clearly that here m the interpretation as well as 
an the parable, we have fire. Everything else in 
the parable is explained, every item in the par- 
able except the fire, but that remains fire in the 
interpretation of the parable as well as in the par- 
able itself. We find the same thing in another 
parable in verses 47 to 50, the parable of the net 
cast into the sea. Here, also, in the interpreta- 
tion of the parable as well as in the parable itself 
we have fire. Every other figure of the parable 
is explained by the literal fact that it represents, 
but wn the interpretation of the parable we have 
‘‘fire.’’ In the light of these facts we cannot deny 
the literal fire of hell without doing violence to 
every reasonable law of interpretation. Further- 


Is There a Literal Helle 295 


more still, we read in Rev. 20:15 that at the judg- 
ment of the great white thorn, ‘‘and if any was 
not found written in the Book of Life, he was cast 
into the lake of fire.’’ There is nothing in the 
whole context that suggests a figure. And in the 
21st chapter and the 8th verse we read: ‘*But 
for the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, 
and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and 
idolators, and all liars, their part shall be in the 
lake that burneth with fire and brimstone; which 
is the second death.’’ 

Remember furthermore that the wicked in the 
eternal world are not mere disembodied spirits. 
This is plain both from the Old Testament and the 
New. We read in Dan. 12:2: ‘‘And many of 
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame 
and everlasting contempt.’’ Now this says ‘‘them 
that sleep in the dust of the earth.’’ The soul 
departs into Hades. It is the body that crumbles 
into dust, and it is the body that is to be raised. In 
the New Testament, in John 5:28, 29, our Lord is 
recorded as saying: ‘‘Marvel not at this; for the 
hour cometh, in which all that are in the tombs 
shall hear His voice, and shall come forth; they 
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; 
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrec- 
tion of judgment.’’ Now it is not the souls of men 
that are in the tombs, it is the bodies of men, and 
this passage teaches the resurrection of the bodies, 
both of the good and of the wicked. In I Cor. 


296 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith | 


15.22 we read, ‘‘For as in Adam all die, so also in | 
Christ shall all be made alive.’’ What Paul is 
talking about in this entire chapter is the resur- 
rection of the body, not merely the immortality 
of the soul, and we are here distinctly told that 
every child of Adam gets resurrection of his body 
in Christ. 

Furthermore, in Matt. 5:30 Jesus says: ‘‘If thy 
right hand causeth thee to stumble, cut it off, and 
cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that 
one of thy members should perish, and not thy 
whole body go into hell.’’ Here in the plainest 
possible terms the body is spoken of as going into 
hell, and in a similar way in Matt. 10:28, the Lord 
Jesus says: ‘‘Be not afraid of them that kill the 
body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather 
fear him who is able to destroy both soul and 
body in hell.’’ From these plain and definite 
words of our Lord it is plain as day that in the 
future life we are Lo have bodies, and that the 
bodies of the lost’ age to have a place in a literal’ 
physical hell of fire. While the bodily torments 
of hell fire are not the most appalling feature of 
hell, while the mental agony, the agony of re- 
morse, the agony of shame, and the agony of de 
spair, 18 worse, immeasurably worse; nevertheless, 
physical suffering, a physical suffering to which 
no pain on earth is anything in comparison, is a 
feature of hell. 


Is There a Literal Hell? 297 


IV. IS THE LAKE OF FIRE A PLACE OF CONSCIOUS TOR- 
MENT, OB IS IT A PLACE OF ANNIHILATION, L.E., 
A PLACE OF NON-EXISTENCE OB IS IT A PLACE OF 
NON-CONSCIOUS EXISTENCE ? 


There is one other question that remains to be 
answered, and that is, zs the lake of fire a place 
of conscious torment, or 1s wt a place of an- 
nthilation, 2.e., a place of non-existence, or is it a 
place of non-conscious existence? There are those 
who believe in a literal hell, but they do not believe 
that those who are consigned to it will consciously 
suffer there for any great length of time. They 
hold either that those who are sent to hell are an- 
nihilated, or else that they exist there in a non- 
conscious state. Of course, this would be an ever- 
lasting hell, and everlasting punishment, but is it 
the hell that is taught in the Bible? Is the lake 
of fire a place of continued conscious torment, or 
is it a place of non-conscious existence? In an- 
swer to this question let me call your attention to 
the fact that the punishment of the wicked is spok- 
en of in the Bible most frequently as ‘‘Death’’ 
and ‘‘Destruction.’? What do these words mean 
in biblical usage? 

1. Let us look first at the biblical usage of the 
word ‘‘Death.’’ Many tell us, time and time again, 
that death means non-existence, or at least non- 
conscious existence, and therefore that is what it 
must mean in the passages where it is spoken of 


298 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


as the future punishment of the impenitent. But | 


does ‘‘death’’ as used wn the Bible mean either 
non-conscious existence, or annihilation? Look 
first at 1 Tim. 5:6; here we read, ‘‘She that liveth 
in pleasure is dead while she liveth.’’ Death here 


certainly does not mean either non-existence, or |: 


non-conscious existence. The woman that lives in 
pleasure still exists, and she certainly exists con- 
sciously, but she is ‘‘dead.’’ Death means wrong 
existence rather than non-existence. It is just the 
opposite of life, and life in the New Testament 
usage does not mean mere existence, it means right 
existence. God-like existence, holy existence. It 
means the ennoblement and glorification and dei- 


-—— a ~— m= —_ 


— 


fication of existence; and death means just the | 


opposite, it means wrong existence, debased exist- 
ence, the ruin, the shame, and the ignominy and 


the despair of existence. In a similar way we are | 
told in Eph. 2:1, that men until they are quickened, {: 
or made alive, by the power of God are ‘‘ Dead m |. 
trespasses and sins.’’ It is perfectly clear then |: 


that death does not mean either non-existence, or 


non-conscious existence. But even more decisive | 
than this is the fact that God Himself has defined 


death very accurately and very fully in Rev. 21:8: 
‘‘But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abomin- 


able, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sor- . 


cerers, and idolators, and all liars, shall have their _ 
part in the lake which burneth with fire and brim- , 


stone; which is the second death.’’ Here we are 
told in so many words that the ‘‘death’’ which is 


Is There a Literal Hell? 299 


the final outcome of persistent sin and unbelief is 
a portion in the place of torment, the lake of fire. 
That this lake of fire is a place of conscious suf- 
fering is made clear in the preceding chapter, Rev. 
20:10, where we are told that ‘‘the devil that de- 
ceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brim- 
stone, where the beast and the false prophet are, 
and shall be tormented day and night for ever and 
ever.’’ The beast and false prophet had already 
been there a thousand years when the devil was 
cast into the lake of fire, and they were tormented 
consciously, without rest. 

2. Now let us look at what ‘‘Destruction’’ 
means in the New Testament. We are told by a 
certain school of religious thought that ‘‘destruc- 
tion’’ means destruction. Yes, ‘‘destruction’’ 
means destruction, but what does destruction 
mean? They say it means annihilation, or ceas- 
ing to be, but the Greek word so translated never 
means that in the Bible, nor even out of the Bi- 
ble. In the best Greek-English lexicon of the 
New Testament extant, Thayer’s translation of 
Grimm’s great work, we are told that when a 
thing is said to ‘‘perish’’ (and the verb from 
which the noun commonly translated ‘‘destruc- 
tion’’ and ‘‘perdition’’ is derived, is the one trans- 
lated ‘‘to perish’’) it is not meant that it ceases 
to be, but that it is ‘‘so ruined that it no longer 
subserves the use for which it was designed.’’ 
Furthermore, here again God has been careful to 
define His terms. He Himself has given us in the 


300 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Bible a definition of ‘‘destruction.’’ We read in | 
Rev. 17:8, 11: ‘‘The beast that thou sawest was, | 
and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottom: | 
less pit, and go into perdition; and they that dwell | 
on the earth shall wonder . . . and the beast that | 
was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of | 
the seven, and goeth into perdition.’’ Here we are | 


told that the beast goes into ‘‘perdition.’’ The 


word here translated ‘‘perdition’’ is precisely the 
same word that is elsewhere translated ‘‘destruc- 
tion’’ and should be so translated here; or else 
in the other instances it should be translated, as 
here, ‘‘perdition.’’ Now if we can find what the 
beast goes into, then we shall know exactly what 
‘‘destruction’’ means, for we are told that he 


goeth ‘‘into destruction.’’ In the 19th chapter | 
of Revelation, the 20th verse, we are told exactly | 
where the beast goes: ‘‘And the beast was taken, | 


and with him the false prophet that wrought mir- 
acles before him, with which he deceived them that 
had received the mark of the beast, and them that 
worshipped his image. These both were cast alive 
into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.’’ Now 
looking forward to the next chapter, the 10th 
verse, which I have already quoted, we read: 


‘‘And the devil that deceived them was cast into | 


the lake of fire and brimstone, where are also the 


beast and the false prophet, and they shall be tor- | 


mented day and night for ever and ever.’ Put- | 


ting these passages together we see that the beast 
goeth into ‘‘destruction,’’ and the destruction in- 


Is There a Literal Hell? 301 


to which he goes is a place in the lake which burn- 
eth with fire and brimstone, where for a thousand 
years he is in conscious torment, and where after 
the thousand years are over he is still there and 
is still tormented. So then ‘‘destruction’’ is 
clearly defined in the New Testament in the same 
way in which ‘‘death’’ is defined, as the condition 
of beings in a place of conscious torment. 

Again in Rev. 14:10, 11, we read regarding 
those who worship the beast and his image and 
receive his mark in their foreheads or in their 
hands: ‘‘The same shall drink of the wine of the 
wrath of God, which is poured out without mix- 
ture into the cup of his indignation; and he shall 
be tormented with fire and brimstone in the pres- 
ence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the 
Lamb; and the smoke of their torment ascendeth 
for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor. 
night, who worship the beast and his image, and 
whosoever receiveth the mark of his name.’’ The 
Bible makes it clear as language can make it that 
the lake of fire to which ‘‘whoever is not written 
in the Lamb’s book of life’’ is consigned, is a place 
of continued, conscious torment. There is no es- 
caping the clear teaching of the Word of God un- 
less we throw our Bibles away and discredit the 
teaching of the Apostles and the teaching of Jesus 
Christ Himself. 

Next Sunday night we will take up the question, 
Is the Punishment of the Wicked Everlasting, but 
we must stop at this point to-night. Sherman said, 


302 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


‘‘War is hell.’? Of course, in the way in which 
Sherman meant it, this is true. It is far more true 
of war to-day than it was in the worst and most 
inexcusable phases of our Civil War—Libby and 
Andersonville, for example, on the part of the 
South, and the march through Georgia on the part 
of the North. But even war to-day as carried on 
by Germany in all its appalling frightfulness, is 
not hell. Hell is incomparably more awful than 
the war now raging in Europe, and this awful hell 
of which we have been studying to-night is the 


destiny of some of you here in this room, unless | 


you soon repent and accept the Lord Jesus Christ. 


Other appalling facts about hell we will take up | 
next Sunday night, but we have already seen | 


enough to make any true Christian determine to 
work with all his might to save others from this 
awful hell. And we have seen enough to make 
every honest and sensible person here to-night de 
termine to escape this awful hell at any cost. 


XV 
Is Furort PunisHMent E\vERLASTING? 


ESUS CHRIST plainly taught that there was 
J to be a literal hell and that this hell would be 
a place of conscious suffering, suffering far 
beyond that experienced by any one here in this 
present life, but we are faced by another ques- 
tion of great importance, Is this future, con- 
scious suffering of the impenitent to be endless? 
There are many who believe in future punishment 
of a very severe and awful character, and who in- 
deed believe in a literal hell of awful, conscious 
suffering, but they deny, or at least doubt, that 
this future hell will be a place of endless, con- 
scious suffering. Many of them admit and teach 
that the suffering may go on for a long time, and 
perhaps for thousands of years, but they hold 
that it will end at last and that all men will ulti- 
mately come to repentance, accept Jesus Christ, 
and be saved. What is the exact truth about the 
matter? We cannot decide this by asking what 
the majority of supposedly reliable theologians 
believe, for majorities are often wrong and minor- 
ities are often right. Neither can we decide it by 
reasoning as to what such a being as God is must 
303 


304. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


do. It is impossible for finite and foolish men 
such as we are, and such as the wisest philoso- 
phers and theologians are, to Judge what an Inf- 
nitely wise and Infinitely holy God must do. All 
reasonings by finite men as to what an Infinitely 
wise God must do are utterly futile and an utter 
waste of time. All we know about the future 1s 
what God has been pleased to tell us m His Word. 
The Bible, as we have seen, is beyond a question 
the Word of God, and therefore what it has to 
say on this subject, or any other subject, is true 
and absolutely sure, and in a question of this 
character one ounce of God’s revelation is worth 
more than a thousand tons of man’s speculation. 
The whole question then is, what does the Bible 
teach in regard to this matter? 


I, WHAT THE BIBLE TEACHES REGARDING THE 
ENDLESSNESS OF FUTURE PUNISHMENT 


1. To find out exactly what the Bible teaches 
as to the endlessness of future punishment let us 
turn first of all to the words of our Lord Jesus 
Himself in Matt. 25:46 (R. V.), ‘‘And these shall 
go away into eternal punishment: but the right- 
eous into eternal life.’’ The first question that 
confronts us in studying this passage is what thé 
word aionios (aionion) which is here translated 
‘‘eternal’’ means. The best Greek-English dic 
tionary of the New Testament is Thayer’s. In 
this dictionary Thayer after a careful study of the 


ee pa a rs hen, th pa SSS Ss ie re lr i I A ICA A GAGA ACCC, 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 305 


word, its derivation and its usage, gives these 
three definitions of the word, and these three only: 
(1) ‘Without beginning or end, that which always 
has been and always will be.’’ (2) ‘‘ Without be- 
ginning.’’ (3) ‘‘Without end, never to cease, 
everlasting.’’ It is frequently said that the word 
aionios according to its derivation means age- 
lasting, and therefore may refer to a limited pe- 
riod. Even admitting this to be true, we should 
bear in mind that the meaning of words is not 
determined by their derivation but by their usage, 
and the most important question is not what the 
derivation of this word may be, but as to how it 
is used in the New Testament. It is used 72 times 
in the New Testament. Forty-four of these 72 
times it is used in the phrase ‘‘eternal life,’’ or 
as it is sometimes rendered, ‘‘everlasting life.’’ 
No one questions that everlasting life is endless 
and that in connection with the word ‘‘life’’ ‘‘age 
lasting’’ (if that be its proper derivation of the 
word) means lasting through all ages, never end- 
ang. Once it is used in connection with the word 
‘‘habitations,’’ referring to the habitations which 
the blessed are to have in the world to come, and, 
of course, these also are never-ending. Once it is 
used of the ‘‘weight of glory’’ that in the world 
to come awaits the believer in Jesus Christ who 
endures affliction for Christ in the life that now is. 
In this case again, of course, by universal consent 
it means endless. Once it is used of the ‘‘house 
not made with hands’’ that believers in Christ are 


306 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


to receive at the coming of the Lord Jesus (I Cor. 
5:1-8). Of course, this ‘Shouse not made with 
hands’? is everlasting. In fact the very point that 
is being brought forward in this passage is the 
contrast between our present bodies which are but 
for a brief time and our resurrection bodies which 
are to exist throughout all eternity. Once it is 
used of the future unseen things that never end, 
contrasted with the present seen things that are 
for a season (II Cor. 4:18). Of course, these are 
never-ending. That is the very point that is be- 
ing brought out in the contrast. Once it is used of 
the everlasting ‘‘comfort’’ (R. V.) or ‘‘consola- 
tion’’ (A. V.) that ‘‘our Lord Jesus Christ Him- 
self, and God our Father’’ give us, and that is 
certainly never ending. Twice it is used of the 
‘‘slory’’ that those in Christ obtain (II Tim. 2:10). 
That, of course, by universal consent is endless. 
Once it is used of the ‘‘salvation’’ Christ brings, 
which is beyond question never ending. Once 
(Heb. 9:12) it is used of the ‘‘redemption’’ that 
Jesus Christ secures for us by His blood. This 
redemption is never ending. In fact, the chief 
point of contrast in the context in this case is be- 
tween the temporary redemption secured by the 
constantly repeated sacrifices of the Mosaic ritual 
and the never ending redemption secured by the 
perfect sacrifice of Christ made once for all. Once 
it is used of the ‘‘inheritance’’ that those who are 
in Christ receive (Heb. 9:15). Here again beyond 
a question it is never ending. Once it is used of 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 307 


the ‘‘everlasting covenant’’ through Christ’s 
blood contrasted with the temporary covenant, 
based on the blood of bulls and goats, given 
through Moses. Here again it necessarily and 
emphatically means never ending. That is the 
very point at issue. Once it is used of the ‘‘ever- 
lasting kingdom’’ of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ (II Peter 1:11), and we are told in Luke ™ 
1:33, ‘‘of His kingdom there shall be no end.’’ 
Once it is used of ‘‘everlasting gospel’’ (or good 
news) and that, of course, also never ends. Once 
it is used of the ‘‘everlasting God’’ (Rom. 16 :26) 
and He certainly endures not merely through long 
ages, but without end. Once it is used of the Holy 
Spirit who is called ‘‘the eternal (or everlasting) 
Spirit,’? and He certainly endures, not merely 
through long ages, but throughout an absolutely 
endless eternity. This covers fifty-nine of the 
seventy-two times it is used, and in these fifty-nine 
instances the thought of endlessness is absolutely 
necessary to the sense, and in not a single one of 
the thirteen remaining times where it is used is it 
used of anything that is known to end. If usage 
can determine the meaning of any word then cer- 
tainly the New Testament use of this word de- 
termines it to mean never ending, or, as Thayer 
defines it, ‘‘without end, never to cease, everlast- 
ing.’? 

Nor is this all, God Himself determines it to 
mean never end? «: He defines it to mean never- 
ending by specific..lly using it in contrast with that 


c 


308 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


which does end. For example, in 2 Cor. 4:18 we 
read, ‘‘While we look not on the things which are 
seen, but the things which are unseen: for the 
things which are seen are temporal (literally, for 
a season); but the things which are not seen are 
eternal.’’ Here the whole point is that the unseen 
things in distinction from the seen which are for 
a season are for a never ending duration. 

But even allowing that the word according to 
its usage could be used of that which, though it 
last throughout an age, or ages, has an end; even 
if that were true (which it is not), then the mean- 
ing of the word in any given instance would have 
to be determined by the context in which it is 
found. Now what is the context in the passage 
which we are studying? Let us read it again, 
‘‘And these shall go away into eternal punish- 
ment: but the righteous into eternal life.’’ The 
same Greek adjective is used in connection with 
‘‘pnunishment’’ and with ‘‘life.’’ (In the Author- 
ised Version it is differently rendered, but in the 
Greek and in the Revised Version it is exactly the 
same.) Certainly this qualifying adjective must 
mean the same in the one half of the sentence that 
it means in the other half of the sentence. We 
must at least admit that Jesus Christ was an hon- 
est man, and He certainly was too honest to juggle 
with words: He would not use a word to mean 
one thing in one half of a sentence and something 
utterly different in the other half. He evidently 
sought to convey the impression that the puntsh- 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 309 


ment of the unsaved was of the same duration as 
the life of the saved. No one questions that the 
life is endless. It would be the destruction of all 
our hopes if it were not endless. Therefore, if we 
are to deal honestly with our Lord’s words, He 
taught that the punishment of the unsaved was to 
be endless. We have exactly the same reason in 
God’s Word for believing in endless punishment 
that we have for believing in endless life. If you 
give up the one you must give up the other, or 
else deal dishonestly with the words of Jesus 
Christ. 

2. We might rest the case here and call it 
proven, but let us turn to another passage, Rev. 
14:9-11, ‘‘And another angel, a third, followed 
them, saying with a great voice, If any man wor- 
shipeth the beast and his image and receiveth a 
mark on his forehead, or upon his hand, he also 
shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which 
is prepared unmixed in the cup of His anger; and 
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in 
the presence of the holy angels, and in the pres- 
ence of the Lamb: and the smoke of their torment 
goeth up for ever and ever; and they have no rest 
day and night, they that worship the beast and his 
image, and whoso receiveth the mark of his 
name.’’ Here we have another expression for the 
duration of the punishment and suffering of the 
impenitent, the expression rendered for ever and 
ever. There are in the Greek two slightly differ- 
ing forms of expression that are so translated. 


—_ 


310 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


The one form of expression literally rendered is 
‘‘unto the ages of the ages,’’ the other form is 
‘‘onto ages of ages.’’ What thought do these ex- 
pressions convey. It has been said by those who 
seek to escape the force of these words as referring 
to abolute endlessness, that the expression ‘‘is a 
Hebraism for the supreme one of its class,’’ and 
as an illustration of the same alleged Hebraism 
the expressions, ‘‘Lord of Lords’’ and ‘‘ Holy of 
Holies’’ are cited. But this is not so. In the first 
place, the form of neither of the two expressions 
is the same; and, in the second place, that is not 
the meaning of the expression ‘‘The Lord of 
Lords’’ or the meaning of the expression ‘‘The 
Holy of Holies.’? The expression ‘‘Lord of 
Lords’’ does not mean merely the supreme Lord, 
but one who is Himself Lord of all other Lords, 
and this expression ‘‘unto the ages of the ages”’ 
never means merely the ages which are the sn- 
preme ages in distinction from other ages (nor 
as another puts it, the ages which come out of 
the other ages, i.e., the closing ages before eter- 
nity). The expression according to its form 
means ages which are themselves composed of 
ages. It represents not years tumbling upon 
years, nor centuries tumbling upon centuries, but 
ages tumbling upon ages in endless procession. 
It is the strongest possible form of expression for 
absolute endlessness. Furthermore, the way to de- 
termine conclusively what the expression means 
is by considering its usage. Usage is always the 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 311 


decisive thing in determining the meaning of 
words and phrases. What is the usage of these 
expressions in the book from which we have taken 
our passage? These expressions are used twelve 
times in this book. In eight of the twelve times 
they refer to the duration of the existence, or 
reign, or glory of God and His Son, Jesus Christ 
our Lord. Of course, in these instances it must 
stand not merely for the supreme ages, or any 
individual ages, it must refer to absolute eternity 
and endlessness. Once it is used of the duration 
of the blessed reign of the righteous, and, of 
course, here again it refers to an endless eternity: 
and in the three remaining instances it is used of 
the duration of the torment of the Devil, the Beast, 
the False Prophet, and the finally impenitent. It 
is urged by those who would deny that the expres- 
sion means an absolutely endless eternity, that it 
is used in Rev. 11:15, where we are told that ‘‘the 
kingdom of the world is become the kingdom of 
our Lord, and of His Christ: and He shall reign 
for ever and ever (unto the ages of the ages),’’ 
and that we are told in 1 Cor. 15:24 that Christ 
‘shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the 
Father’’; and that therefore His kingdom must 
come to an end, and consequently ‘‘for ever and 
ever’’ in this passage cannot mean without end. 
There are two answers to this objection, either 
of which is sufficient. The first is that the ‘‘he’’ 
in ‘‘he shall reign for ever and ever’’ in Rev. 
11:15, does not necessarily refer to the Christ, but 


ox 


312 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


rather to the Lord Jehovah, in which case the 
argument falls to the ground. The second answer 
is that while we are taught in I Cor. 15:24, ete, 
that Jesus Christ will deliver up His mediatorial 
kingdom to the Father, nevertheless we are dis- 
tinctly taught that He shall rule with the Father, 
and we are told in so many words in Luke 1:33 
that ‘‘of His kingdom there shall be no end,’’ 80 
that even if the ‘‘he’’ in Rev. 11:15 referred to the 
Christ and not to the Lord Jehovah, still the state- 
ment would be exactly correct that He, the Christ, 
was to reign for ever and ever, i.e., without end. 
There 1s not a smgle passage in the whole book m 
which this expression is used of anything but that 
which is absolutely endless. So the question is an- 
swered again and answered decisively that the 
conscious suffering of the persistently impenitent 
is absolutely endless. 

3. Now let us look at another passage, II Thess. 
1:7-9: ‘‘The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire 
taking vengeance on them that know not God, 
and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus 
Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and 
from the glory of His power.’’ Here we are told 
that the punishment of those that know not God 
and obey not the gospel is ‘‘everlasting destruc- 
tion.”’ 

What does ‘‘everlasting destruction’? mean? In 
Rev. 17:8, 11 we are told that the beast goeth into 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 313 


‘‘destruction,’’ so if we can find opt where the 
beast goes, or into what he goes, we shall know 
what ‘‘destruction’’ means in the Bible usage. In 
Rev. 19:20 we are told that ‘‘the beast was taken, 
and with him the false prophet that wrought the 
signs in his sight, wherewith he deceived them that 
had received the mark of the beast and them that 
worshipped his image: they two were cast alive 
into the lake of fire that burneth with brimstone,’’ 
so we see that “‘destruction’’ is a portion in the 
lake of fire. And in the next chapter, Rev. 20:10, 
we are told that ‘‘The devil that deceived them 
was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where 
are also the beast and the false prophet (after 
having already been there for one thousand years, 
see context); and they shall be tormented day 
and night for ever and ever.’’ So we see that 
destruction means a portion in the lake of fire . 
where its inhabitants are consciously suffering 
without cessation for ever and ever. It is clear 
then, from a comparison of II Thess. 1:7-9 with 
these passages, that those who know not God and 
obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ 
shall be punished with never-ending, conscious suf- 
fering. 

4, Let us look at one more passage, Matt. 
25:41 (these again are the words of the Lord 
Jesus Himself): ‘‘Then shall he say also unto 
them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, 
into the eternal fire which is prepared for the 
devil and his angels.’’ What I wish you to no- 


314 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


tice here is that the punishment into which the 
impenitent are sent is the ‘‘eternal fire’’ which 
is ‘‘prepared for the devil and his angels.’’ We 
have an exact description of just what the eternal 
fire prepared for the devil and his angels is in 
the passage read a few moments ago, Rev. 20:10: 
‘‘And the devil that deceived them was cast into 
the lake of fire and brimstone where are also the 
beast and the false prophet; and they shall be tor- 
mented day and night for ever and ever.’’ Bya 
comparison of these two statements we have an- 
other explicit declaration of our Lord that the pun- 
ishment of the impenitent is to be a conscious 
agony, where they are punished without rest day 
and night for ever and ever. 

From any one of these passages and especially 
from all taken together, it is clear that the Scrip- 
tures make it as plain as language can make it 
that THE FUTURE PUNISHMENT OF THE PERSISTENTLY 
IMPENITENT IS ABSOLUTELY ENDLESS. 


i. OBJECTIONS 


There are several passages of Scripture which 


those who believe that all men will ultimately re- 
pent and be brought to accept Christ and thus 
saved, urge against what seems to be the plain 
teaching of the passages we have been studying. 

1. The first of these is 1 Peter 3:18:20: ‘‘Be 
cause Christ also suffered for sins once, the right- 
eous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us 


a ee a et 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 315 


to God; being put to death in the flesh, but made 
alive in the spirit; in which also he went and 
preached unto the spirits in prison, that aforetime 
were disobedient, when the longsuffering of God 
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a 
preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls, were 
saved through water.’’ It is urged that as Christ 
went and preached to the spirits in prison there 
will be another chance after men have died. But 
this the passage in question does not assert or 1m- 
ply in any way. 

(1) First of all there is no proof that ‘‘the 
spirits in prison’’ refers to the departed spirits 
of men who once lived here on earth. In the Bible 
departed spirits of men are not spoken of in this 
way. These words are used of other spirits, but 
not of human spirits disembodied, and there is 
every reason for supposing that these ‘‘spirits in 
prison’’ were not the sinful men that were on 
earth when the ark was preparing, but the angels 
who sinned at that time, just as we are told in 
Gen. 6:1, 2 that they did sin (cf. Jude 6, 7). 

(2) Furthermore, even if ‘‘the spirits in pris- 
on’’ here spoken of were the spirits of men who 
were disobedient in the time of Noah, there is not 
a hint in the passage that they were saved through 
the preaching of Christ to them, or that they had 
another chance. There are two words commonly 
used in the New Testament for preaching, one is 
kerusso and the other is ewaggehzo. The first of 
these means to herald, as to herald a king, or to 


316 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


herald the kingdom. It may, however, be used of 
preaching a message, the gospel message or some 
other message. The second word euaggelizo, 
means to preach the gospel. In the passage that 
we are studying it is the first word that is used, 
and there is not a hint that Christ preached the 
gospel to these spirits in prison. He simply her- 
alded the triumph of the kingdom. It was nota 
saving message. So there is nothing in this pass- 
age to put up even inferentially against the plain, 
direct statements regarding the destiny of the 
wicked found in the passages we have been stady- 
ing. 

2. The second passage that is appealed to by 
those who deny the endlessness of future punish- 
ment is Phil. 2:9-11: ‘‘Wherefore also God high- 
ly exalted Him, and gave unto Him the name 
which is above every name; that in the name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven 
and things on earth and things under the earth, 
and that every tongue should confess that Jesus 


Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” . 
Here it is said, we are told, that all those ‘‘under | 
the earth’’ as well as in heaven and on earth 


should bow the knee in the name of Jesus and 


confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, and that this . 


implies that they are saved. But it does not im- 


ply that they are saved. Every knee of lost men | 


and of the devil and his angels too will be forced | 
some day to bow in the name of Jesus and every 


| 


tongue forced to confess that He is Lord. If any | 


| 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 317 


one does that in the present life of his own free 
choice, he will be saved, but otherwise he will do 
it by compulsion in the age to come and every 
one has his choice between doing it now willingly 
and gladly and being saved, or doing it by com- 
pulsion hereafter and being lost. There is abso- 
lutely nothing in this passage to teach universal 
salvation or to militate even inferentially against 
the plain statements we have been studying. 

3. The third. passage that is appealed to is Acts 
3:19-21: ‘‘Repent ye therefore, and turn again, 
that your sins may be blotted out, that so ‘there 
may come seasons of refreshing from the pres- 
ence of the Lord; and that He may send the Christ 
who hath been appointed for you, even Jesus: 
Whom the heaven must receive until the times of 
restoration of all things whereof God spake by the 
mouth of His holy prophets that have been from 
of old.’’ Here we are told of a coming ‘‘restora- 
tion of all things’’ and those who contend for the 
doctrine of universal salvation hold that this 
means the restoration to righteousness of all per- 
sons. But that is not what it says, and that is 
not what it refers to. We are taught in Old Tes- 
tament prophecy and also in the book of Romans, 
that in connection with the return of our Lord 
Jesus there is to be a restoration of all nature, 
of the whole physical universe, from its fallen 
state. For example, in Rom. 8:19-21 we read: 
‘For the earnest expectation of the creation wait- 
eth for the revealing of the sons of God. For the 


318 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own 
will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope 
that the creation itself also shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the 
glory of the children of God.’’ And in Isa. 55:13 
we read: ‘‘Instead of the thorn shall come up the 
fir-tree; and instead of the brier shall come up 
the myrtle-tree: and it shall be to Jehovah for a 
name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be 
cut off.’’ And in Isa. 65:25 we are told: ‘‘The 
wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the 
lion shall eat straw like the ox; and dust shall be 
the serpent’s food. They shall not hurt nor de- 
stroy in all my holy mountain, saith Jehovah,”’ 
and in Isa. 32:15, we are told that ‘‘until the Spirit 
be poured upon us from on high, and the wiider- 
ness become a fruitful field, and the fruitful field 
be esteemed as a forest.’’ It is to this restora- 
tion of the physical universe, here plainly pre- 
dicted in Rom. 8:19-21 and these Old Testament 
prophecies, that the ‘‘restoration of all things”’ 
spoken of in Acts 3:21 refers. There is not a hint, 
not the slightest suggestion, of a restoration of 
impenitent sinners. 

4, Still another passage that is urged is Eph. 
1:9, 10, where we read: ‘‘Having made known 
unto us the mystery of His will according to His 
good pleasure which He purposed in Him unto a 
dispensation of the fulness of the times, to sum up 
all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and 
the things upon the earth.’’ Here it is urged that 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 319 


things in heaven and things in earth are to be 
summed up in Christ. This is true, but it should 
be noticed that the Holy Spirit has specifically 
omitted here the phrase that is found in Phil. 
2:10, the “‘things under the earth,’’ that is the 
abode of the lost, so this passage, so far from 
suggesting that the lost ones in hell will be re- 
stored, suggests exactly the opposite thing. There 
is then certainly nothing in this passage to mili- 
tate even inferentially against the plain statements 
we have been studying. 

5. One more passage that is urged against the 
doctrine we have been studying remains to be con- 
sidered, that is 1 Cor. 15:22. Here we read, ‘‘For 
as in Adam all died, so also in Christ shall all be 
made alive.’’ It is urged in connection with this 
passage that we are distinctly told here that all 
who die in Adam, that is every human being, 
shall be made alive in Christ, and that ‘‘made 
alive’’ means ‘‘obtain eternal life,’’ or ‘‘be 
saved.’’ For years I thought that this was the 
true interpretation of this passage, and for that 
reason in part, I held and preached at that time 
that all men ultimately, some time, somewhere, 
somehow, would be brought to accept Jesus Christ 
and be saved; but when I came to study the pass- 
age more carefully I saw that this was a misin- 
terpretation of the passage. Every passage in the 
Bible, or in any other book, must be interpreted 
in its context. The whole subject that Paul is 


320 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


talking about in this chapter is not eternal life, 
not the immortality of the soul, but the resurrec- 
tion of the body, and all this passage declares is 
that as all lose physical life in Adam, so also all 
will obtain a resurrection of the body in Christ. 
Whether that resurrection of the body is a resur- 
rection to everlasting life or a resurrection to 
shame and everlasting contempt (Dan. 12:2) de- 
pends entirely upon what men do with the Christ 
in whom they get it. There is absolutely nothing 
here to teach universal salvation. It only teaches 
a universal resurrection, resurrection of the wick- 
ed as well as of the righteous. 

To sum up the teaching of all these passages 
that are so often urged to prove universal salva- 
tion, there is nothing in any one of the passages, 
nor in all of them together, to teach that all men 
will ultimately be saved, and there is nothing in 
them to in any way conflict with what we have 
seen to be the honest meaning of the passages 
studied above, namely, that the future punishment 
of sin is absolutely endless. There is not a pass- 
age to be found in the Bible that teaches universal 
salvation, or that all men will ultimately come to 
repentance and be saved. I wish that there were, 


but there is not. I have been searching diligently | 
for such a passage for nearly forty years and! 


have not found it, and it cannot be found. 


ne er oe see 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 321 


Ill WHERE ARE THE ISSUES OF ETERNITY SETTLED? 


There remains one other important question; 
and that is, where are the issues of eternity set- 
tled. There are those who believe that the pun- 
ishment of the persistently impenitent is ever- 
lasting, that it has no end, but they also believe 
that the issues of eternity are not settled in the 
life that now is, but that with many they are settled 
after death and that when men die impenitent 
they will have another chance. Believing in end- 
less punishment does not necessarily involve be- 
lieving that there is no chance after death. There 
are many who believe that there will be a chance 
after death, and that many will accept it, who also 
believe that some will not accept it and will there- 
fore be punished for ever and ever. Now what is 
the teaching of the Word of God on this point? 
Let me call your attention to four passages, any 
one of which: settles the question, and taken to- 
gether they leave no possible room for doubt for 
any candid man who is willing to take the Bible as 
meaning what it says, any man who is really try- 
ing to find out what the Bible teaches and not 
merely trying to support a theory. 

1. The first passage in 2 Cor. 5:10: ‘‘For we 
must all be made manifest before the judgment 
seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things 
done in the body, according to what he hath done, 
whether it be good or bad.’’ In this passage we 


322 Fundamental Doctrines of ‘Christian Faith 


are plainly told that the basis of Judgment in the j; 


world to come is ‘‘the things done m the body,” 
i. e., the things done this side the grave, the things 
done before we shuffle off this mortal coil, the 


things done before the spirit leaves the body. -Of | 


‘course, this particular passage has to do primar- 


ily with the judgment of the beKever, but it shows |, 
what the basis of future judgment is, viz., the |. 


things done this side of the grave. 


2. The second passage is Heb. 9:27: ‘‘Et is | 


appointed unto men once to die, and after this 
cometh judgment.’’ Here we are distinctly told 
that ‘‘after death’’ there is to be, not an appor- 
tunity to prepare for judgment, but. ‘‘judgment,”’ 
and that, therefore, our destiny is settled .at death, 
and that there is no chance of salvation ‘‘after 
death.’’ 


rr ao —_— ST 


3. The third passage is John 5:28, 29: “‘Mar. — 


vel not at this: for the hour cometh, in which all 
that are in the tombs shall hear His voice, and shall 
come forth; they that have done good, unto the 
resurrection of life; and they that have done -evil, 
unto the resurrection of judgment.’’ Here also it 
is clearly implied that the resurrection of good and 
bad is for the purpose of judgment regarding 
the things done before thew bodies were lad m 
thew graves. 

4, A fourth passage, if possible more decwive 
than any of these, gives our Lord’s words, Jom 
8:21: *‘He said therefore again unte them; T go 
away, and ye shall seek me, and shall die m™ ‘your 


Is Futare Punishment Everlasting? 323 


sin, whither I go,, ye. cannot. come.’’ Here our 
Lord: distinctly declares. that the question. whether 
men shall come to be: with Him or not. depends. 
upon what.they do before they die, that if they. die 
impenitent, if they ‘‘die in thetr sms,’’ that whither 
Ie. goes they cannot.come. To sum up the teach- 
ing of all these passages, the issues of eternity, 
the issues of eternal life or eternal destruction,. 
the. issues of eternal blessedness and glory, or 
eternal agony and shame, are settled: in the life 
that now is. 


IV. CONCLUSION 


The future state of those who. reject. in the life 
that now is the redemption offered: to them in 
Christ Jesus is plainly declared in the Word of 
God to be a state of conscious, unutterable, end- 
less torment.and anguish. This. conception: is an 
appalling one, but it.is the Scriptural conception.. 
It is the unmistakable, inescapable teaching of 
Ged’s own: word. 

I wish that all men would repent and accept. 
Christ. If any one could’ show me ane single pass- 
age in the Bible that clearly taught that all men 
would ultimately repent, aceept Christ and. be 
saved, it would: be the happiest day of my life, but. 
it cannot be found. I once thought it could, and I 
so believed and taught. These ideas so widely 
noised about to-day as something new, these the- 
ories of ‘‘Pastor’’ Russell, formerly of Pittsburg, 


324 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


Mr. Gelesnoff of this city, and Dr. Mabie of Long 
Beach, and Mr. Pridgeon of Pittsburg, and many 
others, are not at all new to me. I held and taught 
substantially the same views regarding ultimate 
universal salvation years before these men were 
heard of, indeed nearly forty years ago. I was 
familiar with the arguments that they now urge, 
and other arguments which they do not seem to 
know, but which were to me more decisive than 
those that they urge. But the time came, as I 
studied the Bible more carefully, when I could not 
reconcile my teaching with what I found to be the 
unmistakable teaching of God’s Word. I had to 
do one of three things: I had to either give up 
my belief that the Bible was the Word of God, 
or else I must twist the words of Jesus (and oth- 
ers in the New Testament) to mean something else 
than what they clearly appeared to teach, or else 
I must give up my doctrine of ultimate universal 
restoration and salvation. I could not give up 
my faith that the Bible was the Word of God, for 
IT had found absolutely overwhelming proof that 
it was God’s Word. I could not twist the words 
of Jesus and of others to mean something else 
than what was clearly their intended meaning, for 
I was an honest man. There was only one thing 
left to do and that was to give up my doctrine of 
universal restoration and salvation. I gave it up 
with great reluctance, but I was compelled to give 
it up or be untrue to my own reason and cot- 
science. It is the inescapable teaching of the 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 325 


Word of God that all who go out of this worid 
without having accepted Jesus Christ, will spend 
eternity in hell, in a hell of unutterable, conscious 
anguish. 

This Bible conception is also a reasonable one 
when we come to see the appalling nature of sin, 
and especially the appalling nature of the sin of 
trampling under foot God’s mercy toward sinners, 
and rejecting God’s glorious Son, Whom im His 
love He has provided as a Saviour. 

Shallow views of sin and of God’s holiness and 
of the glory of Jesus Christ lie at the bottom of 
weak theories of the doom of the impenitent. 
When we see Sin in all its hideousness and enor- 
mity, the Holiness of God in all its perfection, and 
the Glory of Jesus Christ in all its infinity, noth- 
ing but a doctrine that those who persist in the 
choice of sin, who love darkness rather than light, 
and who persist in the rejection of the Son of 
God, shall endure everlasting anguish, will satisfy 
the demands of our own moral intuitions. Noth- 
ing but the fact that we dread suffering more than 
we loathe sin, and more than we love the glory 
of Jesus Christ, makes us repudiate the thought 
that beings who eternally choose sin should eter- 
nally suffer, or that men who despise God’s mercy 
and spurn His Son should be given over to end- 
less anguish. 

If, after men have sinned and God still offers 
them mercy, and makes the tremendous sacrifice 
of His Son to save them—if they still despise that 


326. Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


mercy and trample God’s Son under foot, if then 
they are consigned to everlasting torment, I can- 
not but say, ‘‘Amen! Hallelujah!. True and. right- 
eous are thy judgments, O Lord!’’ 

At all events the doctrine of conscious, eternal 
torment for impenitent men is clearly revealed in 
the Word of God, and whether we can defend it. 
on philosophical grounds or not, it is our business 
to believe it; and leave it to the clearer light of 
eternity to explain what. we cannot now under- 
stand, realising that God may. have many infinitely 
wise. reasons: for doing things for: which we in our 
ignorance ean: see no sufficient reason at.all. His. 
the most ludicrous conceit for beings so. limited 
and: foolish as. the wisest of men are, to attempt 
to dogmatise how a Gad of infinite wisdom must. 
act. All we know as to. how. God is to-act is what 
God has. seen fit. to. tell us. 

In cenclusion, two: things are-certain. First, the 
more closely men walk with Ged. and the more de- 
voted they become in. His service; the more likely 
they are to believe this doctrine. Many there are 
who tellus they love their fellow men toa- much ta. 
believe this doctrine; but the men who show their 
love in more practical ways than by sentimental 
protestations about. it, the men who show their 
love for their fellow men as Jesus Christ shawed 
His, by laying down their lives for them,. they 
believe this doctrine, even.as Jesus Christ. Himself 
believed it. 

As Christians become worldly and easy-going 


Is Future Punishment Everlasting? 327 | 


they .grow loose in their doctrine concernmg ‘the 
doom of the impenitent. The fact that laose :doc- 
trines are spreading so rapidly and widely im our 
day is nothing for them, but against them, for 
worldliness is also spreading im the church (1 
Tim. 4:1; 2 Tim. 3:1; 4:2, 3). Increasing laxity 
of life and increasing laxity of doctrine go arm in 
arm. 

Second, men who accept a loose doctrine re- 
garding the ultimate penalty of sin, be it Univer- 
salism, Restorationism, or Annihilationism, or 
that fantastic combination, or conglomeration, of 
them all, Millennial Dawnism, lose their power 
for God. I have seen this proven over and ‘over 
again. These men may be and are very clever at 
argument, and very zealous in proselyting, but 
they are seldom found beseeching men to be recon- 
ciled to God. They are far more hkely to be found 
trying to upset the faith of those already won by 
the efforts of those who do believe tn everlasting 
punishment than trying to win men who have no 
faith at all. If you really believe the doctrine of 
the endless torment of the impenitent, if the doc- 
trine really gets hold of you, you will work as you 
never worked before for the salvation of the lost. 
If you in any wise abate the doctrine, it will abate 
your zeal. Time and time again I have come up 
to this awful doctrine and tried to find some way 
of escape from it, but when I have failed, as I 
always have failed at last, when I have determined 
to be honest with the Bible and myself, I have 


328 Fundamental Doctrines of Christian Faith 


returned to my work with an increased burden for 
souls and an intensified determination to spend 
and be spent for their salvation. 

Eternal, conscious suffering, suffering without 
the least ray of hope of relief, awaits every one of 
you here to-night who goes on persistently reject- 
ing Jesus Christ, as you are rejecting Him to- 
night, and who shall pass out of this world having 
rejected Him. In that world of never ending 
gloom there will be no possibility of repentance. 
As you look out into the future there will not be 
one single ray of hope. ‘‘Forever and ever’? will 
be the unceasing wail of that restless sea of fire. 
After you have been there ten million years and 
look out toward the future you will see eternity 
still stretching on and on and on and on, with no 
hope. Oh, men and women out of Christ, why will 
you risk such a doom for a single year, or a month, 
or a week, or.a day? Hell is too awful to risk for 
five minutes the chance of going there. There is 
but one rational thing for you to do, that is to ac- 
cept Christ and accept Him right now as your 
Saviour, surrender to Him as your Lord and 
Master, confess Him as such before the world, 
and strive from this time on to please Him in 
everything day by day. Any other course is utter 
madness. 


ALSQ 1h? 


The borrower must return this item on or before 

the last date stamped below. If another user 

Places a recall for this item, the borrower will _ 

be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 


Andover-Harvard Theological Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-5788 


Please handle with care. 
Thank you for helping to preserve 
library collections at Harvard. 


