CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104614 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THE 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 



AND BY THE 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



WITH 



INTRODUCTIONS 



BY THE 



VEN. iJtCHDEACON F. W. FAEEAE, D.D., P.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEIIi, I).D, 
F.B.S.E.— VBET REV. PETNCIPAL J. TTJLLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON G. 
KAWLINSON, M.A.-EEV. A. PLTIMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & "WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoek and Tokonto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY 



EDITED BY THE 



YERY KEY. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 



DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 
AND BY THE ' 



KEY. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A, 



E Z E K I E L . 

Jfntrobuction : 
By rev. T. WHITELAW, D.D. 

(EjEjiosition : 
By very rev. E. H. PLUMPTRE, D.D., 

DEAN OF WELLS. 



letits : 
By rev. professor W. F. ADENET, M;A 

ilomilies b2 tJitrious Authors : 

REV. PROF. J. R. THOMSON, M.A. REV. W. JONES. 

REV. J. D. DAVIES, M.A. REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A, 



VOZ. I. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Tokonto. 



THE 

BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEIIBL. 

INTRODUCTION. 



The topics requiring to be treated in an introdttotion to this remarkalble 
writing may be conveniently arranged under two main divisions — the person 
of the prophet, and the book of his prophecies. Under the first will fall to 
be noticed the life of the prophet, the characteristics of the times in which 
he flourished, the special mission with which he was entrusted, and the 
qualities he exhibited both as a man and as a seer ; under the second wiU 
arise for investigation the arrangement and contents of the book, its com- 
position, collection, and canonioity, its literary style, and the principle or 
principles of its interpretation, with a glance at its underlying theology. 

I. EZEKIEL — THE PeOPHET. 

1. The Life of the Prophet. 

The sole information available for constructing a biography of Ezekiel 
is furnished by his own writings. Outside of these he is mentioned only 
by Josephus ('Ant.,' x. 6. 1 ; 6. 3; 7. 2; 8. 2), and Sirach's son Jesus 
(EccluB. xlix. 8), neither of whom communicates any item of importance. 
Whether Ezekiel was the prophet's birth-name conferred on him by his 
parents, or, as Hengstenberg suggests, an oflScial title assumed by himself 
on commencing his vocation as a seer, cannot be determined, although the 
former is by far the more probable hypothesis. In either case it can 
hardly be questioned that the appellation was providentially designed to 

be symbolic of his character and calling. The Hebrew term ^Npin'' 

in the LXX. and in Sirach 'UitKi^X, in the Vulgate Ezechiel, in German 
Ezechiel, or Hezekiel — is a compound either of Vftt WPI* (Qesenius), meaning 
" whom God will strengthen," or " he whose character is a personal proof 

EZKiaEI.. h 



INTRODUCTION TO 



of the strengthening of God" (Baumgarten), or of ^jj piq; (Ewald), 
signifying " God is strong," or " he in relation to whom God is strong " 
(^Hengstenberg). Ab regards suitability the two interpretations stand upon 
a level ; for while Bzekiel was commissioned to a rebellious house whose 
children were "stiff-hearted" (nb-'iP.tn^) and "of a hard forehead" 
(n)tp''|?tn), on the other hand he was assured that God had made his 
face hard (D^RIO) against their fates, and his forehead hard (pjn) against 
their foreheads (ch. ii. 5 ; iii. 7, 8). In respect of social rank Ezekiel 
belonged to the priestly order, being the son of Buzi,' of wh(jm nothing 
further is reported, though it is interesting to note that the name Ezekiel • 
had been borne by one of sacerdotal dignity as far back as the time of 
David (1 Chron. xxiv. 16). Unlike Hilkiah's son Jeremiah of Anathoth, 
who, as a priest of the line of Ithamar, sprang from the lower or middle 
classes of the community, Ezekiel, as a Zadokite (oh. xl. 46 ; xliii. 19 ; xliv. 
16, 16 ; 1 Kings ii. 35), deriving from the superior line of Eleazar the son 
of Aaron, was properly a member of the Jerusalem aristocracy — a circum- 
stance which will account for his having been carried oif in Jehoiachin's 
captivity, while Jeremiah was left behind (2 Kings xxiv. 14), as well as 
explain the readiness with which in one of his visions (ch. xi. 1) he recog- 
nized two of the princes of the people. How old the prophet was when the 
doom of exile fell on him and the other magnates of Jerusalem can only be 
conjecturally ascertained. Josephus affirms that Ezekiel was then a youth 
(TTttis (iv) ; but, if Hengstenberg be correct in regarding the thirtieth year 
(ch. i. 1), corresponding to the fifth year of exile, as the thirtieth year of the 
prophet's life, he must have heen twenty-five years of age when he bade 
farewell to his native land. Other explanations have been offered of the date 
fixed upon by Ezekiel as the chronological starting-point of his prophetical 
activity. The thirtieth year has been declared to date from Nabopolas- 
sar's ascension of the Babylonian throne, which is usually set down at 
B.C. 626 (Ewald, Smend), or from the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, 
rendered memorable by the finding of Hilkiah's book of the Law (Haver- 
nick), or from the preceding j ear of jubilee (Calvin, Hitzig) ; and manifestly 
if either of these modes of reckoning be adopted, the number thirty will 
afford no clue whatever to the prophet's age. All of them, however, lie 
open to objections as strong as those directed against the proposal to count 
from the prophet's birth, which, to say the least, is as natural a mode of 
reckoning as either of the others, and in any case may be provisionally 
adopted (Plumptre), since it practically synchronizes with the so-called 
Babylonian and Jewish eras above named, and harmonizes with indications 
given by the prophet's writing, as e.g. with his accurate knowledge of the 
sanctuary, as well as with his mature priestly spirit, that when he entered 
on his calling he was no longer a stripling. 

> Ad ingenious Jewish tradition makes Ezekiel to have been the aon of Jeremiah, whoot 
Dame it finds in Bnsi, " the despised one." 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIBL. lil 

The influences in the midst of which Ezekiel'e youthful days were spent 
can readily be imagined. In addition to the solemnizing impressions and 
quickening impulses which must have been imparted to his opening 
intelligence and tender heart by the temple services, in which from an early 
age, in all probability, like another Samuel, he took part, for an earnest and 
religious soul like his, the strange ferment produced by Hilkiah's book of 
the Law, whether that was Deuteronomy (Kuenen, Wellhausen), Leviticus 
(Bertheau, Plumptre), or the whole Pentateuch (Keil, Havemick), and the 
vigorous reformation to which, during Josiah's last years, it led, could not 
fail to have a powerful fascination. Nor is it likely that he remained 
insensible to the energetic ministry which, during all the twenty-five years 
of his residence in Jerusalem, had been exercised by his illustrious prede- 
cessor Jeremiah. Bather is there evidence in his obvious leaning on the 
elder prophet, revealing itself in words and phrases, completed sentences 
and connected paragraphs, that his whole inner life had been deeply per- 
meated, and in fact effectively moulded, by the spirit of his teacher, and that 
when the stroke fell upon his country and people as well as on himself, he 
went away into exile, whither Daniel had a few years before preceded him 
(Dan. i. 1), inspired with the feelings and brooding on the thoughts he had 
learnt from the venerated seer he had left behind. 

From this time forward the prophet's home was in the laad of the ChaL 
deans, at a city called Tel-Abib (ch. iii. 15), or " hill of com-eais," perhaps 
so named in consequence of the fertility of the surrounding district — a 
city whose site has not yet been discovered, though Ezekiel himself locates 
it on the river Chebar. If this stream (na?) be identified, as it is by 
GeseniuB, Havemick, Keil, and the majority of expositors, with the Habor 
pun) to which the captive Israelites were carried by Shalmanezer or 
Sargon (2 Kings xvii. 6) upwards of a hundred years before, and the 
Habor be found in the Chaboras of the Greeks and Komans, which, rising 
at the foot of the Masian Mountains, falls into the Euphrates near Circe- 
sium — which is doubtful — then the quarter to which the prophet and his 
fellow-exiles were deported must be looked for in Northern Mesopotamia. 
Against this, however, Noldeke, Sohrader, Diestel, and Smend urge with 
reason that the two words " Chebar " and " Habor " do not agree in sound ; 
that whereas the Habor was (probably a district) in Assyria, the Chebar is 
invariably represented as having been a river in the land of the Chaldeans, 
and that to this land the Judsean exiles are always declared to have been 
removed. Hence the last-named authorities prefer to look for the Chebar 
in a tributary stream or canal of the Euphrates, near Babylon, in Southern 
Mesopotamia.' In favour of the former locality may be mentioned that in 
it the prophet would have found himself established in the midst of the 
main body of the exiles from both kingdoms, to all of whom ultimately, 

■ This opinion can at least claim in its support that tradition locates Tel-Abib south 
*: Babylon at a place called KetU, where at the present day the prophet's pave U pointed 
ont, as the tombs of Jonah and Nahum are in the vicinity of Nineveh. 



INTRODUCTION TO 



although immediately to those of Judah, his mission had a reference ; yet, 
inasmuch as the northern exiles might easily enough have been reached by 
the prophet's words without his residing among them, this consideration 
cannot be allowed to decide the question. 

Unlike Jeremiah, who appears to have remained nnmarried, Ezekiel had 
a wife whom he tenderly cherished as " the desire of his eyes," but who 
suddenly died in the ninth year of his captivity, or four years after he 
had entered on his prophetic calling (oh. xxiv.). Whether, like Isaiah, the 
first of the " greater " prophets, he had children, is not reported. If he had, 
it is clear that neither wife nor children hindered him any more than they 
hindered Isaiah from responding to the Divine voice which summoned 
him to be a watchman to the house of Israel. The summons came to him, 
as it had come to Isaiah, in the form of a sublime theophany ; only not, 
as in Isaiah's case, while he worshipped in the temple, from which at the 
moment he was far removed, but as he sat among the exiles (in the midst 
of the Golah) on the banks of the Chebar. He was then thirty years of 
age. With few interruptions, he exercised his sacred vocation till his fifty- 
second year. How long after he lived it is impossible to tell. Not the 
slightest value can be attached to the tradition preserved by the Fathers 
and Talmudists that he was put to death by a prince of his own people on 
account of his prophecies, and was buried in the tomb of Shem and 
Arphaxad. 

2. The Timet of the Prophet. 

When Ezekiel entered on his calling as a prophet In B.a 695, the 
northern kingdom of Israel had for upwards of a hundred years ceased to 
exist, while the final overthrow of Judah, its southern " sister," was rapidly 
approaching. When Ezekiel was bom, in b.o. 625, in the eighteenth year 
of Josiah, it seemed as if better days were about to dawn for both this 
land and people. Through the labours of Jeremiah, who had five years 
before been invested with prophetic dignity — ^in the expressive language 
of Jehovah, "set over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to 
pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant" (Jer. 
i. 10) — and of Zephaniah, who probably commenced his work about the 
same period (Zeph.i. 1), seconded as these were by the young king's vigorous 
reformation and Hilkiah's finding of the book of the Law of Jehovah, 
idolatry had been well-nigh purged from the realm. Yet the moral and 
religious improvement of the people proved as transient as it had been 
superficial. With the death of Josiah firom a wound received on the fatal 
field of Megiddo in B.a 612, and the accession of his second son Shallum 
under the throne-name of Jehoahaz, a violent reaction in favour of heathen- 
ism set in. At the end of three months, Shallum having been deposed 
by Necho IL, Josiah's conqueror, w4o still lay encamped at Biblath, his 
elder brother Eliakim, under the title of Jehoiakim, was installed in his 
room as vassal to the King of Egypt. Then followed, in B.a 606, 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 



Necho's defeat at Carohemish on the Euphratei (Jer. xlvi. 1), with the 
result that Jehoiakim immediately thereafter transferred his allegiance 
(if he had not already done so) to the Babylonian Bovereign, which, how- 
ever, he preserved inviolate for not more than three years (2 Kings 
xxiv. 1), when, to punish his infidelity, Nebuchadnezzar's armies appeared 
upon the scene and bore off a number of captives, amongst whom were 
Daniel and his companions, all princes of the blood (Dan. i. 1, 3, 6). 
Whether Jehoiakim was eventually deported to Babylon (2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 6), or how he met his death (Jer. xxii. 19), is not known; but, 
after eleven years of inglorious reign, he perished, and was succeeded 
by his son Jehoiachin, who proved even a more despicable character 
and worthless ruler (ch. xix. 5 — 9; Jer. xxii. 24 — 30) than his father, 
and in three months' time was forcibly suppressed by his overlord (2 
Chron. xxxvi. 9 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 8). Having, perhaps, found reason to 
suspect his fidelity, Nebuchadnezzar suddenly descended on Jerusalem, and 
put an end to his career of vice and violence, idolatry and treachery, 
conveying him, along with ten thousand of his chief people, among them 
Ezokiel, to the river Ghebar, in the land of the Chaldeans, and setting up in 
his room his uncle Mattanias, whose name was, in accordance with custom, 
changed to Zedekiah (2 Kings xxiv. 10 — 17). This happened in the year 
B.C. 600. Zedekiah turned out no better than his predecessors. A poor 
roi fainiant (Cheyne), who was quite content to receive a " base " kingdom 
from the hands of the King of Babylon, and yet wanted honesty enough to 
keep his oath and covenant with his superior (oh. xvii. 13 — 15), — this 
wretched " mockery-king" had been five years upon the throne when Ezekiel 
felt divinely impelled to step forth as a watchman to the house of Israel. 

The religious and political condition of the times, as well in Jerusalem 
as on the banks of the Chebar, may be gauged with much exactness from 
the statements of the two prophets, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, who exercised 
their ministries in these spheres respectively. 

( 1 ) As regards the situation tn Judah, so far from the stroke of judgment 
which had fallen on Jerusalem having sobered its idol-mad and vice-intoxi- 
cated inhabitants, it only plunged them deeper into immorality and 
superstition. As their fathers from the first had been a rebellious nation, 
80 continued they to be an impudent and stiff-hearted people (ch. ii. i ; 
iii. 7), who changed Jehovah's judgments into wickedness, and walked 
not in his statutes (ch. v. 6, 7), but defiled his sanctuary with their 
detestable things and abominations (ch. v. 11). Nor this alone, but high 
places, altars, and images were conspicuous " upon every high hill, in all 
the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every 
thick oak" (ch. vi. 13), as from the first it had been with their fathers 
(oh. XX. 28). Whether the picture sketched by Ezekiel of what he saw 
in the temple at Jerusalem (ch. viii.), when transported thither in vision, 
be regarded as a description of real objects that were standing and of 
actual incidents that were going forward in the sacred edifice at the time 



INTBODUOTION TO 



of the prophet's .visit (Ewald, Havemick), or merely as an outline of 
ideal scenes and occurrences that were presented to his mind's eye (Keil, 
Fairbairn, Schroder), the impression it was meant to convey was that of 
Judah's and Jerusalem's total corruption, of their permanent revolt from 
Jehovah, of their total abandonment to and complete saturation with the 
wicked spirits of idolatry, immorality, and infidelity. As much as this was 
stated by Jehovah himself to the prophet, when he gazed in horror on the 
six executioners, who, in obedience to Divine command, went forth to " slay 
utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women " — 
" The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and 
the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness : for they say. 
The Lord hath forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not" (ch. ix. 9). 

As if, moreover, to show that this terrible indictment had not been over- 
drawn, the sins of Jerusalem were rehearsed by Jehovah in a special 
communication to the prophet in the seventh year of the captivity, which 
recounted a catalogue of abominations scarcely to be paralleled in any of 
the surrounding heathen nations — idolatry, lewdness, oppression, sacrilege, 
murder, amongst all classes of the population, from the princes and priests 
to the people of the land (ch. xxii.). Nor is there ground for hinting that 
perhaps this was a mere fancy sketch dictated by excited feeling on the 
part of the prophet, since it is too painfully confirmed by what Jeremiah 
reports as having been witnessed by himself in the days of Jehoiachin, 
immediately before the deportation of that monarch and the flower of his 
nobility: " The land is full of adulterers; . . . both prophet and priest are 
profane; in my house have I found their wickedness, saith the Lord. . . . 
I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing : they 
commit adultery, and walk in lies : they strengthen also the hands of evil- 
doers, that none doth return from his wickedness : they are all unto me 
as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah " (Jer. xxiii. 10 — 14). 
And that no change for the better was wrought by that terrible visitation 
upon the hearts of the people that remained behind in Jerusalem and 
Judah as Zedekiah's subjects, was further revealed to the prophet by 
the vision of the two baskets of figs, of which those in the one basket, 
representing Zedekiah's subjects, were so bad that they could not be eaten 
(Jer. xxiv. 8)— a similitude which more than endorses the truth set forth 
in Ezekiel's parable of the worthless vine (ch. xv.). In point of fact, so 
utterly had Zedekiah's subjects misconstrued the reason and purport 
of that calamity which had sent their countiymen into exile, that they 
began mistakenly to flatter themselves that, while their banished brethren 
had probably been justly enough punished for their iniquities, they, the 
remnant who had been spared, were the special favourites of Heaven, to 
whom the land was given for a possession (ch. xi. 15) — an hallucination 
which not even the downfall of their city sufiSoed to dispel (ch. xxxiii. 
24). So far from dreading that a time might come when they would be 
ejected from the land like their expatriated kinsmen, they confidently 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. vii 

assured one another they had seen the last of Nebuchadnezzar's armies, 
and that, even if they had not, their city was impregnable (oh. xi. 3). In 
vain Jeremiah told them their city's fate was sealed — that both they and 
Zedekiah their king should be delivered up into Nebuchadnezzar's hands 
(Jer. xxi. 7 ; xxiv, 8 — 10 ; xxxii. 3 — 5 ; xxxiv. 2 — 3) ; their princes and 
prophets encouraged thetn in the delusion that they should not serve 
the King of Babylon (Jer. xxvii. 9). In Zedekiah's fourth year, exactly a 
twelvemonth before Ezekiel's stepping forth as a prophet, one of these 
false prophets — " lower," or " fallen prophets," as Cheyne prefers to call 
them, regarding them as " honest though misguided enthusiasts " — Hana- 
niah by name, announced in the temple, before the priests and all'the 
people, as well as in Jeremiah's hearing, that within two full years 
Jehovah would break the yoke of the King of Babylon from ofif the neck 
of all the nations (Jer. xxviii. 1 — 4). To such a vaticination he had 
probably been moved by the arrival shortly before of an embassy from the 
Kings of Edom, Moab and the Ammonites, Tyre and Zidon, which had for 
its object the formation of a league against the eastern conqueror (Jer. 
xxvii. 3), and which seemingly had so far succeeded as to draw into its 
meshes the weak Judsean sovereign, and to excite among the unreflecting 
populace wild expectations of a speedy deliverance from the yoke of 
Babylon. These expectations, however, were doomed to disappointment. 
So far from Hananiah's vain-glorious announcement coming true, was Jere- 
miah's instantaneous rejoinder, within a brief space the easy yoke of wood 
the nation then bore would be exchanged for one of iron, which more- 
over Hananiah himself would not behold, since in that year he should 
die for having taught rebellion against the Lord (Jer. xxviii. 16). Yet the 
ferment occasioned by Hananiah's prediction did not cease, but spread 
beyond the bounds of Palestine, till it reached the banks of the Chebar 
»nd penetrated to the palace of the king. " The valiant son of Nabopo- 
lassar," who seldom dallied with incipient revolt, but usually pounced upon 
his victims in the midst of their treasonable projects, would speedily have 
crushed the new alliance, and with it Zedekiah, had not Zedekiah, fearing an 
evil fate, taken time by the forelock and despatched an embassy to Babylon 
(Jer. xxix. 3), if he did not afterwards proceed thither himself (Jer. li. 59), 
to give to his offended suzerain assurances of continued loyalty. How 
much of truth such assurances contained was not long in appearing, as 
five years later he broke into open revolt' against the King of Babylon 
(2 Kings xxiv. 20), leaguing himself with Tyre and Ammon, and calling 
in the aid of Hophra, or Apries, of Egypt (oh. xvii. 15), who promised 
him "much horses and people." With that rapidity of movement which 
characterized "the favourite of Merodach," as it has distinguished all 
great generals, the troops of Babylon were on the march, and stood in front 
of Jerusalem before the war-ohariots of Hophra could be mustered ; and 
although for • time, when these latter did arrive, the Chaldean soldiers 
were compelled to raise the siege, it was only to return after Hophra'a defeat 



Till INTRODUCTION TO 



or retreat — ^it is uncertain which — to invest the city with stricter closeness 
than before. After a siege of eighteen months, the supposed impregnable 
fortress fell. Zedekiah, who with his court had precipitately fled from the 
palace, was captured in the plains of Jericho and conducted to the presence 
of his conqueror at Biblath, who cruelly massacred his sons and his nobles 
before his eyes, blinded himself, bound him with chains, and carried 
him to Babylon, thus unconsciously fulfilling both the word of Jeremiah 
uttered one year before, that " Zedekiah should speak with the King 
of Babylon mouth to mouth, and that his eyes should behold the king's 
eyes" (Jer. xxxii. 4), and that of Ezekiel spoken five years before, that 
Zedekiah should be brought to the land of the Chaldeans, which yet he 
should not see, though he should die there (ch. xii. 13). On the city's 
fall a massacre of its inhabitants ensued, pitiless and unsparing, realizing 
all the horrors suggested by Ezekiel's parable of a boiling pot (ch. xxiv. 
2 — 5). A month after, its fortified walls were laid in ruins, its temple, 
palaces, and mansions, with " all the houses of Jerusalem," being given to 
the flames, and its population, such of them as had escaped both sword and 
fire, swept away to swell the company of exiles upon the Chebar, leaving 
only a handful of the poorest of the poor upon their native soil, to act 
as its vine-dressers and husbandmen, with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam 
as their governor, and Jeremiah as Jehovah's prophet by his side (2 Kings 
XXV. ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. ; Jer. xxxix., xL, lii.). 

(2) The situation on the Ohebar was, in some respects, different from what it 
was in Jerusalem. From the first, among the exiles there would doubtless 
be kindred spirits to Ezekiel, pious hearts who recognized in their banish- 
ment from Judah the judgment of Heaven upon an apostate people, who 
mourned over their own and their country's declension, and who, as by the 
rivers of Babylon they sat down and wept (Ps. cxxxvii. 1), remembered 
Zion, and longed for a restoration to its saored precincts; but ju^t as 
certainly there would be others, and these probably the larger number, 
who carried with them their old habits of idolatry, and showed as little dis- 
position to abate their devotion to heathenism as their fathers had done 
before them (ch. xx. 30), or as their brethren were then doing in Jerusalem. 
Even at the moment when they pretended through their elders to be 
inquiring at Jehovah's prophet, they were setting up idols in thoir heart 
(ch. xiv, 4) ; when they listened to the prophet's preaching, whether he 
denounced their heathen practices and called them to repentance, or 
prophesied against them Heaven's judgments for their wickedness, they 
applauded his eloquence (ch. xxxiii. 32), and puzzled their heads over his 
parables (ch. xx. 49), but never dieamt of doing as he told thorn. In the 
breasts of both sections of the community there kept on slumbering delusive 
hopes of a speedy deliverance from exile, fostered on the one side by the 
secret conviction that Jehovah would not prove unfaithful to his chosen city 
and people, and, on the other side, by the unauthorized utterances of false 
prophets and prophetesses in their midst, who " saw peace for Jerusalem 



THE BOOK OF TSB PROPHET BZEKIBSL. 



when there was no peace," and "oattsed the people to trust in their lies" 
(ch. xiii. 16, 19), It was to meet and, if possible, to dissipate these baseless 
hallucinations that Jeremiah's letter was despatched by the hands of Zede- 
kiah's ambassadors, counselling the exiles to settle down quietly in their 
new country, seek the peace of the city and empire to which they had been 
carried, and serve the King of Babylon, since not until seventy years rolled 
by would Jehovah cause them to return to their own land (Jer. xxix. 5 — 14); 
and although perhaps both parties in the- Qolah, the pious and irreligious, 
had they been left to themselves, might not have felt indisposed to acquiesce 
in the course recommended by the prophet — the one, prompted by that habit 
of obedience and submission to the Divine will which was not in them 
entirely extinguished, and the other, by the comparatively comfortable 
environment in which they found themselves, materially, socially, politically, 
and religiously (or rather, irreligiously), in the rich, powerful, pleasure- 
loving and idol-serving empire of Babylon — yet, as a matter of fact, they 
were not left to themselves, but were injuriously acted on by the false 
prophets in their midst, one of whom, Shemaiah the Nehelamite, actually went 
the length of sending back a reply to Jeremiah's communication, suggesting 
that the Priest Zephaniah should arrest and confine the prophet as a madman 
(Jer. xxix. 24 — 29); and so the dream kept on haunting them that the Cap- 
tivity would not be long. It is even possible that Jeremiah's prophecy of 
Babylon's ultimate overthrow (Jer. 1.* ), which Seraiah had been commis- 
sioned to read in Babylon (Jer. li. 59 — 64), may have contributed to keep 
alive the delusion that after all the " orthodox " prophets had been right, 
and Jeremiah, the " renegade " and " heretic," in the wrong, and that before 
long the dreary period of exile would terminate ; and when, as the years 
went by, Zedekiah seemed to be firmly established on his throne, and 
tidings came from the old country of the stout resistance Tyre was offering 
to the forces of Nebuchadnezzar, as well as of the projected alliance of Tyre 
and Ammon with Judah against the common oppressor, it was scarcely 
surprising that this delusion should gather strength, and that a large part 
of Ezekiel's fulminations should be directed against it It was manifestly 
in close connection with Jeremiah's letter to the exiles, and in support of 
the policy it advised, that Ezekiel, in the fifth year of Zedekiah, stepped 
forth as a prophet of Jehovah. 

3. T%e Mitnm of the Prophel. 

The special task assigned to the prophet, rather than spontaneously under- 
taken by him, was in general to act as a watchman unto the house of 
Israel (oh iii. 17 ; xxxiii. 7), by giving warning to the wicked man of the 

• Oheyne (,' Jeremiah : his Life and Times,' p. 168), following Bwald ('The Prophets of the 
Old Testament,' iv. 232), who treads in the wake of Colin and Gramberg, assigns this whole 
prophecy to a writer who flourislied near the end of the exile, if not later; but Hitzig's 
argument appears unanswerable, that in Lmguage and style it betrays the hand of Jeremiah, 
while "chronological data confirm this result" ('Der Prophet Jeremia,' pp. 390, 391). 



INTKODUCTION TO 



danger of persevering in his wickedness, and to the righteous man of the 
peril involved in turning aside from his righteousness. More particularly 
the prophet's duty should be fourfold — to beat down and dispel for ever the 
foolish hopes that had been excited in the minds of his fellow-exiles as to a 
speedy deliverance from the yoke of Babylon, by proclaiming the absolutely 
certain and positively near approach of Jerusalem's overthrow ; to bring to 
light and expose the inveterate apostasy and incurable corruption of Judah's 
capital, and, indeed, of the whale theocratic people, as the all-sufficient 
justification both of the judgments that had already overtaken them, and of 
those that were still impending ; to awaken in them individually a feeling 
of sincere repentance, and so to call out from the ruins of the old a new 
Israel that might inherit all the promises which had been given to the old ; 
and when this was done, to comfort the sorrowing community of pious 
hearts with a prospect of restoration after the term of seventy years should 
have been fulfilled. In all these respects the mission of Ezekiel was distinct 
from the parts which had been assigned to his renowned predecessors, 
Isaiah and Jeremiah, as well as from that devolved on his illustrious con- 
temporary, Daniel. Whereas Daniel served as a prophet of Jehovah to the 
mighty world-empire in which he was a high and trusted official, Ezekiel 
exercised the same function towards the exiles from Judah who were 
planted in the heart of that heathen land ; and whereas Isaiah had been 
summoned to begin his official labours at the time when the final overthrow 
of Israel was first clearly made known (Isa. x. 1 — 6 ; xxxix. 6, 7), and 
Jeremiah saw the outbreak of that awful visitation which the son of Amoz 
had foretold, to Ezekiel fell the task of " personally introducing the 
rebellious house of Israel into its thousand years of trial in the waste of the 
heathen " (Baumgarten, in Herzog's ' Eeal-Encyclopadie,* art. " Ezechiel "), 
Or, to express the life-problem of Ezekiel more shortly, it was his business 
to interpret for Israel in exile the stern logic of her past history, and to 
lead her forth " through repentance unto salvation " (Cornill, • Der Prophet 
Ezechiel,' p. 22). 

The first of the above-named parts of the prophet's calling he discharged, 
first by performing a variety of symbolic actions and rehearsing others he 
had witnessed, in which were represented the siege of Jerusalem (oh. iv. 
1 — 8 ; xxiv. 1 — 14), the miseries to he endured by its inhabitants (ch. iv. 
9—17; V. 1 — 11 ; ix. 7 — 11 ; xii. 17—20), the burning of the city (oh. x. 
1, 2) from which (oh. xi. 23) as already from its temple the glory of 
Jehovah had departed (oh. x. 18), ending in the exile and captivity of 
Zedekiah and his subjects (ch. xii. 1 — 13) ; next, by delivering a number 
of parabolic or allegorical addresses, in which were depicted Jerusalem's 
rejection (ch. xv.) and Zedekiah's deportation to Babylon (oh, xvii. 20) ; and 
finally, by exhorting them in poetical compositions (oh. xix. 1 — 14 ; xxi 
8 — 17) and spirited narrations (oh. xxi. 18 — 27), in which the same melan- 
choly events, the approach of Nebuchadnezzar and the desolation of Jerusa- 
lem, were foretold. The second he fulfilled by reporting to the elders who 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. » 

sat before him in his house, the visions Jehovah had caused him to behold 
of the image of jealousy and of the chambers of imagery in the temple 
at Jerusalem (oh. viii, 1 — 18), as well as of the princes who devised 
mischief and gave wicked counsel in the city (oh. xi. 1 — 21); by reciting 
in their hearing the story of Israel's original condition and subsequent 
apostasy, both in highly figurative (ch. xvi., xxiii.) and in plainly prosaio 
speech (oh. xx., xxii.); and by reproving both them and the people 
they represented for their own insincerity and apostasy (ch. xiv.). The 
third part of his mission he pursued throughout, never exulting in the 
lurid pictures he drew, either of Israel's sin or of Israel's overthrow, but 
ftlways aiming at awakening in the breasts of his hearers a conviction of 
their guiltiness and a feeling of repentance ; and although, while Jerusa- 
lem was standing, his endeavours only met with resistance and mostly 
ended in failure, yet there cannot be a doubt that after the city fell his 
words gained a readier access to his listeners' hearts, and were more suc- 
cessful in conducting the exiles to a better state of mind. The fourth 
and last part of his life-work, which became possible only when the city 
had succumbed and the people's hearts had been softened, he carried out by 
giving them in God's name the promise of a true Shepherd, who should 
feed them in place of the false shepherds who had neglected and destroyed 
them (oh. xxxiv. 23); by assuring them of the final overthrow of their 
old adversary Edom (ch. xxxv.), as well as of any new combinations 
that might arise against them (ch. xxxviii.) ; by illustrating the possi- 
bility of their political and religious resuscitation (ch. xxxvii. 1 — 14) as 
well as of their ultimate reunion (ch. xxxvii. 16 — 20) ; and finally, by 
depicting, in a vision of a re-erected temple, a redivided land, and a 
reorganized worship (ch. xl. — xlviii.), the glories of the future, when, at the 
close of seventy years, Jehovah should turn again their captivity. Into 
the proper method of intei*preting this concluding part of Ezekiel's pro- 
phecy it is not necessary at present to enter, further than to say that 
it does not appear self-evident, as the newer critics, Kuenen (• The 
Religion of Israel,' ii. 114), Wellhausen ('Geschiohte Israels,' p. 62), 
Smend (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' pp. 306, etc.), Robertson Smith (• The 
Old Testament in the Jewish Church,' p. 314), and others maintain, that 
the seer's aim in this part of his book — and, in point of fact, his 
principal intention as a prophet — was to outline a plan for the second 
temple, and supply a programme for the post-exilio Church. At least, to 
cite the words of the late Dean Plumptre, " there is no trace in the after 
history of Israel of any attempt to carry Ezekiel's ideal into execution. No 
reference is made to it by the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah, who were 
the chief teachers of the people at the time of the rebuilding of the 
temple. There is no record of its having been in the thoughts of Zemb- 
babel, the Prince of Judah, and Joshua the high priest, as they set about 
that work. No description of the second temple or of its ritual in Josephus 
or th« rabbinical writings at all tallies with what we find in these 



sU iM'KUJJUCnON TO 



chapters " (' Ezekiel : an Ideal Biography,' Expositor, 2nd eeries, vol. viii. 
pp. 422, 423). 

Ab for the manner — the times, places, and methods — ^in which Ezekiel 
exercised his calling, considerable light is oast on this by the hints 
scattered thronghont his volume. From these it appears that he never 
spoke or acted prophetically of his own proper motion, but always under 
the direct impulse of inspiration, either after the word of Jehovah had 
come to him (ch. L 3 ; vi. 1 ; vii. 1 ; xii. 1, etc.), or after he had beheld 
a vision which, from its nature, he understood required to be commu- 
nicated to the people (oh. iiL 22; viii. 1 — xi. 25; xl. 2, etc.). Nor does 
it contradict this representation of the source of Ezekiel's predictions 
that he occasionally gave them first in answer to inquiries from the 
elders of his people (cL xx. 1), as it does not follow that, though these 
appear to have made frequent visits to the prophet's presence (oh. viii, 
1 ; xiv. 1), he could have addressed them without first obtaining permission 
from Jehovah (oh. iii. 1 — 4, 25 — 27 ; xxxiii. 22). Then, while it would 
seem that for the most part the prophet restricted his prophetic utter- 
ances to those who sought him out in his own dwelling (oh. viiL 1 ; xiv. 1 ; 
XX. 1 ; xxiv. 19), and certainly never undertook journeys to remote colonies 
of the exiles, it is by no means apparent that such discourses as recite Judah's 
and Israel's sins (ch. vi., vii., xiii., xvi.) or call to repentance (ch. xxxiii., 
xxxvi.), or justify Jehovah's procedure in dealing with his people (oh. 
xviii., xxxiii.), were not pronounced before public congregations; and if 
usually his prophecies were first spoken before being written, there is 
ground for thinking that some deliverances, as e.g. those relative to 
foreign nations (ch. xxv. — xxxii.) and to the temple (ch. xl. — xlviii.), were 
not published orally at all, but only circulated in writing (see p. xx.). 

In addition to hia mission to Jndah and Israel, the prophet had a 
calling to fulfil with reference to the heathen nations by which God's 
ancient people had been surrounded and not unfrequently opposed, and 
this he discharged by composing the prophecies comprised in oh. xxv. — 
xxxii. Some interpreters regard these predictions as the commencement 
of the consolation Ezekiel was directed to offer to humbled Israel (see 
p. XV.) ; as if the prophet's thoughts were that Israel, though over- 
thrown herself, should derive comfort and hope from the fact that, even 
while punishing her, Jehovah was preparing the way for her recovery 
by pouring out the vials of his wrath upon her foes. It is, how- 
ever, doubtful if the prophet did not mean, along with this at least, to 
sound a note of warning to these foreign peoples who had in times 
past so often harassed Israel, and were even then exulting in her over- 
throw, as if the day and hour of their final triumph over her were at 
hand; that although Jehovah had visited her on acoount of her iniqui- 
ties, he certainly did not mean them to escape, but rather intended they 
should read in Israel's doom the precursor and pledge of their own ; for 
" if judgment had begun at the house of God, what should the end be " 
of those that did not belong to, but were the enemies, of that hovstt? 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. xlU 



4. The Oharacter of the Prophet, 

That considered simply as a man Ezekiel was a striking personality, whot 
had he never been called to prophetic functions, would still have made a 
powerful impression oa his age and contemporaries, will probably not be 
denied. Endowed by nature with high intellectual capacity, wi th a clear 
perception, a lively imagination as well as a faculty of eloquent and 
arrestive speech, he possessed, it is obvious, in no small degree that educa- 
tion and culture which are indispensable to render natural endowments 
effective. Though not a scholar in the modern acceptation of the term, he 
had no slight acquaintance, not merely with the sacred books, institutions, 
and customs of his own people, as will afterwards be shown (p. xxv,), but 
also with the learning, ideas, habits, and practices of the world generally 
in the times in which he lived. To appropriate the language of Bwald, 
without endorsing it in every particular, " he describes the condition and 
circumstances of the nations and countries of the world with a fulness 
and historical vividness equalled by no other prophet. In his oracles 
concerning Tyre and Egypt it is as if he intended to present at the same 
time, in the shape of learned information, a full and complete account of 
these kingdoms as regards their position and relations to the world, so 
exhaustive, at the cost indeed of their artistic effect, are these descriptions 
designed to be " (' The Prophets of the Old Testament,' vol. iv. pp. 9, 10). Or, 
to cite the words of Smend, " To the predominantly practical tendency of his 
mind points his extensive material and technical culture. He understands 
the geography of his day. He possesses accurate knowledge of the markets 
of Tyre. Especially are precious stones and cloth-stuffs known to him. He 
is a skilled designer and calculator " (• Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. xv.). So 
accurate, indeed, is his knowledge of surrounding peoples, that Comill (' Der 
Prophet Ezechiel,' p. xii.) surmises he must have been a diligent as well as 
observant traveller in his youth. Then, in combination with these well- 
cultivated mental abilities, he owned other qualities which are usually 
found in men who lead their fellows, whether in the department of thought 
or in that of action. He was distinguished in a rare degree by energy and 
decision of character (ch. iii. 24 j viii. 10), by resolute and patient self- 
command (ch. iii. 16, 26 ; xxiv. 18), by intense moral earnestness (oh. xxii. 
xxxiu.), and by deep personal humility, which perhaps reflected itself in 
the frequent appellation " son of man " (ch. ii. 1 ; iii. 1 ; iv. 1, et pasgim) ; 
and while without these traits he might have developed into a powerful 
orator, which indeed he was (ch. xxxiii. 32), or into a poet, which he may 
fairly claim to have been (ch. xv. 1 — 6 ; xix. 14 — 21 ; xxi. 14 — 21), without 
aspiring to be the iEIschylus or Shakespeare of the Hebrews (Herder), it 
was his possession of these that fitted him in an eminent degree to ftiLSl 
the calling of a prophet. Nor are indications wanting that Ezekiel was 
not destitut* of ^e softer qualities of the heart. If he lacked the tendat 



xiv INTRODUCTION TO 



eensibilities of Jeremiah whicli frequently dissolved themselves in tears 
(Jer. ix. 1 ; xxii. 10), he occasionally manifested warm feeling, as when he 
deprecated the destruction of his countrymen by the divinely commissioned 
executioners (cli. ix. 8), and again as when he poured forth a threnody over 
the evil fate of the princes of Judah (ch. xix. 1, 14). That the bereavement 
which fell upon him in his thirty-fourth j'Car occasioned him the most 
poignant grief, and would have evoked from his stricken heart audible and 
visible expressions of sorrow, had he not been enjoined " neither to mourn 
nor weep" (ch. xxiv. 15), is not difficult to see. Hence the view that 
Ezekiel was not so much a flesh-and-blood personality as a semi-etherealized 
puppet, which was moved hither and thither in obedience to Divine (or 
supposed Divine) impulse, must be unhesitatingly rejected. 

That regarded as a seer Ezekiel — " the priest in a prophet's mantle," 
as Wellhausen styles him — was distinguished by scarcely less exalted 
qualities, becomes immediately apparent. Not only was his spiritual 
discernment of the highest order (ch. i. 4 — 28 ; ii. 9 ; iii. 23, etc.), but his 
soul's instincts were so attuned to the inner harmonies of righteousness and 
truth, that he had the clearest and most accurate perception of the moral 
and religious situation both in Judah and on the Chebar, as well as the 
finest and directest appreciation of what that situation required. The 
verdict of Smend, that "Ezekiel's judgment of Israel's past was without 
question wrong, that he interpreted the history according to a priori sup- 
positions of his own, and that for the objective historical truth he had no 
sense more " (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. xviii.), will hardly commend itself 
to those who have no preconceived theory of their own to buttress, and 
who are anxious only to reach such conclusions as are warranted by the 
facts of the case. Then it goes without saying that not only had Ezekiel 
a high conception of the nature and difficulty, responsibility and dignity, 
of the prophetic calling, but almost more than any other prophet Uved, 
moved, and had his being in it, the prophecies he uttered being so spread 
throughout his twenty-seven years of active ministry as to leave him 
scarcely a moment free from its sacred duties and impressions. His fidelity 
both to Jehovah who appointed him, and to them for whose sakes he had 
been appointed to his calling, was hardly less conspicuous. That he either 
failed to understand his countrymen or judged them too severely, because 
naturally " accustomed to look upon the dark side of things," or, perhaps 
out of chagrin and vexation, "because he himself had been the victim of 
his people's error" (Kuenen, • The Eeligion of Israel,' ii. 106), is a sugges- 
tion as unworthy as it is baseless. If he " showed not the least inclination 
t» excuse the conduct of his contemporai-ies out of pity for their lot " (ibid.), 
the reason was that the judgment he expressed, besides being true and 
therefore impossible to be changed, was likewise Jehovah's judgment, and 
dared not be tampered with. Accordingly, with these convictions in his 
soul, it was not surprising that in the discharge of his sacred duties ho 
should evince an invincible fortitude like that possessed by all great 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. xt 

prophets, and in particular by his two illustrious contemporaries, Jeremiah 
in Jerusalem and Daniel in Babylon. Yet can it not be justly alleged that 
Ezekiel never spoke in accents of love and tenderness, since in addition 
to the already cited instances of sympathetic feeling which appear in his 
several discouises, throughout the whole of his book, and more especially 
the third part, which is devoted to the consolation of the exiled people, there 
runs a deep undertone of pity for the fallen nation. It was this feeling of 
pity which fitted him to be, what he was more than any prophet previously 
had been, a true shepherd of souls. Cornill finely utters this thought 
when he writes, " Whilst the earlier prophets make the people in their 
collective capacity the subject of their preaching, Ezekiel turns himself to 
individual souls; [in him] the prophet becomes a 'carer for souls,' We 
find in Ezekiel, for the first time in the Old Testament, a clear and definite 
example of that delivering, seeking love which goes after the erring, and 
brings back the lost " (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' pp. 61, 52). 

U. Ezekiel — ^the Book. 

1. Arrangement and Gontenta. 

(1) Arrangement. A glance into the Book of Ezekiel shows that the 
prophetic utterances composing it have not been thrown togethei- at 
random, but set down in accordance with a well-considered plan. As the 
downfall of Jerusalem formed the middle point of Ezekiel's activity, so 
has it been made the centre of Ezekiel's book, the prophecies reported in 
the first twenty-four chapters having all been delivered prior to, while 
those recorded in the second twenty-four, at least mainly, were uttered 
after, that event. Again, if regard be had to the destinations of the oracles, 
two distinct groups emerge — one, a larger, addressed to Israel (ch. i. 

xxiv. ; xxxiii. — xlviii.), and another, a smaller, directed against foreign 

nations (ch. xxv. — xxxii.). Then the prophecies concerning Israel divide 
themselves into two main sections, both as to the times when they were 
spoken and as to the subject matters of which they treat ; those in ch. 
i. — xxiv. having been uttered, as already stated, previous to the fall of 
Jerusalem, and composed of threatenings and judgments, while those in 
oh. xxxiii. — xlviii. were published subsequent to that catastrophe, and held 
forth comforts and consolations to the stricken people. Hence a threefold 
division is distinguishable : oh. i. — xxiv., prophecies (of judgment) against 
Israel; ch. xxv. — xxxii., prophecies against foreign nations; and ch. 

xxxiii. xlviii., prophecies (of consolation) for Israel ; and this division 

is for the most part recognized and followed by expositors (De Wette, 
Ewald, Kliefoth, Smend, Schroder, Wright), although many prefer to 
reduce the three parts into two principal sections, by either combining the 
■econd part with the first as an appendix (Hengstenberg), or connecting 
It with the third part as a preface (Hitzig, Haverniok, Keil, Oornill). One 



xTi INTRODUCTION TO 



expositor (Bleek) adopts a fourfold division by splitting up the third part 
into two subsections, oh. xxxiii. — xxxix., and xl. — xlviii. 

The first part (oh. i. — xxiv.), consisting of prophecies of judgment 
concerning Israel, has been variously subdivided. Bleek (' Introduction to 
the Old Testament,' ii. 106) partitions it into twenty-nine sections corre- 
sponding to the number of its separate utterances ; Kliefoth, excluding the 
introduction (ch. i. 1 — ^iii. 21), into seven (oh. iii. 12 — vii. 27 ; viii. 1 — xi. 

26 ; xii. 1 — xiii. 23 ; xiv. 1 — xix. 14 ; xx. I — xxi. 4 ; xxi. 5 — xxiii. 49 ; 
xxiv. 1 — 27); Haverniok into six (ch. i. — iii. 15; iii. 16 — vii.; viii. — xL; 
xii. — xix. ; xx. — xxiii. ; xxiv.); Smend into five (oh. i. — iii. 21 ; iii. 22 — vii. 

27 ; viii. — xi. ; xii. — xix.; xx. — xxiv) ; Schroder into three (ch. i. — iii. 11 ; 
iii. 12 — vii. 27 ; viii. 1— xxiv. 27) ; and Ewald (' Prophets of the Old 
Testament,' vol. iv, p. 22) into three (oh. i. — xi. ; xii. — xx. ; xxi. — xxiv.), 
representing " the three separate periods in which Ezekiel had felt called 
upon by important events to be more than usually active." Perhaps the 
simplest division is that adopted by Keil, Hengstenberg, and others, which 
forms four subsections according to the chronological notes furnished by 
the prophecies themselves ; as thus : oh. i. — vii., which began to be spoken 
in the fifth year, in the fourth month, and on the fifth day ; . ch. viii. — xix., 
dating from the sixth year, the sixth month, and fifth day; ch. xx. — 
xxiii., at the head of which stands the seventh year, the fifth month, and 
the tenth day ; and ch. xxiv., which was published on the ninth year, in 
the tenth month, and on the tenth day of the month. These several sub- 
sections again are resolvable into component parts, distinguishable by the 
well-known phrase, " And the word of the Lord came unto me," intro- 
ducing each separate oracle communicated to or delivered by the prophet. 
In the first subsection the phrase occurs four, or, excluding the introduction 
(ch. i. 3), three times (oh. iii. 16 ; vi. 1 ; vii. 1) ; in the second, fourteen 
times (ch. xi. 14 ; xii. 1 ; xii. 8 ; xii. 17 ; xii. 21 ; xii. 26 ; xiii. 1 ; xiv. 2 ; 
xiv. 12 ; XV. 1 ; xvi. 1 ; xvii. 1 ; xvii. 11 ; xviii. 1); in the third, nine times 
(ch. XX. 2 ; XX. 45 ; xxi. 1 ; xxi. 8 ; xxi. 18 ; xxii. 1 ; xxii. 17 ; xxii. 23 ; 
xxiii. 1) ; and in the fourth, twice (ch. xxiv. 1 ; xxiv. 15) ; in all twenty- 
nine, or, excluding the introduction, 28 (4 X 7) times. 

The second part (oh. xxv. — xxxii.), comprising oraoles relating to foreign 
nations, divides itself into three subsections according to the subjects with 
which these deal. In the first subsection (ch. xxv.) are found prophecies 
against Ammon, Moab, Edom, and the Philistines, of which the date is 
uncertain, though they seem to have been spoken at the same time and 
before the fall of Jerusalem, most likely during the progress of the siege. 
The second subsection (oh. xxvi. — xxviii.) embraces five separate oraoles, 
four against Tyre and one against Zidon, which began to be published on 
the first day of an unrecorded month in the eleventh year ; and though it 
cannot be afSrmed that the several oracles were oontinuous'ly spoken, yet 
the probability is they were all uttered about the same period. The third 
BQbseotioD brings together six oraoles which at diflferent times were pro- 



THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. xvtt 



nounoed against Egypt, viz. two (oh. xxix. 1 — 16 and xxx. 1 — 19) proceed- 
ing from the tenth year, the tenth month, and the twelfth day ; a third 
(oh. XXX. 20 — 26) from the seventh day of the first month of the eleventh 
year; a fourth (ch. xxxi. 1 — 18) from the eleventh year, the third month, 
and the first day; with a fifth (ch. xxxii. 1 — 16) from the first day and 
a sixth (oh. xxxii. 17 — 32) from the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of 
the twelfth year. Thus in this second part thirteen oracles are included, 
to which Kliefoth, in order to carry out his sevenfold division (14 =2x7) 
adds the next oracle (oh. xxxiii. 1 — 20), which, however, rather serves as an 
introduotion to the ensuing main division. 

The third part (oh. xxiii. — xlviii.), consisting of prophecies of restoration 
for the fallen people, has also heen variously divided. Kliefoth makes as 
many subsections as there are separate oraoles or words of God, viz. eight. 
Ewald distributes the whole into three, setting forth the prosperity of the 
future, (1) as to its conditions and basis (oh. xxxiii. — xxxvi.), (2) as to its 
progress from the beginning until its consummation (ch. xxxvii. — xxxix.), 
and (3) as to its arrangement and constitution in detail in connection with 
the restoration of the temple and kingdom (ch. xl. — xlviii.). Schroder 
constructs two groups, whioh he denominates the renewal of Ezekiel's 
mission (ch. xxxiii.), and the Divine promises (ch. xxxiv. — xlviii.). Perhaps 
as natural a mode of division as any is that of Bleek, Haverniok, Hengsten- 
berg, Smend, and others, who combine Ewald's first and second subsections 
into one, and so reduce the number to two, of whioh the first (oh. xxxiii. — 
xxxix.) was published in the twelfth year, tenth month, and fifth day, and 
the second (ch. xl. — xlviii.) in the twenty-fifth year, first month, and tenth 
day. If the introductory portion of Part I. (oh. i. — iii. 21) be set apart as 
a distinct subsection, then the paragraph (oh. xxxiii. 1 — 20) which intro- 
duces Part III. ought in the same fashion to be reokoned as a separate 
subsection, in which case the number of such subsections in Part III. would 
be three ; but possibly in both cases it is better to include the opening 
verses in the first subsections. In the third part the number of separate 
oraoles, or " words of Jehovah," as above noted, is seven (ch. xxxiii. 1 ; xxxiiL 
23 ; xxxiv. 1 ; xxxv. 1 ; xxxvi. 16 ; xxxvii. 15 ; xxxviii. 1), which har- 
monizes with Kliefoth's arithmetical scheme of making the number of the 
oracles in the different parts of the book a multiple of seven, as without 
question the total number of " Divine words " in the book, 49, is divisible 
by 7 ; yet the scheme itself looks too artificial to have been deliberately 
adopted by the prophet as the ground-plan after whioh his literary 
material was arranged. 

(2) Oontents. These, having been already frequently referred to, need 
not be further detailed than by appending the following table, in which are 
set forth the several oraoles uttered by the prophet, with the dates at which 
they were spoken, and the subjects to whioh they allude ;— 



KBEIEU 



INTRODUCTION TO 



Past Fiebt, 

Concerning Israel : prophecies of judgment. Oh. L — xxir. 

Section First. Oh. i. — vii. 

(Fifth year, fourth month, fifth day, B.O. 695.) 

L The calling of the prophet : Introductory. 

1. The sublime theophany, Ch. i. 

2. Ezekiel's commission. Ch. il. 1 — iii. 15. 
XL The prophet's first activity. 

1. Appointed a watchman. Ch. iii. 16 — 21. 

2. Directed about his work. Ch. iii. 22—27. 

3. The siege of Jerusalem portrayed. Ch. iv. 1 — t. i, 

4. The four signs interpreted. Ch. v. 5 — 17. 
IIL The mountains of Israel denounced. Ch. vi. 
IV. The final overthrow of Israel. Ch. vii. 

Section Second. Ch. viii. — xix. 
(Sixth year, sixth month, fifth day, b.o. 594.) 

L A series of visions. 

1. The chambers of imagery, or Jerusalem's corruption. Ch. viii. 1 — 18. 

2. The six executioners and the man with the ink-horn ; or, the preservation of 

the righteous and destruction of the wicked in Jerusalem. Oh. ix. 1 — 11. 

3. The coals of fire, or the burning of the city. Ch. x. 1 — 2. 

4. The whirling wheels, or the departure of Jehovah from the temple. Ch. x. 

3—22. 
6. The five and twenty princes; or the wickedness of the city leaders. 

Ch. xi. 1—13. 
6. The ascending cherubim ; or Jehovah's withdrawal from the city. Ch. xi. 

14-25. 
n. Two symbolic actions. 

1. Ezekiel's removing ; or Zedekiah's captivity. Ch. xii. 1— 16. 

2. Ezekiel's trembling ; or the terrors of the siege. Ch. xii. 17 — 20. 

3. The certainty of their fulfilment. Ch. xii. 21—28. 
IIL Two threatening discourses. 

1. Against false prophets and false prophetesses. Ch. xiii. 

2. Against the elders of Israel. Ch. xiv. 1 — 11. 

3. The inevitableness of Jehovah's judgments. Ch. xiv. 12 — 23. 
IV. Similitudes and parables. 

1. Parable of the vine tree ; or the worthlessness of Judah. Ch. xv. 1 — 8. 

2. Similitude of the outcast infant; or Jerusalem's abominations. Ch. xvL 

1—63. 
8. The allegory of the two eagles and a vine ; or the fortunes of the royal 
house of Judah. Ch. xvii. 

4. The proverb concerning sour grapes; or Jehovah's equity defended. Ch. xviii. 
6. The lion's whelps and the vine — a lamentation for the princes of Judab 

Ch. xix. 

Section Third. Ch. xx. — xxiii. 
(Seventh year, fifth month, tenth day, b.o. 693.) 

I. The story of Israel's rebellions. Ch. xx. 

II. A proclamation of approaching judgments. 

1. The sword against Israel. Ch. xxi. 1 — 7. 

2. The song of the sword. Ch. xxi. 8 — 17. 

3. The advance of Nebuchadnezzar. Ch. xxi. 18 — ^27, 

4. The sword against Animon. Ch. xxi. 28 — 32. 
IIL The sins of Jerusalem. 

1. The wickedness of the princes and people. Ch. xxii. 1 — ^16. 

2. Their fearful doom, to be cast into the furnace. Ch. xxii. 17 — 2X 

3. No intercessor. Ch. xxii. 23 — 31. 

IV. The histories of Aholah and Aholibamah. Ch. xxiii. 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 



Section Fourth. Ch. xxiv. 
(Ninth year, tenth month, tenth day, b.o. 591.) 

I. The symbol of the boiling pot. Ch. xxiv. 1 — 14. 

II. The death of Ezekiel's wife. Ch. xxiv. 15—27. 

Pakt Second. 
Concerning foreign nations : prophecies of judgment. Ch. xxv. — ^xxxii. 
L Against the Ammonites. Ch. xxv. 1 — 7, 
Against the Moabites. Ch. xxv. 8 — 11. 
Against the Edomites. Ch. xxv. 12—14. 
Against the Philistines. Ch. xxv. 15—17. 

(Date uncertain ; probably same as above.) 
XL Against Tyre. 

1. Her fall predicted. Ch. xxvi. 1. 

2. Her lamentation sounded. Ch. xxviL 

3. Her king bewailed. Ch. xxviii. 1 — ^20. 

III. Against Zidon. Ch. xxviii. 21 — 26. 

(Date : eleventh year, — month, first day, b.o. 589,) 

IV. Against Egypt. 

1. The judgment of Phai-aoh — two oracles. Ch. xxix. 

(Dates: tenth year, tenth month, twelfth day; and twenty-seventh year, 
first month, first day.) 

2. The desolation of Egypt — two oracles. Ch. xxx. 

(Dates : tenth year, tenth month, twelfth day ; and eleventh year, first 
month, seventh day.) 

3. The glory of Pharaoh. Ch. xxxi. 

(Date : eleventh year, third month, first day.) 

4. Lamentatious for Egypt — two oracles. Ch. xxxiL 

(Dates : twelfth year, twelfth month, first day : and twelfth year, 
twelfth month, fifteenth day.) 

Part Third. 
Concerning Israel — prophecies of mercy. Ch. xxxiii. — xlviil. 
(From twelfth vear, tenth month, fifth day, to twenty-fifth year, first month, 
tenth day, b.o. 588—575.) 

I. Ezekiel's commission renewed. Ch. xxxiii. 1. 

II. The shepherds of Israel reproved. Ch. xxxiv. 

III. Prophecy against Edom. Ch. xxxv. 

IV. The mountains of Israel comforted. Ch. xxxvL 

V. The vision of dry bones. Ch. xxxvii. 1 — 14. 

VI. The union of Israel and Judah. Ch. xxxvii. 15 — 28. 

VII. Prophecies against Gog and Magog. Ch. xxxviii., xxxix. 

VIII. Visior.s of the future restoration— 

1. Of the temple. Ch. xl. — xliii. 

2. Of the worship, Ch. xliv. — xlvL 

3. Of the land. Ch. xlvii., xlviii. 

2, Composition, Collection, and Canonicitp, 

The genuineness of Ezekiel has never been seriously challenged. The 
earlier attacks of Gabler, Oeder and Vogel, and Corrodi on its individual 
portions, equally with the contention of Zunz that, as a whole, it belongs 
to the Persian age, are dismissed by the best criticism as unworthy of 
consideration; while De Wette's opinion is endorsed by all competent 
scholars, that Ezekiel wrote down everything with his own hand. Even 
Kuenen, who suspects the historicity of several of its paragraphs, admita 



INTEODUCTION TO 



that " we possess in the Book of Ezekiel a review written by the prophet 
himself" (' The Religion of Israel,' ii. 105) ; in this agreeing with Bleek, 
who regards it as " tolerably certain that Ezekiel himself prepared this 
compilation, and that therefore no utterances are admitted into it which 
are not Ezekiel's own" ('Introduction to the Old Testament,' ii. 117). 
The only points with reference to which divergence of sentiment exitstti 
are the dates at which and the manner in which this compilation was 
formed — whether its various utterances were written down before or after 
they were published, and whether all or only some or none were orally 
delivered. 

Examining these points in reverse order, it is probably less wide of the 
mark, with Bleek, Haverniok, Keil, and others, to maintain that Ezekiel's 
oracles were all orally delivered, than to assert, with Gramberg and Hit- 
aig, that none were. Ewald's conception of the prophet as a literary 
person sitting in his study and writing " oracles" because of the felt decay 
of the prophetic spirit (' The Prophets of the Old Testament,' iv. 2, 9) 
cannot be sustained, if by this is intended that Ezekiel did not exercise 
his calling after the fashion of the older prophets, but restricted his eflForts 
to the preparation of prophetic " fly-sheets." That some of his discourses, as 
e.g. those directed against foreign nations and those relating to the temple, 
may never have been spoken, but only circulated as written documents, is 
conceivable, though it is travelling beyond the evidence to allege that any- 
thing in either of these collections renders it certain they could not have 
been, and were not, read to the exiles. Smend, who holds the two parts 
referred to as free reproductions, and not at all as verbatim reports of what 
the prophet spoke, nevertheless concedes that the prophet " may have orally 
expressed the same thoughts " (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' xxxii.). As to 
whether his "oracles" were committed to writing before being read or 
spoken to the exiles, or were first spoken and afterwards recorded, cannot 
be ascertained in the absence of the prophet himself, and in defect of 
information on the subject from his or another's hand ; so that the one 
assumption stands upon the same footing with and is as good as the other. 
The sole questions of interest are as to whether the " oracles " were penned 
exactly as spoken or freely reproduced in sach a style as to deprive them of 
all claim to complete accuracy ; and whether they were written down at 
a time when the incidents and experiences, being fresh in the prophet's 
memory, could be easily and vividly recalled, or at a later period when, 
his impressions of what had occurred having considerably faded, the 
reminiscences of the past which floated before his mind's eye required to 
be touched up by poetic fancy and literary skill. The two questions hang 
together. The later the period, the less likely the prophet's recollection to 
have been fresh ; the earlier the period, the more difficult to fix upon the 
prophet a charge of "great carelessness in carrying out of details'* 
(Smend). 

(1) 'With reference tp the probable date of composition, the li^test fixed 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. xxl 

upon by Kuenen and Smend is that of the twenty-fifth year of the Cap- 
tivity ; and at this date all critics agree the passage (oh. xl. — xlviii.) must 
be placed. The only reason discoverable for holding that ch. i. — xxiv. were 
not composed before that year, or at least not before the destruction of 
Jerusalem, is the difficulty, on the contrary hypothesis, of getting rid of 
the supernatural or predictive element in prophecy. " One must allow," 
writes Smend, " that in oh. i. — xxiv. many a word stands exactly as Ezekiel 
spoke it ; but, on the other hand, it is only literary fiction when Jerusalem's 
downfall is represented as still future, as in ch. xiii. 2, etc., and xxii. 30, 
etc. The prediction is generally in the strongest way influenced by the 
fulfilment ; step by step there meet us vaticinia ex eventu, as in ch. xi. 10 
and xii. 12. The passage ch. xvii. is throughout anachronistic, and the 
section ch. xiv. 12 generally first thinkable after the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem " (' Der Prophet Bzechiel,' p. xxii.). Nor can it be doubted that this 
conclusion is unavoidable if the premiss from which it is drawn be admitted, 
viz. that prediction, in the ordinary acception of that term, vaticinium pre 
eoentu, is impossible. But a fair-minded critic must acknowledge that such 
a premiss is one to be proved rather than assumed, and that until demon- 
stration is produced it will not be possible to assent to the soundness of the 
inference that, because certain passages predict the downfall of Jerusalem 
and the captivity of Zedekiah, they must have been composed after those 
events. Besides, with what truthfulness could Ezekiel have represented 
himself as having been commanded by Jehovah to foretell the overthrow of 
the Judaean capital and the banishment of its king, if in reality Jehovah 
had given him no such instruction, and if in point of fact he, Ezekiel, had 
uttered no such predictions ? And how could he, Ezekiel, have had the 
efirontery to state, in the opening of his book, that he had been directed by 
Jehovah to speak to the people with his (Jehovah's) words, and yet in the 
body of his book show that he had written with his own ? Clearly Ezekiel 
must in this case have been unmindful of Jehovah's charge, which he pro- 
fessed at least he had received, " Son of man, be not thou rebellious like 
that rebellious house." 

(2) As to ihe final collection and possible revision of Ezekiel's prophecies, 
there is no need to call in the assistance of any hand but the prophet's own, 
the seeming disorder, or " want of arrangement," of which Jahn complained 
being perfectly explainable without having recourse either to a perplexed 
" transcriber," or to Eichhom's amusing supposition of a lazy editor, who, 
having found two separate prophecies of diverse dates, written by the prophet 
for the sake of economy upon the same book-roll, set them down as he found 
them in juxtaposition rather than take the trouble to rewrite them. "What- 
ever interruption of strict chronological sequence the book discovers is best 
accounted for as the handiwork of Ezekiel himself, who at times desired to 
group his prophecies by the subjects to which they related rather than by 
the dates at which they were spoken. If the book was iirst formed in the 
twenty-fifth year of the Captivity, B.C. 575 (ch. xL 1), it was probably revised 



xxn INTEODUCTION TO 



two years later, when the brief oracle concerning Nebuchadnezzar was 
added (oh. xxix. 17 — 21). 

(.3) The canonicity of Ezekiel has seldom been impngned. That it found 
a place in Nehemiah's collection of "the acts of the kings, and the prophets, 
and of David, and the epistles of the kings concerning the holy gifts " 
(2 Mace. ii. 13), may be assumed. It appeared in the translation of the 
LXX. which was issued b.c. 280. Josephus (' Contra Apion,' i. 8) numbers 
it among the sacred books that in his day were regarded as canonical, 
though he also speaks ('Ant.,' x. 5. 1) of Ezekiel having written 
two books instead of one — in this probably blundering, as he does in 
sending off the prophet to Babylon along with Jehoiachin rather than 
with Jehoiakim (' Ant.,' x. 6. 3) or confounding together Jeremiah and 
Ezekiel, the former of whom wrote two books (Havemick) ; or alluding to 
the present Book of Ezekiel, which may then have been recognized as 
consisting of two parts or volumes ('Speaker's Commentary'). The Talmud 
(trans. ' Baba Bathra,' f. xiv. 2) recognizes ' Ezekiel ' among the books it 
specifies as constituting the canon. On account of seeming discrepancies 
between Ezekiel's law-giving and that of the Pentateuch, the oanonicity 
of the former was for some time contested among the Jews in the last 
revision of the Jewish canon, after the destruction of Jerusalem (Deren- 
bourg, 'Histoire de la Palestine,' p. 295); but, the difficulty having been 
removed, the book's right to a place in the canon was not disturbed, and 
was at length formally recognized in the Talmud (trans. ' Baba Bathra,' f. 
xiv. 2). In the Christian Church Melito's canon of the Old Testament 
(a.d. 172) and Origen's (a.d. 260) both acknowledge it. 

3. Its Style and Literary Gharacteristici. 

The verdict of Ewald will probably not be disputed by persons com- 
petent to pronounce an opinion on the subject, that as a writer Ezekiel 
" excels all former prophets in point of skill, beauty, and perfection of 
treatment " (' The Prophets of the Old Testament,' iv. 9). " It is true," adds 
the above-named eminent authority, " his style, like that of most writers 
of this later period, has a certain amount of prolixity, often very involved 
sentences, a rhetorical copiousness and diffuseness ; still it rarely (ch. xx.) 
carries these defects to the same extent as Jeremiah in his later years, 
but generally collects itself with ease and assumes a finished form. . . . 
Moreover, his style is enriched with uncommon comparisons, is often at 
the same moment both charming and telling, full of new turns and 
surprises, and often very beautifully elaborate " (ibid., p. 15). It frequently 
exhibits the most imposing sublimity of thought and expression in dose 
combination with the severest and least ornate narration (ch. i. — iii.). At 
one time it revels in a profusion of images, which seem to pour themselves 
forth from a highly excited fancy (ch. xxvii.); at another time it con- 
descends to comparatively dry and uninteresting details (ch. xl. 6—49). 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



Now it ruelies forward as if borne along upon the current of impetuous 
emotion (oh. xvi., xxxix.); again it halts and staggers as if overbnrdened 
with its message (oh. xvii.). 

More particularly Ezekiel's style is marked by well-defined peculiarities. 

(1) The first that arrests attention is its strongly supernaturalistic flavour. 
The rationalistio conception of prophecy as a sort of superior natural 
endowment, intellectual and ethical, by which the seer, deeply pondering 
the past, contemplating the present, and peering out into the future, is able, 
through applying the eternal laws of righteousness, of which he has a clearer 
discernment than his less gifted contemporaries, to discover both the Divine 
will concerning those towards whom he feels impelled to act as a teacher 
and guide, and to forecast with a precision amounting almost to certainty the 
destinies alike of individuals and nations, — this conception of prophecy, 
while not to be overlooked, affording as it does the requisite psychological 
basis for the exercise of prophetic functions, will not account for the 
phenomena of which Ezekiel is full. In particular, Ewald's picture of the 
prophet as " translating himself, by the aid of the most vivid imagination, 
into all the familiar localities of Jerusalem " (ch. viii. 3 — 18), and repeatedly 
" turning his prophetic eye to the mountains of Israel, i.e. to his mountainous 
native land," as " in conformity with ancient prophetic rights bending his 
watchful prophetic eye upon the whole of Israel," and " discovering " 
(because it was impossible to do otherwise) " much matter for public treat- 
ment in the condition of Jerusalem during the first years of his prophetic 
labours," and as apprehending " the near or the distant dangers that 
threatened the chief city, the follies and perversities that prevailed therein, 
and finally the unavoidable ruin which became more imminent every 
moment," — this picture, if intended to exclude all idea of direct supernatural 
assistance, and to reduce Ezekiel, in whom it is asserted the prophetic spirit 
was declining (!), to the level of an ordinary or even extraordinary man of 
genius, and his book to that of a composition setting forth his subjective 
meditations on the religious and political situation of his country and 
people, his reminiscences of the past, imaginings of the present, and fore- 
castings of the future, — this picture is not one for which material support 
can be found in the prophet's writing. It is undeniably not the idea 
Ezekiel himself had of what it was he was setting down in his book. Even 
conceding that Ezekiel need not be supposed to have indited an exact, 
verbally correct report of what he preached to the elders and people 
(Cornill, ' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. 38), it is yet unmistakable that from 
the beginning to the end of his volume he desires it to be understood that 
the "visions" he describes, "symbols" he performs, and "oracles" he 
delivers are Divine communications of which he has been constituted the 
transmitting medium. To represent the prophet's talk of "visions," 
" symbols," and " oracles," as also his repeated references to " ecstasies " 
and " Divine words," as belonging merely to the literary dressing ot his 
thonghta, is to beg the question at issue. 



xxlT INTRODUCTION TO 



(2) A second characteristic of Ezekiel'a writing is its highly idealistic 
colouring. This reveals itself chiefly in the frequent introduction of visions, 
thongh likewise in the use of allegories, parables, and similitudes. That 
such a style of writing (and speaking) should have been adopted by the 
prophet was probably due to a variety of causes ; as e.g. to his own poetic 
temperameut, his absence from the Holy Land, to which many of his 
" oracles " referred, and the suitability of such imaginative discourse for 
impressing the minds of both hearers and readers. How far in the selection 
of his symbolism he was affected by Babylonian culture is differently 
answered by expositors, who guide themselves chiefly by the views they 
entertain as to the genesis of the prophet's writings and the importance 
they attach to the spirit of the age (^Zeitgeist), which formed his intellectual 
environment. Havernick regards the whole book as having in its symbols 
*' a colossal character which frequently points to those powerful impressions 
experienced by the prophet in a foreign land — Chaldea — which are here 
taken up and given forth again with a mighty and independent spirit " 
('Commentar uber den Propheten Bzechiel,' p. xx.). Were this so — and 
a priori it is neither impossible nor incredible — it would in no degree 
militate against the authenticity or inspiration of the record, but would 
simply prove, as Cornill excellently puts it, that Jehovah, in permitting 
Ezekiel to make use of heathen art and symbolism, " had only constituted 
the gods of Babylon his servants, as already Babylon's king had been an 
instrument in his hand " (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. 30). Still, it is far 
from being conclusively established that Ezekiel was in any perceptible 
degree influenced in the selection of his imagery by his Babylonian 
surroundings, although his language, in its frequent Aramaisms, bears 
unmistakable traces of contact with the East, and although, to use the words 
of the late Dean Plumptre, " in the land of his exile his eyes must have 
become familiar with sculptured shapes which presented many points of 
analogy both to his earlier and later conceptions of the cherubim " ('Ezekiel : 
an Ideal Biography,' Expositor, 2nd series, vol. vi. p. 9). Hence the judg- 
ment of Keil, that " the whole of Ezekiel's symbolism is derived from the 
Israelitish sanctuary, and is an outcome of Old Testament ideas and views " 
('Commentary on Ezekiel,' vol. i. 11), is deserving of respectful consideration 
— all the more that this mode of representing thought appears to have been 
common to the nations of the ancient East, and to have been the exclusive 
property of no one nation more than another (compare ' Speaker's Com- 
mentary,' iv. 23). 

(3) A third distinctive feature in the writing of the prophet is its eminently 
cultured diction. In this respect, to which allusion has already been made 
(see p. xiii.), Ezekiel stands apart even from his two prophetic compeers, 
Isaiah and Jeremiah. " As the Prophet Ezekiel sprang from the highest 
aristocracy of the Israel of the day," writes Cornill (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' 
p. 38), " so has also his style something aristocratic about it, in its carefully 
selected diction and in its massive and well-sustained representation, right 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



in antithesis to Jeremiah, the fiery and direct popular orator, whose oarelesi 
and plain manner of address, but for all that with an elementary force, 
lays hold of and kindles [its hearers] as that of the eminently reserved 
Ezekiel never does." Whether, as Cornill supposes, he had in his youth 
visited the foreign countries he describes, it is certain his writing exhibits 
a remarkable acquaintance with them, as already has been pointed out 
(see p. xiii.) ; while his intimate knowledge of the works of his predecessors 
has arrested the attention of every thoughtful student of his pages. . The 
prophets of the eighth century, Amos, Hosea, and Isaiah, as well as those of 
his own time, Zephaniah and Jeremiah, have contributed their respective 
quotas to enrich his composition. Specially noteworthy is the influence 
which seems to have been made upon him by the study of the last named 
of these " men of God." The following brief list of passages from Ezekiel 
and Jeremiah (taken from a larger list pi-epared by Smend) will reveal the 
nature and amount of this influence : — 



Ezekiel. 


Jeremiah. 


Ezekiel. Jeremiah. 


iL 8,9 


= i. 9. 


T. 6 = 


iL 10—13. 


iii. 3 


= XT. 16. 


V. 11 = 


xiii. 14. 


iii. 8 


= i. 8, 17; XT. 20. 


V. 12 = 


xxi. 7. 


iii. 14 


= tLIIjxt, 17. 


vi. 5 = 


vii. 32. 


iii. 17 


= vi. 17. 


Tii. 7 = 


iii. 23. 


iv. 3 


= XT, 12. 


Til. 26 = 


It. 20. 



A comparison of these passages will show that, while in thought and 
expression, there is, less or more observable, a correspondence which may 
indicate, on the part of Ezekiel, an acquaintance with the elder prophet's 
writings, this correspondence is not so close as to warrant the conclusion 
that Ezekiel prepared his work by a process of selection from Jeremiah, as 
by Colenso, Smend, and others. Lev. xxvi. is declared to be essentially 
a composition made by culling words and phrases from Ezekiel. 

A similar acquaintance of Ezekiel with the Pentateuch can be established, 
as the following examples will show : — 



Ezekiel. 
xi. 22 

XTi. 11 

XTi. 38 
XTi. 46 
XTi. 48 
xvi. 49 
xvi. 50 
XTi. 63 
xviii. 25 
xxi. 24 
xxi. 30 
xxii. 30 
xxiii. 4 
XXV. 4 
xxTiL 7 
xxvii. 13 
zxTii.l& 



Genesis. 



iii. 24. 

xxiv. 22. 

ix. 6. 

xiii. 10. 

xiii. 13. 

xviii. 20; xix. 5. 

xlx. 24. 

xiT. 16. 

xvii'. 25. 

xiii. 13. 

XT. 14. 

xTiii. 23. 

xxxvi. 2. 

xIt. la 

X. 4. 

X.2. 

X. 7 ; XXV. >. 



EzekieL 


Genesii. 


sxTii. 23 


•9 


XXV. 8. 


xxTiii. 13 


= 


ii. 8. 


EzekieL 


Exodus. 


L26 , 


«a 


xxiv. 10. 


i. 28 


•s 


xxxiii. 20. 


iv.l4 


= 


xxii. 31. 


ix.4 


= 


xii. 7. 


X.4 


— 


xl. 35. 


xiii. 17 


= 


XT. 20. 


xvi.7 


= 


L7. 


xvi. 8 


B 


xix. S. 


xvi. 38 


B 


xxi. 12. 


xviiLlO 


= 


xxL 12. 


xviii. 13 


_ 


xxii. 25. 


XX.6 


*" 


ilL 8; iT. 81; vt 
7JZX.8. 



TXH 



mTBODUOTION TO 



Ezekiel. 




Exodus. 


Ezekiel. 




[iOviticus. 


XX. 9 


— 


xxxii. 13. 


xlvi. 20 


= 


ii. 4, 6, 7. 


xxii. 12 


= 


xxii. 25. 


xlviii. 14 


s 


xxvii. 10, 28, 83. 


xxviii. 14 


= 


XXV. 20. 








xli. 22 


— 


XXX. 1, 8. 


Ezekiel. 


Numbers. 


xlii. 13 


— 


XXX. 20. 


i. 28 


= 


xii. 8. 








iv. 5 


s 


xiv. 34. 


Ezekiel. 




Leviticng. 


Ti.9 


= 


xiv. 39. 


iv. 14 


= 


xi.40; XTL16. 


vi. 14 


= 


xxxiii. 46, 


iv. 17 


= 


xxvi. 39. 


viii. 11 


= 


xvi. 17. 


v.l 


o 


xxi. 5. 


ix. 8 


= 


xiv. 5. 


V. 10 


a 


xxvi. 29. 


xi. 10 


= 


xxxiv. IL 


V. 12 


= 


xxvi. 33. 


xiv. 8 


= 


xxvi. 10. 


vi. 3, 4 


= 


xxvi. 30. 


xiv. 15 


= 


xxi. 6. 


ix. 2 


= 


xvi. 4. 


xviii. 4 


= 


xxvii. 16. 


xi. 12 


^^ 


xviii. 3. 


XX. 16 


= 


XV. 39. 


xiv. 8 


^ 


xvii. 10 ; XX. 3. 


xxiv. 17 


= 


XX. 29. 


xiv. 20 


= 


xviii. 21. 


xxxvi. 13 


= 


xiii. 32. 


xvi. 20 


S 


xviii. 21. 


xl. 45 


= 


iiL 27, 28, 32, 38. 


xvi.25 


= 


xvii.7; xix.31; xx.6. 








xxii. 7, 8 


= 


xix. 3; XX. 9. 


Ezekiel. 


Deuteronomy. 


xxii. 26 


= 


XX. 25. 


iv. 14 


= 


xiv. 8. 


xxxiv. 26 


= 


xxvi. 4. 


iv. 16 


=s 


xxviii. 48. 


xxxiv. 27 


= 


xxvi. 4, 20. 


V, 10 


= 


xxviii. 53. 


xxxiv. 28 


= 


xxvi. 6. 


v. 10, 12 


=: 


xxviii. 64. 


xxxvi. 13 


= 


xxvi. 38. 


vii. 15 


= 


xxxii.' 25. 


xlii. 20 


= 


X. 10. 


vii. 26 


s 


xxxii. 23. 


xliv. 20 


= 


xxi. 5, 10. 


viii. 3 


=: 


xxxii. 16. 


xliv. 21 


= 


X. 9. 


xiv. 8 


= 


xxviii. 37. 


xliv. 25 


=: 


xxi. 1—4, 11. 


xvi. 13 


= 


xxxii. 13. 


xiv. 10 


=: 


xix. 35. 


xvi. 15 


s; 


xxxii. 15. 


xiv. 17 


= 


i.4. 


xvii. 5 


= 


viii. 7. 


xlvi. 17 


= 


XXV. 10. 


xviii. 7 


= 


xxiv. 12. 



From these instances, which might be multiplied, it will be seen that 
between Ezetiel's language and thought and the language and thought of 
the Pentateuch sufiScient points of contact exist to warrant the hypothesis 
that Ezekiel was at least acquainted with these books, and had made them 
his study^a very plausible hypothesis, considering who and what Ezekiel 
was. To go beyond this, and argue, either with Graf and Kayser, that 
Ezekiel wrote the law of holiness (^Heiligheits-getetz) of Leviticus (ch. 
xvii, — xxvi.), or with Kuenen, Wellhausen, Smend, and others, that the 
middle portion of the Pentateuch, the so-called- priest-code (Exod. xxv. — 
Numb, xxxvi., with exceptions), was not composed till after the exile, is to 
argue from insufficient data. Against the former of these inferences 
Smend ('Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. 314) reasons forcibly, pointing out 
characteristic differences, linguistic and material, between Ezekiel and the 
portion of Leviticus in question; but the latter inference for which he 
contends is just as little capable of being placed on a solid foundation. 
The numerous allusions in Ezekiel to the priest-code and the other parts of 
the Pentateuch are quite as easily explained on the supposition that the 
whole Pentateuch was written before the exile, as that only parts of it 
(Deuteronomy and the Jehovistic history book) were written before, and 
parts of it (the holiness law and the priest-code) after. 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. xxvii 

(4) A fotirth distinguishing feature in Ezekiel's style is its well-marked 
originality. This is not to be regarded as in any measure compromised by 
what has been advanced concerning the prophet's supposed dependence on 
the Pentateuch and the older prophets. Whatever assistance he may have 
derived from these compositions, he is not for a moment to be represented 
as having ransacked them, after the fashion of a modem author, sifting 
the works of his predecessors for choice quotations wherewith to embellish 
his own pages, but to have freely reproduced their teachings with the 
stamp of his own individuality upon them, after having first taken up and 
absorbed them into his own personality. If his symbolism, as already 
indicated, was mainly derived from Old Testament ideas and conceptions, 
those ideas and conceptions were combined in a way which was peculiarly 
his own. To cite again the words of Cornill (' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' p. 30), 
" Whilst in the earlier prophets we find, as it were, only timid attempts, 
in the Book of Ezekiel there prevails a truly titanic phantasy, which in 
inexhaustible fulness always creates afresh the most profound symbols, 
usually bordering on the extremest limits of the conceivable." Nor is the 
prophet's originality restricted to unusual images and combinations of 
thought, but, as is more or less characteristic of all powerfully ener- 
getic and creative minds, it overflows in the coinage of new words as well 
as in the employment of phrases and expressions peculiar to itself. 
Examples of the latter are the designations, " son of man," used by Jehovah 
in addressing the prophet (ch. ii. 1, 3, 6, 8 ; iii. 1, 3, 4, et paitim), and 
" rebellious house " applied to Israel (ch. ii. 5, 6, 7, 8 ; iii. 9, 26, 27 ; xii. 2, 
3, 9; xvii. 12; xxiv. 3; xliv. 6); the formulas, "The hand of Jehovah 
was upon me" (ch. i. 3; iii. 22; viii. 1; xxxvii. 1 ; xl. 1), "The word of 
Jehovah came unto me" (ch. iii. 16; vi. 1; vii. 1, etc.\ "Set thy face 
against" (ch. iv. 3, 7; vi. 2; xiii. 17; xx. 46; xxi. 2), "They shall know 
that I am Jehovah" (oh. v. 13; vi. 10, 14; vii. 27 ; xii. 15, etc.), "They 
shall know that a prophet hath been among them " (ch. ii. 5 ; xxxiii. 33) ; 
and the clauses introducing Jehovah's utterances : " Thus saith Jehovah 
Elohim " (ch. ii. 4 ; iii. 1 1, 27 ; v. 6, 7, 8 ; vi. 3, 11 ; vii. 2. 5, etc.). Instances 
of the former are hardly less abundant. Keil (' Introduction to the Old 
Testament,' I., vol. i. 357, Engl, trans.) supplies a Ust of words peculiar 
to Ezekiel, of which the appended are a sample: (1) Terhs: ppa, " to thrust 
through" (ch. xvi. 40); n^?, "to trouble" (waters) (ch. xxxii. 2, 13); 
nyo, in hiph., "to lead astray" (oh, xiii. 10); hm, "to paint" (the eyes) 
(ch. xxiiL 40); nriD, "to sweep away or scrape off" (oh. xxvi. 4); DDp, 
"to sprinkle" (oh!'xlvi. 14). (2) Nouns: p^S, "flash of lightning" (ch. i. 
14); »ri," lamentation" (ch. ii. 10); '?D?'D. "polished brass" (ch. i. 4, 27; 
viii.' 2); •^^i, "sounding" (oh. vii. 7);' VIO, "the waU of a house" (oh. 
xiii. 10) ; ai^J, " a socket for setting a gem " (oh. xxviii. 13), 

(6) A last peculiarity that may be claimed for Ezekiel is that of dmpU- 
tity Bleek denies this, and speaks of his style as being "very diffuse and 



xx^ INTEODTJCTION TO 



redundant" — a complaint whicli Smend re-echoes, characterizing it, on 
account of the ahove-mentioned phrases and formulas, as " monotonous," and 
eyen charging it with occasional " carelessness ; " but the judgment of a 
writer in the ' Enoyolopaedia Britannica ' (art. " Ezekiel ") will probably 
commend itself to impartial students as a nearer approximation to the truth, 
that " Ezekiel's prose is invariably simple and unafifected ; " and that " if 
there be any obscurity at all, it is really caused by his exceeding desire to 
make it impossible for his readers to misunderstand him." 

4. Prirusiplea of Interpretation, 

That the Book of Ezekiel must be interpreted exactly as other com- 
positions of a mixed prosaic and poetic, historical and prophetical, literal 
and s}'mboHcal, realistic and idealistic character — that is to say, that to 
each part must be applied its own criteria hermeneutica, its own rules of 
exegesis or laws of interpretation — is self-evident. And in deciphering 
those portions of this work which are of a narrative, historical, poetical, or 
allegorical description, there is ordinarily no difficulty felt. The qusestio 
vexata is how the " visions," " symbols," and " predictions " shall be under- 
stood. Tholuok ('Die Propheten und ihre Weissagungen,' pp. 151, «gg.) 
distinguishes four different modes of interpretation, which he names the 
historical, the allegorical, the symbolical, and the typical ; or, classing 
the last three together, the historical and the idealistic ; and, so far as the 
Book of Ezekiel is concerned, the principal matters to be determined are 
whether its " visions " and " symbolic actions " were actual occurrences or 
merely transactions in the mind, and whether its predictions were purely 
" the product of reflective knowledge and thinking " or were traceable to a 
transcendental origin. The second of these questions, having already been 
alluded to, may be passed over, and a few words devoted to the first. 

As regards the " visions," e.g. of the glory of Jehovah, of the temple at 
Jerusalem, and ot the temple and city of the later times, it can hardly be 
questioned that what the prophet writes concerning these was based upon 
actual scenic representations that were present to his mind's eye during 
the moments of ecstasy he experienced, and were not simply idealistic 
creations of his own fancy, or rhetorical embellishments employed to set 
forth his ideas. Whether in any case what he beheld had a materialistic 
basis is not so easy to determine. Whether, for instance, he actually saw 
the glory of God or only a likeness of the same, and looked upon the 
veritable stone and lime building on Mount Moriah or merely an image 
of the same, seems outside the limits of exegesis to decide. Only the notion 
that " visions " were intended to " elucidate "the prophet's meaning shatters 
itself on the rock of their general obscurity. 

So opinion is not unanimous whether the symbolic actions reported to 
have been performed by the prophet — as, for instance, " lying four hundred 
and thirty days on his right side over against a painted tile," •' baking and 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. jjAx 

eating bread of unoleannesB," "shaving Lis head," etc. — should be understood 
as external (Umbreit, Plumptre, Schroder) or merely internal occurrences 
(Staudlin, Bleek, Keil, Hengstenberg, Smend, Calvin, Fairbaim, ' Speaker's 
Commentary *). Undoubtedly there are circumstances in the accounts given 
of most of these extraordinary actions which seem to bear out the latter 
view ; but just as surely the former is not without support. Yet in any 
case it seems absolutely indispensable to hold that there was more in Iha 
prophet's symbolism than simply the fruit of his own natural and unasdsted 
imagination (Ewald). If he did not actually perform the actions above 
referred to in his own house, it at least seemed to him while in the ecstatic 
or clairvoyant state that he did. In addition to these were symbolic acts 
which there is no reason to doubt he did perform, such as the carrying out 
of his stuff from his house (oh. xii. 7), and his sighing bitterly before the 
eyes of his people (oh. xxi. 6). 

6. Ideological Standpointa. 

Though presumably nothing was further from the prophet's mind than 
to compose a treatise on dogmatics, it is certain there is no book of the Old 
Testament in which the theological views of the author shine out with 
greater clearness than they do in this. So generally is this fact recognized, 
that Ezekiel has been pronounced the first dogmatic theologian of the 
Old Testament, aqd as such compared to Paul, who bears the same character 
and holds the same position in relation to the New (Cornill). An instructive 
essay of some dimensions might easily be prepared on the theology of 
Ezekiel ; nothing more can be attempted in the closing paragraphs of this 
introduction than to outline the teaching it supplies on the subjects of 
Gk)d, the Messiah, man, the kingdom of God, and the end of all things. 

(1) Ood. Whatever view of the Divine Being may have been entertained 
by Ezekiel's contemporaries in Jerusalem or on the banks of the Chebar, it 
is clear that to Ezekiel himself Jehovah was no mere local or national 
divinity, but the supreme and self-existent almighty (oh. i. 24) and 
omniscient (ch. i. 18) One, the Possessor of life in himself, and the Source 
of life to all his creatures, the highest of whom, the cherubim, acted as his 
throne-bearers (oh. i. 22), while the lowest, whirlwinds, storms, clouds, 
etc. served as his messengers. Infinitely exalted above the earth, clothed 
with honour and majesty, he was the Lord not alone of the celestial 
hierarchies, but also of all that dwelt beneath the skies, the supreme Dis- 
poser of events on this mundane sphere ; the absolute Buler of men and 
nations ; whom not only Israel and Judah, but Egypt and Babylon, with 
all other heathen peoples, were bound to obey ; who put down one empire 
and raised up another at his will ; who employed a Nebuchadnezzar as his 
servant with as much facility as he could make use of a David or an 
EzekieL Though not represented, as in Isaiah's vision (Isa. vi. 3), aa 
receiving the adorations of the cherubim in the midst of which he appeared, 



INTBODUCTION TO 



he was nevertheless the Holy One of Israel (ob. xxzix. 7), whose name was 
holy (oh. xxxvi. 21, 22 ; xxxiz. 25). Perhaps this was symbolized by the 
" brightness " round about the " cloud " fob. i. 4, 27) in which the glory of 
the Lord appeared, but in any case it was proclaimed with awful emphasis 
by the withdrawal of that glory from the desecrated temple and city 
(oh. X. 18 ; xi. 23), as well as by the terrible denunciations against the 
wickedness of Israel and Judah which were put into the prophet's mouth. 
Then, arising out of this, was the inviolable righteousness of God, which by 
an eternal necessity with the whole fulness of his Godhead, set him apart 
from and opposed to sin, and demanded even of him that the sinner should 
be rewarded according to his works. This attribute in Jehovah it was 
that to Ezekiel's mind rendered the downfall of Jerusalem and the overthrow 
of her then surrounding nations inevitable. The former had become so 
degenerate, incurably vile, presumptuously apostate and defiant, while the 
latter had so persistently arrayed themselves against Jehovah as repre- 
sented by Israel, that he, by the very necessities of his own nature, was 
obliged to declare himself against them both (ch. vii. 27 ; xiii. 20 ; xvi. 43 ; 
xviii. 30; xxvi. 3; xxix. 3). The God Ezekiel preached was One who 
could make no compromise with sin, who could by no means clear the 
guilty, whether individual or nation, and who would assuredly in the end, 
without pity, consign to well-merited perdition the soul that declined to 
forsake its sin. Yet was he a God of boundless grace, who had no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked (oh. xviii. 23, 32 ; xxxiii. 11) ; who, even while 
threatening judgments against the ungodly, sought to woo them to penitence 
by promises of clemency (oh. xiv. 22 ; xvi. 63 ; xx. 11), and who found the 
reason for his gracious acts in himself, and not at all in the objects of his 
pity (xxxvi. 32). In proclaiming such a God, Ezekiel showed himself 
exactly in line with the clearer and fuller revelations of the gospel. 

(2) The Metsiah. It has been said that, while the Old Testament 
prophets were unanimous in regarding Jehovah as the direct first cause 
which should introduce the Messianio times and set up the Messianic 
kingdom, they frequently diverged from one another in the view they 
gave of the instrumentality by which this splendid hope of the future 
should be realized; and in particular that, whereas in the pre-exilio 
period, when prophecy was at its height, the personal organ of Grod 
in the accomplishment of salvation was the theocratic king (Isa. ix. 
1 — 7; xi. 1 — 5; Micah v. 2 — 7; Zeoh. ix. 9—16), in the post-exilio 
period, after the downfall of the kingdom, "the Messianio King falls 
into the background as a subordinate feature in the image of the 
future painted by Jeremiah and Ezekiel " (Otto Pfleiderer, • Grundriss der 
Christlichen Glaubens- und Sittenlehre,' pp. 130, 131). So far, however, 
as Ezekiel is concerned, the Kingship of the future Messiah is rather 
strikingly emphasized. Besides being depicted as a " tender twig " taken 
from the highest bnmoh of the cedar of Judah's royalty, and planted upon 
ft high mountain, ftnd eminent in the land of Israel (oh. xviL 22 — 24), he 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. xxxi 

is represented as the coming One, to whom the diadem of Israel's sovereignty 
rightfully belonged, and to whom it should be given after it had been 
removed from the head of the " profane wioked prince " Zedekiah (oh. xxi- 
27). If not alluded to, as Hengstenberg and Dr. Carrey think, in the budding 
horn of Israel in the day of Egypt's downfall (oh. xxix. 21), he is expressly 
named Jehovah's servant David, who should be a Prince amongst Jehovah's 
restored Israel, and perform towards them all the functions of a true and 
faithful Shepherd (oh. xxxiv. 23, 24), ruling over them as King (ch. xxxvij, 
24), and appearing in Jehovah's presence as their Eepresentative (ch. xli^ 
3). Should it be said that as yet in Ezekiel's Christology there is no idea ol 
Messiah as a sacrificial priest or victim like the suffering Servant of Jehovah 
in the second portion of Isaiah (liii.), it should at the same time be 
observed that the ideas of " propitiation," " intercession," " mediation," are by 
no means foreign to the prophet's mind. If pressure must not be put upon 
the prince's " eating bread before the Lord " in the east gate of the temple 
(oh. xliv. 3), BO as to make it signify more than the Messianic David's 
participation in a sacrificial meal before Jehovah as the representative of 
his people, it is nevertheless undeniable that the prince's appearing before 
the Lord is connected with the offering of sacrifice. Then the remarkable 
expression put into the mouth of Jehovah, that though he sought for he 
could not find a man who should stand in the gap before him for the land 
that he should not destroy it (oh. xxii. 30), and the equally strong assevera- 
tions that when once he had determined to cut off a people for its wicked- 
ness, though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, should be in the land, 
yet should they deliver only their own souls (ch. xiv. 14, 16, 20), render 
it apparent that Ezekiel understood well the thought, if not of vicarious 
suffering, at least of salvation on the ground of other merits than one's 
own ; and in this again he showed himself a forerunner of the Gospel and 
Epistle writers of the Christian Church. 

(3) Man. If the anthropology of Ezekiel is less developed than either of 
the two foregoing, it is yet sufficiently pronounced. As to origin and 
nature, man was and is God's creature and property (ch. xviii. 4). That 
Ezekiel believed in and taught the doctrine of man's paradisiacal innocence, 
seems a reasonable inference from the language he employs in depicting 
the pristine glory of Tyrus (ch. xxviii. 15, 17). The present fallen and 
corrupt estate of man is distinctly recognized. Man's ways are now evil 
and require to be abandoned (ch. xviii. 21 — 30), while his heart being hard 
and stony needs to be softened and renewed (ch. xviii. 31). For his 
wickedness he is and will be held individually accountable (ch. xviii. 4, 13, 
18). On him, as an intelligent personality and free agent, rests the entire 
responsibility for the reformation of his life and the purification of his 
heart (ch. xxziii 11 ; xliii. 9). Yet does this not imply that man is able 
of himself, by his own strength, and without the gracious help of God, to 
work a saving change upon his soul ; and so the very demand which with 
OUJ breath he makes on man, the demand for a new heart, he in the next 



xdH mTRODUOTION TO 



proffers as a gift of God, saying in Jehovah's name, " A new heart will 
I give you " (oh. xi. 19 ; xxxvL 26 ; xxxvii. 23) ; once more in this antici- 
pating the Pauline doctrines of man's responsihility and inahility, and of 
the consequent need of Divine grace to convert and sanctify the soul. 

(4) The kingdom of God. Although this phrase never occurs in Ezekiel 
in the sense which familiarly belongs to it in the Boot of Daniel (vii.. 14, 
18, 22, 27) and in the New Testament (Matt. vi. 33 ; Mark i. 14 ; Luke vi. 
20 ; Bom. xiv. 17 ; 1 Cor. iv. 20), in the sense, viz., of God's empire over and 
in the souls of renewed men, the thought to which it points is by no means 
absent from his pages. To him, as to the other Old Testament prophets, 
Israel's vocation had been to be a " kingdom of priests " (Exod. xix. 6), and 
the gravamen of Israel's offence in his eyes was that she had totally revolted 
from Jehovah, tamed aside from serving him, and given her allegiance to 
other gods — had, in short, become a rebellious house. Yet Ezekiel did not 
think of Jehovah's kingdom as so inseparably bound up with Israel as a 
mere world-power, that with the downfall of the latter the former should 
at once cease to exist. On the contrary, he conceived of the inner spiritual 
kernel of the nation as existing in the lands of its dispersion (ch. xii. 17), 
as growing by the constant addition to it of penitent and obedient hearts 
(ch. xxxiv. 11 — 19), as swelling out into a new Israel with Messiah as its 
Prince (ch. xxxiv. 23, 24; xxxvii. 24), as walking in Jehovah's statutes (ch. 
xi. 20 ; xvi. 61 ; xx. 43 ; xxxvi. 27), dwelling in the land of Canaan (ch. 
xxxvi. 33; xxxvii. 25), entering into an everlasting covenant with God 
(ch. xxxvii. 26 — 28), enjoying with him the closest fellowship (oh. xxxix. 
29 ; xlvL 9), and receiving from him a gracious outpouring of his Holy 
Spirit (ch. xxxvi. 27 ; xxxix. 27) ; in all this again foreshadowing the more 
spiritual conceptions of the New Testament Church. 

(5) The end. That the prophecies contained in this book, and especially 
in its latter half, possess a decidedly eschatologioal character, has long 
been maintained. Besides having an outlook into the immediate futare of 
Israel's restoration, by the majority of exegetes they have been regarded as 
extending their gaze as far as to Messianic times, and in particular to the 
" latter days." Nor is this conjecture destitute of weighty considerations 
that might be urged in its support. To say the least, it is suggestive that 
the New Testament Apocalypse, as if it had been deliberately framed upon 
the model of Ezekiel, begins with a theophany and closes with a vision of 
a city, through which flows a river of water of Ufe, and in which there is no 
temple, because of being in itself a temple. Nor is this the whole resemblance 
between the two writings ; but while the latter depicts a figurative and 
symbolical resurrection, the former describes a resurrection which is real, 
chants a dirge over Babylon (Eev. xviii. 11) that reminds one of the 
Hebrew prophet's lamentation over Tyre (oh. xxvii.), and represents the 
last struggle between the powers of evil and the Church of Christ (Bev. 
XX. 8) in like terms to those of Ezekiel (ch. xxviii.), as a war of Gog and 
Magog against the saints of God. Whether, on the ground of Ezekiel's 



THE BOOK OF TH£ FBOPHET EZEKIEL. zzzii] 



▼iaion of th« diy bones (eh. zzzvii.), it can be inferred that the firophet 
believed in and taught the doctrine of a fhture resurreotion, or, on the 
strength of certain statements as to Israel dwelling again npon her own 
land, it ought to be concluded that the prophet anticipated a final ingather- 
ing of the Jews to Palestine, with Christ reigning as their Prince in 
Jerusalem, it would hardly be safe to afSrm ; it is much more credible to hold 
that much of the prophet's language in his last visiun points to a condition 
of things which will be realized on earth first in a millennial period, when 
the kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord, and 
of his Christ (Rev. xi. 15), and finally in heaven, when the tabernacle of the 
Lord shall be with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his 
people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God (Bev. xxi. 3). 

LlTEBATCBK. 

1. Among the older commentaries on this book may be mentioned the following i 
(Ecolampadius, ' Comm. Id Ezech.,' 1543 ; Strigel, ' Ezech. Proph. ad Heb. verit. 
recogn. et argum. et schol., illustr.,' 1564, 1575, 1579; Casp. 'Sanctius Comm. in 
Ezech. et Dan.,' 1619 ; Hieron. Pradus et Jo. Bapt. ViUapandus, ' In Ezech. explanatt. 
et apparatus urlna ac templi HierosoL Comm., illustr.,' Bonue, 1596 — 1604; Calvin, 
' FraBlectioues in Ezechielis Prophetn viginti capita piiora,' 1617; Venema, 'Lect. 
acad. ad Ezech.,' 1790. 

2. Among the newer, the following may be reckoned the more important : Boscn< 
miiller, ' Scholia,' 2nd edit., 1826 ; Maurer, ' Commentaries,' voL iL, 1836 ; Havemick, 
'Comm. iiber den Propheten Ezechiel,' 1843; 'Umbreit, 'Prakt. Comm. fiber den 
Heaekiel,' 1843; Hitzig, 'Der Prophet Ezechiel eiklart,' 1847; Patrick Fairbaim, 
' Ezekiel and the Book of his Prophecy,' 1st edit., 1851, 2nd edit., 1855, 3rd edit., 1863 ; 
Henderson, ' Ezekiel with Comm. Critical,' etc., 1856 ; Eliefoth, ' Das Buch Ezekiel's 
iibersetzt und erklart,* 1864 ; Hengstenberg, ' Die Weissagungen des Prophet Ezechiel,' 
1867, 1868 ; Ewald, 'Die Propheten des Alien Bmides,* vol. ii., 2nd edit., 1868; Keil, 
' Commentary on iEzekiel,' Engl, trans., 1868 ; Schroder, in Lange's Series, 1873 ; 
R. Smend, ' Der Prophet Ezechiel,' in ' Kurzg. Ex. Handb.,' 1880 ; I. Knabenbauer 
(Roman Catholic), ' Comm. in Ezech.,' Paris, 1890 ; Dr. Currey, in ' Speaker's Com- 
mentary,' 1882 ; Von Orelli, in Strack und Zockler's ' Comm.,' 1888. 

3. Among works which, though not formal expositions, are yet valuable contribations 
to the literature on Ezekiel, may be placed, W. Neumann, ' Die Wasser des Lebens ' 
(Esek. xlvii. 1 — 12),1S49; Hoflfmann, • Das gelobte Land, etc.,' 1871; Ernst Kiihn, 
•Ezechiel's Gesicht von Tempel,' 1882; C. H. Cornill, 'Der Proph. Ezechiel,' 1882; 
'Das Buch des Proph. Ezechiel,' 1886; Plumptre, 'Ezekiel: an Ideal Biography,' in 
Expotitor, vols. vii. aof viii., 2nd series, 1881. 



THE 



BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKTEL. 



BXPOSmON. 



CHAPTER L 



For the Ufe of the prophet prior to the 
Tision which this chapter relates, and which 
constituted his call to that office, see Intro- 
duction. 

Ver 1. — ITow J literally, and. The use of 
the conjunction indicates here, as in Jonah 
i. 1, that the narrative that follows links 
itself on to something that has gone before. 
In Exod. i. 1 and 1 Sam. i. 1 it may point to 
a connection with the book that precedes it. 
Here the sequence is subjective. We may 
think of Ezekiel as retracing the years of his 
life till he comes to the thirtieth. Then, as 
it were, he pulls himself up. That must be 
the stfuting-point of what he has to say. 
Our English use of " now " is nearly equiva- 
lent to this. In the thirtieth year. I incline, 
following Origen, Hengstenberg, Smend, and 
others, to refer the date to the prophet's own 
life. That year in Jewish reckoning was 
the age of fuU maturity. At that age the 
earlier Levites (Numb. iv. 23, 30, 39, 43, 47) 
had entered on their duties. It is probable, 
though no written rule is found, that it was 
the normal age for the functions of the 
priesthood. In the case of our Lord (Luke 
liL 23) and of the Baptist it appears to have 
been recognized as tne starting-point of a 
prophet's work. Jeremiah's call as a " child " 
( Jer. i. 6 ; ttie word may, however, include 
adult manhood, as in 1 Sam. xxr. 17 ; 1 Kings 
iii. 7) was obviously exceptional. Other 
theories are : (1) That the years are reckoned 
from the era of Nabopolassar, the father of 
Nebnohadnezrar (b.o. 625), dating from his 
throwing off the sovereignty of Assyria, and 
giving here the date b.o. 595 (Michaelis, 
BosenmiUler, E wald, and others); but against 
this it may be urged (a) that there is no 



evidence that that era was in nse ia 
Ezekiel's time, and (b) that he nowhere elss 
uses a double historical chronology. (2) That 
the years are reckoned from the discovery 
of the book of the Law in the reign of Josiah 
(2 Kings zxii. 8 ; 2 Ohron. zxxiv. 14), as a 
turning-point or era in the history of Judah 
(Targum, Theodoret, Jerome, HivemiokX 
which would again bring us to B.a 593. 
This view is, however, open to the same 
objections as (1). We have no proof that the 
Jews ever reckoned irom that event, and 
Ezekiel did not want, here or elsewhere, 
another point to reckon from, as far as his 
people's history was oonoemed, than the 
captivity of Jehoiaohin. In the fourth 
month. Both here and in ver. 2 the months 
are probably reckoned from Abib, or Nlsan, 
the month of the Passover, with which the 
Jewish year began (Exod. xii. 2 ; Neh. ii. 1 ; 
Esth. iii. 7), so ihat the fourth month, known 
by later Jews as Tammnz, would bring us 
to June or July. Among the oaptives 
(literally, the captivity) by the river of Chebar. 
By most earlier commentators the Ohebar 
has been identified with the Ohaboras of the 
Greeks (now the Khdbour), which rises in 
Upper Mesopotamia, at B£i-el-Ain, and falls 
into the Euphrates at Carcesium, a city 
which modem geographers distinguish from 
the Carchemish of the Old Testament. 
Recent critics, however (Rawlinson, Smend, 
and others), have urged that this was too 
far north to be in the " land of the Chal- 
deans " (ver. 3), or Babylon (2 Kings xxiv. 
16), and have suggested that the Ohebar of 
Ezekiel is the Nahr-Malcha, or Royal Oanal 
of Nebuchadnezzar, the greatest of that king's 
irrigation works, to which, therefore, the 
name Chebar (i.e. uniting) would be appro- 
priate. The identification of Chebar with 
the Habor of 2 Kings xviL 6, to wMoh the 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. i. 1—28. 



ten tribes had been deported (whether, with 
Bawlinson, ne think of that river as identical 
with the Chaboras, or Btill further north, 
near an a£Buent of the Tigrii of the same 
name), must, for like reasons, be rejected. 
The two names are, indeed, spelt differently, 
with initial letters that do not interchange. 
The heavens were opened. The phrase, not 
found elsewhere in the Old Testament, 
appears in Matt iii. 16; John i. 51; Acts 
vii. 56; x. 11; Rev. iv. 1. Visions of Ood. 
The words admit of three interpretations : 
(1) Great, or wonderful, visions ; as in the 
''mountains of God" (Ps. xxxvi. 6), the 
"cedars of God" (Ps. Ixxx. 10), the "river 
of God" (Ps. Ixv. 9); (2) visions sent from 
God ; or (3) actual theoplianies or manifesta- 
tions of the Divine glory. Of these (3) is 
most in harmony with what follows, here and 
elsewhere, on the phrase (coinp. ch. viii. 3 ; 
xl. 2 ; xliii. 8). Such a theophany consti- 
tnted in his case, as in that of Isaiah (vi 1), 
Jeremiah (i. 9), Zechariah (i. 8 — 14), his call 
to the ofiSce of a prophet. The visions may 
be thought of as manifested to his waking 
consciousness in an ecstatic state, and are 
thus distinguished from the dreams of sleep 
(oomp. Joel ii. 28 for the distinction between 
the two — " visions" belonging to the young, 
and "dreams" to the old). The visions of 
Balaam, seen in a "trance," but with his 
** eyes open " (Numb. xxiv. 3, 4), and of St. 
Paul, " wliether in the liody or out of the 
body" he could not tell (2 Cor. xii. 2, 3), 
present suggestive parallels. 

Yer. 2.— The fifth year of King Jehoiachin's 
captivity. The date of this deportation 
stands as B.O. 599 (2 Kings xxiv. 8 — 16; 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 9, 10), and thus brings us to 
B.C. 595-4 as the time of Ezekiel's first 
vision. It was for him and for his fellow- 
exiles a natural starting-point to reckon 
from. It would have been, in one sense, 
as natural to reckon from the beginning 
of Zedekiah's reign, as Jeremiah does 
(xxxix. 1, 2), but Ezekiel does not recognize 
that prince — ^who was, as it were, a mere 
satrap under Nebuchadnezzar — as a tme 
king, and throughout his book systemati- 
cally adheres to this era (ch. viii. 1 ; xx. 1 ; 
xxiv. 1, et oJ.). About this time, but a year 
before, the false prophets of Judah were 
prophesying the overthrow of Babylon and 
the letnm of Jeconiah within two years 
(Jer. xxviil. 8), and the expectations thus 
raised were probably shared by many of 
Ezekiel's companions in exile, while he him- 
self adhered to the counsels of the letter 
which Jeremiah had sent (Jer. xxix. 1 — 23) 
to the Jews of the Captivity. To one who 
felt himself thus apart from his brethren, 
musing over many things, and perhaps 
perplexed with the conflict of prophetic 
Toioes. there was given, in the " visions of | 



God " which he relates, the gnidantie that 
he needed. They did not break in, we may 
well believe, suddenly and without prepara- 
tion on the normal order of his life. Like 
other prophets, he felt, even before his call, 
the burdens of his time, and vexed his sou! 
with the nngodly deeds of those among 
whom he lived. 

Yer. 3. — The word of the Tiord came 
expressly, etc. ; literally, coming, there cama 
the word of the Lord; the iterar.on having 
(as commonly in this combination in Hebrew) 
the force of emphasis. The phrase stands, as 
elsewhere, for the conscious inspiration which 
made men feel that Jehsvah bad indeed 
spoken unto them, and that they had a 
message from him to deliver. To give 
parallel passages would be to copy several 
pages from a concordance, but it may not be 
without interest to note its first (Gen. xv. 1) 
and last (Mai. i 1) occurrences in the Old 
Testament, and its reappearance in the New 
Testament (Luke iii. 2). Unto Ezekiel. We 
note the transition frojn the first person to 
the third; but it does not give sufiScicnt 
ground for rejecting either ver. 1 or vers. 
2, 3 as an interpolation. (For the prophet's 
name, which appears only here and in ch. 
xxiv. 24, see Introduction ; and for " land of 
Chaldeans," note on ver. 1.) The hand of the 
Lord. Here again we liave a phrase of 
frequent occurrence, used of Elijah (1 Kings 
xviii. 46), of Elisha (2 Kings iii. 15), of 
Daniel (viii. 18; x. 10), of Isaiah (viii. 11), 
of St. John (Rev. i. 17). The " hand " of 
the Lord is the natural symbol of his power, 
and the phrase seems to be nsed to add to 
the consciousness of inspiration, that of a 
constraining, irresistible power. Ezekiel 
continually uses it (ch. iii. 14, 22 ; viii. 1 ; 
xxxiii. 22 ; xxxvii. 1 ; xl. 1). 

Yer. 4. — A whirlwind came out of the 
north. What, we ask, was the meaning of 
this symbolism? In Jer. i. 13, 14 a like 
symbol is explained as meaning that the 
judgments which Judah was to suffer were to 
come from the north, that is, from Chaldea, 
upon the prophet's countrymen. Here the 
prophet is himself in Chaldea, and what he 
sees is ttie symbol, not of calamities, but of 
the Divine glory, and that explanation is, 
accordingly, inapplicable. Probably the 
leading thought here is that the Divine 
presence is no longer in the temple at 
Jerusalem. It may return for a time to 
execute judgment (oh. viii. 4 ; x. 1, 19, 20), 
and may again depart (ch. xi. 23), but the 
abiding glory is elsewliere, and the templd 
is &8 ?hiloh had been of old (Ps. Ixxviii. 60). 
Ezekiel was looking on the visible symbol 
of what had been declared in unfigurative 
language by Jeremiah (vli. 12, 14; xxvi. 
6, 9). That the north should have been 
chosen rather than any other quarter of the 



, 1. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZBKIBL. 



hmTena is perhaps eonneoted (1) with Job 
sxxviL 22, where it appears as the region of 
" fiiir weather," the unclouded brightness of 
the "terrible majesty" of God; (2) with 
Isa. xiv. 13, where "the aides of the north" 
are the symbols of the dwelling-plnce of 
God. For the Jews this was probably 
associated with the thought of the moun- 
tain-heights of Lebanon as rising up to 
heaven (Currey, on Ezek. i. 4, in ' Speaker's 
Commentary'), or with the fact that the 
" north side " of Zion (Ps. xlviii. 2), as the site 
of the temple, was the " dwelling-place of the 
great King." Parallels present themselves 
in the Assyrian hymns that speak of the 
" feasts of the silver mountains, tlie heavenly 
courts " (as the Greeks spoke of Olympus), 
" where tbe gods dwell eternally " (' Records 
of the Past,' iii. 133), and this ideal moun- 
tain was for them, like the Meru of Indian 
legead, in the furthest north. So, in the 
legendary geography of Greece, the Hyper- 
borei, or " people beyond the north," were a 
holy and blessed race, the chosen servants 
of Apollo (Herod., iv. 32—36; Pindar, 
' Pyth.,' X. 4 ; Msoh., ' CHioeph.,' 373). Pos- 
sibly the brilliant coruscations of an Aurora 
Borealis may have led men to think of it as 
they thought of the glory of the dawn or the 
brightness of the lightning, as a momentary 
revelation of the higher glory of the throne 
of God. (For the " whirlwind " as the accom- 
paniment of a Divine revelation, see 1 Kings 
xix. 11 ; Job xxxviii. 1 ; Acts ii. 2.) A great 
cloud, etc. So far the signs of the approach- 
ing theophany were like those ou Sinai 
(Exod. six. 16, 18) and Horeb (1 Kings xix. 
11). With a fire infolding itself; the 
Revised Version margin gives flashing 
continually. The Autliorized Version sug- 
gests the thought of a globe of fire darting 
its rays through tbe surrounding darkness. 
The colour of amber ; literally, the eye. The 
Hebrew word for" amber "(cftasftmaZ) occurs 
only here and in ver. 27 and ch. viii. 2. It 
is almost absolutely certain that it does not 
mean what we know as " amber." The LXX. 
and Vulgate give electrum, and this, in later 
Greek and Latin authors, has " amber" for 
one of its meanings. Primarily, however, it 
was used for a metallic substance of some 
kind, specifically for a compound four parts 
of gold and one of silver (Pliny, ' Hist. Nat.,' 
xxiii. 4, B. 23). Some such compound is 
probably what we have to think of here, and 
10 the description finds a parallel in Dan. x. 
6 ; Rev. i. 15. This, in its ineffable bright- 
ness, is seen in the centre of the globe of 
fire. One may compare Dante's vision of 
the Divine glory ('Paradiso,'xxxiii. 55). 

Ver. 5.— The likeness of four living 
oreatnres. The Authorized Version is hap- 
pier here in its rendering than in Rev. iv. 6, 
where we find "beasts" applied to the 



analogues of the forms of Ezekiel's vision. 
There the Greek gives ^mo, as the LXX. does 
here, while in Dan. vii. 3 — 7 we have fi^pm. 
In oh. X. 15 they are identified with the 
" cherubim" of the mercy-seat ; but the fact 
that they are not so named here is pre- 
sumptive evidence tliat Ezekiel did not at 
first recognize tliem as identical with what 
he had heard of those cherubim, or with the 
other like forms that were seen, as they were 
not seen, in the temple (1 Kings vi. 2U ; vii. 
29), on its walls (2 Ohron. iii. 7), and on its 
veil or curtain (Exod. xxxvi. 35). What he 
sees is, in fact, a highly complicated develop- 
ment of the cherubic symbols, which might 
well appear strange to him. It is possible 
(as Dean Stanley and others have suggested) 
that the Assyrian and Babylonian sculptures, 
the winged bulls and lions with human 
heads, which Ezekiel may have seen in his 
exile, were elements in that development. 
The likeness of a man. This apparently was 
the first impression. The " living creatures " 
were not, like the Assyrian forms just 
referred to, quadrupeds. They stood erect, 
and had feet and hands as men have. 

Ver. 6. — ^We note the points of contrast 
with other like visions. (1) In Isa. vi. 2 
each seraph has six wings, as each " living 
creature " has in Rev. iv. 8. (2) In Rev. iv. 
7 the four heads are distributed, one to 
each of tlie "living creatures," while here 
each has four faces, and forms, as it were, a 
Janus quadrifront. The wings are described 
more minutely in ver. 11. 

Ver. 7. — Their feet were straight feet, 
etc. The noun is probably used as in- 
cluding the lower part of the leg, and what 
is meant is that the legs were not bent, or 
kneeling. What we may call the bovine 
symbolism appears at the extremity, and the 
actual foot is round like a calf s. The 
LXX. curiously enough gives "their feet 
were winged (wTepaToiy Burnished brass. 
Probably a shade less brilliant, or more 
ruddy, than the eUetrum of ver. 4 (see 
note there). 

Ver. 8. — ^They had the hands of a man, etc. 
The prophet seems to describe each detail 
in the order in which it presented itself to 
him. What he next sees is that each of the 
four forms has two hands on each of its four 
sides. Nothing could supersede that symbol 
of activity and strength. 

Ver. 9. — Their wings were joined, etc. As 
interpreted by vers. 11 and 24, two of the 
wings were always down, and when the 
living creatures moved, two were extended 
upwards, so that their tips touched, and 
were in this sense "joined." When at rest, 
these were let down again (ver. 24). They 
turned not, etc. We note the emphasis of the 
threefold iteration of the fact (vers. 12, 17). 
None of the four forms revolved on its axis. 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHKT BZEKIEL. [oh. 1.1— 28. 



Tbe moUon lof wlutt we may call the com- 
poaite qnadiilateial was simply lectUinear. 
Did the symbolism lepiesent tbe diieot- 
iten, the ibaightforwardDess, of the Divine 
energy manifested in tbe nniveree ? 

Yer. 10. — As for the likeness, etc. The 
Bevised Version rightly strikes out the 
comma after " lion." The hnman face meets 
the prophet's gaze. On the right he sees the 
lion, on the left the ox, while the face of the 
eagle is behind. What did the symbols 
mean? (1) The human face represents the 
thonghtthatman, as made "after the image of 
Qod " (Gen. i. 27), is the highest symbol of 
the Eternal. So long as we remember that 
it is but a symbol, anthropomorphism is 
legitimate in thought, and appropriate in 
Tisions; though, like theriomorphism, it 
becomes perilous, and is therefore forbidden 
(Exod. zx. 4 ; Deut. iv. 17) when it takes 
concrete form in metal or in stone. So Daniel 
(Tii. 9, 13) sees the " Ancient of Days " and 
" one like nnto a son of man ; " and St. 
John's yision (Bev. i. 13) represents the same 
symbolism. (2) The lion bad been the 
familiar emblem of sovereignty, both in 
the temple of Solomon (1 Kings vii. 29) 
and in his palace (1 Kings x. 20 ; 2 Chron. 
ix. 18, 19). So, in Oen. xlix. 9, it is the 
symbol of the kingly power of Judah, and 
appears with a yet higher application in 
Bev. V. 5; while, on the other hand, it 
represents one of the great monarchies of 
tlie world in Dan. vii. 4. Its modem he- 
raldic use in the arms of England and else- 
where presents yet another analogne. (3) 
The ox had appeared, as here, so also in 
1 Kings vii. 25, 44, in company with the 
lion, notably in the twelve oxen that sup- 
ported the " sea " or " laver " in the temple. 
Here also we have a kind of sovereignty — 
the natural symbol of a strength made sub- 
servient to human uses. Both the lion and 
the ox, as we have seen, may have become 
familiar to Ezekiel as a priest ministering 
in the temple or as an exile. (4) The 
eagle was, in like manner, though not taking 
its place in the symbolism of the temple, 
the emblem of kingly power, and is so 
employed by Ezekiel himself in ch. xvii. 3, 
7 ; while in Dan. vii. 4 the lion has eagle's 
wings (comp. Hos. viiL 1 ; Isa. xlvi. 11 ; 
Obiid. 4; Hab. i. 8). In Assyrian sculpture 
Nisroch (the name is cognate with the Hebrew 
for "eagle," nesher) appears as an eagle- 
headed hnman figure, and is always repre- 
sented as contending with or conquering 
the lion and the bull (Layard, ' Nineveh,' ii. 
458, 469), The facts suggest the inference 

(1) that Ezekiel may have seen this symbol ; 

(2) that over Bind above the general thought 
that all the powers of nature are subject to 
the government of God, there was also the 
more ipeciflo thought th»t the great king- 



doms of the earth were bat lervanti of his, 
to do hi* pleMuie? Tbe repioduotion of 
the fourfold form, with the variation already 
noticed, in Bev. iv. 7, is every way suggestive, 
and it is, at least, a natnial imerence that 
the symbols had acquired a new significance 
through tbe new truths thathadbeenrevealed 
to the seer of Fatmos ; that the hnman face 
may have connected itself with the thought 
of the Son of man who shared in the glory 
of the Father ; the ox with that of his sacri- 
fice ; the lion with that of his sovereignty 
over Israel, as the Lion of the tribe of Judan 
(Bev. V. 5) ; the eagle with that of his bear- 
ing his people as on eagles' wings, into the 
highest heavens (Exod. xix. 4 ; Dent, xxxii. 
11). The patristic interpretation, which 
finds in the fonr living creatures the symbols 
of the four evangelists (an interpretation by 
no means constant or unvarying — the lion 
being sometimes identified wim St. Matthew, 
and the man with St. Mark, and conversely, 
while the ox and the eagle are uniformly 
assigned to St. Luke and St. John respeo- 
tively), must be considered as the play of a 
devout imagination, bat not as unfolding 
the meaning of either Ezekiel or St. John. 
In the later Jewish tradition tbe four forms 
are assigned, takiug Ezekiel's order, to the 
tribes of Beuben, Judah, Ephraim, and 
Dan, as the "stendards" (Numb, ii 2) 
which they generally bote when encamped 
in the wilderness; but this is obviously 
outside the range of the prophet's thoughta. 

Ver. 11.— Thus were their faces: and, 
etc. ; better, with Bevised Version, and their 
facet and their mttg$ were eeparate above ; 
i.e. were stretched upward, touching the 
neighbouring wings at the tip, and so 
"joined," while the other two covered the 
bodies and were never stretched (comp. 
Isa. vi. 2). 

Ver. 12. — Whither the spirit was to go, 
etc. The description passes on to the 
originating force of the movement of the 
mysterious forms. The Hebrew noun may 
mean" breath," " wind, ' or " spirit," the 
meanings often overlapping one another. 
Here the higher meaning is probably the true 
one. The " Spirit" (as in Gen. i. 1 ; vi. 3 ; 
Pa. civ. 80 ; cxxxix. 7; Isa. xl. 7, ISj and 
in Ezekiel himself, pastim) is the Divine 
Source of life in all its forms, especially in its 
highest form, moral, intellectual, spiritual. 
It is this which gave unity and harmony to 
the movements of the " living creatures," as 
it gives a life, harmony, and unity to all the 
manifold manifestations of the might of God 
of which they were the symbols. (On " they 
turned not," see note on ver. 9.) 

Ver. 13 — Like burning coals of fire, etc. 
It may not be amiss to note the fiust that the 

Shrase throughout the Bible denotes incan- 
esceat wood. The nearest approach to its 



OH. 1.1— 2a] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



Qse by Bzekiel ia in 2 Sam. xxii. 9, 13. For 

"lamps," read, with the Eevised Version, 
"torches." Here the vision of Ezekiel, in 
which the living creatures were thus incan- 
descent, bathed, as it were, in the Are that 
played around them, yet not consumed, 
followed in the path of previous symbols — of 
the burning bush (Eiod. iii. 2), of the pillar 
of fire by night (Exod. xiii. 22), of the fire 
on Siuai (Exod. xix. 18), of the " fire of 
the Lord " (Numb. xi. 1 — 3), and the " fire of 
God " (2 Kings i. 12). Speaking generally, 
" fire," as distinct from " light," seems to be 
the symbol of the power of God as mani- 
fested against evU. " OurGod is a consuming 
Fire " (Dent. iv. 24 ; Heb. xii. 29). The red 
light of fire has in it an element of terror 
which is absent from the stainless white of 
the eternal glory, or from the sapphire of the 
visible firmament. Lightning (comp. Exod. 
xix. 16 ; XX. 18 ; Dan. x. 6 ; Bev. iv. 5 ; 
viii. 5 ; xi. 19 ; xvi. 18). 

Ver. 14. — ^Kan and returned. Compare 
the " to and fro " of Zech. iv. 10. The com- 
parison implies at once suddenness (as in 
Matt zxiv. 27) and overwhelming bright- 
ness. 

Ver. 15. — Behold one wheel, etc. As tlie 
prophet gazed, yet another marvel presented 
itself — a " wheel " was seen. It is " by " or 
" beside '' (Eevised Version) the living 
creatures, and "for each of the four faces 
thereof" (Eevised Version); »'.«. as the next 
verse states defin itely, there were four wheels. 
We may compare the analogues of the 
" wheels " of fire in the theophany of Dan 
vii 9, and the chariot of the cherubim in 
1 Chron. xxviii. 18. 

Ver. 16. — like unto the oolonr of a beiyL 
The Hebrew for " beryl " (tarshtah) suggests 
that the stone was called, like the turquoise, 
from the region which produced it. Here 
and in Dan. x. 6 the LXX. leaves it un- 
translated. In Exod. xxviii. 20 we find 
XpvvdKiBos ; in eh. x. 9 and xxviii. 13 &v9pa^, 
i.e. carbuncle. It is obvious, from this variety 
of renderings, that the stone was not easily 
identified. Probably it was of a red or 
golden colour, suggesting the thought of 
fire rather than the pale green of the aqua- 
marine or beryl (see especially Dan. x. 6). 
Xhey four had one likeness, etc. A closer 
gaze led the prophet to see that there was a 
plurality in the unity. For the one "wheel" 
we have four; perhaps, as some have thought, 
two wheels intersecting at right angles, per- 
haps, one, probably seen behind, perhaps also 
below, each of the living creatures. They 
are not said actually to rest upon it, and the 
word "chariot" is not used as it is in 
1 Ohion. xxviii. 18. They would seem 
rather to have hovered over the wheels, 
moving simultaneously and in full accord 
with them. The " wheels " obvimialy repre- 



sent the forces and laws thatsustain the mani- 
fold forms of life represented by the " living 
creatures" and the " Spirit." In each case 
the number four is, as elsewhere, the symbol 
of completeness. A wheel in the midst of 
(^within, Eevised Version) a wheel ; t.e. with 
an inner and outer circumference^ the space 
between the two forming the "ring" or 
felloe of ver. 18. 

Ver. 17.— When they went, etc The 
meaning seems to be that the relative po- 
sition of the wheels and the living creatures 
waa not altered by motion. On " they 
turned not," see note on ver. 9. All sug- 
gests the idea of orderly and harmonion* 
working. 

Ver. 18. — As for their rings, etc. The 
"rings" or "felloes" of the wheels im- 
pressed the prophet's mind with a sense of 
awe, partly from their size, partly from their 
being " full of eyes." These were obviously, 
as again in ch. x. 12, and in the analogues 
of the " stone with seven eyes " in Zech. iii. 
9 ; iv. 10, and the " four beasts [t.e. ' living 
creatures'] full of eyes," in Eev. iv. 6, symbou 
of the omniscience of God working through 
the forces of nature and of history. These 
were not, as men have sometimes thought, 
blind forces, but were guided as by a supreme 
insight (comp. 2 Ohron. xvi. 9). 

Ver. 19. — The wheels went by them; 
better, with Eevised Version, iieai^ fluim; 
ie. moving in parallel lines with them. And 
when the Living creatures went, etc. The truth 
embodied in the coincident movements of 
the " living creatures " and the " wheels," ii 
the harmony of the forces and laws of nature 
with its outward manifestations of might. 
In the two directions of the movement, 
onward and upward — when the living 
creatures were lifted up — ^we may see (I) 
the operations of the two when they are 
within the range of man's knowledge, and, 
as it were, on the same plane with it; and (2) 
those which are as in a higher region beyond 
his ken. 

Ver. 20. — ^Whithersoever the spirit was to 
go, etc. The secret of the coincidence of the 
movements of the " living creatures " and of 
the " wheels " was found in the fact, which 
the prophet's intuition grasped, that the 
phenomena of life and law had one and the 
same originating source. For " the spirit of 
the living creature " (singular, because the 
four are regarded as one complex whole), the 
LXX., Vulgate, and EevisedVersion margin, 
give " the spirit of life," a rendering tenable 
in itself, but the contextual meaning of the 
word is in favour of the Authorized Version 
and the Eevised Version text. 

Ver. 21. — When those went, these went. 
The words, strictly speaking, add nothing 
to the previous description ; but the prophet 
appears to have wished to combine nhix ho 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. 1. 1—2 



hid before said separately, w aa to make 
the plctuie complete, before paaeing on to 
the yet more gloriong visioii uiat next met 
his gaze. 

Yer. 22. — ^And the likeness of the firmv 
ment, etc. The word is the same as that in 
Oeu. i., paisim ; Ps. ziz. 1 ; d. 1 ; Dan. xii. 3. 
It meets ua again in vers. 23, 25, 26, and in 
X. 1, but does not oocnr elsewhere in the 
Old Testament. What met the prophet's 
eye was the expanse, the " body of heaven 
in its clearness " (Exod. xxit. 10), the deep 
intense blue of an Eastern sky. Like th* 
tolonr of tiie terrible orystal, eto. The Hebrew 
noun is not found elsewhere. Its primary 
meaning, like that of the Greek KpitrrdWos, 
ia that of " cold," and I incline therefore to 
the margin of the Bevised Version, "ice." 
Bock-crystal, seen, as it is, in small masses, 
and in its pure colourless transparency, 
hardly suggests the idea of terror; but the 
intense brightness of masses of ice, as shin- 
ing in the morning sun, might well make 
that impression. Had Ezekiel seen the 
glories of a mountain throne of ice, as he 
looked up, on his way from Palestine to 
Cbaldea, at the heights of Lebanon, or 
Hermon, and thought of them as the fitting 
symbol of the throne of God? We note. 
In this connection, the use of " terrible " 
in Job xxxvii. 22 (see note on ver. 4). 

Yer. 23. — Under the firmament, etc. The 
description must be read as completing 
that of ver. 11. The two upper wings of the 
"living creatures" were not only stretclied 
out, but they pointed to the azure canopy 
above them, not as sustaining it, but in the 
attitude of adoration. Nature, in all her 
life-phenomena, adores the majesty of the 
Eternal. 

Ver. 24. — Thenoiseof theirwings,etc. The 
wings representing the soaring, ascending 
elements in nature, their motion answers to 
its aspirations, their sounds to its inarticulate 
groanings (Bum. viiL 26) oi its chorus of 
praise. The noise of great \7aters may 
be that of the sea, or river, or torrents. 
Ezekiel's use of the term in ch. xxxi. 7, in 
connection with the cedars of Lebanon, seema 
in favour of the last. On the other hand, 
in ch. xxvii. 26 ; Pa. xxix. 8 ; cvii. 23, the term 
ia manifestly used for the aeaa. The thought 
appears again in Bev. i. 15 ; xix. 6. In Pa. 
xxix. 8, et ai., tlie "voice of the Lord" is 
Identified with thunder. For the voice of 
■peeoh, which wrongly auggeats articulate 
ntteriinoe, read, with the Bevised Version, 
• noise of tumult. 

Yer. 25. — And there was a voloe from the 
Armament Bevised Version gives above. 
Qlie prophet's silence suggests mat what he 
iMua waa at first ineffable (comp. 2 Cor. 
xiL 4)k perhaps nnintelUgibla. All that be 
knew waa that an awful voiMb Ulu thunder 



(comp. John xii. 29), came from above the 
expanse of azure, and that it stilled the 
motion of the wings, working peace, as in 
the midst of the endless agitations of the 
universe. The wings that had been stretoiied 
upward are now folded, like the others. 

Yer. 26.— The likeness of a throne. The 
greatest glury waa kept to the last. High 
above the azure expanse was the h'kene»» of 
a throne (we note the constant recurrence 
of the word " likeness," ninu times in this 
one cliapter, as indicating Ezekiel's con- 
sciousness of the vision-cliarauter of what he 
saw). The idea of the throne of the great 
King first appears in 1 Kings zxii. 19, ia 
frequent in the Psalms (Ps. ix. 4, 7 ; xi. 4 ; 
xlv. 6), notably in Isa. vi. 1. In the visions 
of St. John (Bev. i. 4, and passim) it iatbe 
dominant, central object throughout. As 
the appearance of a sapphire stone. The 
intense blue of the sapphire has made it in 
all ages tlie natural symbol of a heavenly 
purity. Ezekiel's vision reproduces that of 
Exod. xxiv. 10. It appears among the gems 
of the high priest's breastplate (Exod. xxviiL 
18 ; xxxix. 11) and in the "foundations" of 
Bev. xxi. 19. The description of the 
sapphire given by Pliny (' Hist. Nat.,' 
xxxvii. 9), as "never transparent, and 
refulgent with spots of gold," auggests lapis- 
lazuli. Aa used in the Old Testament, how- 
ever, the word probably means the sapphire 
of modern jewellery (Brann, 'De Vest. 
Sacerd.,' p. 680, edit. 1680). A likeness as of 
the appearance of a man. The throne, the 
symbol of the sovereignty of God over the 
" living creatures " and the " wheels," over 
the forces and the laws which they repre- 
sented, is not empty. There was " a likeness 
aa of the appearance " (we note again the ac- 
cumulation of words intended to guud against 
the thought that what was seen was more 
than an approximate symbolism) " of a man." 
In that likeness there was the witnesa that 
we can only think of God by reasoning 
upward from all that ia highest in our con- 
ceptions of human greatness and goodness, 
and thinking of them aa free from theiir 
present limitationa. Han'a highest thought 
of God ia that it ia " a face like his face that 
receives him." He finds a humanity in the 
Godhead. It is noticeable that this preluding 
anticipation of tlie thought of the Incarna- 
tion, not recognized in the vision of Moses 
(Exod. xxiv. 10) or Isaiah (vi 1), appears 
prominently in the two prophets of the exile 
— here and in the memorable Messianic vision 
of " One like unto the [' a,' Bevised Version] 
Son of man " in Dan. vii. 13. What might 
have been perilously anthropomorphic in 
the early stages of the growth of Israel, 
when men tended to identify the symbd 
with the thing symbolized, was now made 
subservient to the truth whiob underlies even 



OH.1. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 



anthropomorphic thought (corap. Rev. 1. 13). 
Irenasus {' Adv. Hser.,' iv. 20. 10), it may be 
noted, dwells on the fact that Ezekiel uses 
the words, " ' hsec visio sirailitudinls gloriae 
Domini,' r>e quis putaret forte eum in his 
proprie vidisse Deum." 

Ver. 27. — As the colour of amber. Ttie 
" amber " (see note on ver. 4) represents the 
pnrity and glory of the Divine nature — the 
truth that "God is light" in his eternal 
essence. The " fire " which, here as ever, 
represents the wrath of God against evil, is 
round about within it, i.e. is less absolutely 
identified with the Divine will, of which it 
is yet an almost constant manifestation. It 
is, in the language of the older logicians, an 
inseparable accident rather than part of its 
essential nature. 

Ver. 28. — As the appearance of the how. 
The glorious epiphany was completed, as in 
Ber. iv. 8 and x. 1, by the appearance of the 
rainbow. The symbol of Gtod'i Mthfulness, 



and of the hope that rested on it (Oen. ix 
13), was seen in the glory of the Divine 
perfection, even in the midst of the fire of 
the Divine wrath. Mercy and love are 
thought of as over-arching all the phenomena 
of the world and its history, attempering the 
chastisements which are needed for tluwe 
with whom that love is dealing. The whole 
complex appearances of Ezekiel's descrip- 
tions, including the arch of prismatic colours, 
finds its nearest natural analogue, as has 
been before suggested (note on ver. 4), in the 
phenomena of the Northern Lights. I fell 
upon my face. As in ch. iii. 23; Dan. viii. 
17; Bev. i. 17, the prostrate attitude of 
lowliest adoration, the dread and awe of one 
who has seen the King, the Lord of hosts, 
and yet survives, was a preparation for the 
more direct revelation to his consciousness 
of the Word and will of Jehovah (comp. 
Dante, 'Inferno,' iU. 136: T. 142). 



HOMILETIOS. 

Ter. 1. — Visions of God. The Book of Ezekiel opens with a gloiioni apooalypse. 
No doubt the primary object of this revelation was the spiritual education of the 
prophet. But all the deeper spiritual experiences of individual souls afford living lessons 
for their brethren. Therefore the visions are recorded and the private privileges published 
abroad, inviting our study at least, perhaps also our emulation. 

I. The sees of the visions. 1. A priest. (See ver. 3.) Of all men they who 
minister to others in spiritual things need first to have their own visions of God. A 
spiritually blind priest can only give dead, formal, perfunctory service. Yet it is only 
too possible to handle religious business ofGcially without any true insight, without 
any experience of the Divine. The very familiarity with the routine of religious services 
may tend to harden a soul against the inner truth and reality of religion. The priest 
nay see the temple, but never behold the glory of God. It is a great moment when 
he rises from formal service to spiritual experience. 2. A prophet, Ezekiel is now 
called to the high mission of prophecy. But he must first behold his own visions of 
God. The prophet must be a seer. No one can speak for God who has not first heard 
the voice of God or seen the glory of his truth. The true preparation for public preach- 
ing is private communion with God. 

II. The time op the visions. In early maturity. Ezekiel was in his thirtieth 
year. This was the time for entering on the priestly office. It was the same age as 
that of Jesus when he commenced his public life. Our subject has a very special 
bearing on all persons who are about thirty years old. Samuel was called in childhood, 
Moses when eighty years of age, Ezekiel at an intermediate period. Different souls take 
varying times for their development. Some are like the slow oak, others like the 
rapidly growing sycamDre. There is a special fitness in the time of Ezekiel's vision. 
1. It was after years of preparation. AU secular training and earthly experience may 
be enlisted in the service of God, and consecrated to his use. 2. It was le/ore a life of 
work. The visions are seen on the very threshold of the prophet's public career. It is 
well indeed to meet God early in life. Then the soul is most susceptible. Joel says that 
young men shall see visions, while old men only dream dreams. Such visions con- 
secrating early manhood give promise of a full day of work. It is possible to be called 
to the vineyard at the eleventh hour. But it is aitA to have lingered in the market-place 
so long, and it is far better to begin in the fresh, fair morning of life. 

III. The ciEonMSTANCBS of the visions. 1. Ezekiel was among the captives. (1) 
He was an exile from his native land. God is not confined to holy sites. Enemies 
may banish from home; tbey cannot banish from God. (2) He was surrounded by 



t THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL, [oh. 1. 1—28. 

lorroirful men — "among the oapdves." The atmosphere was depresnng. Yet the light 
of hearen broke through it. God is not the less good and great because men are follen 
and human life is too often a sad wreck. (3) He was himself a captive. Those yery 
waters of Babylon by which others hung their harps in despair heard the first notes of 
the lyre of a braver soul. Trouble revealed the need of God, and invited his gracious 
help. If Bzekiel had not been a captive he might never have beheld his glorious visions. 
The visions were worth the captivity. If poets learn in sorrow what they teach in song, 
may not the glory of the song justify the experience of the sorrow, and so explain some 
of the mystery of it ? 2, Ezekiel was by the river Chebar. He was in no city confines, 
but oat in the open, in a quiet scene of nature. Isaiah saw his vision in the temple of 
Solomon (Isa. vi.). Ezekiel saw his in the more glorious temple of nature. God is on 
the broad earth as surely as he is in any sacred place. 

rV. The soubcb of the visions. 1. It vraa/rom heaven. Then the prophet must 
look up to see it. The heavens declare the glory of God, and yet many men never heed 
the message because earth enchains their attention. We need to know that there are 
transactions in heaven which deserve our notice. The physicist holds astronomy to be 
as true a science as geology. There is a spiritual astronomy which claims our study 
as much as the facts of m^n and earth. 2. It was through the opening of heaven. To 
many heaven is sealed. The firmament is like brass. Ko glory of God breaks through 
its awful expanse. God has to reveal himself before any man can see bis glory. But 
revelation is not the creation of new truth. It is only rolling back the curtain, opening 
the gates of the unseen. The heavenly world is present, but too often it is veiled from 
sight, or perhapa our " eyes are holden." 

y. Tee NAT0BE OF THE VISION. It was a vision of God. The prophet is to see 
some rays of the Divine glory, some fringe of the robe of the Almighty. This is the 
highest of all visioDS. It is much more important that the prophet should behold the 
eternal glory of God than that he should foresee future earthly events. No doubt 
the secondary vision — the prevision of what is to happen on earth — is got through the 
higher vision ; it is seen in the mirror of Divine truth. For us this vision of God comes 
in a new form. Heaven was open when Christ was manifested. In the human 
countenance of Jesus we may see that once rare sight of the glory of God, which is 
as a very vision of angels of QoA. ascending and descending upon the Son of man 
(John i. 31). 

Ver. 5. — " The likeness of a man!' There is very much in the visions of Ezekiel that 
strikes us as strange, and even monstrous. With the sweep of his mighty eagle-wing 
tie soars far above commonplace experience to awful regions of unearthly sublimity. 
But ever and anon in his highest flights be seems to find relief by laying hold of some 
trait of human nature. The Son of man appears repeatedly in Ezekiel's celestial 
panorama. The prophet seems to delight in hearing the still, sad music of humanity 
among the dread sounds of the larger universe. Those living creatures which may 
have been suggested to his eye of prophetic imagination by the cherubs at the Jerusalem 
temple, or by the winged bulls on Assyrian monuments which we now see on the great 
tablets in the British Museum, those prototypes of the "living creatures" of St. John's 
grander "revelations," were not simply viewed in their strangeness and greatness. 
They were linked to human experience by <t common likeness. Whether we take 
them as symbolical of Divine attributes, or as descriptive of heavenly beings, the human 
features are equally significant. 

L Thbbb ABE HUMAN FBATUBBS IN HEAVEN. We think of heavoD by its contrast 
with earth. But it also has points of resemblance. All will not be strange there. The 
Bame God who made earth, made heaven ; and he who rules the one sphere also reigns 
in the other. In passing from earth to heaven we do but cross from one district to 
another district in the same Divine dominion. 1. There is a resernblance between spirits 
in heavenly regions and men. Angels may be without physical bodies, sinless, and 
gifted perhaps with higher faculties than any possessed by a Plato or a Milton on earth. 
Yet they are spirits, and we are spirits. There is a natural kinship in all spiritual life. 
2. T/tere is a human likeness in Ood. Man was made in the image of Qoi, Then, 
conversely, we may say that in some degree God is like man. The child may give us 
some idea of the parent. The pobiiive side of anthropomorphism is reasonable and 



flH.1.1— 28.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. • 

helpful to our understanding. We cannot limit Gbd to the human. But we may 
recognize human characteristics as part of the infinite nature of God. Christ is the 
manifestation of these characteristics. 8. The human Christ is in heaven. Ohrist 
ascended to heaven in his human nature, and he is there now as a hrother man. 
Therefore it is more fully true in Christian days than before the incarnation of our 
Lord, that there are human elements in heaven. 4. Th^e are men in heaven. Many have 
gone there before our time, and have founded a human colony in the celestial sphere. 
May not the spirits of the blessed dead have some influence on the very atmosphere of 
heaven, spreading through it a certain human tone? 

n. These abe human featubes ik bevelation. Ezekiel's vision was a revelation 
to him. In this revelation he saw traits of humanity. 1. Revelation comes to tM 
through human channels. God speaks to us through prophets, and teaches us by meaus 
of the lives of his saints. This is not merely a limitation. It helps xis the better to 
imderstand Divine truth. It is a translation of the thought of heaven into the language 
of earth. Only let us beware of the literalism which forgets that any such translation 
has taken place. 2. Revelation makes known to us the true glory of humanity. We 
do not know what man may become till we see the Divine idea of man in the heavenly 
revelation. Ezekiel's vision of the human in heaven, like Plato's doctrine of the Divine 
ideas, suggests to us that there is something far above normal humanity for man to aim 
at. The earthly man is far below the heavenly. Let him strive after that lofty ideaL 
Especially is this possible now that the heavenly man has descended to earth in the 
Person of Christ. To follow Christ is to copy the celestial type of humanity. 3. In 
all religion it is important not to lose sight of human nature. The prophet in his vision 
of God IB careful to observe anything that links the Divine to the human, the heavenly 
to the earthly ; a purely celestial religion could have little influence on poor, toiling, 
struggling man. We have to see (1) God's sympathy with man ; (2) man's living, 
earthly experience of God ; (3) man s duty to his fellow-men. 

Ver. 12. — Straightforwardness. Ezekiel seems to have been particularly struck 
with the direct movement of the four living creatures which he beheld in his vision, 
for he refers to this several times. " Their feet were straight " (ver. 7). Twice the 
prophet tells us that " they went every one straight forward " (vers. 9, 12), and on the 
second occasion he emphasizes his assertion by adding that " they turned not when 
they went " — ^a remark which he subsequently repeated in describing the motion of the 
wheels (ver. 17). 

I. Heavenly cokdttct is btbaiohtfobwabo. Here is the contrast between the 
heavenly, the ideal, the perfect, and the too-common course of human conduct on earth. 
The lanes and alleys of earth are crooked; the golden streets of the new Jerusalem 
are all straight. Our conduct is commonly marked by uncertainty, indecision, and 
variability, and sometimes by duplicity and shameful inconsistency. VVe walk with 
halting gait. We put our hand to the plough, and then look back. Like Christian on 
the Hill DifBculty, we turn aside from the steep path of duty to some bower of ease ; 
or, like the same pilgrim in later life, we forsake the narrow way for Bye-path Meadow 
— the road to Giant Despair's castle. In order to realize the ideal of heavenly conduct 
certain characteristics must be formed. ^ 1. Truth. We must really go the way we 
profess to be in. If we walk only to be seen of men, we shall take different paths 
according as their eyes are upon us, or as we are left to ourselves. Eye-service is 
always variable service. The path of the hypocrite is crooked. 2. Singleness of aim. 
Many men turn first to the right and then to the left, while they are drawn hither and 
thither by counter-attractions. Their thoughts are like the compasses of ships that 
are sailing between magnetic rocks. Let them beware of the danger of making ship- 
wreck. "Ye cannot serve God and mammon." The divided life is a broken life. 
The single eye is the only safe vision. 3. Perseverance. It is easier to start straight than 
to keep straight. Yet it is vain to begin well and turn aside later to paths of error. 
Bad men sometimes do good deeds. It is the good man who lives a good life throughout, 
or at least in the main. 

IL StBAIGHTFOBWABD CONDUOT depends on HEAVKNIiT OHABAOTEBISTICS. It is 

never easily attained, and it is quite unattainable without the conditions on which it 
depends. These must be considered. I. A right aim. Each of the living creatures is 



10 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHBT EZEKIBL, [oh. i. 1—28. 

said to go, as the words may be rendered literally, " in the direction of his face." If 
he faced an impassable barrier, a huge cliff, or a yawning chasm, straightforward progress 
would be impossible. If he. faced a wrong way it would be undesirable. Don Quixote 
rides straightforward in tilting at a windmUl, and only gets an ignominious fall. The 
youth in ' Excelsior * goes straightforward in his alpine-climbing, and is rewarded in the 
useless death of a fanatic. Heavenly conduct can be continuously direct, because in 
h«aven there is no need of repentance. The first step for us on earth is to face about 
to the right. Conversion must precede consistency. 2, A fixed gaze. This is implied 
in the reference to the direction of the face. The look ahead precedes the movement 
forward. The blind man falls into the ditch. If any one walks blindfolded he is sure to 
move circuitously. The ploughman who would cut a straight fiirrow must not notice 
the daisies by his side or the lark overhead ; he must fix his eyes on the end of his course. 
The Christian must run straight, by " looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of 
the faith." 3. Harmony of powers and energies. The living creatures of Ezekiei's vision 
are strangely composite — ^various faces, calves' feet, birds' wings. Yet faces, feet, and 
wings all turn in one direction. There is no " schism in the body." The schism in our 
nature between flesh and spirit, and the consequent contradiction of our aims, accounts 
for the crooked paths we take. The internal harmony of a life at peace is necessary 
for a straightforward course. 4. Spiritual direction. The movement is ** whither the 
spirit was to go." The higher nature must conquer, command, and direct the lower. 
Conscience must be supreme. Spiritual thought and feeling must be paramount. 
The Spirit of God must be sought and yielded to ca the guide and impulse of all tiie 
life's course. 

Yer. 13. — Tht MgTttfire. " And the fire was bright." Either the living creature* 
themselves seem to be transformed into fire, to be glowing with fire, or the prophet 
means to tell us that he saw a bright fire in tiie midst of them. In any case this fii« 
is part of the heavenly vision. It is symbolical of the life of perfection. 

I. CoNBiDEB BOW GOOD IT IS FOB THE FiBX TO BE BBiQHT. There are men in whose 
breasts the fire of Ood burns dimly. The embers smoulder in a dull mass, threatening 
speedy extinction. Love is chilling, faith is fainting ; as for the fiame of hope, that is 
long since dead. On the other han^ the bright fire may stand for fresh warmth of soul, 
a burning zeal, a passion of devotion, a glow of heavenly love. Let us note the advan- 
tages of this. 1. Light. The bright fire shines. Truth is obscure in the dull soul. 
Out of burning love springs the flame that illumines many a dark mystery. 2. Power. 
Heat is a source of energy in the human body as well as in the furnace of the steam- 
engine. Spiritual heat is spiritual force. Lethargy and paralysis seize the soul when 
i* has ceased to glow with heavenly devotion. 3. Fwi/ication. The bright fire bums 
un foul refuse, which would only lie on a dull fire in a lump that gives off evil odours, 
wliile it quenches the flames that are too feeble to consume it. Evil thoughts and 
passions only disappear when they are burnt up in the fires of devotion. 4. Cheering. 
There is no pleasanter image than that of an English fireside. When the winter storm 
howls out of doors, the open fire within is a centre about which the family gladly 
gathers, and where domestic life spends its happiest hours. So there is a cheerful glow 
in the company of souls among whom the fire of God burns. Gloomy religion is a sign 
of cold-hearte&ess. But the brightest glow of earthly devotion is as a foretaste of the 
warmth and brightness and joy of God's heavenly home, where he is gathering his 
children one by one from the frosts and wilds of earth around the great fire of his own 
love. 

II. Idquibe how the ddix fibe hat be bbiohtenxd. The first inquiry must be 
as to whether the fire is alight at all — whether it has been extinguished, or whether it 
has ever lieen lit. No bellows or fuel will bring fire into the cold, black grate. It may 
be that the fire of devotion to God has never been kindled in a man's breast. For him 
the first need is for a spark from the heavenly altar. Fire kindles fire. Christ's 
glowing heat sets our dull heart beating in response. " We love him, because he first 
loved us." But the fire may be alight and yet it may bum but poorly. Here, however, 
we must beware of a mistake. The fire that crackles and blazea most has not neces- 
sarily the most strength and heat. It may be only the " flash in the pan," while quiet 
glowing ooaU will last longer and give out more power. Yet even these may {aii. Let 



OH. 1. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET BZEKIEL. U 



na see what is then needed. 1. Fresh air. The ooali may have " oaked.** They must 
be stirred and broken up. One vigorous thrust with the poker may startle the dull 
cinders into a brisk blaze. Souls need shaking up. Cmsty habits must be broken. 
Changes, shocks of surprise, blows of trouble, all do their work to let the air of heaven 
in upon the dull fire of the self-contained souL 2. More fuel. A fire cannot live for ever 
on its own cinders. Old grey ashes will not bum again. Souls need fresh fuel — new 
truth, repeated stores of grace, food in Scripture and in Christ, nouiishment from 
communion with God. 3. A free vent. While the chimney is foul the fire will be 
dulL _ The upward movement of the flame of devotion may be choked by the sooty 
accretions of earth. It must have a free course to the sky. It must also have scope 
for the play of its energy in life and work. Then it will leap up bright and strong. 

Vers. 16 — ^21. — Wheels of Frovidence. Whatever else the prophet may have under- 
stood by the vision of the wheels, it seems clear that some earthly things are there 
indicated in contrast with the heavenly cherubim. The living creatures have wings, to 
soar above the earth. The wheels . are constructed to run along the ground. They 
therefore seem to represent the Divine upon earth. 

I. Fbee movement. Each wheel has another wheel within it, seemingly set at right 
angles to it, so that the two are like the equator and the meridian on a globe. This 
construction allows of free motion in any direction. 1. Providence u in motion. 
Change is part of the order of nature and of life. There is a Divine progress moving on 
to a grand consummation. 2. This motion is free. The wheels within wheels can run 
in any direction. The great world does not go spinning down the grooves of change. 
Nature and human life are not cramped and limited to the set course of a railway. Ck>d 
works in freedom, and can turn the direction of events whithersoever be chooses. 

n. Tekmble intelligence. The circles of the wheels are awful to behold, for they 
are studded with eyes. The course of nature is not blind. Every fact is stamped with 
thought ; every change is marked by intelligence. History also, the great course of the 
human world, is marked by the thought of a Divine purpose. This thought shows 
adaptation to circumstances. The many-eyed wheels can see well where they are 
going, and so avoid disaster and make straight for their goal. But such vast and 
universal intelligence has an element of terror about it. Man is sure to be bafBed and 
confounded if he is mad enough to try to outwit Ch>d's providence. Even when he 
submits, there must be something tremendous in the conception of a universal and all- 
searching gaze. 

ni. Habmont with heaven. The wheels always accompany the living creatures. 
The lower course on earth corresponds to the direction of beings whose wings sweep 
through heavenly regions. Heaven and earth are linked together. The same principles 
that are displayed above are to be seen in the Divine movements here. The contrast 
between the two worlds is only too sadly apparent on the human side ; on the Divine 
side it does not exist. Moreover, just in proportion as men endeavour to conform to the 
will of God do they make their lives to run parallel with the holy lives of heavenly 
beings. Thus the good man's career is a partial realization of heaven upon earth. 

lY. Sfibitual dibection. Like the living creatures, the wheels run whithersoever 
the Spirit is to go. 1. Ood's Spirit is on the earth. Heaven is his throne, but earth is 
his footstool. Nature and providence are inspired. The thought and purpose and 
harmony of the whole are above and beyond the blind concourse of dead matter, the 
wild, chaotic rush of uncontrolled waves of circumstance. The signs of mind in the 
world are not like the wave-marks found on rocks, which bear testimony to the past 
existence of an ocean, but only in distant geologic ages. They show a present living 
Spirit. 2. The recognition of the presence of OoHs Spirit tpill make earth agree with 
heaven. The wheels do not follow the living creatures. Both are directed by the same 
Spirit. It is a vain fancy that men can imitate the angels of heaven. But it is a 
possible thing to follow the leadings of God's Spirit. In doing so earthly life is surely 
assimilated to the life of heaven. 

Yer. 28. — The rainbow. The glory of Gkxl is here compared to a lunbow. Observe 

some of the points of resemblance. 
L A HEAVENLY 8PLEND0UB. There is beauty on earth in the flowers of the field, in 



12 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. [oe. l 1—28. 

the plumage of birds, In the brightness of insect life, and in innamerable objects of the 
great garden of nature. There is also beauty in heaven. The smile of God is heaven's 
Bunshhie ; his presence is the joy of the eternal summer of that perfect clime. To see 
God is to behold the highest beauty. Happy the soul to which it can be said, " Thine 
eyes shall see the King in his beauty." Men who shrink from Divine things as though 
they were dull and unattractive are as yet blind to the true nature of them. The house 
of Gk>d is a place of gladness for those who have learnt to worship in the beauty of 
holiness. 

II. A HABMONT OF VABious ELEMKNT8. All oolouTS are present in the rainbow, 
ranged in perfect order and blending where they meet without any harshness of contrast. 
There is rich variety in the glory of God. Each may find there his favourite hues of 
the perfect character. Some may select the true blue of faithfulness, others may prefer 
the glowing red of love. To one the golden splendour of perfection is most entrancing, 
to a second the imperial purple appears as the supremely important colour, to a third 
the green that reminds him of sweet fields of nature and earthly beauty may seem most 
attractive. All are present in the rich pleroma of glory. And all are in harmony. 
There is no clashing of Divine attributes. " Mercy and truth are met together ; righteous- 
ness and peace have kissed each other " (Ps. Izzxv. 10). 

nL A coNTBABT WITH CLOUD AND sTOBH. The bow is "In the cloud. It is seen " in 
the day of rain." These facts give it the peculiar significance which we attach to it. All 
is not bright. Therefore the serene arc is the more welcome ; and when it stands against 
an inky thunderKsloud its brightness is most apparent. There can be no rainbow on a 
cloudless day. The glory of God's goodness is seen in contrast with the thunders of 
wrath (gainst sin. It is most visible in days of storm and terror if only men will look 
up for it 

rV. A FBOMIBE OF ETEBNAL UEBOT. The rainbow recalls God's primitive promise 
to Noah (Gen. ix. 12 — 17). But each rainbow is a new appearance, and therefore a 
fresh plei^e of the old-world promise. Apart from the special application of the bow 
to the Flood in the covenant with Noah, it is a natural token of mercy in the midst of 
judgment, and thus a natural sign of God's saving grace. The glory of God is like this 
rainbow. He is glorious, therefore, in his mercy. Love is the chief beauty of the 
character of God, as indeed it is its central fact. 

V. A BBOAD BEVELATioH. All Can See the rainbow. It stietches wide from hUl to 
plain, from frowning cliff to far across the purple waves of the storm-lashed sea. The 
glory of God's grace is not a choice fact for a few rare souls to enjoy. It is the substance 
of a world-wide gospeL All are invited to behold it, 

Pbaotioal conclusions. This revelation of gloiy like a rainbow should have its 
influence on life. Note some of the rightful effects. 1. Glad trust. For spiritual 
&ith there is more than natural joy in echoing the language of Wordsworth-^ 

« My heart leaps up when I behold 
A rainbow in the sky." 

i.Beverenee. Ezekiel says, "When I saw it I fell upon my face." Love is not to be treated 
with light freedom. Such love and goodness as we see in God deserve the utmost 
veneration. 8. Attention. The prophet listened to the voice that spake out of th* 
rainbow. 



H0MILIB8 BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 1. — Exit* and captivity. It is not the soil which a people till that makes that 
people a nation. The Jews have more than once furnished a striking illustration of 
this principle; for no nation has suffered more from banishment and dispersion, and no 
nation has more tenaciously clung to its nationality, or more effectively preserved it in 
circumstances the most unfavourable. It is its religion which makes a people a nation ; 
even more than a common language, a common ancestry, and common traditions. It 
has ever been so conspicuously with the Jews. The record of their captivity in the 
East is a record of their religious experience ; the literature of their captivity is the 
literature of their prophets, amonsist whom Ezekiel occupies a place of prominence and 
interest. His figure, as we see liim in imagination, " among the captives by the river 



OH. 1. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 28 

of Chebar " is historicallj picturesque ; but it is also suggestive of sacred and preoioua 
trutb. 

I. Tee oaftivitt and exile of Jitdah and Ibbael mrsT be beoabded ab 

BBTBIBUTIVE CHASTISEMENT INFLICTED BY GoD ON ACCOUNT OF THEIB APOSTASY. 

Although much obscurity gathers around the earlier history of the " chosen people," 
one fact stands out in undisputed clearness — ^they were a people prone to idolatry and 
rebellion against Jehovah. Their own historians, men proud of their descent from 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, men themselves profoundly attached to the one true Gtod, 
record with unsparing fidelity the defections of their countrymen from the service and 
worship to which they were bound by every tie of gratitude and loyalty. Apostasy was 
not confined to any class ; kings and subjects alike did wickedly in departing from G-od. 
As a nation they sinned, and as a nation they suffered. Surrounded by people more 
powerful than themselves — by Egypt, by Phoenicia, by Assyria — their strength lay 
in their pure faith and their spiritual worship. But again and again they yielded to 
temptation, and fell into the idolatries practised by surrounding peoples. The punish- 
ment was foretold, the warning was repeated ; but all was in vain. And it was in 
fulfilment of prophetic threats that the inhabitants, first of Northern and then of 
Southern Palestine, were transported to the East, and condemned to the existence which 
awakened their pathetic lamentations, when, strangers in a strange land, they wept 
when they remembered Zion. Ezekiel, when he awoke to a consciousness of his 
prophetic mission, found himself amongst those who were bearing the penalty due to 
their follies and sins. 

II. The captivity and exile or Judah and Ibbael webe the occasion of the 

BAISINO UP AMONO THEM OF OBEAT SPIBITUAL TEAOHEBS AND LEADEBS. It is obvioUS 

that, when separated from their metropolis and their temple, when denied the religious 
privileges to which their fathers had been accustomed, the Jews stood very espe- 
cially in need of men who, by their character, their knowledge, their sympathy, and 
their moral authority, should rally the courage, inflame the piety, and inspire the hope 
of their countrymen. And it is a proof of God's wonderful care and kindness that the 
Hebrews in their captivity were not left without such men. A noble, heroic, and 
saintly band they were ; and right well did they fulfil a mission of no ordinary difficulty. 
It is sufficient to name Ezra and Nehemiah, who were commissioned to lead bands of 
the exiles back to the sacred soil ; and Ezekiel and Daniel, who were directed to instruct 
their fellow-countrymen in religious trutb, to admonish and to comfort them, and to 
utter to the heathen nations around words of faithful warning. 

III. The CAPTIVITY and exile of Judah and Israel were the means of 

SBOUBING TO THE FAVOURED NATION IMPORTANT AND MEMORABLE EELTQIOUS ADVAN- 
TAGES AND BENEFITS. 1. There were negative advantages. By means of the Captivity, 
the chosen nation was finally and for ever delivered from the sin of idolatry. The 
witness of the prophets, the stem discipline of adversity, the opportunity of reflection 
and repentance, were not in vain. 2. There was this great positive advantage accruing 
to Israel through the exile in the East — the people were encouraged to turn to the Lord 
whom they had forsaken, to seek reconciliation and restoration, and to make vows of 
obedience and fidelity to him to whom their allegiance was justly due. — ^T. 

Ver. 1. — " Visions of God." God is ; God lives ; God everywhere and for ever worki 
and manifests himself. But spirit is only apprehensible by spirit. And the created 
intelligence finds its noblest exercise in tracing the presence and recognizing the 
attributes of the Supreme. An especial revelation was accorded to the prophets ; but 
one great end of this special revelation doubtless was that by their intermediation and 
ministry men generally might be encouraged to look upwards, and to behold the 
gracious face of their Father in heaven. 

I. Man's capacity fob the vision of Qod. This is often denied by those who 
seem to delight in degrading man to a mere observer of natural phenomena. But m 
upon earth the knowledge of our fellow-men is more precious and excellent than the 
knowledge of material processes and physical laws; so do we find the full scope for the 
highest powers of our being when we pass from his works to the Divine Worker, and 
from his children to the Father of the spirits of all flesh. Whether we call the faculty 
the higher reason, or spiritual faith, there is a faculty by which we gain knowledge of 



M THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [ch.i. 1— 28 

the Author of our being. The greatest men have been those \<rho have enjoyed the 
clearest vision of Glod. Such vision is possible only to natures endowed with intelligence, 
with moral capacity, with a free and spiritual faculty. Such natures " look unto him, 
and are lightened," In his light they see light. It is the especial privilege of the pure 
in heart that they " see God." Only the superstitious and ignorant can suppose that 
he who is the Eternal, Immortal, and Invisible is apprehended by sense. He is leen 
by the cleansed, illumined vision of the soul. 

II. Man 18 SUBJECT TO MANY HINDRANCES WHICH PBEVENT HIM FROM EXPIi- 

BiENOiNO AND ENJOYINO THIS VISION. God IS Beason, and the nature must be rational 
which is to commune with him. There are many who, gifted with powers of intellect, 
rise to a rational apprehension of him who is the Eternal Law and Order behind all 
phenomena which appeal to sense. But God is Righteousness, Holiness, and Love, and 
the nature must be moral, and morally susceptible and loving, which is to experience a 
fuller communion with him. Worldliness, the absorption in the outward show of 
things ; sin, the repugnance to submissive contact with the pure and blessed Spirit ; — 
these are the hindrances which prevent men from seeing God. The eyes of the blind 
must be opened, the scales must fall from them, before the glorious vision of perfect 
goodness can he enjoyed, before the spirit of man can sim itself in the light of the 
Divine countenance. 

III. There were moral qualifications fob a special and prophetic vision of 
Gk)D. Doubtless those who were summoned to be the vehicles of Divine truth to their 
fellow-men were providentially selected and fitted for the office. Certain times, 
places, circumstances of various kinds, were chosen with this end in view. But we are 
more concerned with those moral preparations which made men meet to see " visions of 
God." We especially note two characteristics of all honoured with this capacity and 
faculty. 1. Humility cmd receptivity. God reveals himself to the lowly, while he 
rejects the proud. Man must empty himself of self-conceit, self-righteousness, and self- 
confidence, in order that he may be filled with the Dirine nature. 2. Aspiration. The 
look must be heavenward ; the desire and longing must be Godward. " As the hart 
panteth after the water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, God 1 " 

IV. Prophetic aid has ever been used to enlighten men, and to enable 
them to experience visions of God. As a matter of fact, man does thus help his 
fellow-man. Ezekiel brought God near to the hearts of the children of the Captivity. 
Headers of the inspired Scriptures have always been indebted to prophets and apostles 
for spiritual help ; God himself has spoken through the enlightened nature of his special 
ministers, and his voice has thus reached multitudes who were profoundly in need of 
teaching, of guidance, of consolation. And this service is being rendered to-day. In 
the Church of Christ visions of God are daily enjoyed ; and for those visions Christians 
are indebted to the agency, the ministry, of their fellow-men. The service is constantly 
rendered, and is as constantly acknowled.!;;ed with gratitude and appreciatioti. 

Application. A clearer and completer vision of God is attained by those who are 
brought spiritually into contact with Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, and the true 
Light. A fuller illumination is effected by the agency of the Holy Spirit, whose presence 
has, ever since Pentecost, more abundantly enriched the Church. The children of the 
Captivity were indebted to Ezekiel for aid in recognizing and rejoicing in the eternal light ; 
but we are far more under obligation to him who has come forth from God, and has gone 
to God, and who has assured us, " He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." ^T. 

Ver. 3. — The LorcCs word and the Lord's hand. The prophet felt and knew that 
God was drawing near to him. This experience he could only express in language drawn 
from human relations. Spiritual realities were by him expressed in terms derived from 
the acts of bodily life. The " word " and the " hand " here spoken of are metaphorical 
but they are strictly true ; «.e. the just idea is, as far as maybe by language and emblem' 
thus conveyed to our mind. If God reveal himself to man, it must be by means of the 
characteristics of man's spiritual nature ; and such characteristics are pictured in the 
ex|iressions here employed by Ezekiel. The "word" of the Lord means one thing, 
the " hand " another ; yet the employment of both expressions is necessary in order to 
convey, with anything like completeness, the penetration of the prophet's nature by 
Divine truth, the commission of the prophet to undertake Divine servioe. 



OB. 1. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 16 

L The quiokenino and uLnMUfATioN of the mm> to beceitb the tbuth. 
The word is the expression of the thought. The Divine word is the utterance of the 
Divine thought, and the Divine thought is truth. The expression here used implies a 
community of nature hetween man and God. God has thoughts and purposes which 
concern man's good; and man's highest well-heing is dependent upon the introduction 
of these into his spiritual nature. Man has not simply to hear and understand the 
word ; it is for him to welcome and retain and ponder it, as a precious possession and a 
mighty power. The word of God, no douht, came in a special sense to the prophets ; 
there was a directness, an absence of any intermediary, in this communication. Through 
the prophet the word came to the people, to whom it might and did prove a word of 
enlightenment, of warning, of encouragement. That this might be so, the prophet's 
nature needed to be yielded up to the penetrating, purifying, illumining grace of God 
himself. 

IL The submission and obedience of the will peactioally to aoknowledoe 
Divine authobitt. The " hand of the Lord " is an expression frequently met with in 
the Scriptures. Nehemiah acknowledges the "good hand of God upon him." To 
interpret the expression, it must be remembered that the hand is the symbol of activity, 
of the practical nature, of direction, of control, of protecting power. Now, a man could 
not fulfil prophetic functions simply by hearing the word of the Lord; there was some- 
thing for him to do. In truth, the relations between God and man are such that it is 
necessary that God should command, and that man should obey. And if this is true 
of men generally, it is manifestly true of those who were called to the prophetic office. 
They had need not simply of revelation, but of guidance, of authority exercised and 
conveyed. What is this but to say that they needed that the hand of the Lord should 
be upon them? It must be remembered that the Prophet Ezekiel discharged his 
ministry, both by the communication verbally of Divine messages, and by the 
performance of certain actions. Of these actions some were symbolical, and others 
were directly and obviously instructive and directive. Thus the prophet needed, not 
merely the word of the Lord to enter his mind, but the hand of the Lord to control and 
govern his conduct. 

Application. True religion is twofold. It enjoins upon us (1) the reception of 
Divine truth, as graciously revealed in various ways to the ^hnman intelligence ; and 
(2) the subjection to Divine authority, as exercised with wisdom and compassion by 
him whose omnipotent hand can both point out the path of duty and service, and can 
clear away every obstacle which might prevent that path being pursued. — ^T. 

Vers. 4 — ^25. — Hie glory of the Eternal, This marvellous vision, which has corre- 
spondences with others to he found in Scripture, miist be interpreted in the light of the 
prophet's peculiar genius and imagination, and in the light of the canons and customs 
of ancient and Oriental art. To find significance in every detail would be to indulge an 
idle curiosity ; to dismiss the figures as the product of an imagination dissociated from 
truth would be irrational and irreverent. It is plain that Ezekiel was possessed, and 
all but overwhelmed, by a conviction of the glorious attributes and universal sway of 
God. The imagery under which he conceived and represented the Divine presence and 
government is altogether different from either classical or modem art ; but it would be 
a narrow pedantry which on this account would repudiate it as valueless or ineffective. 
In fact, it is opulent, varied, and impressive. Everything earthly must come short of 
setting forth Divine glory ; yet much is communicated or suggested by this vision of 
the majesty of the Eternal which may aid us to apprehend God's character, and 
reverently to study God's kingly operations carried on throughout the universe. 

I. The glort op the Eternal is been in natural foboes. It was in these, as in 
a setting, that the more specific forms discerned by the prophet were enshrined. The 
stormy wind from the north, the great cloud with its flashing fire, the amber brightnesi 
gleaming about it, — all these are manifestations of an imseen but mighty power, 
recognized by the spirit as Divine. This is certainly a stroke of the true artist, first to 
portray the material, the vehicle, and then to proceed to paint in the more defined 
symbolic figures. The modern doctrine of the correlation and convertibility of forces 
points us to the unity which is at the heart of all things, and convinces us that we »re 
in a universe, » foajaosp which, if it ia to be explained by any rational and spiritual 



16 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBIi. [oh. 1. 1—28. 

power behind it, must be explained by a power which is undivided and single. Poetf 
and prophets alike find scope for their imagination in connecting all the phenomena and 
the forces of nature with the creative Spirit conceived as revealed by their means. 

II. The globt op the Btbbnal is seen in living cbbatobbs. There is, of course, 
no intention to picture any actually existing animals under the imagery of the vers. 
6 — 14. But we have a symbolic representation of Uf«. • Every observer is conscious 
that, in passing from mechanical and chemical forces to consider the manifold forms 
of life, he is climbing, so to speak, to a higher platform. Living beings, in all their 
wonderful and admirable variety of structure and of formation, are witnesses to the 
wisdom and the power of the Creator. Let Science tell us of the order and of the 
process of their appearing; the fact of their appearing, in whatever manner, is a welcome 
token of the Divine interest in this earth and its population. If the poet delights to 
trace God's splendour in " the light of setting suns," the physicist may with equal 
justice investigate in organic nature the handiwork of the All-wise. Life is the work 
of the living God, in whom all creatures " live, and move, and have their being." A 
lifeless planet would lack, not only the interest with which our earth must be regarded, 
but something of the evidence which tells us God is here, and is ever carrying out his 
glorious plans. 

III. The globt of the EtbrnaIi is seen in human atteibutbs. Each living one 
in the prophet's vision possessed a fourfold aspect or countenance ; the combination being 
intended to enrich our conceptions of the handiwork of God, and the witness of that 
handiwork to him. Interpretations differ ; but it is not uncommon to recognize in the 
ox the sacrificial, in the lion the powerful and regal, in the eagle the aspiring, elements, 
added to the true humanity, and combining with it to complete the representation. 
The four Gospels have been generally regarded as exhibiting severally these four 
characteristics ; and accordingly the symbol of Matthew is the man, of Mark the lion, 
of Luke the ox, of John the eagle. 

IV. The gloky of the Etbenal is seen bspeoiallt in intbllioencb. The wheels 
had their rings or felloes " full of eyes round about." This is symbolical of under- 
standing, because sight is the most intellectual of the senses, the eye being the medium 
of the greater part of our most valuable knowledge of the world without. Conscious 
intelligence can only arise through participation in the Divine nature ; it is the subject, 
not the object, of knowledge. In an especial manner, the intellect witnesses to the 
glory of God, for by it we have insight into the Divine reason- In the exercise of the 
prerogative of knowledge and judgment, in insight and intuition, we are putting forth 
powers which are in themselves among the most splendid and convincing testimonies to 
" the Father of lights." 

v. ThB OLOBT of the EtBBNAL IB SEEN BSPEOIALLT IN UTTBBANOB. The prophet 

in his vision heard the noise of the wings of the living ones, and the voice above the 
firmament — appealing to the sense, not of sight, but of hearing. It, is perhaps not 
fanciful to discern here a conscious, voluntary witness to God borne by Us creation, 
and especially by those endowed with the human prerogative of speech, as the utterance 
and expression of thought and reason. The music of the splieres, the voice of the 
stars, " the melody of woods and winds and waters," all testify to Qod. The poet 
represents the heavenly bodies as 

** For ever singing as they shine, 
< The hand that made us is Divine.'" 

Yet the articulate, definite, and intelligible utterances of beings endowed with intellect 
and with speech are necessary to enrich and to complete the chorus of adoration and 
praise offered by earth to heaven. The tongue, " the glory of the frame," has its place 
to fill, its witness to bear, in the service of the vast, illimitable temple. 

VI. ThB OLOBT OF THB EtERNAL IB BEEN IN THE COMMTJNITT AND HABUONT 

APPOINTED BETWEEN HEAVEN AND EARTH. The living crcatures had wings by which 
they soared into the sky ; they reposed and ran, however, upon wheels, by which they 
maintained their connection with the solid ground. This remarkable combination of 
wings and wheels seems to point to the twofold aspect of all creation. All things hare 
an earthly and a heavenly side. If wheels alone were provided, earth would seem cut 
off from keaven ; if vrings alone, the terrestrial element would be lacking, which wwiU 



OH. 1. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THI PROPHET BZEKIBL. 17 



be a oontradiction to obyious fact. Man hag a body, and bodUy needs and occupations, 
which link him to the earth ; but he has also a spiritual nature and life which witness 
his relation to the ever-living Gkxi — the Spirit who seeketh such to worship him aa 
worship in spirit and in truth. Yet his whole nature is created by God, and redeemed 
by Chrirt ; and his service and sacrifice, in order to being acceptable, must be undivided 
and complete. Whether we regard the nature of the individual man, or regard the 
Church which is the body of Christ, we are constrained to acknowledge that all parts 
of the living nature — body, soul, and spirit — are summoned to unite in revealing ta 
the universe the incomparable majesty and glory of God. — ^T, 

Vers. 26 — ^28. — He who is upon the throne. There is a natural tendency to clothe 
the spiritual in material form, and thus to bring the invisible and impalpable within 
the range and sphere of sense. It must not be supposed that, when the inspired writers, 
ill this and simUar passages, depict in imagery of material splendour the presence of the 
Almighty, they are misled by their own language, and forget that " Grod is a Spirit." 
I'heir aim is to represent, in such a way as shall impress the mind, the glorious 
atMbutes of the Eternal, to suggest the relations which he sustains to his creatures, 
and to inspire those emotions which are becoming to the subjects of Divine authority 
in approaching their rightful King. Thus understood, the language of this passage is 
fitted to help us to conceive aright of him whom no man hath seen. 

L Thk elevation and supebiobitt of thk Divine Being. The living creatures 
are depicted as above the earth, but below the heavens. Above the firmament that 
was over their heads, the prophet in his vision saw the dim form which shadowed forth 
the presence of the Eternal. Position, we know, is relative, and it would be absurd to 
take this representation as literal. Yet how instructive and inspiring is this picture 1 
Ezekiel took the same view of the great Author of all being as was taken by Isaiah, 
who saw the Lord " high and lifted up." Raise our thoughts as we may, QoA is still 
immeasurably above us. When we speak of him as " the Most High," we are striving, 
in such language, to set forth his infinite superiority to ourselves and to all the works 
of his hands. 

IL The authobitt and dominion of the Divine Beino. A throne speaks, not only 
of greatness, but of power and of right to rule. God is the King, to whose sway all 
creation is subject, and to whose moral authority all his creatures who are endowed 
with an intelligent and voluntary nature should delight to offer a glad obedience. His 
commands are the laws which we are bound to obey ; his voice is for us the welcome 
voice of rightful authority. The religion of the Bible is a religion which enjoins and 
requires obedience and subjection. Christianity is the revelation of a kingdom which 
IS righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 

lU. The huiianitt of -tas Divine BeinoI Such language may at first hearing 
sound almost daring. And nothing would be further from the truth than to suggest 
that the Deity is subject to htunan frailties and infirmities, such as the heathen — both 
savage and cultivated — have been in the habit of attributing to their gods. But there 
is great significance in the language of Ezekiel, when he tells us that upon the throne 
of universal empire " there was the appearance of a man." We have thus brought 
before us the glorious truth that the human nature is akin to the Divine. We can 
reason to some extent from our own thoughts and feelings to those of the Infinite 
Spirit. The resemblance is of course partial, but it is reaL And believers in the Incar- 
nation cannot but recognize the justice and the preciousness of this representation of 
the prophet. 

Iv. The 8FLEND0UB OF THE DiviNE Beinq. Ezekiel uses all the resources of nature 
to invest his representation of the Eternal with unapproachable splendour. He failed, 
where all must fail, in the attempt to portray that which cannot be portrayed. His 
language, glowing as it is, gives but hints aud suggestions of glory which surpasses 
human apprehension. Yet, as he speaks of sapphire and amber, of fire and brightness, 
we feel that his mind was impressed with the Divine glory, and that his description is 
fitted to awaken our profoundest and lowliest reverence and adoration. 

y. Tmt MKBOT OF THE DiviNE Being. No picture of the character and attributes of 
the Supreme would be complete which did not include mercy. Man stands pressingly 
in need of the Divine compassion. His weakness, his sin, his helplessness, ars such, 
HKKIEL. • 



18 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. [oh. 1. 1—28. 

that Divine pity is his only hope. Now, the bow in the cloud is the emblem of mercy. 
The rain, the dense dark clouds, the floods upon the earth, represent affliction, chastise- 
ment, distress. But the sun of grace and kindness shines through the gloom ; the 
rainbow spans the sky, and its beauty cheers the soul of the beholder, as with an 
assurance of compassion, as with a promise of relief. Mercy is the crowning attribute 
of the Supreme. Gk)d is our King and Judge ; but he has not forgotten to be gracious ; 
he is also our Father and our Saviour. — ^T. 

Ver. 28. — Beverence. In order that the prophet might be prepared to discharge his 
prophetic ministry aright, it was necessary that, in the first place, he should experience 
a just conception of the greatness, holiness, and authority of the Being by whom he 
was commissioned. He could only then appear in a proper attitude before men when 
he had found what was his proper attitude before God. The fear of the King of heaven 
alone could preserve him from any fear of those whom he was directed to visit as au 
authorized ambassador. Hence there was first afforded to Ezekiel a vision of the 
Eternal Majesty — a vision which doubtless often recurred to his memory when he was 
fulfilling tlie duties devolving upon him as the servant and messenger of Jehovah to 
men, and when he encountered incredulity, neglect, scorn, or opposition. 

L Mait has a nature oafable of bevebenoe. Fear is one thing, reverence is 
another. Fear is awakened by the sense and apprehension of personal danger ; reverence 
is enkindled by the sight of supreme goodness, purity, and power. It may be base 
to fear; it must be honourable and profitable to venerate. It is the prerogative of 
man to recognize, to admire, to adore supreme excellence. 

II. God IB THE PBOPEB AKD SUPREME OBJECT OF BEVERENCE. Within limits it is 

right and good that we should honour and revere our fellow-men. The child may 
justly revere the parent, the pupil, the teacher, the subject the king. Tet there is but 
One who may be revered with no qualification, with no reserve. The Divine attributes 
are such that, the more we study them, the more we shall find in them deserving of 
wondering and adoring awe, and the more shall we be assured that there is in them an 
mfinity of excellence which is unfathomable, undiscoverable. 

III. In God's pbbsenob it is just that human reverence should be manifested 
AND expressed. Ezekiel says, with beautiful simplicity, " I fell upon my face." 
Overcome with the vision of natural and moral perfection, the prophet felt himself unfit 
to look up, felt that his right place was in the dust. It is meet and proper that we 
should manifest the emotions which we justly feel. With reverence and godly fear 
siiould human spirits, conscious alike of dependence and of ill desert, draw near to the 
Infinite Holiness and Strength. Familiarity in devotion is hateful and contemptible ; 
lowly veneration is both becoming and acceptable. 

lY. Beverence is the attitude in which man is justified in expecting) blessing 
FROM God. 1. It is good for us profoundly to feel our inferiority, our dependence, our 
innumerable necessities. 2. It is good for us to receive the revelation of God that is 
only made to the lowly and submissive. 3. It is good that reverent, prophetic spirits 
should be the channel by which men may submissively receive authoritative representa- 
tions of Divine glory and Divine grace. — ^T. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Introduction respecting the person and mission of the prophet. I. His 
PERSONAL QUALIFICATIONS. A real, though sometimes undiscoverable, fitness between 
the instrument and the task, is au invariable law in the procedure of G^d. 1. Mark 
the significance of his name, " God becomes strength." Most probably the name 
had originated with God, who had, either secretly or openly, influenced his father 
Buzi in selecting it. A name, when God-given, is a revelation of what is unique and 
special in the man's nature. Thus Israel, Naba), Peter, Jesus. 2. He was designated 
from his birth, and by his birth, to special service for God. Every man's entrance into 
life is designed to be an entrance upon Divine service. The world a capacious temple, 
and God its central Object. In Ezekiel's case there was no diversion of purpose ; no 
casting about for a definite vocation in life. His education, aK through the stages of 
youth, was concentrated on this single object — to be Jehovah's priest. The noblest 
types of the Leritical priesthood would be set before him as his model 8. He bad 
reached the maturity of hi* powers. By a merciful ordinance of God, in accommoda- 



OH. 1.1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKiEL. 19 

tion to human weakness, God had prohibited the priests from entering upon full service 
until they had attained the ripe age of thirty. Then strength would be developed ; 
practical wisdom and knowledge of liuman affairs would he acquired; self-mastery 
might be attained. Acting on this declaration of the Divine will, John the Baptist 
(like Ezekiel, priest and prophet in one), and our Lord himself, began not their public 
ministry until they had reached their thirtieth year. There are nowhere signs of 
haste or impatience in the development of Jehovah's plans. Premature action is a 
concomitant of weakness — an omen of failure. 4. His moral fitness. Many of the 
priests in the temple were mere functionaries — ^professional automatons. The perform- 
ance of the most sacred duties degenerated into mere mechanism. Men saw not the 
spiritual import of sacrifice, nor the awful significance of the temple ritual, and priests 
too often became " blind leaders of the blind," But Ezekiel was alive to the moral 
greatness of his office. To him bad been revealed the nearness and the holiness of 
G-od ; the spirituality of the Law, which carried its sanctions into man's interior nature; 
the dark facts of human sin ; the need of atonement and of cleansing. Hence, as the 
ordained servant of a holy God, Ezekiel had cultivated humility, habits of devotion, a 
principle of childlike faith, candid truthfulness, conscientious fidelity, and unfiinching 
courage. For such sublime service, the highest qualities of soul were demanded. 6. 
His fertile imagination. Many of the visions described in his prophetic book are based 
upon objects and scenes in the temple at Jerusalem. C!ommencing here (prior to the 
Captivity) to exercise his faith in the unseen ; commencing here the practice of looking 
beneath the surface of material things, and acquiring a habit of spiritual penetration, he 
gradually learnt to discover in nature symbols of celestial truths, and to see God every- 
where. Thus he trained his imagination for useful and distinguished service. 

n. His field of seevicb. 1. The vicissitudes of earthly affairs. WhUe Ezekiel looked 
forward to the fulfilment of his peaceful vocation in Jerusalem, lo I war and defeat 
resulted in exile and bondage. With the dust of humiliation upon their heads, the 
ciiosen people were conducted to Chaldea, and residence was allotted to them on the 
banks of the Chebar. JMolbing is more fluctuating than earthly fortune. Jerusalem 
to-day, Chaldea to-morrow. 2. No outward circumstance is fatal to owe real welfare 
nor a barrier to benevolent activity. Now it was to he seen that piety can flourish 
amid a dearth of external privileges. The seeds of religious truth shall be carried into 
new fields. The special capacity of Ezekiel shall find more fitting scope for its exercise 
than amid the quiet grandeur of Solomon's temple. He is a priest in an ampler 
temple — a priest for the world. The eotd is superior to all imprisonment. 3. The 
permanency of spiritual work. The kingcraft of Nebuchadnezzar, the overthrow of 
Zedekiah, the honours and decorations of Chaldean captains, — these things have long 
since ceased to exert any influence upon the life of the human race ; but Ezekiel is 
still (and has been for twenty centuries) a teacher of men : his work still proceeds ; his 
name is encircled with honovir. Already king and captive have exchanged places. The 
first is last ; the last, first. 

III. His investitubb with the prophet's office, Jeremiah during Ezekiel's time, 
and John afterwards, were, like him, priests and prophets too. In the case of other 
prophets, some special visit from God — some suitable display of his glory — attended 
their special designation to office. We have parallel instances in Moses, Samuel, and 
Isaiah. The vision was supersensuous, and must be accounted for, partly by external, 
and partly by internal, causes. 1. External. " The heavens were opened." The veil of 
material limitation was, for the time, withdrawn. The celestial realm was disclosed. 
A similar privilege was accorded to Elisha's seivant, in answer to his master's prayer : 
"And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man; and he saw: and, behold, the 
mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha." To open the 
heavens to human view is to unveil, in part, the spiritual universe. So, to our Lord 
on the banks of Jordan, " the heavens were opened," A Divine voice proceeded ; the 
Holy Ghost was imparted. Ezekiel, like Moses and Isaiah, " saw visions of God." The 
heavens were opened for the very purpose that the central Object might be seen. To 
see God ; to have undoubted assurance of bis presence, purity, and aid — this, every true 
prophet requires, " The word of God came expressly," or rather verily, " to him," 
The ear confirmed the vision of the eye. Not only a spectacle, but an articulate voice. 
So Haralet sought to assure himself of the reality of the spectre, when h« demanded that 



20 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. 1 1—28. 

it should speak. The ear b a more trnstworthy witness than the eye. " Faith comes 
by hearing." 2. There was, on the part of Ezekiel, internal aptitude. Our organs of 
sense have become dull, gross, earthly, by reason of the decline and decay of the soul's 
true life. As vehicles by which the soul holds commerce with the spiritual realm, they 
are insufficient. Hence the spirit of a man has to be quickened by a special activity of 
God, so that it may, for the time being, transcend its native cajMibilities, its native 
sphere, in order to see God's administration of the universe, and in order to receive 
new communications of his will. This is what is usually termed a state of ecstasy. In 
the creation of the material universe, a word was sufficient ; but bo indocile, intractable, 
are the elements of human disposition and will, that the hand of Jehovah muat be 
exerted. " The hand of the Lord was upon him." — D. 

Ver. 4. — Earli/ gymbdls of Jehovah's presenee. The materials of the vision are supplied 
from the storehouse of nature. We climb along the altar-steps of material nature up 
to nature's God. Earthly phenomena serve (1) as veils, which scarcely hide the Divine 
Artificer ; (2) as symbols, indicating his perfections ; (3) as instruments, with which 
he accomplishes his wilL For the vision before us, God chose to employt not the 
grosser forms of inert matter, but the dynamic forces which are at work on every side 
— ^wind, light, heat. 

I. The idea is brought before us of nfsoRUTABLB mtstbrt. This is betokened by the 
whirlwind. In all revelation of bis doings which God vouchsafes to man, there mutt 
be more or less of mystery. The finite cannot measure the Infinite. How the wind 
originates, what its full mission, or whither its destination, we cannot tell. This was 
a stormy vrind — ^partly baneful, partly beneficent. It betokened a severe visitation of 
Jehovah — a temporary calamity destined to issue in permanent good. " He rideth upon 
the wings of the wind." As in the hotter climate of the East, a storm rapidly rises and 
sweeps the face of the earth; so, after repeated monitions, Jehovah suddenly visits 
men in judgment. " His footsteps are not known ; " "He maketh his messengers winds." 

XL There is the idea of pabtial bevelation. This is indicated by the cloud. The 
cloud both tempers the heat of the sun and conceals the wonders of the starry heavens. 
Whenever God has revealed his glorious majesty to men, there has been the attendant 
circumstance of the cloud. At the Bed Sea, on Mount Sinai, over the mercy-seat, on 
the Mount of Transfigmration, the glory of God was veiled within the drapery of a- 
cloud. The eye of sinful man cannot sustain the overpowering brightness of the Deity. 
For what is at present concealed from ua, no less than for what is disclosed to us, it 
becomes us to be sincerely thankful. " What we know not now we shall know here- 
after." 

IIL There is the idea of PUEmmo enebgt. This is symbolized by the fire. One 
of the most potent and widespread agents at work in the material universe, is fire— an 
impressive emblem of the purity and justice of the Most High. Nothing in nature is 
more destructive than fire. For the precious metals, it is the <»dy agent that purifies. 
The flame was self-kindled, as was the flame that consumed the sacrifice on the temple 
altar. This vision was intended to extinguish the false hopes of the Hebrews. The 
design was threefold, viz. to produce (1) suitable terror and alarm; (2) genuine 
sorrow ; and (3) internal purification. " A fire is kindled in mine anger." Wood and 
hay and stubble will be consumed ; gold and silver will be beautified. 

IV. There is the prospect of evbntuai. pbospbbitt. "A brightness was about it." 
We have here a prefigurement of that " abounding grace " which is yet in reserve for 
the chosen remnant of Israel — a picture of the " times of refreshing " which shall in due 
time come " from the presence of the Lord." A prophet who announces only judgment 
is no less false than he who peals forth only the clarion-note of mercy. The brightness 
is set forth here as suffusing the whole vision — storm, cloud, fire. Every part of Jeho- 
vah's administration shall be covered with renown. He will graciously vindicate hii 
ways to the satisfaction and joy of his saints. Immortal splendour will encircle th« 
final result. — ^D. 

Vers. 6 — ^14. — Unnen form* of inteUigeni ministry, Man is only a part, thoagh 
ID integral part, of the active universe of God. Even inert matter is pervaded by 
tynamio forces, such as attraction, heat, and electricity ; and every part of God'i 



OLLl— 2&] THE BOOK OF THE FBOPHBT EZEEIEL. 21 

creation is executing, either intelligently or ignorantly, hi* gnpreme will. To a heathen 
monarch he made a startling revelation, " I girded thee, though thou hast not known 
me." These cherubic forms (seen first at the gate of Eden, and again in symbol over 
the mercy-seat) are representatives of all creature-life, both terrestrial and super- 
terrestrial. Human science not the measure of God's kingdom. 

I. Observe theib kuubeb and vabiety. As all matter is cubical, having length, 
breadth, and thickness, so the number four is the prophetic sign for our terrestrial 
globe. Hence we have in the vision a four-faced form of life, with one aspect towards 
each quarter of the globe. There is completeness and suf&ciency in all Grod's arrange- 
ments. The manifold varieties of creature-life are ordained to do their Master's will, in 
whatever quarter of the world exigency may arise. This is an intimation of help to the 
righteous, but of vengeance to the wicked. 

II. Note their intelligent qttalities. The human form is prominent in the pro- 
phetic picture, indicative of the fact that intelligence and reason are the ruling attri- 
butes. The universe is not a promiscuous assemblage of dead atoms, nor is the life 
of men the march of inexorable fate. Combined with the intelligence of man, is the 
courage of the lion, the patient endurance of the ox, and the swift speed of the eagle. 
The noblest service which God's creatures can render, falls immeasurably short of the 
requirements of God. Yet are our powers never so ennobled or enlarged as when 
engaged in his work. To him must our very lest be consecrated. Par from exhaust- 
ing our strength, God's service renews and refreshes the spirit. There is always a latent 
reserve of power. The more we do, the more we can do. Two wings are at rest, while 
two are in motion. 

III. Mark their intense devotion. " Their appearance was like burning coals of 
fire, and like the appearance of lamps . . . the fire was bright." The nature of true 
servants was given to these living creatures. They glowed with sympathetic ardour 
to fulfil their Monarch's will. The flame within was kindled and kept alive by an 
invisible hand, so that by virtue of its intense energy, it touched and beautified every 
part of their nature. As the ministers of Jehovsdi^ they shared in his resplendent 
purity. 

IV. See their prompt and olad obedience. "They went every one straight 
forward . . . whither the spirit was to go, they went." Service was a delight. It 
would have been a restraint upon the impulses and energies of their nature — a very pain 
—if no service had been allotted them. Hastening to execute the high behests of God, 
they go and return like a lightning-flash. Personality was retained in its full integrity, 
but self was repressed ; they moved spontaneously under the Divine impetus. Self- 
will sweetly coalesced and identified itself with the will of God. The perfection of a 
child-spirit is reached when we can say, " I do always the things that please him." 
No by-ends, nor sinister advantages, are sought by these dutiful servants. Each one 
moves in a straightforward line. The shortest course is pursued to reach the Divine 
end. 

V. There was unity of action, combined with diversity. Each form of creature- 
life had its special mission to fulfil ; yet each worked in harmony with the other for a 
common end. In appearance they were conjoined, and yet were separate. The par- 
ticular service to be performed by the eagle's wing could not be executed by the foot 
of the ox, nor by the hand of the man. There is scope in God's service for every 
quality and attribute of souL 

VI. Note their special commission. These ideal forms of creature-life were com- 
missioned to chastise the rebellious nations. They appear on this occasion as the 
executors of Divine vengeance. " Fire went up and down among the living creatures, 
ami the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning." When God comes 
forth to judge the earth, he is accustomed to employ a variety of agents. Sometimes 
he employs the material elements, as at Pompeii and Moscow. Sometimes he employs 
men — even " men of the world, which are his hand." Sometimes he employs tiie 
principalities and powers of heaven. " The angels are the reapers ; " " They shall bind 
the tares in bundles to burn them." John heard a voice out of the temple, saying 
to the seven angels, " Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of Gcd 
upon the earth." The Jews in their exile, when Bzekiel appeared upon the scene, 
were flattering themselves with the prospect of a speedy restoration to liberty and t« 



22 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. i. 1— 2a 

Home ; but the mission of Ezekiel was designed to dissipate this false hope. A long 
night of chastisement was to precede the dawn of mercy. The glowing fire and the 
lightDiug-flame were impressive portents of impendiag judgment. " Our God ia a 
consuming fire." — D. 

Vers. 15 — 21. — Natwe'a material forces are the active servants of the Church. New 
phenomena now appear to the prophet's ecstatic vision. Wheelsof vast and appalling 
magnitude are seen, and seen in combination with the cherubim. Now, wheels are 
essential parts of man's mechanical contrivances ; therefore we are compelled to regard 
the material earth and the encircling atmosphere as the scene of this activity. In 
a striking and instructive manner we perceive God working in and through material 
nature. We learn in this passage — 

I. That this teebbstkial aLOBffi is the btaob on which Gh)D is wobking out 
HIS bedemptive enterpeisb. Other ends, which are plainly sought in nature, are 
evidently not final; they are steps to a loftier end. It is possible that, in other planets, 
other aspects of God's glorious nature are in course of being unveiled ; other purposea 
are unfolding ; other principles (perhaps not comprehensible by men) are being 
developed. Our earth is consecrated and set apart for this high end, viz. that it may 
be the theatre for the display of moral redemption. 

II. 1'hAT all CHE WHEELS OF NATURE MOVE TOWARDS THK BXEOCTION OF THIB 

PLAN. By the wheels of nature are symbolized all mechanical and chemical forces. 
These are ever moving in their appropriate activities ; are, in their sphere, resistless. 
For the most part these activities are a blessing to men; but if withstood, they injure 
and destroy. These great dynamic forces do not act in a capricious and haphazard 
manner. They follow implicitly the mandates of law ; they are represented as " full 
of eyes ; " they are the docile, ready servants of the cherubim : " the spirit of the living 
creatures is in the wheels also." The same Divine Spirit which dwells in angels and 
in men, possesses and potentiates (though in inferior measure) the forces of nature. 
Mechanical forces yield to chemical ; chemical forces yield to vital ; vital forces yield 
to intelligent ; intelligent forces yield to spiritual. A graduated scale of subordination 
appears, and in ail there is the manifestation of one controlling Spirit. This complete 
subordiuation of nature to the central purpose of redemption, is seen in the miracles 
wrought by Jes Js Christ. The intervening agents are not within the range of human 
vision ; yet, to a spiritual eye, they might have been (in part at least) discerned. For 
to Nathanael Jesus Christ affirmed, with special emphasis, " Verily, verily, I say unto 
you. Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending 
upon the Son of man." 

III. That, by the forces of matebial natube, God's will is swiftly and hoise- 
LES8LT DONE. The idea conveyed to the mind by the vision of these mysterious 
wheels is easy and rapid motion. Celerity is made prominent by the fact that they 
went straight to their destination : " They turned not when they went." It was enough 
that the volition of the Divine mind was expressed. " He spake : and lo ! it was done ; " 
"Whither the spirit was to go, they «ent ; " "The spirit of the living creature was in 
the wheels." If the cherubim were lifted up from the earth, these wheels were lifted 
up ; or when the oheiubim stood, the wheels stood. Service in any direction — rest or 
motion — the wheels instantly and spontaneously followed the Divine behest. Here 
saints may find strong consolation : " God's will is our sanctification." His will shall 
be done. For who can finally resist it ? 

IV. 'The vast scale of God's plans and agencies appals odb finite mindb. " The 
felloes of these wheels were so high," says the prophet, " that they were dreadful." It 
is the ambition of the human mind to measure and grasp the universe ; and when, at 
length, we begin to discover the magnitude and the minuteness of God's works, we 
fall prostrate under a sense of our impotence. " It is higher than heaven ; what can we 
know ? It is deeper than Hades ; what can " our feeble intellect do ? It should temper 
our self-confidence, and induce in us profound modesty, to remember that we do not, 
while in the flesh, see objects as they absolutdy exist ; we see only the likeness and 
a'ppearairux of realities. A subjective element mingles with the objective, in our con- 
sciousness. " Now we know impart" We anticipate the time when imperfect kQQw- 
ledge shall give place to perfect certainty. 



OB. L 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. 23 

v. That all the aotivitibs of hatubb and of FBOViDEiroE abk tinoxd with 
A uo^ai. pubfobe. There ia surely something to be gathered from the fact that the 
prophet makes mention of these several colours. The fire which enfolded upon itself 
was of the colour of amber. The throne on which the Eternal sat was in appearance 
like a sapphire stone. The living creatures were like burning coals of fire. The wheels 
were like the colour of the beryl — i.e. a bluish green. These colours are constituent 
elements of the perfect white, and imply that God's righteousness (as well as his 
wisdom and goodness) is manifest in all his works. The universe is imbued with a 
moral purpose. " Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look 
down from heaven ; " " The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little 
hills by righteouBness." — D. 

Vers. 22 — 28. — T^ vision of God is the source of prophetic inspiration. We cannot 
fail to observe in Scripture that the prominent prophets were prepared for their 
responsible work by an ecstatic sight of Deity. Without a clear and overpowering 
sense of the greatness of God, along with the undeserved honour of being his messenger, 
mortal men shrink from the perilous task of reproving and warning their fellows. This 
was the royal university in which the prophets received their high commission ; and 
every evangelic prophet, too, must hear his message from Jehovah's lips before he can 
speak with authority to the people. In the words of St. Paul, modern preachers should 
be able to say, " I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you." We 
leam — 

L Teat God's elevation above his obeatubes is a uobal ATTirnDE bathes 
THAN UATEBIAL DISTANCE. His eminence measured by intrinsic excellence, not by 
intervening space. That both angels and men — all the principalities and powers — are 
symbolized in the "living creatures" (or cherubim) is evident from the fact that 
immediately above the wings of these ideal beings stretched the floor of heaven — a 
crystal fiimament, awe-inspiring in its splendour — and on this was erected the sapphire 
throne of Deity. Between the blue transparent fioor of the heavenly palace and the 
wings of the cherubim no distance intervened. " He is not far from every one of us ; 
in him we live." We may see, not only the rod, but also the hand that has appointed 
it. " Because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved ; " " The Lord of hosts is 
with us ; " " Thou encompassest my path ; " " Blessed ore the pure in heart : for they 
shall see God." 

II. That God ib actively enoaoed in the administbation of this itnivebse. 
He was seen by Ezekiel, as also by Isaiah, occupying a throne. This implies that he 
has not given himself up to majestic and well-earned repose. The crystal firmament 
and the sapphire throne bespeak the presence of serene and perfect peace. Yet 
there is no indolence in heaven. Perfect life means constant activity. " My Father 
worketh hitherto, and I work ; " " They serve him day and night in his temple." It is 
an exploded fallacy of the sceptics that God has withdrawn himself from the scenes 
of earth, and takes no interest in human affairs. The very opposite is the truth. 
He acts mediately in the most minute changes and events. " His throne is pre- 
pared in the heavens : his kingdom ruleth over all." 

III. That the jsobt high God deigns to beveal himself in human fobm. This 
is an unquestionable honour put upon human nature. We have in these visions of 
Ezekiel mysterious forms of cherubic life, but God does not disclose himself to the 
view of the prophet in any of these forms. " Verily he took not on him the nature 
of angels." It is nowhere said that God created the angels in his own image. It is 
said that man was formed after the likeness of himselfl It is nowhere said that 
recovery was provided for fallen angels ; for man it is provided, and at prodigious 
expense. Angels are uniformly styled " servants ; " the redeemed from humanity are 
designated " sons." In the apocalpytic visions of St. John, the angels stand in an outer 

■ circle round about the throne ; while the elders — representatives of the Church — sit 
on thrones nearer to the Deity. God has put stupendous honour on human nature. 
There is a Man upon the highest throne. God has stooped to our poor level, that h« 
might raise us up to his. " We are to be partakers of the Divine nature." In this 
vision granted to Ezekiel we have a forecast of the Incarnation — an anticipation of 
Bethlehem. 



24 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. 1.1—28. 

IV. That God'b nature glows with tieet indignation against sin. The glorious 
Being who occupied the throne, presented in one respect a twofold appearance. From 
the loins — as a dividing line — upwards he appeared as <^»mai, dectron — as when 
gold and silver we fused in the flame. From the loins downward there was the 
appearance of fire. No other interpretation can be put upon this, but that the God of 
heaven was about to proceed on an errand of judgment. It was still in his heart to 
forgive, if only men would abandon the abominable thing ; but the lower parts of his 
person — ^his legs and feet — ^burned with fierce resolve to vindicate bis outraged honour. 
Similar is the declaration of the Apostle Paul, that " the Lord Jesus will be revealed 
from heaven, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that 
obey not the gospel of his Son ; " "He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire ; " 
" Our God is a consuming Fire." 

V. That in the midbt of judgment God is mindful of his covenanted mbeot. 
" As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the 
appearance of the brightness round about." The execution of righteous retribution 
upon the ungodly will be an occasion of advantage, and blessing to the redeemed. The 
blacker the storm-cloud, the more clear and beauteous is the rainbow traced upon its 
departing form, when the Sun of Righteousness again shines forth. This is God's 
repeated proclamation of mercy — ^the renewal of his gracious covenant. This brightnes* 
was round about Jehovah's head — a halo of gloiy, a diadem of transcendent beauty — 
redemption's matchless crown. In it are blended all the attributes of Divine per- 
fection, from the scarlet hue of righteousness to the soft blue of perfect peace. " He 
will be ever mindful of his covenant ; " and it increases our strong consolation to be ever 
mindful of it also. On the rain-drops this heavenly bow of beauty is sketched, as if 
to suggest that on the daily gifts which flow from the Divine hand we may discern 
the " everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure," 

VI. That the supeemb Lobd of heaven and babth stoops to hold intbeooursb 
WITH men. This series of magnificent visions was intended to prepare the mind of the 
prophet to receive new disclosures of truth, new commissions of duty. The splendour 
of the scene, when once the prophet's visual organ was enlarged — the glorious sovereignty 
of Jehovah especially — so impressed and awed the prophet's mind, that he fell upon his 
face. Nothing so humbles the proud heart of man as the sight of God, or even a general 
sense of his nearness. In the presence of God's greatness, he perceived by contrast his 
own littleness ; in the presence of God's piu'ity, he saw his own vileness ; under a sense 
of God's absolute rule, he was constrained to render glad and prompt obedience. Such 
lowliness of spirit is • prerequisite for the Master's service. " The meek will he teach 
his way." Because the lawgiver of Israel was the meekest of men, God " made known 
his ways tinto Moses." So is it stilL " With the froward thou wilt show thyself 
firoward." Humility of mind is the only attitude in which we can wait with patience 
at wisdom's gate, and really pray, " Speak, Lord ; for thy servants hear." And still 
God speaks to humble men. Prayer is not a mere traditional custom of piety. It is 
a i-eal application poured into the attentive ear of God, and gracious messages of love 
come to us in return. Said our Lord in his last days on earth, " If a man love me, 
he will keep my commandments, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto 
him, and make our abode with him." Ezekiel — a man of like passions with ourselves 
— records, " I heard the voice of One that spake." — D, 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The Divine tummions to the prophetic mission. " Now it came to past 
in the thirtieth year," etc. Our text authorizes the following observations. The 
Divine summons to the prophetic mission — 

I. Was addbessed to Ezekiel at a time which he vest minutelt becobds. 
" Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of 
the month. ... In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of King 
Jelioiaohin's captivity." This statement made with so much detail suggests : 1. That 
Ezehiel received this summons in vigorous manhood. We take " in the thirtieth year " 
as referring to the age of the prophet. The mighty call reached him when he had 
passed beyond the inexperience and immaturity of youth, and before the approach of 
the decay of either his physical or mental powers. Thirty years was the age at which 
the Levitas in the wilderness entered upon their laborious duties (Numb. It. 3). Jerome 



OH. 1.1— 2a] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET BZEKIEL. 26 

taja that the priests entered upon their office at the same age ; but the statement is 
very questionable. John the Baptist began his ministry on the completion of bis 
thirtieth year._ And "the Light of the world" was not publicly manifested until our 
Lord had attained the same age. 2. Tliat he desired to place the reality of hit predie- 
tions heyond question. Some of these are very remarkable. " We should deem it 
impossible for any one," says Fairbaim, *' in a spirit of candour and sincerity, to peruse 
the wonderful and discriminating predictions contained in his writings respecting either 
the Jews themselves (those, for example, in ch. v., vi., xi., xvii., xxi.), or the neigh- 
bouring nations, more particularly those of Tyre and Egypt — predictions which foretold 
in regard to the subjects of them very different and varying fortunes, and such aa 
necessarily required ages for their accomplishment — we should deem it impossible for 
any one in a proper spirit to examine these, and compare them with the fulfilment, 
without being persuaded that they afford indubitable evidence of a supernatural insight 
into the far-distant future." And the minuteness of the statement of time in the 
text, and the chronological order which is observed and stated in the prophecies, would 
emphasize the genuineness of these predictions and the certainty of their Divine or^n. 
3. That the summons made a deep impression upon the soul of the prophet. The careful 
particularity of the record indicates that Ezekiel felt profoundly the importance of that 
which he records. Those seasons in which God approaches most near to the soul, and 
communicates most directly with us, are momentous ; they constitute epochs in our 
spiritual history. 

II. Was addressed to him in bionifioant ontonMSTANCES. 1. In a heathen land. 
" In the land of the Chaldeans," whither he had been carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar. 
The Chaldeans were idolaters. The Jewish rabbins assert that the Holy Spirit inspired 
the prophets only in the Holy Land. But here in Chaldea the inspiration of God 
quickens the soul of Ezekiel, heaven is opened imto him, visions of God are unfolded 
onto him,, and the voice of God speaks to him. In the same land the Divine inspiration 
came to DanieL And it was not at Jerusalem, but in Patmos, that St. John beheld 
his marvellous and glorious visions, and heard the mighty and awful voices of the great 
apocalypse. God is not limited to any place whatsoever. His Spirit can work as freely 
and effectively in one place as in another. 2. In a captive condition. " As I was 
among the captives," or, " in the midst of the captivity." With others of his fellow- 
countrymen Ezekiel had been taken from Judaea and settled in Chaldea. That some 
of the captives painfully felt their condition is clear firom Ps. cxxxvii. To the patriotic 
and the pious there was much in their exile to cause grief. They would mourn for the 
fatherland with its stirring and sacred memories, and for the temple and its precious 
privileges, from which they had been removed. These sorrows the godly had to suffer 
in common with the wicked. Those who were faithful to the Lord their God had to 
bear the captivity which had come upon the people by reason of the general unfaithful- 
ness. Ezekiel, Daniel, and his three noble companions in the court of Nebuchadnezzar, 
men eminent for their religious fidelity, suffered the privations and griefs of the captivity 
not less, but perhaps much more, than they did whose sins caused that captivity. In 
every age the good are subject to the same outward afdictions and trials as the wicked. 
They have no exemption from the common calamities of life. In this respect " all 
things come alike to aSl" etc. (Eccles. ix. 2). 3. By the river of Chebar. We cannot 
with certainty identify this river. According to some it is " the modern Khabow, 
which rises near Nisibis, and flows into the Euphrates near Kerkesiah, two himdred 
miles north of Babylon." But Professor Bawlinson is of opinion that it " is the Nahr 
Maleha, or Eoyal Canal of Nebuchadnezzar — the greatest of all the cuttings in 
Mesopotamia." It is probable that there was quiet and solitude by this river, and 
these are favourable to the reception of Divine communications. It was amid the awful 
heights of Sinai that Moses on two occasions was alone with God forty days and forty 
nights (Exod. xxiv. 15 — 18 j xxxiv.). And somewhere in the seclusion of the same 
mountain region " the Lord passed by " the Prophet Elijah, and the voice of God ipaka 
onto him (1 Kings xix. 8 — 18). And our Lord and Saviour frequently sought retiro- 
ment for communion with his Father (Matt. xiv. 22, 23 ; Mark L 35 ; Luke ir. 42 ; 
T. 16). Devout solitude and serenity are congenial with Divine manifestation and 
communication. Moreover, there is something very suggestive about a river. It tends 
to huah the tumults of the mind and to stimulate peaceful and pure thought. Whea 



26 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. 1. 1—28. 

the spirit of Elisha wag agitated, he was incapable of exercising his prophetic office, but 
when the agitation was allayed by music, he was able to prophesy, " When the 
minstrel played the hand of the Lora came upon him." And, as has been suggested by 
another, the gentle murmuiings and rhythmic ripplings of the waters of the river 
may in like manner have attuned the spirit of Ezekiel to prophetic action and 
utterance. 

III. Was aocoufanied by Divinb visions. " The heavens were opened, and I saw 
visions of God." These words indicate : 1. A remarkable faculty in man. He has 
power to behold " visions of God." I do not attempt to determine whether he saw 
them with the eye of the body or of the mind. To me it seems almost certain that the 
vision was spiritual. But whether it was physical or spiritual does not affect the great 
truth that we have power to receive spiritual and Divine revelations. Doubtless the 
seeing faculty in the case of the prophet was purified and strengthened for beholding 
these sublime and celestial scenes (cf. 2 Kings vi. 17) ; but no new or additional 
faculties were given unto him. It behoves us to lespect our nature, seeing that it is 
capable of beholding visions and hearing voices from God. 2. Great condescension in 
Ood. He opened the heavens, unfolded the glorious revelations, and empowered the 
jirophet to behold them. The prophet speaks of them as " visions of God." The 
expression indicates that : (1) God was their Author. They proceeded from him. (2) 
God was their Object. It is true that " no man hath seen God at any time." The 
essential Deity "no man hath seen, nor can see;" yet these visions were manifestations 
of his majesty. Schmieder has beautifully said, " The Lord stooped to him, and his 
spirit was caught up to see God." 

IV. Was accompanied by Divine ooMMnNioATioNB. " The word of the Lord came 
expressly unto Ezekiel the priest." Or, more correctly, " The word of Jehovah came in 
reality unto Ezekiel." The prophet not only saw Divine visions, but he also " heard 
the voice of One that spake" (ver. 28). The true prophet is himself taught of God. 
His authority with men arises from the fact that he speaks not his own thoughts, 
opinion!^, or conclusions, but the word which he has received from God; that he comes 
to them Trith an assured " Thus saith the Lord." 

V. Was accompanied by the Divine impabtation of poweb. " And the hand of 
the Lord was there upon him." The power of God was acting upon the spirit of 
Ezekiel as an inspiring, strengthening, constraining force. " The band of Jehovah 
was on Elijah," and though weary, he put forth great physical exertion (1 Kings xviiL 
'46). The right hand of the glorified Lord was laid upon St. John in his dread swoon, 
and he was revived and strengthened. Whom God summons to arduous service he 
strengthens for the discharge of the same. He gives power commensurate with 
duty.— W. J. 

Vers. 4 — 28. — The providential government of Ood. This is acknowledged even by 
some of the ablest expositors to be a most difficult portion of sacred Scripture. Isaac 
Gasaubon says that " in the whole of the Old Testament there is nothing more obscure 
than the beginning and the end of the Book of Ezekiel." And Calvin " acknowledges 
that he does not understand this vision." Yet we would humbly and reverently 
eadeavour to set forth what appear to us to be the principal teachings of this marvellous 
vision. Its chief meaning the prophet himself tells us when he says that he saw " the 
appearance of the likeness of the glory of Jehovah " (ver. 28). But in this case that 
glory is his glory in the providential government of our world. In dealing with this 
subject we may perhaps bring out the main teachings of our text by considering — 

I. The variety op agencies employed in the providential government of God. 
1. TTte entire animate creation is thus employed. Great is the diversity of opinion as 
to the meaning of the four living creatures, the likeness of which Ezekiel saw (vers. 
4 — 10). We will state what we believe to be their true significance. As delineated by 
the prophet " it is an ideal combination," as Fairbairn says ; " no such composite 
creature exists in the actual world." And the name by which they are called, living 
ones, " presents them to our view as exhibiting the property of life in its highest statv 
of power and activity ; as forms of creaturely existence altogether instinct with life." 
Hengstenberg says that the living creatures are " the ideal combination of all that lives 
ea earth." We regard them as intended to symtwlize the whole living creation of 



OH. 1.1- -28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKEEL. 27 

God. And their composition, relations, and movements teach us that every variety and 
order of life is employed in his providential government of our world. The endeavour 
has been made to assign a specific meaning to each different portion of the living 
creatures. The symbolism unfolds itself to us thus : " The likeness of a man " indicates 
mental and moial powers ; e.g. reason, conscience, affections, etc. " The hands of a 
man " indicate dexterity, power of skilfill and active service. " The face of a lion " 
suggests strength (cf. Prov. xxx. 30), courage (cf. Prov. xxviii. 1), and sovereignty. 
" The face of an ox " leads us to think of patient, diligent, productive labour (cf. Prov. 
xiv. 4). And " the face of an eagle " suggests the power of soaring high above the 
earth (of. Job xxxix. 27 ; Isa. xl. 31), the keen, searching gaze, and the far-extended 
vision. In the evolution of his providential government God employs powers of every 
kind and degree. The convincing reasoner and the eloquent speaker, the man of 
brilliant imagination and the man of patient investigation, the skilful inventor and 
the diligent handicraftsman, and men and women and little children even, having only 
feeble and commonplace abilities, God uses in the working out of his great designs. 
All creatures, from the lowest insect to the highest intelligence, are subject to his 
control and subservient to his purposes. It is doubtful whether the symbolism of the 
living creatures includes the angelic creation. But apart from this vision, we know 
that angels are employed by God in his providential government of our world. Illus- 
trations of such employment abound in the sacred Scriptures. Endless in variety and 
countless in number are the agents which he employs. 2. The great forces of nature 
are thus employed hy God. (Vers. 15 — ^21.) The wheels symbolize the powers of 
nature. Their relation to the living creatures, and the relation of both to the great God, 
is thus pictorially set forth by Hengstenberg : " The whole was designed to represent 
a kind of vehicle, in which the Lord occupied the place of the charioteer, the living 
creature the place of the chariot, under which are the powers of nature represented by 
the wheels." This interpretation of the meaning of the wheels is confirmed by Pa. 
xviii. 10 : " He rode upon a cherub, and did fly ; yea, he did fly upon the wings of the 
wind;" Ps. civ. 3, 4: "Who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the 
wings of the wind," etc. ; Ps. cxlviii. 8 : " Fire, and hail ; snow, and vapours ; stormy 
wind fulfilling his word." All the forces of nature serve God, and are used by him in 
the execution of his purposes. In the case before us these powers are represented as 
about to be employed for judgment upon the unfaithful Jews. But they are also 
employed for purposes of mercy and grace. He can use them for the protection of his 
faithful people, as well as for the punishment of the rebellious. 

II. The chief ohabaotebistics op the operation of the pbovtoential qovebn- 
MENT OF God. 1. The immensity of its extent. It is said of the rings, or circimiference, 
of the wheels that " they were so high that they were dreadful ; " or, " they were both 
high and terrible." How vast are the designs and doings of the providence of God! 
That providence goes back into the immeasurable and awful past; it reaches onward 
into the endless future. It embraces an infinity of events, some of which are of 
stupendous importance. 2. The complexity of its movements. We read of the wheels 
that " their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel " 
(ver. 16). " The wheels are not ordinary wheels," says Hengstenberg, " but double 
wheels, one set into the other." Looking upon the working of an elaborate and intricate 
machine or engine, the uninitiated are bewildered by the movements, the relations and 
bearings of which they know not. Somewhat thus do we contemplate the operations 
of the providential government of God. " Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the 
great waters, and thy footsteps are not known ; " "Oh the depth of the riches both of 
the wisdom and knowledge of God 1 how xinsearchable are his judgments, and his ways 
past finding out I " Unfathomably deep to us are the mysteries of the Divine providence. 
3. The vnsdom of its direction. The rings of the wheels were •* full of eyes round 
about them " (ver. 18). Eyes are the symbols of intelligence. The forces of nature 
are not blind or aimless in their movements, but are directed by the All-wise. And 
however inexplicable to us the workings of the providential government of God may 
be, they are guided and controlled by infinite intelligence and goodness. 4. The 
harmoniousness of its operation. " When the living creatures went, the wheels went 
by them," etc. (vers. 19—21). One Spirit animated the whole. The one Power which 
employs and controls the whole living creation also govenu the Inanimate forces of 



28 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. 1.1—28. 

oature, so that all co-operate towards one great and blessed end. Though the great 
powers at work in our world often seem to us to be in conflict, yet in his providence 
God is prompting some, and restraining others, for the accomplishment of his own 
gracious and glorious purposes. " All things work together for good to them that love 
God." 5. The progreasiveness of its movements, " They turned not when they went ; 
they went every one straight forward" (ver, 9); "They went every one straight 
forward : whither the spirit was to go, they went ; they turned not when they went " 
(ver. 12). Eeal and great progress is being made in our world. The former days were 
not better than these. The social condition of the people improves ; education advances 
along the whole line ; science makes great and rapid strides ; in the apprehension of 
revealed truth there is marked progress ; and Christian principles and practice are ever 
extending their empire. Under the providential government of God, the world is moving, 
not to the darkness of midnight, but to the splendours of noontide. 

IIL The supreme Controllbb of the administbation of the pbovidbntial 
GOVERNMENT OF GoD. (Vers. 22 — 28.) Notice : 1. The manifestation of the Qod-Man. 
We have spoken of the manifestation of the God-Man ; but Ezekiel does not say that 
he saw either man or God. Very guarded are his words : " Upon the likeness of the 
throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man above upon it" (ver. 26). He tells 
us that he also saw " the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord " (ver. 28). 
It was a vision, perhaps as clear as the prophet was capable of receiving, of the Divine- 
Human. We can have no doubt of the Person thus indicated. It was a foreshadowing 
of the incarnation of the Son of God; an anticipation of God manifest in the flesh. 2. 
The supremacy of the Qod-Man. " Upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness 
as the appearance of a man above upon it." The Lord is upon the throne. He is the 
great Head of the providential government of God. All created life, and all nature's 
forces, are subject to his control. " All power is given unto him in heaven and in 
earth." This fact is rich in consolation and in inspiration to all who trust in the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 3. The gracious fiddity of the God-Man. " As the appearance of the 
bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness 
that was round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the 
Lord." The meaning of " the bow that is in the cloud " is determined by Gen. ix. 
12 — 17. It indicates that in the severe judgments which were coming upon the 
chosen people, God would not forget the gracious covenant which he had made with 
their fathers. Even the judgments would be inflicted for their well-being, and after 
the judgments there would be a return of prosperity and of the manifest favour of God 
(cf. Isa. liv. 7 — 10). In wrath he remembers mercy. Tlie God-Man presides over the 
providential government of our world in infinite fidelity and grace. He reigns to bless 
and to save. 

Conclusion. 1. Let us helieve in this glorious government. " The Lord reigneth." 
2. Let us render loyal obedience to the gracious King. — W. J. 

Ver. 28 (part of) — ch. ii. 2. — The overwhelming and the reviving in Divine 
revelations. " And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of One 
that spake. And he said unto me. Son of man," etc. Two main lines of mentation 
are suggested by these verses. 

I. The manifestation of the Divine globt overwhelms even the best of 
MEN in thbib present STATE. When he saw "the appearance of the likeness of the 
glory of the Lord," Ezekiel fell upon his face. We find the same thing in ch. iii. 
23; xliii. 3; xliv. 4. Isaiah felt himself "undone" when he "saw the Lord sitting 
upon a throne " (vL 5). Daniel, after a vision of heavenly glory, was emptied of 
all strength (x. 8). And even St. John, the beloved disciple, who had reclined 
upon the bosom of the Lord, when he saw the revelation of his majesty, " fell at his 
feet as dead " (Eev. i. 17). 1. The sight of such glory humbles man vrith the sense of 
his own immeaswable inferiority. How vast is the disparity between the Creator 
and the creature I He, " the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name 
is holy, and who dwelleth in the high and holy place ; " we, frail men " that dwell in 
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, and are crushed before the moth." 
It is humiliating to reflect upon the infinite distance between the glory of God and our 
insignificance and meanness and shame. Such considerations rebuke those personi 



OT.1. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 29 

who, in hymn or prayer, addresB the Most High in tenns of unbecoming familiarity, or 
even of positive irreverence. Most inadequate must be their realization of the truth 
that he is " glorious in holiness," and of their own un worthiness. " God is in heaven, 
and thou upon earth ; therefore let thy words be few." 

" The more thy glories strike mine eyes. 
The humbler I shall lie." 

2. The eight of tuch glory overwhelms man hy qmckening hit eonscioumess of sin 
into greater activity. Thus it was with Isaiah (vi. 5); and with St. Peter, when 
he was impressed with the superhuman powers of his Master, and perhaps realized 
that he was the Son of God (Luke v. 8). Such splendours as Ezekiel saw reveal 
the darkness and defilement of the hearts and lives of those who see them. The con- 
scious presence of perfect holiness awakens or intensifies man's sense of his own sinful- 
ness. " I have heard of thee," saith Job, " by the hearing of the ear : but now mine 
eye seeth thee. Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes." 3. Such 
humiliation is a condition of hearing the voice of Qod. " I fell upon my fece, and 
I heard a voice of One that spake." Pride and self-sufficiency cannot hear the Divine 
voice. " The meek will he guide in judgment ; and the meek will he teach his way. 
. . . The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him ; and he will show them his 
covenant." The highest revelations are for the simple, spiritnal, and teachable — the child- 
like spirits (cf. Matt. xi. 25, 26). Moses, eminent for his meekness, was admitted 
into communion and communication with God of special intimacy (Numb. xiL 6 — 8). 
The hiunbling effect of Divine visions sometimes qualifies the soul to hear Divine voices. 
II. God k his grace baibbs aud revives his sebvants ovbewhelmbd with 
THE MANIFESTATIONS OF HIS GLOBT. " And he Said unto me. Son of man, stand upon 
thy feet," etc. Three remarks are suggested. 1. The design of such manifestations 
is not to overwhelm, but to prepare for service. The Divine intention in tiie vision 
which Ezekiel saw was to prepare him for the discharge of the arduous duties of his 
prophetic mission. So also was it with Isaiah (vi.) and with St. John (Rev. L). And 
if spiritual visions of the true and the holy are granted unto God's servants now, it is 
in order that they may more efficiently serve him amongst their fellow-men. 2. The 
Divine su/mmons to duty or service is accompanied by Divine strength to obey the same. 
" And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I wiU speak unto thee. 
And the Spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my feet, that 
I heard him that spake unto me." Here are three points. (1) The title by which 
Ezekiel is addressed. " Son of man." Expositors have discovered various meanings 
in this appellation ; but it seems to ub that the interpretation of Lightfoot is the true 
one. " This expression is of frequent use in Scripture, in the Hebrew rabbins, but 
more especially in tjie Chaldean and Syrian tongues. . . . Why Ezekiel, and no other 
prophet, should have been so often styled thus, has been ascribed to different reasons 
by different commentators. To me . . . the principal reason appears to be this — that, 
as his prophecy was written during the Babylonish captivity, he naturally made use of 
the Chaldean phrase, ' Son of man,' that is, ' man.' " (2) The summons which was 
addressed to him. " Stand upon thy feet." That is the attitude of respectful atten- 
tion. It also indicates readiness for service. (3) The strength which was communi- 
cated to him. "And the Spirit entered into me," etc. It is the same Spirit which was 
in the hving creatures and in the wheels. The Spirit was given to the prophet to set 
him upon his feet and to empower him to hear the word of the Lord. The entrance of 
the Spirit into him "is a quickening of mind and body conjointly, which brings about 
the transition from the revelation in vision to the revelation by word" (Schroder). 
When God commands, he also invigorates for the fulfilment of the command. When 
he summons man from spiritual death, he bestows the life-giving Spirit to every one 
who will receive him (cf. Eph. iL 4 — 6 ; v. 14). When he oaUs upon us to work out our 
own salvation, he encourt^es us to do so by the assurance that he worketh in ua 
(Phil. ii. 12, 13). When he sends us forth to arduous service, he says, " Certainly I will 
be with thee " (iSxod. iiL 12). And when he calls us to painful endurance, he gives us 
the assurance, "My grace is sufficient for thee " (2 Cor. xii. 9). 3. After the Divine 
summons and strength comes the Divine voice. " I heard him that spake unto me." 
Humbled by the vision of glory, and revived and strengthened by the Spirit, the pro- 



80 



THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. n. 1—10. 



phet was now in a condition to hear the voice of the Lord (cf. 1 Cor. iL 12, 13). " Signs 
without the Word are in vain. What fruit would there have been if the prophet had 
merely seen the vision, but no word of God had followed it ? " (Calvin). 

Conclusion. Here are two cheering considerations. 1. When Qod casts down it it 
in order that he may the more effectuaUy revive us. (Hos. vL 1, 2.) 2. Whom Ood 
commissions he also gualijiet. — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XL 



Ver. 1. — Son of man, etc. It is noticeable 
that the phrase Q>en adam), aa addressed to 
a prophet, occura only ia Ezekiel, in whom 
we fiad it not less than eighty times, and in 
Dan. viii. 17. As used elsewhere, e.g. in 
Numb, zxiii. 19 ; Ps. viii. 4 ; Job xxv. 6 ; 
Isa. li. 12 ; Ivi. 2, and in Bzekiel's use of it, 
it is probably connected with the history of 
Adam, as created from the ground (adamah) 
in Gen. ii. 7 ; iii. 19. The prophet is re- 
minded, in the very moment of his highest 
inspiration, of his Adam-nature with all its 
in&rmity and limitations. In the use of a 
like phrase (bar enosh, instead of ben adcm) 
in Dan. vii. 13 we have the same truth 
implied. There one like unto man in all 
things is called to share the sovereignty of 
the "Ancient of Days," the Eternal One. 
Here the prophet, nothing in himself, is 
called to be the messenger of God to other 
sons of men. It is in many ways sugges- 
tive that our Lord should have chosen the 
Biime formula for constant use when speaking 
of himself (Matt. viii. 20, and passim in 
the Gospels). Stand upon thy feet. The 
attitude of adoration is changed, by the 
Divine command, into that of expectant ser- 
vice, that of awe and dread for the courage of 
a soldier of the Lord of hosts (compare the pa- 
rallels of oh. iii. 24 ; xliii. 3, 5 ; Dan. viii. 18). 

Ver. 2. — And the Spirit, etc. It scarcely 
admits of question (though the Hebrew has 
no article, and so far Luther's version, " loh 
ward wieder erquickt," is tenable) that the 
word is used in the same sense as in ch. 
i. 20, 21 (comp. oh. iii. 24). The Spirit 
which moved the "living creatures" and 
the " wheels " in the mysterious symbol was 
now in him. Ezekiel finds in that foot the 
ground of his prophetic inspiration (comp. 
Numb. xxiv. 2 ; Judg. xi. 29 ; 1 Sam. x. 6, 
10 ; Isa. xi. 2, et al.). 

Ver. 3. — To a rebellious nation j literally, 
with Eevised Version, nations that are 
rebellious. The Hebrew word (i;6im) is tliat 
used elsewhere for " heathen," and that may 
be its sense here. As in oh. xxxvii. 22, Judah 
and Israel may be thought of as having 
fallen to the level of the heathen. Part of 
Ezekiel's work was actually addressed to the 
heathen as such (ch. xxv.-— xxxii.). The 
wurd may, however, be used in the plural to 



include both Jadah and the remnant of the 
northern kingdom. They and their fathers. 
The words anticipate the teaching of ch. 
xviii. The people to whom the prophet was 
sent could not say that they were suffer- 
ing for the sins of their fathers. They, in 
their own persons, had transgressed up to 
the very day on which the prophet received 
his mission. They had rebelled as their 
fathers had done in the days of Moses and 
Joshua (Numb. xiv. 9; Josh, xxiu 18). 

Ver. 4. — Impudent children and stiff- 
hearted ; literally, hard of face (i.e. callous 
to their shame) and stiff of heart. The LXX. 
gives aptly, <rK\ripoTrp6aaToi ko! aK\r)poicipSioi 
(compare the " past feeling " of Bph. iv. 19). 
Thus saith the Lord Ood. In the Hebrew, 
Adonai Jehovah; which the LXX. repre- 
sents by Kiptos, Kipios, and Luther by " der 
Herr Herr." The two highest names of the 
God of Israel were used to denote the 
fulness of the prophet's inspiration. The 
same formula occurs in ch. iii. 11, 27 ; xiii. 8 ; 
xxii. 28, and passim. So also in 2 Sam. vii. 
18, 19, 20, 29; and elsewhere. 

Ver. 5. — ^Whether they will hear, or 
whether they will forbear, etc. The latter 
word is used in the sense of "cease" or 
" desist," as in 1 Cor. ix. 6 and Eph. vi. 9. 
The same formula meets us in ver. 7 ; ch. iii. 
11, 27. The prophet is warned beforehand of 
the (at least) probable failure of his mission, 
wholly or in part. We note the parallelism 
of thought, though not language, in 2 Cor. 
ii. 15, 16. Such, at all times, has been the 
condition of tho prophet's work. The ex- 
pectation is grounded upon the antecedent 
fact of theu: being a "rebellious people." 
There is the consolation that in the end, 
partly through the fulfilment of his words, 
partly, it may be, through the witness of 
their own consoieuoe, they shall know that 
there has been a prophet among them (comp. 
ch. xxxiii. 83 ; Jer. xxviii. 9). We note that 
it is the first time that Ezekiel claims that 
name for himself. 

Ver. 6. — Though briers and thorns be 
with thee. The two Hebrew nouns are not 
found elsewhere, and have consequently 
puzzled translators. The LXX. gives two 
verbs, irapotarp-^ffovrtv koI inurvffT'iiaovTai iifi 
(r\ ; the Vulgate, imyreduli et subversoret. The 
words, however, are formed from roots that 
imply "pricking" or "burning," and the 



OH. n. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT BZEKIEL. 



31 



Authorized "Version rendering, followed by 
the Bevised Version, is tenable enough. A 
cognate form of the first is found in oh. 
xxviii 24, and there the LXX. gives truSKorji, 
and the Vulgate, tpina. A like figurative 
use of "scorpions" is found in 1 Kings xii. 
H (but here the reference may be to some 
scorpion-like scourge) and Ecolus. xxvi. 7 
(compare also our Lord's words in Luke x. 
19). Be not afraid. Compare the like 
command in Jer. i. 17. The words imply, 
probably, a past as well as a future ex- 
perience. Ezekiel had already known what 
it was to dwell among those whose hearts 
Were venomous as scorpions. The comparison 
was a sufficiently familiar one among both 
Eastern and tireek writers. 

Ver. 7. — Thou shalt speak my words, etc. 
The words conveyed (1) a ground of 
encouragement in the fact that the words 
would be given by Jehovah (comp. Jer. i. 7, 
17; Matt. x. 19, 20); and (2) a warning 
against the intermingling of lower thoughts 
and a self-originated message (ch. xiii. 7; 
xxii. 28). They are most rebellious; literally, 
the Hebrew being a noun, they are rebellicm, 
or stubbornness, itself. 

Ver. 8.— Be not thou rebellious, etc. The 
words convey a warning against the prophet's 
natural weakness. Instinctively he shrank, 
as Moses haddone(Exod.iii.ll; iv.IO — 13) 
and Isaiah (vi. 5) and Jeremiah (i. 6), from 
his dread vocation of being a " mortal vessel 
of the Divine Word." In so shrinking he 
would identify himself with the very 
"rebellion" which he was sent to reprove, 
and would incur its punishment. Eat that 
I give thee. As in the parallel of Bev. x. 
9, the words imply that what was to be given 
him was no message resting, as it were, on the 
surface of the soul. It was to enter into 
the prophet's innermost life, to be the food 
and nourishment of his soul ; to be, in our 
familiar phrase, "inwardly digested" and 
incorporated with his very flesh and blood. 
He was to live "not by bread only" (Dent. 



vi. 3), but by every word that proceeded out 
of the mouth of Jehovah. 

Ver. 9. — An hand was sent (put forth. 
Revised Version) unto me, eto. Apparently 
the hand was not that of the human form 
seated on the throne (ch. i. 26), nor of one 
of the four living creatures (oh. i. 8), but 
one appearing mysteriously by itself, as in 
the history of Belshazzar's feast Q)an. v. 5). 
The words connect themselves with the use 
of the hand stretched out of a cloud as the 
symbols of tlie Diviae energy both in Jewish 
and Christian art. The writer has in his 
possession a Jewish brass tablet, probably of 
the sixteenth century, commemorating the 
legend of the miraculous supply of oil at the 
Feast of the Dedication, in which such a 
hand appears as pouring oil into the seven- 
branched candlestick, or lamp, of the temple. 
Lo, a roll of a book, etc. The words remind 
us of the volume, or roll, in Ps. xl. 7 ; Jer. 
xxxvi. 2 ; Zech. v. 1 ; liliie those which are 
still used in Jewish synagogues. 

Ver. 10. — It was written within and 
without. Commonly such rolls, whether of 
vellum or papyrus, were written on one side 
only. This, like the tables of stone (Sxod. 
zxxii. 15), was written, as a symbol of the 
fulness of its message, on both sides. And 
as he looked at the roll thus " spread before " 
him, he saw that it was no evangel, no glad 
tidings, that he had thus to identify with 
his work, but one from first to last of lamen- 
tations, and mourning, and woe. Jeremiah 
had been known as the prophet of weeping, 
and was about this time (probably a little 
later) writing bis own Lamentations (the 
Hebrew title of the book, however, is simply 
its first words) over the fall of Jerusalem. 
Ezekiel's work was to be of a like nature. 
The word meets us again (ch. xix. 1, 14; 
xxvi. 17; zxvii. 2, 32; xxviii. 12; xxxii. 2, 
16) as the key-note of his writings. Out of 
such a book, though the glad tidings were 
to come afterwards, his own prophetio work 
was to be evolved. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 1, — Ood speaking, and man listening. This second chapter of the prophecies 
of Ezekiel introduces us to the personal call and commission of the prophet. The first 
chapter was engaged with preliminary and preparatory visious. Now the prepared soul 
receives the direct word from. God. 

I. God SPBAKIN8. God speaks to Ezekiel : 1. In words. Previously the prophet's 
attention had been arrested by visions — glorious, awful, soul-stirring visions — visions 
that not only roused his feelings, but that must also have awakened in his mind many 
strange thoughts by their profound suggestiveness ; still only visions, and therefore 
mysterious revelations shrouded in a measure of uncertainty. Now God proceeds from 
the vague vision to definite speech. It matters not whether we consider that the 
speech came in physical sound, in real air-waves, that any other listener, had he been 
present, might have understood, or whether the words were impressed on the mind of 
the prophet. In any case, he heard them, and thus he received a clear, definite, unmis- 
takable message. We are not left to uncertain visions, nor even to the difficult hiero- 



82 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. [ok. n. 1—10. 

s;lypluc8 of nature. We have a revelation in language, • written Bible. 2. In dirtet 
address. God spoke immediately to EzekieL Here is the contrast between the pro- 
pUet and the ordinary bearer of a Divine message. We receive our messages at second 
hand from God's inspired teachers. They held direct communications with Heaven. 
But may not we do something similar, not indeed in new prophecies or gospels, but at 
least in the illumination of soul which makes the old truth stand out in a new light, or 
helps us to make a fresh application of it to new circumstances? By his Spirit God does 
thus speak directly to every listening soul, though the words are those of familiar truth. 
II. Man LisTENiiio. Speech is useless without a hearer. For ages the " silent 
proclamation " of nature has been spread before the gaze of heedless witnesses. The 
difference between the seer and the man who beholds only material facts may lie in 
the natures of the men more than in the external facts that are presented to them. 
The one is a seer because he has eyes to behold what is equally present to the other, 
though unperceived for lack of sight to discover it. So the prophet must have " ears to 
hear " the message of God. And all who would receive God's message in their souls 
must have the hearing ear. The manner of the delivery of the Divine message to 
Ezekiel suggests the way in which it should be received. 1. Ina certain human sim- 
plicity. Ezekielis addressed as " son of man." When nearest to Heaven he must not 
forget his human nature. The prophet is our feUow-man. The knowledge of heavenly 
truth does not kill human nature, nor destroy the kinship between the e^ghtened and 
the ignorant. (1) Here all pride is rebuked. The prophet must not suppose that he 
is anything more than a man. (2) Human interests are to be considered. The mes- 
sage is given to one man for the sake of his fellows. 2. In manly obedience. Ezekiel 
is to stand up. He had fallen in fear before the vision of glory. To hear the word of 
revelation he must arise. God does not delight in the humiliation of bis children. 
We are exhorted to " come boldly unto the throne of grace " (Heb. iv. 16). Beligion 
does not destroy manliness. Yet God expects the attention shown by a servant to bis 
master. Ezekiel is not to sit. He who receives a word from God is to be awake, 
listening, attentive, and ready to obey, like the servant who stands by his master's side. 

Ver. 2. — 2%e entrance of the Spirit. K it were not for another reference to the Spirit 
in ch. iv. 3, we might reasonably suppose that the prophet was referring to his own 
spirit, and indicating, in picturesque language, that he recovered from faintness, or that 
his " spirits " rose, that he gained courage and strength. But since this passage plainly 
shows that none other than the Spirit of God can be meant, it is clear that a very 
close connection between the Holy Spirit and man is here indicated. The possibility 
of misunderstanding as to what spirit is designated only emphasizes the idea of the 
intimate association of the human and the Divine. 

I. The Spirit of God enters man. We can never fathom the mystery of the 
nature of God. But it would seem that certain modes of the Divine Being are more 
within touch of us than others. So, while as our Father God rules and blesses us, and 
while the Son of God enters humanity generally by taking our nature upon him and 
becoming our Brother, the Spirit enters into individual souls, and unites himself with 
our very selves. The Christian is a temple of the Holy Ghost. Something more must 
lie in this fact than the omnipresence of God, for God is everywhere, and therefore 
does not need to enter any region of creation. The spiritual entrance must there- 
fore mean the manifestation of his presence (1) by an exercise of energy, or (2) by a 
revelation to consciousness. The prophet may know the latter form of Divine 
entrance. The former, however, is the more usual in experience. Now, it is very much 
to know that God does indeed dwell with the children of men. The earth is not 
a God-deserted waste. Religion is not a one-sided effort of man to reach after God. 
Spiritual life is not simply an exercise of a man's own powers. God has his share in the 
suul's experience, touching it in its inmost secret being. He is nearer to the spiritually 
minded man than that man's own thoughts. 

II. The Divinb Spirit enters through the Divine Word. Ezekiel tells us 
that " the Spirit entered into me when he spake unto me." So it was in the days of the 
early Church, The apostles preached first ; then, after their word had been received, 
the Holy Ghost descended upon the hearers. While it is commonly recognized that 
prayer is a fitting means tiirough which to obtain a fuller presence of the Spirit of God, 



CH. n. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 83 

is it 80 often acknowledged that the reception of truth is an equally important eondi- 
tion? God's Spirit does not come like a flash of lightning, striking the unexpectant 
soul, nor like a gift of magic. The understanding of truth is the open door through 
which the inspiration of life enters. Heuce the importance of teaching, preaching, 
reading the Bible, meditation, cultivating spiritual intelligence and enlightened faith. 
Yet this very connection between the Spirit and the Word is a rebuke to cold intel- 
lectualism. The Word by itself is not enough. When we have comprehended and 
embraced it to the full, it is still but the door through which to receive the far more 
important gift of the Holy Ghost. 

III. The entkancb of the Spirit is a soubob of btbenoth. Ezekiel was bidden 
to stand up. At first it would seem he was so overwhelmed with awe in the presence 
of sublime visions of heaven, that he could scarcely obey. But as the first sounds of 
the Word of God reach hia dazed ears, the Spirit of God enters him, and at once he 
acquires a new energy, and is able to stand erect in manly strength. Shame for sin 
casts us down ; inspirations of God lift us up. To see God afar off is to fall down before 
him in confusion and terror ; to welcome God in the shrine of the heart is to enjoy a 
cheuring encouragement and an uplifting power. The Church too often droops and 
languishes for lack of this inspiring presence. She should remember that God's Spirit 
is not only a purifying, enlightening, and comforting influence, but also the supreme 
Source of energy. That same Spirit which of old brooded over the face of the waters, 
and brought life and order out of chaos and death, now broods over the human world 
with influite powers of life to bestow on all who will receive him. Then, in receiving 
strength from the incoming of the Spirit, the soul is able to receive more truth from 
God, as Ezekiel heard more Divine wordj when he stood up in his new strength. 
Thus there is no limit to the growth of knowledge and power m this twofold process. 

Vers. 3, 4. — An mtihtssy to rebels. The people of Israel are regarded as a vassal 
nation that has added rebellion to disloyalty, and has gone so far as to throw off its 
allegiance to its suzerain lord, and now the Supreme Sovereign sends his prophet as an 
ambassador to declare his will at this terrible crisis. 

I. Transubessors ripen imto rebels. They and their fathers had transgressed 
in the past. But the children have exceeded the wickedness of their parents by 
breaking out into open revolt. This may refer to the idolatry that follows neglect of 
the service of the true God, or to the abandonment of Jehovah after previously 
disobeying him. 1. All sin tends to aggravate its ovm evil. Rebellion is worse 
than transgression. The bad child may be more wicked than his corrupt parent — at 
least, if only left to the evil influences of his home. In every man, if sin is 
chosen, a downward course is being followed into blacker iniquity and more out- 
rageous wickedness, till the goal is reached and the sinner has fully developed the 
kingdom of hell within him. 2. Moral transgression leads to personal opposition 
against Ood. At first the transgressor may have no desire to quarrel with God. He 
only wants to have his own way, and possibly regrets the misfortune that this happens 
to be opposed to the Divine will. For a time he tries to sever morality from devotion, 
and to retain his worship after he has broken up his obedience. This state of discord 
cannot last. The enemy of God's Law cannot but become an enemy of God. He who 
resists the law opposes the government. 3. Concealed iniquity ends in confessed 
impiety. The transgression may be secret ; the rebellion will be open. The sudden 
fall of a saint that sometimes surprises and shocks the Church may be only the step from 
disloyalty to rebellion. 4. The progress of sin coarsens and harden* the sinner. The 
parents "transgressed." The children are "impudent" and "stiff-hearted." Reve- 
rence cannot long outlive obedience. The conscience which is roughly used loses its 
sensitiveneHo and becomes harsh and callous, like the skin <rf the hand that works with 
rough materials. Thus the worst sin is least acknowledged, and the greatest sinner 
most impenitent. 

II. God does not neglect his rebel children. 1. Ood has not lost his claims 
on them. Men may throw off* their allegiance to God, but they cannot destroy his 
rightfid authority over them. No soul can outlaw itself. To renounce a sovereign is not 
to escape from the power of his rule. If an English soldier declared hunself a repub- 
lican, he would not be exonerated from the service of the queen. God ia the Judge of 

EZEKIEL. D 



34 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. a. 1—10. 

all the earth— of those who reject his Law as surely as of those who obey it. 2. Ood 
desirtB to recover them. The message may come in wrath, threatening destruction. 
Yet it need never have been sent at all. The ambassador might have been spared, 
and an avenging army despatched to the rebellious nation. But God sends warnings 
before judgments, preaching prophets beforu destroying angels, invitations to return 
before mandates of extermination, gospels of grace before swords of doom. The darker 
the message of warning is, the more assuredly is it prompted by mercy ; because, if an 
exceedingly dreadful punishment is deserved and is even imperilling, it is an especial 
mark of God's forbearance towards the worst of sinners that be liolds it back in the 
hope of urging to repentance those who have been treasuring up for themselves so 
fearful an accumulation of wrath. Much more, then is the gospel of Christ a message 
of mercy, inviting sinners back into the kingdom of heaven instead of trampling them 
underfoot as worthless rebels. 

Ver. 6. — Dwelling among scorpions. L Thb distbkss. Ezekiel lay on no bed of 
roses. His messages of stern denunciation raised up enemies who gave him worse than 
a thorny couch— a very house of scorpions to dwell in. No more hideous picture of 
distress can well be conceived than that of the faithful prophet thrust into a thicket of 
briers, which turns out to be a scorpions' nest. The thorns are bad enough, yet fierce 
stinging creatures are added. This is a prophet's Inferno. Captives who only sufiTered 
from the grief of exile would hang their harps on the willows in heart-broken despair. 
Eiekiel's is a far worse case — to be tormented by his fellow-captives in return for his 
faithful words. 1. A great mission may bring a great distress. The common people are 
spued ; the prophet is tormented. Ezekif 1 has his scorpion-neighbours ; St. Paul, exalted 
to the third heaven, receives his thorn in the flesh ; Christ, the Holy One, is crowned 
with thorns, pierced with nails, and more terribly wounded with cruel hatred. 2. A 
man's worst enemies may le those of his own household. The scorpions are not pagan 
Babylonians, but Jews. No rancour is so bad as that of one whose milk of natural affec- 
tion is turned to the venom of a brother's hatred. This is the murder-spirit of Cain the 
fratricide, the devilry of Judas the traitor. 3. A guilty conscience is a dangerous sting. 
If it does not wound its owner, it is likely to turn on its accuser. Ezekiel had to 
accuse the Jews of sin. We may often take the very ferocity of the attack made 
upon the gospel as a sign that its opponents are not at ease in their own hearts. 4. A 
spiteful tongue stings like a scorpion. Ezekiel was cruelly hurt when no bodily harm 
was done to him. Possibly his enemies were scarcely conscious of the keenness of 
their words. But the rankling wound which comes from venomous speech is more 
painful than the fiery swelling of the worst scorpion-sting. Spiteful slanderers are more 
mischievous than the most repulsive insects. 

II. The duty. Though scorpions infest the sphere of his labours, still the faithful 
prophet must toil on, braving their threatening stings. The people at Banias build 
leafy booths on the tops of poles, for residence during the hot season, in order to 
escape the attacks of scorpions, which are very abundant in their neighbourhood. 
No such escape is permitted to the prophet of God. 1. Unpopularity may be a sign 
of fidelity. This is a shamefully forgotten doctrine in our day of easy living. Now 
the popmar preacher is regarded as the great preacher, and the unpopular servant 
of God is regarded, even by his brethren, as a " failure." If so, then Ezekiel and 
Jeremiah were " failures," while their now-forgotten comrades, who prophesied smooth 
things, were great " successes." Such a doctrine would have given us no Hebrew pro- 
phets to stand in the first rank of God's heroes. But time is a great avenger. Frederick 
Robertson of Brighton, whose sensitive spirit was assailed by a scorpion-press during 
his lifetime, is now recognized as a prince of Divine teachers ; while the very names of 
his enemies — happily for them — are forgotten. 2. ITie duty of fidelity in the midst 
of persecution is blessed loith heavenly rewards. The rewards begin on earth in the 
BOiU's culture. Mediasval monks would roll in thorns for self-chastisement. Persecuted 
prophets needed to invent no such fantastic devices. The thorns were thrust upon 
them ; their path was beset by scorpions. There is danger in the path of ease. It is 
better to be stung by the vicious scorpion than bitten by the deadly cobra. The thorn- 
bush of persecution has its venomous insects, but in the flower-beds of pleasure lies 
the serpent whose bite is death. 



CH. n.l— 10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL, S5 



Ver. 7. — Preaching to unwilling hearers. There can be no more difficult or painful 
duty than that of a preacher to unwilling hearers. But it was seen in the case of 
Hebrew prophets; it was illustrated in Christ's brave dealings vvith the Pharisees and 
Sadducees ; and it must necessarily fall at times to the lot of every faithful Christian 
minister in the present day. 

I. It is the duty of the preacher to deliver a message to all kinds of 
HBAREKS. He cannot select his favourite audience. He has no right to wait till men 
ask (or his message. He is the herald sent into the camp, who must declare the will 
of his Master, even though his hearers are too busy with their work or amusement to 
give him attention, or too unsympathetic to care to hear what he says. With most 
things the supply is regulated by the demand. The farmer will not grow more 
corn than the people need for food ; the manufacturer turns out the largest quantity 
of those products that sell most widely. But this spirit of commerce should not obtain 
any footing iu the Christian Church. Yet, nn doubt, it has invaded the Church, and 
the temptation is to echo popular cries from the iiulpit, and to bow to the will of 
the pew. Many people ask for short sermons, restive under the strain of attention 
to more lengthy discourses. Some wish for pleasant, cheerful themes ; they are par- 
ticularly desirous tliat no demands shall be made on their thinking faculties ; they 
would luxuriate in sweet, soothing fancies. Then the temptation is to concede what 
is thus demanded. That is to lower the claims of truth. In this region it is necessary 
to create the right hunger, and here the supply must precede and exceed the demand. 
The negligence of the people is no reason for the preacher's reticence. 

II. The duty to preach to umwilling hearers rests on Divine obligations and 
ON HUMAN NEEDS. 1. Divine obligations. The preacher is not the slave of his people, 
but the servant of God. If he is sent to speak for God, a burden of responsibility is 
laid upon him. Moreover, he is the custodian of truth. Truth seeks the daylight and 
the free air. Men have no right to imprison her because her presence in the busy world 
is sometimes unwelcome. God's truth must be brought even where it is not sought, 
even where it is hated and rejected. 2. Humam, needs. They who are most reluctant 
to hear a message from Heaven most need that message, for their very indifference or 
opposition is a sign of that state of alienation which God is seeking to overcome. If 
the family were awake when the house was on fire there would be no necessity for the 
watchman to call to them. But in their sleep is their great danger. Just because 
they are indifferent they most need to be warned. 

IIL The responsibility op the preacher is limited to the faithful delivery 
OF HIS MESSAGE. Mark this — the delivery must be faithful. There is a snare for the 
preacher in our subject. He may lay the charge of the failure of his message against 
his hearers, when he ought to have taken it home to himself. Though he cannot 
command success, it is his duty to aim at it and to labour for it with the utmost 
assiduity. Possibly the message has not been rightly apprehended by him nor wisely 
and affectionately commended to the people. He may have been indolent in prepara- 
tion. He may have been cold or stem, haughty or aloof from his hearers, when he 
should have approached them in a loving brotherly way. Or his own heart may not 
have opened to receive the message. How, then, can he expect his hearers to be 
interested in it? One cold heart can inspire no warmth in other cold hearts. But 
when the preacher has done his best in the strength of God, he must leave his message. 
At this point the responsibility shifts to the hearers. Even the words of him who 
spake as never man spake sometimes fell by the wayside and on stony ground. What 
wonder if ours seem to fail ? The apparent failure of the faithful is indeed no real 
failure ; the words may fail, but the man has not failed, for he has done his duty — and 
no man can do more than that. 

Ver. 8. — Faithful among the faithless. Ezekiel is to go among the rebellious people ; 
but he is to be most careful not to rebel himself against the will of God. Though he 
stand alone, yet he must be true. 

I. A SEVERE TRIAL. It is difficult to be faithful among the faithless. There ia « 
subtle poison in the atmosphere of evil society. No doubt Christ instituted his Church 
in part that his followers might be lifted out of the malarious regions of sinful associa- 
tions, and drawn into a more wholesome climate of saintly companionship. Ezekiel 



Se THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. n. 1—10. 

was scarcely allowed any such help from Church-fellowship. Like Nehemiah, he had 
to stand alone and face the current of rebellion. Then, beyond the unconscious 
temptation to go with the multitude to do evil, there was a very visible danger in the 
case of Ezekiel. He was called to testily against his brethren with such a message 
that they would turn against him like so many scorpions. He was to find himself in 
a border of thorns as the penalty of his fidelity (see ver. 6). Although this visible 
persecution is now rare, the spirit of it is not dead, and there are places still wliere the 
faithful must stand alone and be made to smart severely for their integrity. How olten 
this is the case with one high-principled Christian young man in a house of business 
where the methods of conducting trade and amusement both assail bis fidelity 1 It is 
hard to be faithful under such circumstances. Yet the duty does not cease. The 
rebellion of others is no excuse for us also to rebel. 

n. A LOFTY DUTY. 1. Extraordinary fidelity. Ezekiel was not only warned not 
to rebel in the exact manner of his fellow-countrymen. He had a higher command 
laid upon him than any that was imposed upon them. They were only required to 
keep the general Law of God ; he was commissioned to a special task of difficulty and 
danger in a prophet's career, and his faithfulness was to consist in his not rebelling 
against this great task. The most honoured servants of God are those who are set in 
the posts of greatest danger and required to discharge the most arduous service. Brave 
men leap to such service and danger in human pursuits, eagerly volunteering to join 
expeditions into the heart of Africa or in search for the north pole. Some, too, are as 
eager in God's service. These are God's heroes. 2. Superhuman aid, Ezekiel was 
a man of God, a man of faith and prayer. Hence his power to be faithful. To stand 
faithful we must feel the influence of God's grace. It is possible to be 

" True as the needle to the pole^ 
Or as the dial to the sun," 

because needle and dial-shadow follow great commanding influences. 

III. A BFLENDID EXAMPLE. One faithful man among a host of traitors is a mighty 
encouragement to the weak. He can be a nucleus about which they can cluster, 
although they would never have had strength to stand without his great personality. 
Like a lighthouse in a wild and <vintry night, the solitary example of fidelity sheds 
its encouraging rays far out to the larkness round about. Joseph in immoral Egypt, 
Daniel in unprincipled Babylon, Paul at wicked Rome, Luther at Worms, Latimer 
at Oxford, — these men are beacon-ligLts shining down the ages. It is worth the cost 
of all the hardship of exceptional trials of fidelity to become such magnificent inspiring 
influences for all time. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — " Son of man." This expression is so constantly used with reference to 
Ezekiel that it cannot be considered a mere Oriental idiom with no peculiar significance. 
There were special reasons why Ezekiel, as the prophet chosen to communicate God's 
will to Israel, should be thus designated. 

I. True humakitt in the pbophbt enabled him to hold communion with the 
Father of sfibits. Man is God's chosen vehicle for communicating with man. The 
ministry of angels is a reality, but such ministry is subordinate to that which is strictly 
human. Man is made in the likeness of God, and shares in the Divine reason. His 
highest thinking, it was grandly said by Kepler, is thinking over again the thoughts of 
Ood. It is in virtue of this prerogative that human beings are able to enter into the 
counsels of the Eternal Wisdom. The inferior inhabitants of this globe may indeed 
express in their structure the designs of the Creator. But man is more than the 
creature; he is the child of the heavenly Father, who calls his children to share in the 
revelation of his own character and will. And certain selected individuals, notably tho.se 
designated " prophets," are admitted into special relations with the Infinite Spirit, that 
they may be made the medium of carrying out his purposes of wisdom and of love. 

IL The prophet's true humanity enabled him to enter into the CIROUMSTANCEa 

AND NEEDS OP THOSE TO WHOM HE MiKisTEUED. The prophots Sprang from the people, 
and knew them from familiar intercourse and intimacy; they knew their sins and 



CH. II. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET BZEKIEL. S7 

weaknesses, their temptations and straggles. Some, like Elijah and John the Baptist, 
led a life secluded and ascetic — only now and again coming furth from their retirement 
and mingling with their countrymen lor some special purpose. But others lived amongst 
those whom they had known in childhood and youth, and made themselres acquainted 
with their temporal condition anii their spiritual wants. It seems to have been so 
with Ezekiel. And as participation in common sorrows and sufferings often draws 
men closer together, it is reasonable to believe that comrades in exile were upon terms 
of closest fellowship and correspondence. The prophet knew well, in virtue of a 
common nature and a common lot, the people amongst whom he dwelt, and to whom 
he was called to minister. 

in. The prophet's true humanity rendered his ministry sympathetic, 
AUTHORITATIVE, AND EFFECTIVE. Men may See much of one another, may be hrought 
frequently into contact with one another, and yet may have little mutual knowledge, 
and even feel little interest in one another's experiences. . But this was not the case 
with Ezekiel, who did not harden his heart against even the disobedient, rebellious, and 
unresponsive, but, on the contrary, cultivated, as a man, a spirit of true brotherhood 
with his fellow-men. He was deeply pained when it was his duty to threaten or to 
denounce ; he was sincerely glad when it was given him to speak words of kindness 
and encouragement. There was, in consequence of this human sympathy, an especial 
authoritativeness in his prophetic ministrations. What he said and did went home, in 
many cases, to the heatts of those whom he addressed ; because they interpreted hia 
words and deeds in the light of his spirit and character. 

IV. The prophet was thus a type of Christ himself, who was wont to designatb 
HIMSELF THE SoN OF MAN. Perfect Man as well as perfect God, the Lord Christ entered 
into the position of those whom he came to save. Like Ezekiel, the Lord Jesus came 
to a captive people ; like Ezekiel, he addressed to them words of reproach, words of 
warning, words of consolation, words of hope. He did more than this : he bore their 
sins, and carried their sorrows. And thus he brought deliverance to the bondmen, 
opened the prison-doors, and hade the oppressed go free. — T. 

Ver. 3. — Eebdliout nations. This must have been a hard message for Ezekiel to 
deliver to his fellow-countrymen. It was the heathen, the Gentiles, who were usually 
designated " nations; " and in applying this desijination to Israel, he seemed to degrade 
the chosen people from their peculiar position of honour, and to rank them with the 
idolatrous nations whom they were accustomed to despise. And it has been surmised 
that, in employing the plural, the prophet intended to intimate that the Hebrews no 
longer constituted one people, one state, but were divided among themselves, dissolved 
as it were into disconnected and opposing sections and factions. It may be just and 
profitable to regard Israel as representative of the human race, in respect to this 
lamentable charge of rebellion, which may certainly be brought against mankind at 



I. Bebellion implies on the part of those who are guilty of it the possession 
OF A VOLUNTARY NATURE. If there is no liberty, there can be no rebellion. Eebellion 
implies intelligent apprehension, and it implies deliberate purpose. The rebel knows 
what is the authority which he defies, and he defies that authority, not only intelligently, 
but of purpose. Brutes do not rebel ; but men and angels may do, and have done 
Hence the serious responsibility attaching to rebellion against God on the pai t of wilful 
though misguided men. 

II. Eebellion implies a just authority aoainst which, contrary to right, the 
REBEL sets HIMSELF. There can be no rebellion where there is no government, no 
rebel where there is no governor. Neither can there be rebellion, properly speaking, 
against a usurper, who has no claim upon the loyalty and alli glance of those whona he 
may unjustly denominate his subjects. The moral government of the world is a fact, 
and its a J ministration is characterized by equity. As the universal Legislator and 
Judge, God demands the subjection and obedience of mankind; all are his lawful 
subjects. There is no rebel against Divine authority who can bring against the rule 
and sway of the great Governor of the universe the charge of injustice and tyranny. 
" Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ? " 

IIL Bebelliov aoainbt God involves great quilt akd misert. This awful fact 



38 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPH^IT BZEKIEL. [ch, n. 1—10. 

is not to be questioned by any reasonable student of the moral history of mankind. 
Nowhere more strikingly than in the liistory of Israel has it been shown tiiat they 
who resist Divine authority and violate Divine Law incur the most awful guilt and 
entail upon themselves the most awful punishments. Sentimentalists may complain 
that such assertions are the expression of seveiity and fanaticism; but it. remains for 
ever true that " the way of transgressors is hard," and " the wages of sin is death." 

IV. Man's guilty KEBEiiLioN prompted infinite mbbcy to provide a vast 
EEDEMPTION AND DBLIVERANOB. The history of the Hebrew people exhibits instances 
not only of human apostasy, but of Divine compassion and merciful interposition and 
deliverance. Thus the Captivity was itself a punishment for rebellion, for idolatry, 
and for all the evils idolatry brought upon the nation. Yet God did not forget to be 
gracious. He made the Captivity an occasion for displaying his grace ; mercy triumphed 
over judgment. Eepentance and submission took the place of resistance and defiance. 
Discipline, chastisement, answered its appointed purpose. God pitied the rebels even 
whilst he censured the rebellion. And very similar has been his treatment of mankind 
at large. The whole race has rebelled, and the whole race has been redeemed. There 
is spiritual amnesty provided through Christ Jesus, reconciliation through faith and 
repentance, restoration to affectionate loyalty and to happy subjection through the 
gracious influences of the Holy Spirit. 

V. When rebellion is subdued, and the rebel humbled, subjection is followed 
BT LOYALTY AND HAPPINESS. God does not leave his wrork hall done. He pardons the 
penitent, but he blesses the loyal and the reconciled. Great is the change which takes 
place in the state of him who has laid down the weapons of rebellion and has cast him- 
self in penitence and submission before the footstool of the throne. As rebellion is 
exchanged for loyalty, and defiance for submission and gratitude, so disgrace is 
exchanged for honour, and the just sentence of death for the merciful assurance of 
Divine favour and eternal life. — T. 

Vers. 4^ 5. — The prophet's commission. Nothing is clearer than that the prophets did 
not believe themselves to be acting and speaking simply upon the promptings of their 
own inclinations or their own convictions of what was right and expedient. Whether 
they were self-deluded or not, certain it is that they deemed themselves ministers and 
messengers of the EternaL It was this which gave them both courage and authority. 
In the most explicit manner, Ezekiel in this passage records his commission to go 
among his fellow-countrymen as the herald of God's wisdom, authority, and grace. 

I. The commission. " I do send thee unto them." There is great simplicity and 
great dignity in this language of authorization ; he who heard it could never forget it. 
When disappointed in the result of his ministry, or alarmed at the threats of those 
whom he sought to benefit, these words must often have recurred to the mind of the 
prophet, inspiring him with fresh zeal and courage. If the ambassador of a powerful 
king Is strengthened in the fulfilment of his trust by the recollection that he received 
his authority from a court honoured by friends and feared by foes, how much more 
must the ambassador from God derive courage and confidence from the knowledge that 
he is sent by the Supreme, who will never desert those who engage in his service and 
do his will 1 

II. The mbssaob. At first the prophet received no other message than this: "Thus 
salth the Lord God." But this was the earnest of much to follow. And, Indeed, the 
whole of the prophecies were amplifications of this. Ezekiel was to go among the 
children of the Captivity with words from Jehovah. A prophet is one who speaks for, 
on behalf of, the Divine Being by whom ho is commissioned. If the speaker had his 
own special reasons for believing that the words he uttered were not his own, but G^d's, 
those who listened to his declarations of warning and of promise had a witness within, 
in the testimony of their own conscience, assuring them that the prophet spoke with 
Divine authority. And this is bo still with all who will listen reverently and obediently 
to the heavenly voice. It is thus that the Scriptures possess over our minds a pre- 
eminent power ; their writers preface every authoritative utterance with the statement, 
"Thus iaith the Lord." 

IIL Thb tasioub bboeption of the messaqe. It is in accordance with the reason- 
ablenMof ths inspired writers that they cherished such moderate expectations regarding 



oa.n. 1— 10.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. «9 

the effect to be produced by their ministry. Fanatics would have felt assured that, in 
such circumstances, they must meet with ready credence and immediate obedience. 
Bzekiel certainly had no such delusive anticipations, and was indeed expressly warned 
that his message would meet with varying reception. Some would hear, some would 
forbear. It was with Bzekiel as in the Christian dispensation it was with Paul ; we 
are told that the result of his ministry at Eome was that " some believed the things 
which were spoken, and some disbelieved." 

IV. The impression proddcbd by God's messekobb upon those to whom he was 
SENT, " They shall know that there hath been a prophet among them." Even those 
who were so much under the influence of ignorance, prejudice, evil example, and sin, 
that they did not and would not turn unto God, nevertiieless were well aware that their 
obstinate impiety was unjustifiable. They might ridicule the prophet in their language, 
but they reverenced him in their hearts. Beneath the laugh of incredulity was a deep- 
seated fear, springing from an inward conviction that the voice they rejected was indeed 
the voice of God. Had one come among them flattering their vanity and pride, and minis- 
tering to their sinful tastes, they would in their heart of hearts have despised him. But 
when one came fearlessly upbraiding them with their unfaithfulness, and denouncing 
their guilty defection, they could not but know that a prophet had been among them. 

Application. This passage has an especial significance for ministers of God's Word, 
and for all religious teachers. It shows them where their strength lies ; warns them 
against enunciating their own speculations or inculcating precepts founded upon their 
own experience; and directs tliem to go among their fellow-men with this dignifled and 
effective message, " Thus saith the Lord." They may be tempted to court men's 
favour and good will by uttering words of flattery. But it is well that, when so tempted, 
they should remember that there is in men a conscience, which may be repressed, but 
which cannot be crushed, which renders a homage, though silent, to the just authority 
of truth and righteousness, and which recognizes, even though it does not lekd to 
practical obedience, the precepts and the warnings which are from God. — ^T. 

Ver. 8. — Prophetic receptivtmess. This Book of Ezekiel is one abounding in figure 
and symbol; it would be a mistake to take all its contents literally. When we read 
that the prophet was required by God to eat that which was given him, and are then 
informed that a written scroll was that which was to be eaten, we are at first surprised. 
But then we recollect that eating has been in many religions regarded as a sacred and 
symbolical act. The Mosaic dispensation had its Paschal meal, and the Christian 
religion has its sacrament of the Lord's Suppei'. So that the symbol of the text is quite 
in accordance with the practices which, upon Divine authority, have prevailed in the 
Church throughout the ages. 

I. In order that the teacher mat impart to his fellow-men, he must first 
RECEIVE FROM GoD. That this is the meaning of the symbol of this passage is evident 
from the context. It was in connection with the prophet's commission that he was 
bidden to eat the scroll. It was thus that he was to fit and qualify himself for his 
special ministry ; he was to take from God, that he might have wherewith to supply 
the needs of the people. 

II. The revelation of God must be gradually and completely appropriated 
AND assimilated BY THE MINISTER OP DiviNE TRUTH. Eating is a proccss by which 
suitable nutriment is introduced into the bodily system, and assimilated by the organs 
of digestion, so that it both builds up the bodily structure and supplies the organism 
with renewed power for life-work. Such is the function fulfilled by God's truth in con- 
nection with the spiritual being and life. The teacher of the revealed mind and will of 
the Supreme cannot be fitted for his service by a superficial and slight acquaintance 
with his message. That message must sink into the depths of his nature, must 
penetrate his being, must enter into all the functions of the spiritual life. 

III. The beliqious teacher may have to contend with and overcome natural 
disinclinations towards some parts of the ministry entrusted to him. The 
requirement of God could not but awaken in the prophet's mind something of repug- 
nance. The scroll he was bidden to eat was filled with lamentations, mourning, and 
woe • the message he was commissioned to deliver was a message of reproach, of 
expostulation, of warning, of threatening. Such a ministry could not be agreeable to 



40 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ii. 1—10. 

his natural inclinations ; he must have shrunk from it as uncongenial and distasteful. 
It must often happen that the fulfilment of duty is distressing to the faithful and yet 
sensitive preacher of righteousness ; it is a bitter thing to deliver s message of condem- 
nation to one's feUiiw-men. 

IV. Yet it is sweet to obey and to fulfil the comuands of the Lord. When 
the disinclination to undertake the painful commission had been overcome, a profound 
satisfaction followed. The prophet found that in keeping God's commandments there 
is great reward. The distress is temporary and brief; the satisfaction is lasting. The 
surgeon may often inflict pain upon his patient; the physician may see it right to 
order a course of treatment which is repulsive. To act wisely and conscientiously may, 
in such cases, be painful. But let the duty be discharged, and there follows • true 
satislaotion. It was so with Ezekiel ; it is so with every true and faithful servant of 
God. The office may be one arduous and difficult, painful and repugnant ; yet, if it is 
the office to which God calls a man, obedience and fidelity, the unshrinking fulfilment 
of the service, will bring a rich reward. Sweet are the delights of those who conquer 
self, who yield themselves up to the service of that Saviour who himself carried the 
cross. They shall enter into the joy of the Lord. — T. 

Ver. 9. — The scroll. It is certainly remar able that, whilst the ministry of Ezekiel 
was to be fulfilled by word of mouth, the communication of its substance should be 
figuratively represented by the scroll — " a roll of a book, written within and without." 
What the scroll was to the prophet, it may fairly be said, the volume of Holy Scripture 
is to us. Holy Wiit is the record of successive revelations, and its form, as literature, 
aaswers very important purposes. Scripture is the standard of faith and doctrine and 
practice, to wliich the ministers of the gospel are bound to refer, according to the well- 
known saying, " The Church to witness, the Scripture to prove." This strikingly 
symbolical pas!<age suggests valuable truth regarding both the form and the substance 
of the inspired volume. 

I. The fokm of the weitten revelation. The fact is that we hare the scroll, 
the volume, i.e. the mind of the holy and inspired men of old perpetuated in the written 
form. Certain advantages are by this means secured, which more than compensate for 
any disadvantages which may possibly be connected with the literary form which 
revelation assumes. 1. A written revelation, as compared with one merely oral, is 
deliberate. What men say in conversation, or under the stress of popular oratory, is 
not to be compaied in this respect with what is carefully committed to a literary form. 
Speech is often intended merely to produce an immediate impression ; what is written 
is probably intended to bear examination, to stand the test of reflection and of time. 
2. OonUnv/yua. Fragmentary and disjointed utterances are all that can be expected 
from an ordinary spfaker ; and even a thoughtful and powerful speaker must usually, 
by the very conditions of his work, come short in the point of orderliness and continuity. 
The preparation of a book, and especially of a volume containing in many books the 
revelation of the Divine mind, involves a design, a plan, a connection and correspond- 
ence among the several parts which go to make up the whole. 3. Incorruptible. The 
untrust worthiness of tradition is proverbial. Wisdom is apparent in the arrangement 
by which the communication of God's will to man has been placed beyond the corrupt- 
ing influences to which every oral tradition is liable. 

II. The substance op the written revelation. The " roll of a book " delivered 
to Ezekiel may be presumed to have been the emblem of the communications which 
were to form the matter of his prophetic ministry. And although the writing is 
described as consisting of mourning and woe, this is probably only because such was 
the prevailing tenor of the earlier portions of his prophecies. We may say generally 
that the written revelation through Ezekiel is a summary of that which occupies tha 
entire Bible. The scroll, accordingly, may be considered as: 1. Displaying the Divi 
interest in mankind. 2. Revealing Divine acquaintance with men's sinful charact 
their wanderings from God, and the various errors and follies into which sin has ev 
led its victims. 3. Declaring God's foresight of the miserable condition into whicn 
idolatry, apostasy, and every kind of moral evil and error must certainly plunge the 
rebellious. Nowhere is this more vividly displayed than in this book of prophecies. 
4. Expressing the Divine solicitude fur man's welfare, and the Divine provision for 



OH. n. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 41 



man b recovery and salvation. In all these several particulars the Book of Bzekiel is 
a miniature of the Bible. The theme of the prophet, and the theme of Holy Writ u * 
whole, is surely nothing else than this— the exhibition of man's heinous sin, and the 
offer of God's merciful salvation. — ^T. 

Vers. 1,2. — The interlacing of Divine command and Divine strength. The command! 
of God are acts of kindness. If he had abandoned us, he would give us bo indications 
of his will. He is not so unreasonable as to give commands without also proffering 
help. If he says « This is the way," he also says, " I will be with thee." Hence, with 
Augustine, we may say to God, "Give what thou reqnirest, and require what thou 
pleases t." 

L Command. "Stand npon thy feet." The form of address, " son of man,'' was 
Intended to encourage the prophet. The vision of God's kingdom, and of his royal 
state, had oppressed the mind of Ezekiel, and he had prostrated himself before such 
majestic splendour. But now the voice of the supreme Monarch assures him that he may 
also find a place among the honoured servants of Jehovah. Though but a frail man, a 
descendant of erring progenitors, he was yet a man, and therefore capable of high 
attainment and noble service. There was no hardship implied in this command to 
stand upon his feet. It chimed in with his own predisposition. Duty taken step by 
step, in easy gradations, becomes a delight. The requirement was honourable. There 
had been occasion for prostrate humility in the presence of the holy God. But humility 
is the way to honour. Now he is required to lift himself up to the full stature of his 
manhood, and to be ready for active and willing service. Use thy feet I Look heaven- 
ward I Be a man ! Equip thyself for service ! 

II. Pbomisb. " I will speak unto thee." This is a stupendous act of Divine conde- 
scension — to hold intercourse with fallen, fickle men. It is a mark of special favour if 
an earthly monarch calls a commoner into his presence, discloses to him royal counsels, 
and engages his services for the throne. Much greater token of good will is it, if that 
commoner had been heretofore a detected criminal, a dangerous rebel. But the simili- 
tude serves very poorly to illustrate the immeasurable grace of the heavenly King, who 
stoops to converse nith the children of men. Human monarchs have set times, which 
they set apart to give audience to the noblest of their subjects. But God permits us to 
approach him at all times, and, if we will but speak to him, he will also speak unto us. 
"His delights are with the sons of men." He loves to employ men in bis service. 
Tea I he has determined to employ none but men in proclaiming to their brethren the 
royal purposes of redemption. 

III. Indwellino powbb. While Jehovah spake to his servant, " the Spirit entered 
into him." Finding in Ezekiel a readiness to obey, God immediately imparted to him 
the needed strength. If the will be present with us, the power to perform will not long 
be absent. When humility opens the door of the human heart, God will enter and 
abide there. It was not so much Ezekiel who put forth his strength and rose erect, as 
the indwelling Spirit, " who set him on his feet." Verily, "in God we live, and move, 
and exist." " I live ; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." Bzekiel's name was no 
misnomer. In very deed, God was his Strength. And the result of the Spirit's entrance, 
further, was " that I heard him that spake unto me." The very power to hear, whether 
by the organ of sense, or by the finer aptitude of the spirit, comes alone from God. " He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear." — D. 

Vers. 2 — 5. — An arduous emhassage. Every prophet is b missionary; every true 
missionary is a prophet. In an inferior sense of the word, he is a mediator — a mediator 
between God and man. 

L The missionary oharaoteb op the pbophbt. He is one " sent." He goes not 
to this difficult and responsible work by the impulse of his own reason or will. He is 
in the employ and under the direction of another — of One whom he cannot disregard. 
He cannot go or stay, as he pleases. He is a servant. The Son of God himself has 
undertaken similar work. He was " sent " into our world on an errand of kindness. 
" As thou hast sent me, so have I sent them." 

IL The missionary's unpbomisino field of action. ** I send thee to the children 
of Israel, to a rebellious nation." The possession of outward advantages, or of special 



42 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. n. 1—10. 

Divine favours, does not ensure gratitude or obedience on the part of men. In Eden, 
man transgressed. In Canaan, the glory of all lands, the Hebrews rebelled. Righteous- 
ness is not conveyed by blood-relationship. The piety of Abraham did not descend in 
the line of natural posterity. But rebellion isaweed that grows freely in the degenerate 
soil of the human heart. The people of Israel, in Ezekiel's time, were hardened in sin. 
The evil had become inveterate by long centuries of vicious habit, and all the alternate 
measures of kindness and severity which God had employed had failed to reduce the 
people to submission. Though now in exile and disgrace, yet " to that very day " the 
rebellious spirit continued. Nor were they even ashamed of the past. No blush tinged 
their cheeks. All right feeling seemed petrified within ! 

III. The missionabt's instrument. He is armed simply with the authoritative 
Word of God. What he hears from God, <Aa*, and tta< oZorae, may he speak J He is not 
allowed to elaborate, from his own judgment, conditions of reconciliation. He is not 
to rely for success on the inventiveness of reason, nor on beguiling acts of sophistry, nor 
on the persuasiveness of subtle rhetoric. He is to proclaim everywhere, " Thus saith 
the Lord ! " Authority is the weapon on which he is to rely — not human authority, 
but Divine. He is to be simply the mouthpiece of Deity. But, being this, he will 
become the power of God and the wisdom of God. His business is to speak Divine 
truth with all the pathos of Divine love. 

IV. The missionabt's encoubagbmbnt. Whether the people would hear, or whether 
they would forbear, was still an unsolved problem so far as the prophet was concerned. 
God had not given to him the promise of visible and direct success. But whether they 
accepted or rejected the Divine overtures, the end which God anticipated would be 
realized. The people should have this conviction inwrought in their minds, viz. that a 
messenger from God had been among them. This was all that Ezekiel migh t confidently 
expect. This was the goal at which he was to aim, viz. to convince them that ho 
was God's prophet — to commend his mission to the consciences of the people. Hence, 
if no other end was gained, he was not to feel depression of souL Whether the people 
relented or further rebelled, he was to continue his simple work ; and rest assured that 
God would defend his own cause, and bring final good out of present evil. — D. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Ood's ambassador a warrior. The path of duty, since the Fall, is never 
smooth. We may have an inward sense of delight — tranquil satisfaction, arising from 
the approval of conscience and the smile of God — but from without we must expect 
sharp opposition. There is demand for vigilance, skill, and courage. 

I. Opposition foreseen. Men who have lono; time departed from God are not easily 
induced to return. The tree that has grown wildly crooked, cannot readily be restored 
to straightness and shape. Those who have abandoned the paths of truth and righteous- 
ness, sadly degrade their original nature. The cedars are reduced to thorns and briers. 
Sinners are unprofitable and injurious in the world — a curse to society. They bear no 
fruit, or only sour and poisonous fruit. They choke the, promise of better things. Or 
they are like scorpions, bent only on mischief. Originally lords of nature, they have 
sunk to the level of the meanest insects. There is poison in their crafty words. There 
is a dagger in their very looks. 

II. CoTJEAQE demanded. " Be not afraid of them." Why should God's servants 
fear? Our adversaries' words are mere breath. Not a particle of power have they but 
such as is permitted them by our Master. While they open their mouths in loud boast- 
ing, the finger of death is loosening the silver cord within. As the mighty God hath 
said to the angry waves, so hath he said to these, " Thus far shall ye go, and no further." 
They may loudly bark, but it is seldom they have power to bite. The fierce opposition 
of the ungodly may turn to our good ; it may and ought to deve'op our courage. The 
severer the conflict, the more strength we may gather, and the greater will be our 
triumph. As they are so zealous in a bad cause, how much more zealous should we be 
in the very best of enterprises? 

III. The only weapon permitted. In this conflict with human folly and rebellion, 
our only weapon is to be " the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God." " Thou 
shalt speak my words unto them." If they meet us with contempt and malice, wa 
have but to repeat in calmer tones, and with undisturbed patience, the same facts — the 
message from the lips of God. Any addition of ours, however suitable it may seem, 



CH. n. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 43 

only weakens the force of the message. We must see to it that the eda:e of the weapon 
is not blunted by our own carelessness. Our only concern should be that we do speak 
all the counsel of God— that it is the Word of Grod, both in substance and form, which 
we utter. 

IV. An insidious danger exposed. " Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious 
house." One foe within the camp is more injurious than a thousand outside. If a germ 
of disease be in the medicine, it will invalidate all its efficacy. Rebellion assumes a 
myriad forms. It is a hydra with more than a hundred heads. Listlessaess in hearing 
the heavenly commission — a tampering with its fixed terms, a rash attempt to improve 
the Divine original — these and such-like acts are seed-germs of rebellion in the soul. 
" If the salt be deprived of its savour," wherewith shall the corruptions of the world 
be purged out? An unfaithful ambassador adds fresh aggravation to the revolt of a 
■province. Sin is a contagious eviL — D. 

Ver. 9 — ch. iii. 3. — '' TOe bread of heaven." The appetites of the human body may be 
regarded by us as pictures and symbols of the inner hunger of the spirit. Not more 
surely does the body cry out for food than does the inner man crave for truth. He only 
who has created this complex frame can meet its varied wants. 

I. The hungeb of the soul. As the emotional element in man cries out for 
friendship, as the intellectual asks for knowledge, so the spiritual elemen' eagerly 
asks after God's will. " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " To be out of harmony 
with God is misery to the soul. To be ignorant of God's purposes and intentions 
respecting us must bring perpetual disquietude. Hence the question in some form, 
either vague or clear, is ever rising to the surface, " What must I do to gain eternal 
life?" 

II. Divine pbovision. In order to qualify Ezekiel more fully for his undertaking, 
a fresh vision was vouchsafed to him. A hand was stretched out from heaven, contain- 
ing a parchment roll. Inform, it seemed like the " bread that perisheth ; " but it was 
in truth the heavenly manna — the revelation of Jehovah's will. Man, at the best, is 
under the dominance of animal appetites ; and consequently spiritual facts make most 
impression on him when presented under material images. But God never deceives. 
He unfolded the roll; showed him how full it was of instruction and meaning; 
explained to him its real contents, viz. " mourning, lamentations, and woe." Like 
unleavened bread and bitter herbs, this knowledge ot God's will may be most healthful 
for men at certain seasons of their life. God's regard for us is too genuine and profound 
for him to indulge our appetites with dangerous delicacies. The bitter must come before 
the sweet, darkness before light, sorrow before joy. 

III. Personal digestion required. The commnnd is heard, "Eat that I give 
thee." " Fill thy bowels with this roll." A superficial acquaintance with God's will 
is not enough for the prophet's equipment. He must observe, learn, masticate, digest, 
incorporate, the truth. Here is indeed precious counsel — a Physician's wise advice. 
Less food, probably, but more digestion. Heavenly counsel this, which every disciple 
should write in golden letters on his chamber walls. The truth which God gives to 
men does not become really theirs until it is assimilated into their own nature — becomes 
part and parcel of themselves. By examination and reflection and practical obedience, 
this truth passes into the very blood and nerve and fibre of our being. We hecome the 
truth — " living epistles, known and read of all men." 

IV. The taste palatable and pleasant. " It was in my mouth as honey for 
sweetness." The regenerate man will welcome all the truth of God. Whatever God's 
will be, he know-^ that God's will is right, and that righteousness must bring blessing 
and peace. He is not now so blind as to limit his vision to the narrow present; he 
compasses, in the sweep of his eye, the remote and the future. That the prophet learnt 
that lamentation and mourning were decreed, was an element of hope. Would the 
Divine Kuler take such pains with men if he did not intend to do them ultimate good? 
The very severity of the treatment implied that health would come at last. To do the 
will of God is always sweet to the renewed man. Unless our spiritual palate is in a 
diseased condition, every particle of heavenly truth will be " as honey for sweetness." 
" Thy words were found, and I did eat them ; and they were unto me the joy and 
rejcacing of my heart." — ^D. 



a THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. n. 1—10. 

Vers. 3 — 8. — The commission to prophetic service. " Aad he said unto me, Son of 
man, I send thee to the chilcirea of Israel," etc. We have here — 

I. A DiscoDBAGiNG SPHERE OF PBOPHETio SEE VICE. (Vers. 3, 4.) Ezekiel was sent 
to: 1. A people who had mournfully fallen,. "I send thee to the children of Israel, 
to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me." By descent they were sons of 
Israel, who had engaged in mighty wrestling with God, and by faith had prevailed ; 
and they ought to have been his sons in character. But instead of that they are here 
spoken of as " the rebellious nations." The word is plural, as in the margin ; and it is 
that which is used to denote the heathen as distinguished from the people of God. 
They are designated "nations," as if they had something of the sins of all heathen 
peoples. They were sadly degenerate branches of a noble root. In former times the 
Israelites had been the Lord's " peculiar treasure ... a kingdom of priests and a 
holy nation" (Exod. xix. 5, 6); now they were "the rebellious nations that have 
rebelled against " him. 2. A people persistently rehellious against God. Observe the 
repetition of this charge against them in vers. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. Their rebelliousness had 
existed long. Generation after generation they had been revolters against Jehovah. 
"They and their fathers have transgressed against me unto this very day." The 
children trod in the sinful steps of their rebellious fathers. Unless restrained by the 
grace of God, children will imitate their parents, however wicked they may be. Let 
parents remember the power of their example over their children, and so live that their 
children may imitate them with advantage. 3. A people openly obdurate in wicked- 
ness. "They are impudent children, and stiff-hearted." They were hard of face; 
they had lost shame ; they had ceased to blush by reason of their sins. " Were they 
ashamed when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, 
neither could they blush " (Jer. vi. 15). And they were " stiff-hearted" — an expression 
which denotes steadfastness and determination in their evil ways; they were hardened 
in wickedness. 4. A people resolutely hostile to the Lord's prophets. "Briers and 
thorns be with thee, and thou dost dwell among scorpions; be not afraid of their 
words, nor be dismayed at their looks." Three ideas are suggested concerning the 
people. (1) Their barrenness. They were as destitute of the fruits of righteousness 
as dry thorns. (2) Their injuriousness. They would prick and sting as briers and 
thorns. (3) Their venomousness. Like scorpions, they would seek to poison the heart 
and life of the prophet. They would assail him with envenomed words, and scowling, 
threatening looks. The life of a prophet of Jehovah was generally one of trial and 
persecution. Ezekiel is here forewarned of the pains and penalties awaiting him in his 
future course. In like manner our Lord made known to the twelve apostles the perse- 
cutions they would have to encounter in the fulfilment of their mission (Matt. x. 16— 
22). What an evidence it is of the mercy of God that he should send his prophet to 
so rebellious a people (cf. Hos. xi. 7 — 9)! 

II. The subline ohabacteb of fbophetio bebvice. It involves two main func- 
tions. 1. Reception of Divine communications. "Son of man, hear what I say unto 
thee." The prophet must be a devout listener in the glorious temple of Gh>d'8 great 
universe. His spiritual ear must be keenly sensitive even to the whispers of the Divine 
voice. 2. Publication of Divine communications. " Thou shalt say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lord God" (ver. 4). "And thou sbalt speak my words unto them." It is 
his business neither to expound the systems of other men, nor to propound his own 
opinions, but to declare the Word of the Lord. He must speak what he receives from 
God ; and he must speak it in his Name and by his authority. The Christian minister 
is an ambassador of the Lord Jesus Christ, offering his pardon, etc. (cf. 2 Cor. v. 20). 

III. The dnoertain beception of pbopiietio skbviob. "Thou shalt speak ray 
words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear." It was not 
granted to Ezekiel to know how his message would be regnrded by his fellow-country- 
men. He received no assurance that they would hear and heed it. Bather it was 
suggested to him that they might refuse to hear his testimony. Nevertheless, he Bust 
d^ver to them the words which he received from God. He must 

"Learn a prophet's duty: 
For this cause is he bom, and for this cause. 
For this cause comes he to the world — to bear 
WitneiB." 



OH. n. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 46 

And now the ministers of Jesus Christ must speak his Word faithfully, irmspective of 
the treatment which is given to that Word. The treatment which the gospel receives 
from their hearers they are not responsible for ; but for fidelity in the proclamation of 
that gospel they will be held responsible (cf. ch. iii. 16—21). 

IV. The Divine encouragement in prophetic sekvioe. 1. Obedience to the 
Divine call demands this seruice. " I send thee to the children of Israel " (ver. 3) ; 
"I do send thee unto them" (ver. 4); "Be not thou rebellious" (ver. 8). The true 
prophet, whether Hebrew or Christian, is called of God. He cannot decline the service 
without grievous unfaithfulness and disobedience. He is encouraged to fulfil it by the 
fact of the Divine commission ; for he who calls strengthens and sustains his servants. 
2. Attention to the Divin:e exhortations strengthens for this service. " Be not afraid of 
them, neither be afraid of their words," etc. (ver. 6). 1'his exhortation implies that 
he who gives it will defend his servant. "Be not afraid of their faces; for I am with 
thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord" (Jer. i. 8; and see Matt. x. 26—31). 3. The 
assurance of its vindication encourages in this service. " They, whether they will hear, 
or whether they will forbear, yet shall know that there hath been a prophet among 
them." Because of his covenant relation to the children of Israel, the Lord will send 
his prophet unto them. " His testimony, the tidings from him, must be heard in the 
midst of Israel." The declaration of that testimony was a proof of the fidelity of the 
Lord to his covenant engagements. And the people should know the genuineness of 
that testimony. Those who truly heard it would know, by blessed experience of the 
results of obedience, that a prophet had been among them. And those who rejected it 
Would know by bitter experience, know to their confusion, that a prophet had been 
among them, and that his words were true. So also" shall the mission of every true 
Christian minister be vindicated, as we see from 2 Cor. ii. 14 — 16. 

Conclusion. 1. Let those who have received a mission from the Lord he encouraged 
tofidfil it. (Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 1.) 2. Let those to whom the Word of the Lord is preached 
- take heed how they hear," — W. J. 

7er. 9 — ch.iii. 3. — Hie vision of the roll; or,a view of the prophetic message. "And 
when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me," etc. This section concerning the 
roll of prophecy must be looked upon as being; of the nature of vision. It pertained 
not to the external and material, but to the internal and spirituaL It suggests the 
following observations concerning the prophetic message. 

I. The pbophetio message is received from the Lord. "And when I lookeil, 
behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roll of a book was therein; and he 
spread It before me." The volume was unrolled before him that he might become 
acquainted with the Divine commission given to him ; " undertake his mission with 
a clear consciousness of its difficulty ; " and know the Word of the Lord which he was 
to proclaim. He was not to promulgate his own thoughts, opinions, or convictions 
(however true or noble they might have been); but the things which were revealed to 
him by God. "Thou shalt say unto them. Thus saith the Lord G<id. , . . And thou 
shalt speak my words unto them" (vers. 4, 7). And the Christian minister is to 
" preach the gospel " (Mark xvi. 15), to " preach the Word " (2 Tim. iv. 2), after the 
example of the apostles who, " when they had preached the Word of the Lord, 
returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel," etc. (Acts viii. 25). "They ceased 
not to teach and preach Jesus Christ " (Acts v. 42 ; and cf. 1 Cor. i. 23 ; 2 Cor. iv. 5 ; 
Eph. iii. 8; Col. i. 27, 28). „, „ 

IL The pbophetio message is both long and mournful. The roll was " written 
within and without : and there was written therein lamentations, and mourning, and 
woe." This roll is intended to represent the book of the prophet. 1. It was long, 
"Written within and without." Such was the extent and fulness of the revelation 
that the one side, which generally was alone used for writing on, was insufficient to 
Cdntain it- both sides were required. 2. It was mournful. "There was written 
therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe." A correct description of many of the 
prophecies of this book. How mournful was the moral condition of the people as set 
forth by the prophet! How woeful the judgments which he proclaimed unto them ! 
Very often the Word of the Lord by the prophets was in fact a heavy " burden " 
(cf.Li«. xiii. Ij XV. 1; xvii. 1; xix. 1; Nah. i. 1; Hab. i. 1; Zech. ix. 1; xii. 1 : 



46 T[]E BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. m. 1—27. 

M»L L 1). And the Word of the Lord to the rebellious and the hardened (such as the 
Israelites were) is still a stern word — a wurd of condemnation and woe. The true 
prophet cannot prophesy smooth things to stiff-necked sinners. To such character* 
he must proclaim " the severity of God." 

III. The prophetic message must be well diqebted by the pbophet. "More- 
over he said uato me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roll," etc. (ch. iiL 
1 — 3). The meaning of this is given in ch. iii. 10, " Son of man, all my words that 
I shall speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears." He must 
receive it, meditate upon it, appropriate it, make it a part of his being. " Here we 
have the right expression," says Umbreit on eating the roll, " to enable us to form 
a judgment and estimate of true inspiration. The Divine does not remain as a strange 
element in the man ; it becomes his own feeling thoroughly, penetrates him entirely, 
just as food becomes a part of his bodily frame." There is need of a similar appro- 
priation of the Word of God by Christian preachers to-day. That Word should be in 
them not only by intellectual apprehension, but by spiritual assimilation also. It 
should be not merely on their lips, but in their hearts. This will give the accent and 
power of conviction to their words when they publish it. 

IV. The prophetic message was delightful unto the prophet. "Then did 
I eat it ; and it was in my mouth as honey fur sweetness." " Thy words were found, 
and I did eat them," etc. (Jer. xv. 16). It seems strange that this roll of " lamenta- 
tions, and mourning, and woe " should be sweet to Ezekiel. It was so probably : 
1. Because it was the Word of the Lord. (Of. Ps. xix. 10 ; cxix. 103.) 2. Because of the 
honour conftrred upon him in making him the agent of the Lord in hearing and 
speaking that Word. " It is infinitely sweet and lovely to be the organ and the spokes- 
man of the Most High " (Hengstenberg). 3. Because even its severest portions were 
righteous. There was nothing that would clash with his sense of justice and truth. 
Says Calvin, "1'he sweet taste means Ezekiel's approbation of God's judgment and 
commands." 4. Because hehind the severest judgments there was the grace of the Lord 
Ood. In the roll there were promises of mercy and restoration to the penitent. 
" Athwart the cloud," says Hengstenberg, " the rainbow gleams. Better to be con- 
demned by God than comforted by the world. For he who smites can also heal, and 
will heal, if his proclamation of judgment, and the judgment itself, be met by peni- 
tence ; while, on the other hand, the comfort of the world is vain." So the roll was 
in the prophet's "mouth as honey for sweetness." Yet there were times when his 
stern message and his arduous mission were not sweet to him, and he " went in bitter- 
ness, in the heat of his spirit" (ch. iii. 14; and cf. Eev. x. 9, 10). The work of the 
Christian preacher has its sweetness and bitterness; its high and holy joys, and its 
deep and heart-rending sorrows. 

V. The prophetic message must be faithfully delivered. " Son of man, eat 
this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel." Even despite the determined oppo- 
sition of those to whom he is sent, he must discharge his mission with fidelity (of. ch. 
iii. 4 — 11, the meaning of which is very similar to that of the paragraph, ch. ii. 3 — 8, 
which has already engaged our attention). And it is required of the ministers of the 
gospel of Jesus Christ that they be faithful to the great trust which is committed to 
them (1 Cor. iv. 1, 2 ; Eph. vi. 21 ; Col. i. 7 ; iv. 7 ; 2 Tim. ii. 2). Blessed are they 
who in the review of their life can humbly declare, with St. Paul, that they have kept 
the glorious deposit which was entrusted to them (cf. 1 Tim. i. 11 ; 2 Tim. iv. 7). — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 

niiATJTi?B TTT ' ^^> ^^' "^^^ *™8 prophct does not choose 

l.JlAi'liLW 111. I ijjg message (Acts iv. 20) ; his " meat" is to 

Ver. 1. — Eat that thon findest, etc. The | do his Lord's will (John iv. 34), and he takes 

iteration of the command of oh. ii. 8 seems j what he " finds " as given to him by that 

to imply, like the words, " be not thou re- i will. 

bellious," in that verse, some reluctance on Ver. 3. — It was in my mouth as honey, etc. 

the prophet's part. In snbelanoe tl.e lom- Tlie words remind us of Ps. xix. 10; Prov. 

uiaud wag equivalent to that uf Bev. xxii. xxiv. 13; and ajjaiu of those of Jeremiah in 



OH.ra. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



47 



the darkest hour of his ministry (xv. 16). 
They are reproduced yet more closely by 
St. John (Rev. x. 9). There is, after the 
first terror is over, an infinite sweetness in 
the thought of being a fellow-worker with 
God, of speaking his words and not our own. 
In the case of St. John, the first sweetness 
was changed to bitterness as soon as lie had 
eaten it ; and this is, perhaps, implied here 
also in ver. 14. The first ecstatic joy passed 
away, and the former sense of the awfiilness 
of the work returned. 

Ver. 5. — Of a strange speech and of a hard 
language, etc.; literally, as in margin, both 
of Authorized Version and Revised Version, 
to a people deep of lip and heavy of tongue ; 
i.e. to a barbarous people outside the cove- 
nant, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Scythians ; not 
speaking the fumiliar sacred speech of Israel 
(compare the " stammering lips and another 
tongue" of Isa. xxviii. 11; xxxiii. 19). 
The thought implied is that Ezekiel's mis- 
sion, as to " the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel " (Matt. xv. 24), was outwardly easier 
than if he had been sent to the heathen. 
With Israel there was at least the medium 
of a speech common both to the prophet 
and his hearers. In ver. 6 the thought is 
enlarged by the use of " many peoples." 

Ver. 6. — Surely, if I sent thee to them, etc. 
The "surely" represents the Hebrew "if 
not " taken as a strong afSrmation, just as 
"if" in Ps. xcv. 11 represents a strong 
negation ; compare the use of the fuller 
formula jnraiidi in 1 S.am. iii. 17 ; 2 Sam. 
iii. 35 ; xix. 13 ; and of the same in Deut. 
i. 35 ; Isa. Ixii. 8 ; and in Ezekiel himself 
(xvii. 19). The margin of the Authorized 
Version, Jf I had sent thee to them, would 
they not have hearkened, etc.? expresses the 
same meaning, but is less tenable as a 
translation. The thought in either case 
finds its analogue in our Lord's reference 
to Sodom and Gomorrah, to Tyre and Sidon 
(Matt xi. 21—24 ; Luke x. 12—14). Israel 
was more hardened than the worst of the 
nations round her. 

Ver. 7. — For they will not hearken unto 
me, etc. The words are, as it were, an a 
fortiori argument Those who had despised 
the voice of Jehovah, speaking in his Law, 
01 directly to the hearts of his people, were 
not likely to listen with a willing ear to 
hia messenger. We are reminded of our 
Lord's words to his disciples in Matt. x. 24, 
25. Impudent and hard-hearted; literally 
(the word is not the same as in ch. ii. 4), in 
Eevised Version, of an hard forehead and 
of a ttiff heart. The word "hard" is the 
lame word as the first half of Ezekiel's 
name, and is probably used with reference 
to it as in the next verse. 

Ver. 8.— I have made thy face strong ; 
literally, as in the Revised Version, hard. 



Ezekiel's name was at once nomen et omen. 
Hard as Israel might be, he could be made 
harder, i.e. stronger, than they, and should 
prevail against them (compare the parallels 
of Isa. 1. 7; Jer. i. 18; xv. 20). The bold- 
ness of God's prophets is a strictly super- 
natural gift. Whatever persistency there 
may be in evil, they will be able to meet it, 
perhaps to overcome it, by a greater per- 
sistency in good. 

Ver. 9. — Adamant. The Hebrew word 
shemir is used in Jer. xvii. 1 (where the 
Authorized Version gives " diamtmd " for a 
stone used in engraving on gems. In Zech. 
vii. 12 it appears, as it does here, as a type 
of exceeding hardness. It is not found 
elsewhere in the Old Testament It is 
commonly identified with the stone known 
as corundum, which appears in some of its 
forms as the sapphire and the Oriental ruby, 
and also as the stone the powder of which 
is used as emery. The special point of the 
comparison is, of course, that the adamant 
was actually used to cut either flint itself 
or stones as hard as flint. Neither be dis- 
mayed at their looks. The words indicate 
the extreme sensitiveness of the prophet's 
natural temperament. He had shrunk not 
only from the threats and revilings of the 
rebellious house, but even from their scowls 
of hatred. 

Ver. 10. — All my words, etc. The stress 
lies on the first word. The prophet was not 
to pick and choose out of the message, but 
was to deliver "all the counsel of God" 
(Acts XX. 27). Take into thine heart, etc. 
An inverted order of the two commands 
would, perhaps, have seemed more natural. 
What we actually find, however, is sufficiently 
suggestive. The message of Jehovah is first 
received into the inner depths of tho soul, 
but in that stage it is vague, undefined, in- 
communicable. It needs to be clothed in 
articulate speech before it can be heard 
with the mental ear and passed on to others. 
The mouth speaks out of the fulness of the 
heart. 

Ver. 11. — Get thee to them of the Cap- 
tivity, etc. In ch. ii. 3 and iii. 1, 4 the 
mission had been to " the house of Israel " 
generally ; now it is specialized. He is sent 
"to them of the Captivity." Tiiey are the 
rebellious house. There is an obvious sig- 
nificance in the phrase, "thy people." Je- 
hovah can no longer recognize them as his. 
The words of ch. ii. 7 are repeated. Here 
also, even among the exiles, who were better 
than those that remained in Judah, he was 
to expect partial failure, but he was uot, on 
tliat account, to shirk the completion of his 
task. Thus saith the Lord Ood; Adonai 
Jehovah, as in ch. ii. 4. 

Ver. 12. — Then the Spirit took me up, etc. 
The words are to be interpreted as in uh. ii. 2. 



48 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. iii. 1—27. 



Luther, however, gives " a wind lifted me 
up." Tlie parallels of ch. viii. 3 (where, how- 
ever, we have the addition, " in the visions 
of God") and ch. xi. 1 suggest the con- 
clusion that this was a purely subjective 
sensation, that it was one uf the phenomena 
of the ecstatic state, and that there was no 
actual change of place. On the other hand, 
tho use of like language in the cases of 
Elijah (1 Kings xviii. 12; 2 Kings ii. IG), 
of our Lord (Mark i. 12), of Philip (Acts 
viii. 39), would justify the inference that the 
prophet actually passed from one locality to 
the other. The language of 1 Kings xviii. 
46 probably points to the true solution of 
the problem. The ecstatic state continued, 
and in it Ezekiel went from the banks of 
Chebar to the dwellings of the exiles at Tel- 
Abib (see note on ch. i.), at some distance 
from it. I heard behind me, etc. The words 
imply that the prophet, either in his vision 
or in very deed, had turned from the glory 
of the living creatures and of the wheels, 
and set his face in the direction in which he 
was told to go. As he does so, he hears the 
sounds of a great rushing (LXX., a-eia/ios ; 
Luther, " eartliquake "), followed by words 
which, though in the form of a doxology, 
uttered, it may be presumed, by the living 
creatures, were also a message of encourage- 
ment. His readiness to do hia work as a 
preacher of repentance calls forth the praise 
of God from those in whose presence there 
is "joy over one sinner that repeuteth." 
We are reminded of the earthquake in the 
Mount of Purification and the Gloria in ex- 
ceUit of Dante ('Purg.,' xx. 127—141; xxi. 
53—60). The words, fromhis place (belong- 
ing, probably, to the narrative rather than 
the doxology), point, not to the sanctua'ry at 
Jerusalem, which Jehovah had forsaken, but 
to the region thought of as in the north 
(see note on ch. i. 4), to which he had with- 
drawn himself. 

Ver. 13.— And I heaid, etc. There is no 
verb in the Hebrew, but it may be supplied 
from ver. 12. We lose in the English the 
poetry of the original, " kissing, or touching, 
each its sister." The attitude as of wings 
raised for tiip;ht. and the sound of both the 
wings anil wheels, implied the departure of 
the glorious vision, presumably to the region 
from which it came. 

Ver. 14.— The Spirit lifted me up (see note 
on ver. 12). Here the LXX. has the more 
definite phrase, " the Spirit of the Lord." 
For bitterness (see note on oh. ii. 3). The 
heat of my spirit. The first noun is here 
translated literally. Elsewhere it is rendered 
as " wrath" (Deut. xxix. 23; Job xxi. 20; 
Prov. XV. 11, et ol.), " fury " (Jer. iv. 4). Here 
probably it points to the conflict of emotions 

indignation against the sins of his people, 

the dreaa of failure, the conBoiousness of un- 



fitness. The hand of the lord, etc. Tlie word 
for " strong " is the same as that which enters 
into Ezekiel's name. Taking this and ver. 9 
iato account, there seems sufficient reason 
for translating as the Vulgate does, con- 
fortans (so Luther, "held me firm"), at 
least for thinking of tliat meaning as implied 
(comp. Ezra vii. 9 ; viii. 18 ; Neh. ii. 8 ; 
Dan. X. 18). There was a sustaining power 
in epite of the " bitterness " and the " heat." 
In a more general sense, as in ch. i. 3, it 
is used as implying a special intensity of 
prophetic inspiration, as in the case of 
lilisha (2 Kings iii. 15); but this is the 
only case iu which it occurs with the ad- 
jective " strong." 

Ver. 15. — AtTel-Abib, etc. We now enter 
on the first scene of the prophet's ministry. 
The LXX. leaves the proper name. The 
Vulgate rightly translates it as acervus nova- 
rum frugrnn, the " mound of ears of corn " 
(the meaning appears iu the name of the 
Passover month, Abib). Luther gives, 
strangely enough, "where the almond trees 
stood, in the month Abib "). Jerome's 
suggestion, that here also there was a nomen 
et omen, and that those who shared Ezekiel's 
exile were regarded as the " firatfruits " of 
the future, is at least ingenious, and finds 
some support in Ps. cxxvi. 5, 6. The place 
has not been identified, and its position 
depends on that of the river with which it is 
connected (see note on ch. i. 1). The word 
" Tel " is commonly applied to the mounds 
formed out of masses of ruins, which are 
common all over the plains of Mesopotamia. 
The name in this case may suggest that the 
earth had gathered over it, and that it was 
cultivated. I sat where they sat, etc. The 
ministry begins not with speech, but silence. 
Our Western habits hardly enable us to 
enter into the impressiveness of such a 
proeedure. The conduct of Job's friends 
(Job ii. 13) presents a parallel, and as 
Ezekiel seems to have known that book 
(ch. xiv. 14, 20), he may have been influenced 
by it. Like actions meet us in Ezra ix. 3 — 5 ; 
Dan. iv. 19. 

Ver. 17. — A Vfatohman unto the house of 
Israel. The seven days' session of amaze- 
ment came to an end, but even then there 
was at first no utteiance of a message. The 
word of the Lord came to his own soul, and 
told him what his special vocation as a pro- 
phet was to be. He was to be a " watoliman 
unto the house of Israel." He was, like the 
watchman of a city on his tower, to be on 
the look out to warn men against coming 
dangers, not to slumber on his post. In 2 
Sam. xviii. 24—27 and 2 Kings ix. 17—20 
we have vivid pictures of such a work. It 
had already been used figuratively of the 
prophet's work by Jeremiah (vi. 17). 
The cognate verb, with the image fully 



OH. m. 1—27.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



49 



developed, meets bb in Hab. ii. 1. Its use in 
Hos. ix. 8 is doubtful as to meaning, and 
in Isa. lii. 8 and IvL 10 it may be, if we 
accept the theory of a Deutero-Isaiah, an 
echo from Ezekipl. It is reproduced with 
Bpecial emphasit in ch. xxxiii. 2 — 7. More 
than any word it describes the special 
characteristic of Bzekiel's work. He is to 
watch personally over individual souls. 
So in a like sense, a corresponding word is 
used of the Christian ministry in Heb. xiii. 17 
(compare also for the thought, though the 
word is not the same, Isa. xxi. 11, 12 ; Ixii. 
6 ; Ps. cxxvii. I). A vivid picture of the work 
of such a watchman is found, it may be 
noted, in the opening speech of the 
'Agamemnon' of .^schylus. Give them 
warning, etc. It is, I think, a legitimate 
inference that the prophet acted on the 
command while he was with the exiles and 
before the departure of ver. 22, not by 
harangues or sermons addressed to the whole 
body of the exiles, but by direct warning to 
individuals. 

Ver. 18. — ^Thon givest him not warning, 
eto. The word, as in the parallels already 
referred to, is characteristic of EzeMel, almost 
indeed, peculiar to him. Fs. xix. 11 may be 
noted as another instance of its use. When 
the watchman saw danger coming, he was to 
blow the trumpet (cb. xxxiii. 3—6). The 
prophet was to speak his warnings. Thou 
shalt surely die ; literally, dying thou shalt 
die. Were the words of Glen. ii. 17 in the 
prophet's mind ? To save Ms life ; literally, 
/or hit life, or that he may live. Shall die in 
his iniquity. Do the words refer only to 
physical death coming as the punishment 
of iniquity? or do they point onward 
farther to the judgment that follows death, 
the loss of the inheritance of eternal life 
which belongs to those whose names are 
written in the book of life ? Looking to the 
tremendous responsibility implied in the 
words, we can hardly, I think, in spite of 
the questions which have been raised as to 
the belief of the Hebrews in the immor- 
tality of the soul, hesitate to accept the 
latter meaning. Ezekiel anticipates the 
teaching of Pliil. iv. 3 ; Eev. iii. 5 ; xiii. 8, 
if, indeed, that meaning was not already 
familiar to him in Exod. xxxii. 32, 33. 
For " in " his iniquity we may, perhaps, 
read " because of." The negligence of the 
watchman does not avail to procure a full 
pardon for the evil-doer. The degree in 
which it may extenuate liis guilt depends on 
conditions Imovm to God, but not to us. In 
any case, as in our Lord's words (Luke xii. 
47, 48), a man's knowledge and opportunities 
are the measure of his responsibility. But 
the unfaithful watchman has his responsi- 
bility. It is as though the blood of the 
sinner had been shed. His guilt may be 

EZEKIEL. 



described in the same words as that of Cain 
(Gen. ix. 5). Compare St. Paul's words in 
Acts xviii. 6 and xx. 26 as echoes of Eze- 
kiel's thought. 

Ver. 19. — Thou hast delivered thy soul, 
etc. This phrase is again an eminently 
characteristic one (oomp. ch. xxxiii. 9). Here 
also, though the words do not necessarily 
imply more than deliverance from bodily 
death, thought of as a judgment for negli- 
gence, it is, I think, scarcely possible to avoid 
finding in thein a " springing and germinant " 
sense, analogous to that which we have 
found in the preceding verse. The dread 
warning has for its complement a message 
of comfort. The judgment passed on the 
prophet does not depend on the results of his 
ministry. " Whether men will hear, or 
whether they will forbear," he has " delivered 
his soul," i.e. saved his life, when he has 
done his duty as a watchman. The phrase 
is noticeable as having passed out of the 
language of Scripture into familiar use. A 
man can say, " Liberavi animam meam," 
when he has uttered his conviction on any 
question of importance affecting the well- 
being of others. 

Ver. 20. — From his righteousness. The 
Hebrew gives the plural, "his righteous- 
nesses" — all his single rigbteous acts that lie 
behind. I lay a stumbling-block, etc. The 
word is again characteiistio (ch. vii. 19; 
xiv. 3, 4). It occurs in Jer. vi 21, and 
Ezekiel may have learnt the use of the word 
&om him. It is found also in Lev. xix. 14 
and Isa. Ivii. 14 ; but the date of these, ac- 
cording to the so-called higher criticism, 
may be later than Ezekiel. In Isa. viii. 14 
the word is different. The English word 
sufficiently expresses the sense. One of the 
acts of Eastern malignity was to put a stone 
in a man's way, that he might fall and hurt 
himself. Here the putting the stone is 
described as the act of Jehovah, and is 
applied to anything that tempts a man to 
evil, and so to his own destruction (Jer. vi. 
21). The thought is startling to us, and 
seems at variance with true conceptions of 
the Divine will (Jas. i. 13). The explana- 
tion is to be found in the fact that the 
prophet's mind did not draw the distinction 
which we draw between evil permitted and 
the same evil decreed. All, from this point 
of view, is as God wills, and even thpse who 
thwart that will are indeed fulfilling it. 
Glimpses are given of the purpose which 
leads to the permission or decree. In the 
case now before us the man has turned from 
his righteousness before the stumbling-block 
is laid in his way. The temptation is per- 
mitted that the man may become conscious 
of his evU (so Kom. vii 13). If the prophet- 
preacher does his duty, the man may conqnei 
the temptation, and the stumbling-block may 



60 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. m. 1—27, 



become a "stepping-stone to higher things." 
If, through the prophet's negligence, he 
comes unwarned, and stumbles and falls, 
he, as in the case of the wicked, bears the 
penalty of his guilt, but the prophet has 
here also the guilt of blood upon his soul. 
The " righteousnesses " of the man (here, as 
before, we have the plural), his individual 
acts of righteousness, shall not be remembered, 
because be was tried, and found wanting in 
the essential element of all righteousness. 
The highest development of the thought is 
found in the fact that Christ himself is 
represented as a "stumbling-stone" (Isa. 
viii. 14 ; Rom. ix. 32, 33 ; 1 Cor. i. 23). St. 
Paul's solution of the problem is found in 
the question, " Have they stumbled that 
they should fall?" (Bom. xi. 11). Was that 
the end contemplated in the Divine purpose 7 
Will it really be the end ? 

Yer. 22. — And the hand of the Lord was 
there upon me, etc. There is obviously an 
interval between the fact thus stated and 
the close of the message borne in on the 
prophet'* Bonl. Psychologically, it seems 
probable that the effect of the message was 
to fill him with an overwhelming, crushing 
sense of the burden of his responsibility. 
How was he to begin so terrible a work? 
What were to be the nearer, and the remoter, 
issnes of such a work '! Apparently, at least, 
he does not then begin it by a spoken warn- 
ing. He passes, at the Divine command 
borne in on his soul, from the crowd that 
had watched him during the seven days' 
■ilence, and betakes himself to the solitude 
of the " plain," as distinct from the " mound " 
where the exiles dwelt, and there the vision 
appears again in all points as he had seen 
it when he stood on the river's bank. 

Ver. 24. — Go, shut thyself within thy 
house, etc. The command implied that he 
was to veaae for • time fjxim all public 



ministrations. There was a time to keep 
silence, as well as a time to speak (Eocles. 
iii. 7), and for the immediate future silence 
was the more effective of the two. It would, 
at least, make them eager to hear what the 
silence meant. 

"Ver. 25. — They shall put bands npon thee, 
etc. Did the warning mean that the 
prophet's hearers would treat him as the 
men of Jerusalem treated Jeremiah (xxxii. 
3 ; xxxiii. 1 ; xxxviii. 6) ? Of this, at all 
events, we have no record, and so far we 
are led to the other alternative of taking 
the words (as in ch. iv. 8) in a figurative sense. 
The prophet would feel, as he stood in the 
presence of the rebellious house, as tongue- 
tied, bound hand and foot by their hardness 
of heart, teaching by strange and startling 
signs only, and, it may be, writing his 
prophecies. In ch. xxiv. 27, four years later, 
and again in ch. xxix. 21, we have a distinct 
reference to a long period of such protracted 
silence. We may compare, as in some sense 
parallel, the silence of Zacharias (Luke i. 
22). That silence unbroken for nine months 
was a sign to those who " were looking for 
redemption in Jerusalem," more eloquent 
than speech. 

Ver. 27. — When I speak with thee, etc. 
This then, as ever, was the condition of the 
prophet's work. He was to speak out of his 
own heart. When the " time to speak " came 
words would be given him (Matt. x. 19). 
And those he would then speak would be as 
the echo of those in ver. 11. In our Lord's 
words (Matt. xi. 15 ; xiii. 9) we have, it may 
be, a deliberate reproduction of Ezekiel's 
formula. The LXX., in this instance, it 
may be noted, translates the second clause 
by " He who is disobedient (mruBSni), let him 
be disobedient," which in its turn finds an 
echo in £ev. xxii. 11. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers, 1 — S. — Eating a hook. I. The food provided. 1. This is in the form «/ 
Uteratwe. Ezekiel receives a written roll. All good literature is mental food — not 
merely a plaything or a sweetmeat, but soul-stuff for sustaining intellectual life and 
promoting mental growth. God feeds our highest nature through literature. His 
Spirit comes through bis Truth, his Truth is revealed in his Word, and his Word is 
contained in a book — the Bible. 2. This must he taken as it is provided. Ezekiel did 
not write the roll. He found it. The word of God was sent to him. He did not 
invent or imagine it. We do not create Divine truth. We find it in the Bible. If 
we would be honest we must take what we discover there, and not feed on our own 
notions to the neglect of the Divine revelation. 3. The Divine provision is full and 
ample. The roll was inscribed on both sides — " written within and without " (ch. iL 
10). The Bible has far more in it than Ezekiel's roll. It is a library in itself, both 
extensive and closely filled. There is no verbosity in it. Its many words are rich and 
deep. No age will over consume the whole of its vast and varied teachings. 

II. The UBAL ooksumeo, Ezekiel must not only read the roll ; he must eat it. All 



CH. in. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 61 

Divine truth needs to be treated thus. We must feed on the Bible to profit by it, 1. 
There must be personal appropriation. We take a thing to ourselves in the most 
absolute kind of possession when we eat it. No book will profit much until it is thus 
appropriated. The bibliomaniac is not always a student of literature. The possession 
ot a large library is no guarantee of great learning. The mind is fed by the books 
which are studied, not by those that ouly collect dust as they stand on the shelves. 
The Bible profits only as it is used. The clasps of some Bibles are suspiciously stiff. 
They suggest that the books are more prized tlian searched. 2. ITiere must be internal 
consumption. There is no good in running over the words of a book with the eye, if 
the though la of it are not absorbed into the mind. Good books cannot be profitably 
skimmed. We may have much verbal knowledge of the Bible without ever making 
it our food. The meaniag of texts, historical and geographical allusions, side-lights of 
manners and customs, may all be studied, and yet the Bible may lie outside us, and our 
souls starve fur want of spiritual food, because we do not take its essential truths down 
into our inner being in comprehension, meditation, and application. 3. There must he 
assimilation. The food, when digested, is converted into a part of the bodily labrio — 
blood, boues, nerves, and flesh. A good book well digested becomes a part of a man's 
life. It colours his thought and gives tone and character to his mind — its own breadth 
and elevation enlarging and exalting the reader. This is the highest use of literature. 
In assimilating Plato or Milton the great souls of the philosopher and the poet take 
possession of our souls, and lift them into a higher atmosphere, 

III. The effects following. 1. There is a pleasant taste. Ezekiel found the roll 
as honey for sweetness. The mentally inert have no idea of what rare delights they 
miss by not preparing themselves to enjoy the pleasures of literature. The writer of 
Ps. cxix. fouud the highest of these delights in the Law of God. To the loving student 
of the Bible that grand ancient literature of man and God is a source of most profound 
delight. He who truly sympathizes with the spirit in which the Bible was written will 
never need to read it as a task. He will delight in it as in a savoury meal. 2. Pain 
ensues. This was the case in the parallel vision of St. John (Rev. x. 10). Ezekiel also 
found bitterness later (ver. 14). The reason is that "lamentations, and mourning, and 
woe" were written ou the roll (ch. ii. 10). There are bitter truths to be considered in 
God's Word. Conscience makes the pleasant reading of the Bible to be followed by 
painful reflections. Yet this bitterness is a wholesome tonic. 3. The final result is an 
increase of strength. Ezekiel is able to set bis face like an adamant (ver. 9), and 
prophesy to the rebellious people. Feeding on God's Word fits us to teach that Word 
and to exemplify it by our conduct. 

Ver. 5. — Colonial missions. Ezekiel was- not sent, like Jonah, to s foreign city ; 
though living among people of a strange language, he was not called upon to preach to 
the natives. His mission was to a colony of fellow-Jews in a foreign country. He is 
the typical colonial missionary of the Old Testament. 

I. The claims of colonial missions. Broadly stated, there are two great claims in 
colonial missions. 1. Chse kinship. The colonists are our brethren. Charity begins 
at home, and the/English home now stretches to Canada and to Australia. It is stated 
by those who know our colonies that the affection for the old country is warm among 
them. To treat them with coldness is a cruel neglect of family ties. 2. Pressing need. 
It has been said that the colonies should provide for their own religious requirements. 
Such a sweeping statement betrays ignorance of the condition of our colonies. They 
cannot be lumped together in a mass when we discuss them ; for there are enormous 
differences between the several colonies in regard to resources and capacity for religious 
activity. An old colony, such as we find in parts of Australia, can well provide for 
itself. But we have to consider new colonies, cities springing up like mushrooms, with 
the most raw civilization. Here the fight for life is fierce. Here young men, leaving 
behind all home influences, find themselves in close companionship with the roughest 
characters. Little or no provision can be made on the spot for the spiritual assistance 
of these people. We must follow them into the bush, or leave them to sink to mere 
animalism. 

IL The difficulties of colonial missions. 1. Lrick of novelty. We cannot draw 
romantic pictures of these missions like those pictures of New Guinea or Central Africa, 



52 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. m. 1—27, 

■which thrill the spectator with emotion. The work is English, commonplace, without 
much adventure. But it is only the superficial mind that should be discouraged by so 
childish an objection when real need presses. 2. Boughness of character. The back- 
woodsmen may not speak a rough dialect, but the freedom of their life tempts into 
their neighbourhood some of the wildest characters. Two classes emigrate — the most 
energetic and best workmen, who go of their own accord ; and the most worthless persons, 
who are sent by their friends. We ship our " ne'er-do-weels " off to the colonies. 
But change of scene does not bring change of character. Those who were scoundrels in 
the streets of London do not bncome all of a sudden respectable citizens in Melbourne. 
While we continue to pour into our colonies the scum and refuse of the old world, a 
great burden is being laid upon these young communities to protect themselves from 
dangerous influences. 3. Width of area. The colonies are vast in extent, yet they are 
but thinly peopled. The colonial missionary must travel far. His parish may be as 
large as a county. Men of great energy and devotion are required for such work. 

III. The encouragements of colonial missions. 1. Beadiness of access. Travel- 
ling is safe. There are no native chiefs to conciliate. The interference of a foreign 
government has not to be considered. The colonists speak our own language, and 
thus no time is spent in learning a foreign tongue before the real work begins. The 
missionary has the claims of kinship to help him. 2. A great future. No missions 
have been more successful than those to the South Sea Islands, yet the population of 
those islands is rapidly dwindling away, and in course of time all effects of the missions 
will have vanished, simply because the people will have died out. It is just the opposite 
in the case of our colonies. There population advances by leaps and bounds. Greater 
Britain is already one of the wonders of the world. If Christianity loses hold of this 
young giant, the ultimate result will be disastrous to mankind ; but if the colonies are 
won for Christ, the freshest, strongest, most promising life of the world is secured for 
the cause of truth and righteousness. Moreover, no work is so remunerative in result 
as successful colonial missions. The new Churches have only to be planted and fostered 
for a time. Before long they will stand alone and become centres of usefulness. While 
foreign mission Churches are too much like the ivy, that must always cling to an external 
support, colonial Churches are like the saplings, needing a stake for a time to keep 
them straight and to help them to stand against the gale, but which can soon dispense 
with that aid. Lastly, where colonies are planted among native races, colonial missions 
may save these poor creatures from the ruin which bad white men always bring, and 
thus the colonies may become centres of Christianizing influence for the heathen. 

Ver. 9. — Adamant. I. What it is foe the fobehbad to be of adamant. 1. 
It is external hardness. Zechariah writes of those who "made their hearts as an 
adamant stone" (vii. 12). Bzekiel is not to do this; he only has Mis forehead 
made as adamant. The adamantine heart is a sign of sin. It is sure to fail in all 
attempts at spiritual work. We must feel sympathy with those whom we would help. 
But it is possible to have a " tough skin with a tender heart." Unfortunately, those 
people who are pachydermatous are also too often tough-hearted. Yet the forehead of 
adamant does not imply want of sensitiveness to the finer feelings. It only means a 
certain callousness in regard to external criticism. 2. It is hardness against hindrances 
to progress. The adamant is to be in the forehead, in the front. It is like Christian's 
armour, with a good breastplate, but no protection for his hack. We want most strength 
and security in advancing. 3. It is hardness before the seat of thought. The forehead 
guards the brain. Much may move our hearts, but no human considerations should 
shake our convictions. 4. It is hardness before a vital organ. The brain must be 
sheltered, or the life will be forfeited. We may bear attacks on the outworks of our 
religious life. The crowning citadel of faith must not be touched. 

II. Why the forehead should be of adamant. 1. It is required by the opposi- 
tion of men. Ezekiel had to face fierce opponents. The servant of truth must often 
encounter unpopularity. If men, always speak well of a Divine messenger, there is a 
suspicion of weakness in following the popular whims. There must be unpleasant 
truths for the faithful preacher to declare. 2. It is necessary for siiccess. The prophet 
must guide, mould, influence men. If he is but a weather-cock, his mission has failed. 
Often be must set himself like a rock in the middle of a raging torrent. Decision and 



OH. in. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. BS 

Brmncss are essential in the work of a leader of men. The Christian minister who is 
afraid of his congregation has forfeited all right to be their teacher. 3. It is demandedhy 
loyalty to God. The prophet is God's messenger. The Christian minister is Christ's 
servant. To his own Master he stands or falls. Obsequiousness before men means a 
betrayal of the duty owed to God. 

III. How THE roREHEAD MAT BECOME OF ADAMANT. Many of the truest Servants of 
God are naturally so sensitive and timorous that they well need some such assurance 
as that given to Ezekiel. Now, God had made his prophet's forehead as adamant. It 
is a Divine work. But there" are human ideas through which he works. 1. Ood is to 
he feared more than man. We must remember that " the fear of man . . . bringeth a 
snare." While shrinking from man's petty anger we risk the awful thunders of the 
wrath of God. 2. Trust is to he put in the protection of God. He will not desert his 
own agents at the post of peril. When men do their worst, Almighty aid is at hand. 
If death is to be encountered, there is the martyr's crown beyond. 3. There must he 
a deep conviction of the truth of our message. A wavering mind will not support a 
countenance of adamant. We must first be sure ourselves. Then we can dare to face 
the world. Truth is the adamant that hardens the forehead against unbelief, misrepre- 
sentation, opposition. It has been well said, " Those men are strongest who stake 
most on a deep and worthy conviction." 4. An honest kindness of intention will create 
the firmness of adamant. Selfishness wavers ; sympathy is strong. The murderer's 
hand trembles; the surgeon's hand is steady, though his patient shrieks under the 
knife. When we earnestly desire to benefit people, we can afford to have ttiem mis- 
understand us, and perhaps even smile when they cry out against our unkiudness. 
Mixed motives weaken the front we present to the world. A pure, unselfish devotion 
will be brave, strong, firm as adamant. 

Ver. 14. — T}te start in life. Ezekiel here describes the commencement of his active 
ministry. Hitherto he has been under preparation, receiving communications from 
heaven in vision and word. Now the time has come for him to start on his errand 
and begin his work among the captives of Babylon. 

I. The prophet la carried awat by the Spirit of God. Although we need not 
suppose that Ezekiel was carried up bodily into the clouds, blown over tlie fields, and 
dropped down in the midst of a crowd of his countrymen, we are not to suppose that 
his visit to them was any the less one of Divine impulses. Lilie Philip the evangelist, 
when he was taken from the Ethiopian convert and sent to Azotus (Acts viii. 39, 40), 
Ezekiel felt a mighty power of God driving him to his work. Inspiration does not only 
illumine ; it impels. The Spirit of God drove Christ into the wilderness (Mark i. 12). 
Such an action does not involve forcible constraint against the will. God only works 
on men in this way through their wills. The will of the man is so completely sub- 
servient to the will of God that it no longer acts separately ; it voluntarily obeys as 
though it were but a Divine instrument. The highest work for God is always done in 
this way. Without the mighty spiritual impulse such tasks as God sets his servants 
could never be accomplished; but with it the hardest service ends in success. 

II. The prophet goes in grief and anger. 1. In grief. The prophet is in 
bitterness. The cause of his sorrow is that he is to speak of bad subjects, and to 
face unwilling hearers. Nothing can be more painful to a sympathetic soul. If a 
preacher could delight in denunciation and take a pleasure in describing the borrors of 
future punishment, he would be little better than a demon at heart. A true preacher 
of repentance must be a voice of sorrow. Moreover, it must be painful to a sensitive 
man tu find himself compelled to create unpopularity for himself by fidelity to his mes- 
sage. His face may be as adamant ; but his heart will bleed. 2. In anger. Ezekiel 
went "in heat." There is a righteous wrath. Christ could be "moved with indigna- 
tion" against cruelty and hypocrisy. The man who is incapable of this anger lacks 
power of conscience. Love must lie at the heart of the servant of God, but anger 
at sin and at the wrong of it to God and man may show itself in his voice and 
manner. 

III. Th« prophet feels the mighty hand of God upon him. Gkxi does not 
only send his servant; he accompanies him. The Spirit carried Ezekiel forth; the 
hand of God was strong upon him all the way. This hand of God is felt in various 



64 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. hi. 1—27 

ways. 1. In pushing forward. Grod thus keepa his servants to the front. While 
he is with them he will allow of no cowardice or indolence. 2. In support. This 
hand of God is a helping hand, a holding hand, a supporting hand. Q-od sustains 
those whom he sends. 3. In restraint. While pushing his servants on in the right 
way, God is ready to hold them back from peril, error, and ruin. 4. In wplifting. 
The servants of God may slip and even fall. Then they are not deserted. The 
same strong hand which sent them forth lifts them up and sets them on their feet 
again. Thus the mighty ever-present God stands by to help his feeblest servants and 
lead them on to victory. 

Ver. 15. — Silence. When Ezekiel came npon a settlement of captives he sat down 
with them in silent amazement for seven days. At the end of that time a Divine 
message roused him, and sent him forth on his mission. We have now to consider the 
lessons of the week of silence. They may be the more valuable for us because we seem 
to have lost the faculty of keeping quiet. The rush and roar of modem life have 
killed that ancient power, and its depth and spiritual range are lost to us. No 
doubt much of the superficiality and unreality of modern life may be traced to the 
habit of ceaseless chatter. It would be well if we could rediscover silence. Silence 
has many shades according to the varying circumstances in which it arises and the 
diverse moods in which it is cherished. Some of the characteristics of silence are 
illustrated in the case uf Ezekiel. 

I. The silence or grief. Ezekiel grieved to see the sorrowful state of his fellow- 
captives, and to think that it was his mission at first even to add to their distress 
by words of rebuke and warning. Like a true patriot, he found the troubles of his 
countrymen occasions of personal mourning. As a tender-hearted man, he could not 
fail to be pained at their moral shame and peril. Their grief silenced his voice. The- 
greatest sorrow lies too dee|i for words. The widow of Tennyson's "warrior" was 
stricken into a fearful silence. Referring to a season of extreme trouble, David said, 
"I was dumb with silence, I held my peace " (P». xxxix. 2). Thus terrible blows stun 
the sufferer. 

II. The silence of wonder. The prophet was astonished. The fearful spectacle 
of his kindred in distress overwhelmed him with amazement. A great surprise pro- 
duces a shock of silence, by throwing us off the familiar lines of thought, so that we 
know not what to think or say. It is fortunate for us that this is the case, or we might 
blunder into some very rash expressions. We may well be silent before " the burden 
and the mystery of all this unintelligible world." 

IIL The silence of sympathy. Job's three friends "sat down with him upon 
the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him : for they 
saw that his grief was very great " (Job ii. 13). In the deepest trouble the kindest 
words sound harsh. You cannot handle an open wound in the most tender manner 
without giving pain. A look of sympathy is mdte helpful than a speech of most choice 
phrases. To weep with those who weep is better than to preach to them. 

IV. The silence op anticipation. Ezekiel has not received the message which 
he is to give to the captives. So he waits for it in silence. Having as yet no utterance 
to give, he is wise in keeping his lips closed. It has been truly remarked that we 
should not attempt to speak because we have to say something, but only because we 
have something to say. Macaulay delighted his companions by " flashes of silence " 
in the torrent of his conversation. It woiild be well if some of us kept longer silence, 
that when we did open our mouths some words of weight mijiht come forth. It is 
good to understand the feeling of ' II Penseroso,' and to be able to welcome the "spirit 
of contemplation " — 

" Come, pensive nun, devout and pure, 
Sober, steadfast, and demure." 

Ver. 17. — TTie toatchman. (See on ch. xxxiii. 1 — 9.) 

Vers. 17 — 21. — Varieties of Judgment. The duties and responsibilities of the prophet 
as a watchman, which are here first described, receive more elaborate attention later in 
the book, where therefore they can be best studied. The other side of the subject — 



OH.m. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. SS 

that which concoma the guilt and Hangerg of the people, which is also set forth in 
the passage before us — is worthy of grave consideration on its own account. Let us 
take that alone now. 

I. Judgment is determined bt peesonal ouilt. God is discrimiDatin^ and fair. 
He does not deal out judgment in the gross ; each case is raken in detail. There is to 
be no wholesale deluge of future retribution ; every man will bear his own share of guilt. 
There will be differences between the treatment of one sinner and that of another. 
DiB'erences in conduct and circumstances are noted. Temptation is weighed on the 
one side ; light and opportunity on the other. The child of the thieves' den cannot be 
judged as the son of a Christian home. The ignorance of the heathen puts them in quite 
another category in the day of judgment from that in which the i'avoured inhabitants 
of Christendom will stand. There is thus not only a difference between the guilt of 
different deeds — as of minor morals or great crimes ; there is also a difference in the 
guilt of similar deeds committed by people differently situated. 

II. JuDOMENT IS AFFECTED BY AFTBR-coNDtTCT. The whole passage treats of this 
after-conduct. It presupposes that sin has been committed. Yet it shows a variety of 
possibilities according to subsequent behaviour. We cannot return on the past. 
History is not to be wiped out. What is done remains as a fact accomplished. Yet its 
evil fruit may be crushed, or it may be eaten to the last bitter morsel. Later conduct 
may aggravate the guilt, deepen the black dye, and add to the weight of the impend- 
ing conduct. Or it may be such as to lift the load of doom and open a door of escape. 
We have to do with a personal God, not with a blind Kemesis. God rules by law, but 
this law is not a mechanical system. Therefore : 1. There is hope for the worst of men. 
None need despair. 2. It is wrong and foolish for the sinner to be reckless. Nobody's 
fate is so bad that it cannot be made worse. Even the vilest sinner may be warned of the 
danger of intensifying his already heinous guilt and multiplying the many stripes which 
he has already earned. The possibilities of evil are infinite ; so also are the possibilities 
of heightened penalties. As there are third heavens and seventh heavens, so are there 
deeper and darker and yet more horrible inner circles of future punishment. 

III. GniLT VARIES ACCORDINO TO THE SINNER'S WABNINO AND HIS TREATMENT OF 

IT. Here are four possible cases. 1. The unwarned sinner suffers. He cannot be 
excused because no prophet was sent him. On the face of it this looks unjust ; but 
it is not so, since no man could have been a sinner at all unless he had known he was 
doing wrong. Therefore by the light of his own conscience he must be judged and 
condemned. Moreover, the moral degradation of sin in the heathen and in ignorant 
people nearer home is a fact that must bring its natural consequences. If only the 
pure in heart can see God, the impure must miss the beatific vision by lack of 
faculty to receive it. Sin kills the soul by natural necessity. 2. The warned sinner 
who persists suffers a worse penalty. He not only dies. His blood is on his own 
head. This must imply an aggravation of guilt and a consequent increase of punish- 
ment. 3. The fallen righteous man is punished, though he is not warned. His 
previous goodness gives him no irnmunity in present sin. He of all men can plead 
no excuse in the lack of warning, for certainly he should have known his danger. 
His eyes were once open. He may have beeu careless and surprised into sin. But 
this would not destroy guilt, for should he not have watched and prayed against 
entering into temptation? 4. The fallen righteous man who repents on receiving 
warning is forgiven. He is judged by his returning course of conduct. Too often 
despair follows the fall of good men, or reckless indifference. But the grace of Christ 
is for his own repentant people, as well as for those who had never known him. He 
who baile his disciples forgive seventy times seven offences is as long-suffering and 
patient in his own treatment of genuine penitents among his brethren. 

Vers. 22 — 24. — On the plain and in the house. The prophet is sent first into the 

Elain and then into his house. In both cases he follows Divine leadings. In both 
e is separated from his friends and neighbours. But there are certain differences 
between the two experiences, all full of significance. 

I. On the plain. 1. The scene. If Ezekiel was sent into the plain, this must 
have been because it was a place adapted to what was to happen there. Its charac- 
teristic feotuna must enter into the significance of the prophet's errand. Note some 



66 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. in. 1—27. 

of these. (1) Retirement from society. The mournful crowd of Jews was by the river- 
baok, and Bzekiel was to detach himself from them and retreat to the solitude of the 
plain. It is nut good for man to live in a crowd. Depth of soul is to be cultivated in 
retirement. God does not often reveal himself in the din" of the world. A too public 
life is both shallow and callous. (2) Breadth of view. The plain is broad and spacious. 
There is ample range for the eye to rove over its vast expanse. The soul may here 
lose its cramped feelings. The suffocation of the crowd is escaped. When God's 
glory appears it has room for a large display. Heavenly painting requires a broad 
canvas. (3) Openness to heaven. There is no roof over the plain. You can look 
thence right up to the sky. The lark can rise from his nest on the plain and soar as 
high as his unwearied wings will bear him. We want freedom from earthly limitations. 
The smoke of the city hangs over the haunts of men. W^e must go forth from all 
human entanglements to seek free intercourse with God. 2. The events. Once on the 
plain this man of visions, the Prophet Ezekiel, saw new wonders, and there the glory of 
God appeared to him. Other men had been on the plain before ; wild tribes of the 
desert have ranged over it since, and perhaps herded their cattle or pitched their tents 
on the very site of the great revelation. Yet to them the heavens have been as brass. 
Fitting scenes may prepare us for heavenly visions, but they cannot create them. 
When the glory is revealed no higher privilege conld be vouchsafed. It is worth any 
journey — if need be, across Siberian plains — to have such a privilege. No longer do 
we look for this in outward show. But there may be a Divine glory upon the plain 
to the naturalist who examines the meanest weed that grows there, as an angel of 
Divine revelation, an embodiment of heavenly wisdom and beauty. 

II. In the house. Tlie sight of the glory on the plain smites the prophet to 
the ground with awe and reverence. But he is not to lie there dismayed. Heavenly 
words follow the heavenly vision, and these words have a practical import. God does 
not reveal himself only to dazzle beholders with a splendid pageant. A vision of glory 
is not enough without a message of truth. Revelation makes known the mind of God. 
So the voice speaks, and speaks with a [iractical aim, bidding the amazed prophet arise 
and go to his house. 1. The scene. (1) The greatest privacy. On the plain Ezekiel 
was in retirement. In the house he is in seclusion. Christ baile his disciples go into 
their closet, and shut the door, to pray to their Father in secret (Matt. vi. 6). (2) 
Separation from the external world. On the plain a man has space ; at home he is 
shut in by four walls. On the plain he is open to the voices of nature ; alone in the 
house he is left to subjective experiences. (3) Cessation of worh. The prophet must 
leave his ministry for a season, and wait in patience. 2. The use of this scene. Retire- 
ment and seclusion give a time of rest, which all busy workers need. They afford 
opportunities for meditation and prayer. Here the soul can take stock, can review its 
forces, can seek fresh supplies. Note : Ezekiel sees the vision on the plain before he 
goes to retire to the solitude of his house. To be profitable, meditation must be based 
on revelation. 

Ver. 25. — A prophet stricken dumb. This is something abnormal, almost monstrous. 
A prophet is a speaker by calling. His mission is to use his voice. Something is 
strangely amiss if he is to be driven to silence. The occurrence, the causes, and the 
consequences of such a phenomenon must be of exceptional importance. 

I. The fact. The prophet's tongue is to cleave to the roof of his mouth. If he 
would speak, he shall not be able to do so. Then, as before the time of Samuel, the 
word of the Lord must be "rare" (1 Sam. iii. 1). Divine messages cease. 1. No 
light. The sun is eclipsed. At noon it is night. Truth sinks into obscurity. Heaven 
ceases to have a meaning. Man is left to earth alone. 2. No guiding hand. Left 
in the dark, people may plunge into quagmires of error or fall into pits of destruction ; 
there is no warning to keep them safe. 3. No commanding voice. Now the people 
feel free to choose their own course. 4. No consolation nor message of grace. The 
prophets were not all Cassandra^, nor was every message a prediction of judgment. 
These men were the consolers of the sorrowful. They bore Messianic messageu of hope. 
Now their words are hushed. If the black thunder-cloud is dispelled, so also is the 
rainbow that spanned it. 

II The cause. 1. By the power of Qod. It is God who paralyzes the tongue of 



OH. III. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 67 

his servant. This is no matter of wilful reticence or sullen silence on the part of the 
prophet. If God sends a message, he can also withhold one. Eevelation is not 
extorted from heaven by cunning sorcery. It is freely vouchsafed by the will of God, 
and if he chooses to hide it, no skill or might of man can extract it. The lips of 
the prophet from whom God has withheld a message are as surely sealed to all new 
Divine revelation as the lips of a corpse. The dead can tell no secrets, the uninspired 
prophet can make no revelation. 2. On account of man't sin. This is a judicial act. 
God does not work in caprice. But neither does he act with mechanical uniformity. 
He will not waste his gracious words for ever. Christ warned his disciples not to cast 
their pearls before swine. How many have heard the gospel so often and heeded it 
not, that they may well feel they deserve to be shut out from hearing it any more ! 
Why should the sower cast his seed bj' the wayside again, only to be trodden under- 
foot or stolen by the wild birds ? 

III. The purpose. There must be an object in this cessation of prophecy, and that 
object must be more than the mere economy of effort. God has positive ends in view 
in all that he does, for he is ever advancing to larger good, and never sitnply with- 
drawing from fruitless fields as though frustrated and confined to a smaller area. 
At first the cessation of prophecy may be accepted as a relief from inconvenient 
admonition. It used to remind men of ugly facts — of sins committed and duties 
neglected. Now they are free from its annoying insistence. But presently other 
effects may be seen. 1. To show the value of. what was neglected. Though we may 
not recognize the fact, the presence of a Divine voice is a great boon — it is light and 
counsel and help. Men may learn to value it when they have lost it. We do not know 
how precious our friends were till they are taken from us. Perhaps we were sometimes 
irritated by what they said. Oh that we could have them back now that we have 
lenrnt their value 1 But it is too late. 2. To speak by silence. Many words have failed. 
Silence itself may be eloquent. The very cessation of prophecy may provoke reflection 
on the old messages. 3. To spare the aggravation of guiU. The more words of 
warning are unheeded, the worse is the guilt of the rejection. 

Ver. 27. — JJberty of hearing. Jeremy Taylor wrote on ' Liberty of Prophesying,' 
when that right had been interfered with unjustly. In more lawless times liberty of 
hearing has also been put under restraint. Where it is unhampered it brings its own 
responi-ibility. Now we all have liberty of hearing. The use and abuse of this 
liberty call for some consideration. 

I. The ttse op the liberty of hearing. I. All men are free to hear God's Word. 
This is not a message for the priests ; it is given to the people. It is not sent to the 
few elite ; it belongs to the multitude. There is no esoteric doctrine in the Christian 
revelation. 2. All men can understand the Divine Word. Little children can grasp 
its most precious truths. Simple folk can receive what is vital and most valuable. 
The path is such that a wayfaring man, though a fool, may not err therein if he follows 
it with a true heart. 3. All men have a right to receive Ood's Word. It is our duty 
to circulate the Bible throughout the world. If God has given utterances that are 
intended for all peoples and nations and languages ami tongues, it is the duty of those 
to whom these oracles of God have been committed to see that everything is done to put 
them within the reach of those who have not yet received them. 4. All men to whom 
the Word of Ood has come are under a solemn obligation to give heed to it. Liberty 
does not exonerate from duty ; on the contrary, it is the essential condition of the 
performance of any duty as such. If God speaks, we can refuse to hearken, but wa 
ought to listen ; and only by thus listening can tiie Word of God be of any profit to us. 

II. The abuse of the libeety of hearing. It is possible to forbear, if the hearing 
is within our own power. God forces no one to hear his Word, nor does he force any 
one to enter his kingdom. The good Shepherd seeks the wandering sheep, but when he 
finds it he does not drive it before him; he calls it to him, ami even then, if the foolish 
creature is so madly inclined, it can turn a deaf ear to his mercilul voice. 1. It would 
be useless to compel a hearing. God does not desire unwilling service. The revelation 
that is not welcome can bring little good. God blesses us through our own acqui- 
escence ; in the rebjllious heart the blessing would be soured into a curse. 2. To be 
Widerstood, the Word of Ood must be received sympathetically. This is not a statement 



M THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oH.m. 1— 27. 

of external facts so much as a Ught to shine into the heart. If, therefore, the 
language of it were dinned into our ears, syllable by syllable, the spirit, the truth 
itself, would still remain outside. We should hear the sounds, not the message they 
contained. 3. To refuse to hear the Word of Qod is to incur a grave respomibility. 
As a word of command it requires obedience. To decline to receive the message is to 
rebel and disobey. As a word of grace this Divine utterance offers a boon. To refuse 
it is to insult the gracious Speaker. It is also to run the risk of severe judgment 
when we fail for lack of that which would have saved us if we had given attention to 
it. They who act thus are without excuse. It will be " more tolerable for Tyre and 
Sidon" in the day of judgment than for such. 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUJS AUTHORS. 

Vera. 4 — 7. — The privileged wnd the unprivileged. It is impossible to wad tWs 
language without beino; remioded of the parallel language recorded to have been uttered 
by our Lord Jesus Christ. The Prophet Ezekiel was assured that, whilst his message 
would be rejected by his fellow-countrymen, it would have been received with gratitude 
and faith had it been addressed to a Gentile nation. And our Lord, in upbraiding the 
unbelief of Capernaum, declared that the tidings he proclaimed would have been 
received with joy and would have induced repentance had they been addressed to Tyre 
and Sidon — nay, to Sodom and Gomorrah I It must indeed have rendered the mission 
of Ezekiel doubly difficult to be assured beforehand of the hardness of heart and the 
incredulity of the house of Israel. Yet it was a divinely appointed discipline to which 
he was subjected ; and it was a wholesome, albeit a painful, preparation for the discharge 
of a distressing service, to be told that his words should be rejected, and yet to be 
bidden to utter them in the name and by the authority of his God. 

I. The less favohked would wblcomb the Divink mbssengeb and the Divine 
MESSAGE. People of a strange speech, the prophet was assured, would, had he been 
sent to them, certainly have hearkened unto him. How is this to be accounted for? 
Such people would have been favourably inclined to the herald of God's justice and 
mercy : 1. By their surprise at an unwonted instance of God's condescension and gracious 
interest. 2. By their gratitude for words of warning and of promise. 3. By their 
responsiveness to the interposition on their behalf of a new power brought to bear upon 
their moral nature. 4. By the hope of Divine acceptance and of a new and better life 
awakened by the summons in their nature. 

II. The highly favoured will meet the Divine messengeb and the Divine 
MESSAGE with indiffbeence, UNBELIEF, AND iBEESPOKSivENBss. 1. Privilege is often 
associated with moral obduracy. The expression used is very severe : *' Of a hard 
forehead, and of a stiff heart." It is observable, and very significant, that the 
historians and prophets of the Hebrews, so far from flattering their countrymen, used 
with regard to them language of stern upbraiding and denunciation, reproached them 
with their unbelief, rebelliousness, hardness of heart, and stiff-necked attitude towards 
Divine authority. And such reproach was abundantly justified by the facts of their 
history. They were chosen to privilege, not in virtue of any excellence of their own, 
but in the sovereign wisdom and mercy of the Lord. The more God did for them, 
the less they heeded his commandments. Not that this condemnation applied to all ; 
there were those "faithful among the faithless;" but generally speaking, the Jews 
were a disobedient and rebellious race. 2. This moral obduracy leads to the rejection 
of God's iDCBsengers. •' The house of Israel " — so the Lord forewarned Ezekiel — " wiU 
not hearken unto thee." The same truth was expressed by our Lord himself centuries 
afterwards, when he reproachfully reminded his kindred according to the flesh that 
through long centuries messengers from God had been sent to their forefathers, only to 
be ill treated, wounded, and slain. Ezekiel was only to be treated as similarly autho 
rized messengers of God both before and afterwards. 3. God's messengers are rejected 
by those who have rejected God himself. Most terrible are the words of the Lord to 
Ezekiel : " They will not hearken unto thee ; for they will not hearken unto Mb." 
God had spoken unto Israel in the events of past history, and in the directions and 
reproaches of conscience. Ezekiel might well believe that there was no special reuou 



0H.ni. 1—27,] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL, 59 



why they should listen to him ; but he was well aware that there is no sin mors 
awful than the refusal to listen to the Eternal himself, all whose words are true and 
just, wise and good. It was not a case for personal feeling, a case of offence gfven 
and taken. Such feeling would have been out of place. The serious aspect of Israel's 
unbelief was just this — it was unbelief of God ; they turned away from the voice that 
spake from heaven. 

Application. The privileges of those who, in this Christian dispensation, hear the 
gospel of salvation preached to them, far exceed the privileges of the ancient Hebrews. 
To reject the testimony of Christ's ministers is to reject Christ himself, as our Lord has 
explicitly declared. The condemnation and guilt are tenfold when men harden their 
hearts, not only against the authority of the Divine Law, but against the pleadings of 
Divine love. — ^T. 

Vers. 8, 9. — The fearlessness of the Lord's messenger. After hearing that Israel 
would give no heed to his prophetic messages, the Prophet Ezekiel must have needed 
strong encouraging. It is always depressing to engage in a hopeless undertaking. Yet 
there was a moral necessity for the mission to be fulfilled. And the Lord strengthened 
and fortified his servant for his painful duty by breathing into him a Divine courage, 
and by bidding him dismiss all fear. Although Bzekiel's position was very special, 
every servant and herald commissioned by the Most High to witness on his behalf to 
his fellow-men has frequent need of such encouragement as that imparted to the 
prophet of the Captivity. 

I. The outward occasions of feab. There are many circumstances which are 
likely to arouse the apprehensions, and so to depress the energies, of God's messengers 
to their fellow-men. 1. Want of sympathy with his message on the part of those to 
whom he is sent. 2. An attitude of deliberate indifference and unbelief. 3. Deter- 
mined resistance and resentment. 4. Threats of personal violence. The former 
occasions of fear are such as every minister of religion must expect to encounter. But 
the Hebrew prophets sometimes met with actual ill treatment — ^blows, bonds, and 
death. So it was with the apostles of our Lord, and so it has been with missionaries 
of the cross, who have fulfilled their ministry among the unenlightened, prejudiced, 
and hostile heathen. Many have "resisted unto blood, striving against sin.'' 

II. The inwabd inclination to feab. There is great difference in the matter of 
constitutional temperament ; some men are naturally timid, and prone to be overawed 
by opposition and intimidation, whilst others have a certain delight in antagonism, and 
care not what odds are against them in the conflict. 1. Sometimes the messenger of 
God is too prone to regard his own peace and comfort, and is averse to any step which 
may bring him into collision with others. 2. The feeling on the part of God's servant, 
that he is but one against many, inclines him to retirement and reticence. 3. And 
this is increased when there is no countenance or support from colleagues in labour 
and warfare. The consciousness of personal feebleness and insufficiency, combined 
with the feeling of isolation, may naturally account for the prevalence of fear in the 
presence of difficulty, opposition, and hostility. He who made man, and who is per- 
fectly acquainted with human nature, is aware that his servants are subject to such 
infirmities, and that they need accordingly a special provision of Divine grace to 
fortify them against the spiritual danger to which they are exposed. 

III. The Divine pkeservative fkom feab. 1. The consciousness of a message 
from God to be delivered, whether man will hear or forbear, is fitted to take away all 
dread of men's displeasure, as well as all undue desire for men's favour. 2. The assur- 
ance that Divine authority accompanies the Lord's servant is in itself sufficient to 
make his face and his forehead hard as adamant in the presence of opponents whose 
only authority lies in force or in the conventional greatness attaching to earthly rank 
or station. 3. To this is added the express promise of God's aid. The opponents may 
be mighty ; but the soldier of truth and of righteousness has the assurance that he 
who is with him is mightier stilL " Fear not," says the Alm^hty, " for I am with 
yoa."-T. 

Ver. 10. — Z%e inpouring of Divine fulness. A great and strong nature is sometimes 
observed to obtain a v»st ascendancy over others, to communicate opinion, to exercise 



60 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIIX,. [ch. in. 1—27. 

influence, to control, to impel, to restrain, to inspire. Now, the prophet is the man 
to whom the Lord, who is the eternal Truth and Wisdom and Authority, stands in 
Bueh a relation. As is strikingly described in the text, God pours into the ears and 
the heart of the prophet the words which are the expression of his infinite mind and 
will, and thus fits him to stand as his own representative before his fellow-men. 
There was no doubt a special immediateness in this relation between God and the 
ancient prophets such as Ezekiel ; yet the remarkable language of this passage may 
justly be taken as describing the intercourse which exists between the Father of 
spirits and those whom he has made partakers of his nature and of his truth and life 
and love. 

I. The abundanob op Divine oommdnioations. Tliere is grandeur in the language 
here attributed to the Eternal : " All my words that I shall speak unto thee." How 
can we gather up into one apprehension all the communications, the words, addressed 
by God to man ? 1. All nature may fairly be regarded as the speech of him who, 
being at once the Father of spirits and the Author of the universe, makes use of the 
works of his hands as the medium by which to communicate with the beings whom 
he has endowed with capacities for knowing himself and for sharing in his character. 
2. Man's moral nature is in an especial manner the organ by which the Creator reveals 
his most venerable and admirable attributes ; unless man had a heart to feel, he would 
remain for ever a stranger to the glorious character of his God. 3. The text refers 
undoubtedly to a specud revelation accorded to selected individuals for definite pur- 
poses. And although there are those who would admit the manifestations of God 
previously described, and yet would question the reality of a supernatural revelation, 
there are good reasons for believing that we are indebted to such special provision for 
not a little of our most precious knowledge of our God. 

II. The obstacles to human eeceptiveness. These are not so much intellectual 
as moral. It is the worldly nature, engrossed with the pursuits of earth and the 
pleasures of sense, that repels Divine communications. The atmosphere is too dense 
and foggy for the rays of Divine righteousness and purity to pierce. It is sin which 
makes the ear deaf and the heart impenetrable so that the words of wisdom and of 
love die »way unheeded and unheard. 

III. The penetration and occupation of human natube bt the imparting 
or Divine communications. The purpose of the Eternal was that the whole being 
of the "son of man" should be taken up and occupied by the words to be uttered. 
And surely this is the intention of God regarding, not Ezekiel alone, but every child 
of man. There is no obstacle upon the Divine side. On the contrary, the purpose of 
infinite benevolence is that our humanity may be receptive of Divine blessing. 1. 
Divine truth is intended to fill the intelligence. In God's light it is for us to see 
light. Truth regarding God and man, and regarding God's relation to man, is commu- 
nicated in wonderful and abundant measure to the truth-seeking soul, and especially 
by bim who is " the Truth." 2. Divine love is intended to fill the heart. 3. Divine 
authority is intended to control the will — the active nature of man. 4. And Divine 
service is intended to fill man's life, so that the words of God may produce their 
perfect fruit in the actions and the habits of man. — T. 

Vers. 12, 13. — Celestial voices. As a true prophet, Ezekiel was specially susceptible 
to spiritual influences. Again and again he speaks of the Spirit as taking possession 
of him, placing him in new circumstances, enlarging his experiences, qualifying him 
for special ministries. Divesting oui'selves of the notion that such interpositions are 
to be interpreted as mechanical and local, we must seek to enter into their spiritual 
significance. The interest of this passage largely lies in its bearing upon the prophet's 
own personal history and ministerial service. 

I. Celestial voices game to one who had just passed through vbkt dis- 
heartening experiences. 1. Ezekiel had been reminded of the unbelief and rebel- 
liousntss of his countrymen, to whom it was his vocation to minister. Their character 
had been described to him in language of the truth of which ho was too well aware. 
To preach to the hardened and unsympathetic is no pleasant task. Yet it is a task 
to which every minwler of religion is often called. His is frequently the voice of one 
crying in the wilderness. And again and again has he been cast dowu and distressed 



OH. m. 1— 27J THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 61 

in spirit when thus encountered by prejudice, worldliness, and unbelief. 2. Ezekiel 
had been made to feel the difficulties arising from the feebleness and insufficiency of 
the spiritual labourer. It is hard to face a poweiful foe; but to do so becomes harder 
when the warrior is conscious of liis own weakness. And this has been the experience 
of every faithful servant of God. Often has the minister of Christ, overpowered by 
a sense of his impotence, cried aloud, "Wiio is sufficient for these tilings?" 

II. Celestial voices come to reanimate, to comfort, and to strengthen the 
SERVANT OF GoD. When the prophet was depressed by his experii-nces and appre- 
hensions, the Spirit lifted him up, and he heard voices from above. Wliilst we listen only 
to the voices of earth, we shall endure distress and discouragement. But if filled with 
the Spirit, we may hear voices which shall ravish our hearts with joy and inspire them 
with courage. 1. Celestial voices summon our attention away from man to God. 
There is a Divine side to our humanity, to our life, our work, and even our sorrows. 
The spirit, of man is capable of apprehending the Divine, and, indeed, only in doing 
so does it realize the purpose of its existence. God is not far from every one of us ; 
and he is near to all who call upon him in truth. 2. Celestial voices summon us to 
contemplate the majesty of the Eternal. This is their burden : " Blessed be the glory 
of tlie Lord from his place." Huw poor do earth's pleasures, and how paltry do earth's 
interests seem, when brought into comparison with the heavenly and eternal! The 
Hebrew prophets certainly enjoyed a wonderful insight into the majestic attributes of 
Jehovah. If we will be led by them, they will lead us into the presence, and reveal 
to us something of the glory, of the Lord of all. Thus may we he freed from bondage 
to earth's littleness ; thus may we learn the true, full lessons of being. 3. Thus earthly 
trouble may be lost and absorbed in heavenly grandeur. The voice of the rushing, the 
noise of ike wheels, the rustling of the wings, — these appealed to the imagination and 
touched the spirit of the prophet; and his trials and difficulties shrank into their 
proper insignificance, when he was conscious of the nearmss and of the infinite superi- 
ority of the Divine. We may not always he able to reason down our difficulties, to 
repress our anxieties, to vanquish our temptations. But we may bring all into the 
presence of Divine visions and Divine voices; and they will assume their just propor- 
tions, and God will be the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End, of all. — T. 

Ver. 14. — Human bitterness and Divine strength. The Prophet Ezekiel would have 
been more or less than human had he not felt poignantly the painful commission with 
which he was entrusted. He was a patriot as well as a prophet ; and his distress and 
trouble arose not merely from the discounigcraent natural to his position and service, 
but from his sympathy with his felluw-countrymen, his censure of their sin, his 
sorrow for their fate. Yet it was not the will of God that his grief should interfere 
with the efficiency of his ministry. And the l>ord who called him to his special work 
chose the occasion of the prophet's depression as the occasion of his intervention upon 
his behalf and for his strengthening. It was when Ezekiel was in bitterness and the 
heat of his spirit that the hand of the Lord was strong upon him. Nor was this 
experience peculiar to this prophet; many have, in God's service, known Ezekiel's 
bitterness, and have, in the time of their bitterness, felt God's hand upon them, a hand 
of encouragement, of guidance, and of blessing. 

I. The natural depression of the disappointed worker foe God. The cir- 
cumstances described in the context are abundantly sufficient to account fur the bitter- 
ness and heat of the propliet's spirit. Every faithful servant and minister of God can 
enter, more or less completely, into his feelings. The conditions of labour are often 
discouraging and distressing:. 

II. There is danger lest the effect of mental bitterness should be the 
CRIPPLIHO OF THE HANDS FOR EFFICIENT LABOUB. A cheerful mind Contributes to 
efficient toil. Even if the task be difficult and painful, it will not be well performed 
if bitterness and heat uf spirit prevail. " The joy of the Lord is your strength." 

III. Divine interposition can impart strength, can allay vexation, can 
FIT for spiritual MINISTRY. " The hand of the Lord," says the prophet, " was 
strong upon me." This metaphorical expression is full of significance. 1. Strong to 
uphold, as a father's hand sustains his child in a difficult and dangerous road. 
2. Strong to defend, as the hand of an escort may ward off from his charge the attacl; 



62 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. in. 1—27. 

of a foe. 3. Strong to direct, as the hand of the helmsman may steer the ship upon 
her course. 4. Strong to cheer and encourage, as the hand of the husband may grasp 
that of the wife, to comfort and to animate with courage, in times of common difficulty, 
sorrow, and distress. 5. Strong to save, as the hand of a deliverer may rescue a drowning 
form from raging waterfloods. — ^T. 

Vers. 17 — 19. — The watchman's office. Every servant of G^od conceives his service 
in his own manner, under the special light of his own experience and character. 
Kzekiel evidently felt the peculiar solemnity of his position among the children of the 
Captivity, and evidently was consumed by a desire to discharge his difiicult and painful 
duty with fiiielity and efficiency. Hence his habit of regarding himself, as indeed the 
Divine Spirit prompted him to do, as a watchman set to admonish and protect the 
Hebrew exiles in the East. In many respects this figure sets forth the vocation of 
every true minister of Christ called upon to watch for souls as one who must give 
acconnt unto God. 

I. The watchman's commission. The spiritual guardian and keeper does not 
undertake this duty at the suggestion of his own thoughts and inclinations; he is 
called to it by the voice of God himself. The word of the Lord comes unto him. He 
is stationed where he stands by Divine authority. He has to listen for the Divine 
voice, to give heed to every direction, to be ready to utter sdch messages as ho may 
receive from Heaven. 

II. The watchman's duty. This is, generally, to testify to man according to the 
instructions he receives. He has to hear in order that he may speak, to take in the 
truth in order that he may give it forth. It is, therefore, not enough that he be 
attentive and intelligent; he must impart the tidings, the message, which he receives. 
He lias a ministry, a trust, to fulfil for the benefit of his fellow-men — he has to seek 
to bring them into conscious relations with the Father of spirits. 

III. The watchman's special office fob the rebellious. Watching for men, 
the spiritual guardian is hound to remember the special character of those over whom 
he is placed. He is not simply an instructor entrusted with the duty of declaring 
truth, of inculcating lessons and precepts. He has to deal with " a rebellious house." 
Hence one great function of the watchman is to warn. Throughout this book the 
greatest stress is laid upon this duty. "Warn them from me ! " is the admonition of 
God to the faithful watchman. The people are in danger from manifold temptations ; 
and they have to he put upon their guard against the spiritual perils by which they 
are threatened. The wicked are to be warned, that they may repent ; the righteous 
have to be warned, lest they fall from their righteousness. 

IV. The watchman's responsibility. The oSice thus described is indeed an 
honourable one ; but it is difiScult and responsible. Much depends upon the way in 
which the duty is discharged; the safety of the people and the acceptance of the 
guardian are both alike at stake. 1. The watchman's fidelity will be rewarded. If he 
fulfil his duty, he will deliver his soul, he will be approved and recompensed, promoted 
and honoured. 2. The watchman's unfaithfulness will be punished. If he do not his 
duty, others will suffer, but he himself will not escape just retribution. The blood of 
the lost will be required at his hand. 

Application. 1. Here is a lesson for those who are appointed to wat«h for souls. 
Their ears must be open to receive the Word of the Lord; their lips must be open to 
speak that Word. 2. Here is a lesson for those who enjoy the Ijenefit of spiritual 
ministrations. It is not only an awful and responsible duty to watch ; it is an awful 
and responsible ) rivilege to listen to the watchman's warning. If the preacher ii 
accountable for his utterances, the hearer is aconuntable for the spirit in which he 
receives those utterances. Take heed what, and how, you hear ! — T. 

Vers. 26, 27. — Dumbness and speech. The wise man has said, " There is a time to 
keep silence, and a time to speak." There are those who speak when they would do 
well to hold their peace ; there are those who are speechless when it becomes them to 
utter their mind with boldness. A prophet is emphatically one who speaks for God; 
a silent prophet is a paradox. Yet, as Ezekiel was, of all his order, the one whose 
ministry was especially a ministry of symbol, it is only in harmony with his peculiar 



OH. m. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THK PROPHET EZEKIEL. 63 

vocation that, for a time and for a purpose, he should be as one dumb. On the other 
hand, the abundance of his utterances is apparent from the length to which the 
book of his prophecies extends. There were reasons for both bis dumbness and his 
speech. 

I. The testimony of silbhcb. That God should enjoin one of his own prophets 
to silence is certainly a very remarkable fact, and one that needs explanation. 1. It is 
evidence of Israel's unbelief and inattention. When the people refused to hear, there 
was a solemn dignity in the refusal of the prophet any longer to speak. 2. It is in 
rebuke of Israel's attempt to silence the Lord's messenger. The people would have 
their monitor hold his peace ; and God gave them their will. The oracle was dumb. 
3. The silencing of the prophet was judicial. Punishment is a reality ; and severe 
indeed is the penalty inflicted upon that nation in which the voice of God's prophets 
is silenced. The effects of such sin recoil upon the sinners' heads. 4. Such silencing 
was suggestive. It offered opportunity for reflection; it called for consideiation 
regarding the future ; it may well have appeared to the thoughtful premonitory of 
worse calamities to follow. 

II. The testimony of speech. 1. This is the result of Divine preparation : " When 
I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth." The same power which, at one time and 
for one purpose, closes the lips, at another time and for another purpose, opens them. 
So long as God withholds the message, the prophet is silenced; no sooner is the 
message conveyed to the prophet than he is empowered to utter it. 2. This is in 
fulfilment of a Divine commission : "Thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
God." A command hke this may well unseal the lips. The man who is convinced 
that he is justified in thus prefacing his utterances may well speak, whether his 
message be palatable or unpalatable, whether it bring the messenger praise or blame 
from his fellow-men. 3. This is accompanied by Divine authority : " He that heareth, 
let him hear ; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear." It is for the people's own 
advantage that the prophet witnesses; if he warns, it is that they may escape 
threatened danger ; if he promises, it is that they may obtain blessings ; if he com- 
mands, it is that they may obey, and secure the rewards of obedience. Accordingly, it 
is for the people to consult their own highest interests. But in any case they are 
subject to Divine authority ; from that, and all that it involves, there is no escape. 

Application. 1. God has different ways of dealing with men ; sometimes not only 
different, but apparently opposite ways, as in the case before us. And indeed, one man 
may be reached and benefited by speech ; another man, by silence. 2. In whatever 
way God deals with us, we are equally and inevitably responsible. It is indeed in our 
power to hear or to forbear, f.e. to obey or to disobey. But to every man faith and 
obedience bring blessing ; and moreover (which is still more important), they are in 
themselves right and becoming. Ours is the privilege ; ours is the accountability for 
its proper use. — T. 

Vers. 4 — 14. — Ambassadorship. God makes unusual manifestations of his glory to 
men, to qualify them for extraordinary service. The opened heavens and the voice of 
Divine approbation, on the occasion of Jesus' baptism, were a preparation for the 
desert conflict. The transfiguration of our Lord on the mount was designed to qualify 
the disciples for arduous spiritual toil. Ezekiel found it right pleasant to receive 
higher revelations of Gud's Person and God's will, but irksome to the flesh to convey 
that will to his brethren. 

L Thb booece of authobity. The splendid manifestation of God, recorded in the 
first chapter, was intended to prepare and fortify Ezekiel for this difficult undertakmg. 
The God of heaven, who dwelt amid such splendours, and who had such a magnificent 
retinue, condescended to employ this timid " son of man " as his ambassador. When- 
ever an envoy has been sent by his monarch to a foreign court, on a momentous 
errand, he has been sustained by the consciousness that he represented, in his weak 
person, the honour of the monarch and the strength of the whole empire. So Ezekiel 
had been admitted to the court of the celestial King, and was honoured to bear the 
commands of the eternal God. No other authority could be compared with this. 
Havin" revealed to his ecstatic vision the glories of the heavenly King, the Sovereign's 
voice broke graciously on the servant's ear, " Go, get thee unto the house of Israel," 



$4 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. [oh, in. 1—27. 

LL The bubstahob or the message. "Speak with my words." The first task 
the prophet had to perform was with himselt'. It was a necessity that he should 
repress and suhject self. He must overbear his timidity. He must mortify his pride. 
He must forego personal tastes and predilections. This done, his task was simple. 
Ho was to be spokesman for God. He was released from the perplexity of inventing 
Buasive arguments or selecting fitting words. All the material for reproof, expostula- 
tion, counsel, appeal, was furnished by God himself. On every occasion the prophet 
was required to speak in the name of the Sovereign, and to use this formula, " Thus 
saith Jehovah." 

III. The besistance anticipated. At first sight, it would seem as if the prophet's 
mission were an easy one. To convey a further disclosure of God's will to his own 
people would surely be a most welcome thing. If they had accorded to Moses almost 
reverential honour, will they not display, a similar disposition to another prophet? 
Moreover, the people were now in the extremity of trouble — ^in the depths of affliction : 
would they not the more readily hear a message from their God ? A singular doom 
was awaiting such bright hopes. Surface prospects were indeed favourable, but the 
most formidable opposition was thinly veiled. No foe on earth is so terrible to face as 
a depraved human will. As metals, that have been repeatedly heated and cooled, 
cannot easily be made ductile; so, under much gracious treatment, the heart of Israel 
had become hopelessly hardened. It is an unalterable law of Heaven, that kindness 
abused becomes the heaviest curse. Yet no measure of opposition was to deter the 
prophet in fulfilling his duty, or he, too, would experience the curse of disobedience. 
Though he was forewarned how resistant would be his auditors, his commission was 
unmodified, his task unchanged. If no advantage should accrue to the house of 
Israel, larg.i advantage would accrue to the prophet, as the result of his fidelity — ^large 
advantage would result to later generations. Difficulty is not the measure of duty. 
Service for Gud bears fruit in unexpected directions. 

IV. Special equipment is provided bt God. In our warfare for God we may find 
encouragement in the superior resources of our Master against all assailants. Truth is 
mightier than error all the world over. Eighteousness is mightier than wickedness. 
We have an ally in the conscience of our foe, if all his passions be against us. Best 
encouragement of all, God's strength is mightier, more durable, than the might of 
allied humanity. The confiict may be long, but final conquest is sure. Sp' cial equip- 
ment, too, is provided for special difficulties. " To the froward God will show himself 
froward." If his enemies show a brazen face, God will give his servants a forehead of 
steel. If they mail themselves with flints, God will provide his defenders with breast- 
plates of arlamant. " My grace is sufficient for thee ; " " As thy day thy strength." 

V. The true prophet is an integral part op God's universal army. He does 
not labour alone, nor contend alone. The Spirit of God is upon him — fortifies him on 
every side. Angels rejoice in the appointment of human ambnssadors. The great 
forces of the universe work along with the servant of God. The living creatures 
co-operate with God's soldiery. As we go forth to the battle with sin, we may hear 
behind ns the rustling of the heavenly wings, and the music of the heavenly wheels, 
and the chorus of sympathizing saints, " Be ye faithful unto death." The battle is 
not ours, but Ood's. The cause with which we are identified is most honourable. Our 
Master is the King of heaven. We act in alliance with the noblest spirits in the 
universe. Complete triumph is predestined. — D. 

Vers. 15 — 21. — Responsibility. It is a serious thing to be responsible for our own 
conduct ; it is (if possible) yet more serious to have responsibility for others. The two 
things are inseparably intertwined. 

I. Responsibility springs from natural relationship. Relationships are of all 
kinds— near and remote. No man is completely detached from others. Sis life 
penetrates other lives. A father is responsible for his children. Brothers are respon- 
sible for sisters, and vice versd. It was not until the demon of murderous hate had 
strangled the natural instinct of brotherhood, that the sullen miscreant asked, " Am I 
my blether's keeper?" 

II. Responsibility springs from official position. The eternal God had exalted 
Ezekiel to a position of honour in his kingdom ; and high rank is another name for 



OH. in. 1—27.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 6« 

high responsibility. To make this clear to his servant, God employed comparison, 
analogy, forcible illustration. On the city watchman hung the fate of the city — the 
lives of fellow-citizens. He was exempted from other duties that he might the better 
discharge this. For many reasons, some manifest, some hidden, God appoints men, 
not angels, to be the exponents of his will to men. Faithful service will be riohlj 
rewarded; the loss of such rewards is a heavy penalty. But responsibility, if abused, 
bears a prolific harvest of disasters. 

III. BESPONSiBrLiTT SPRINGS FROM suPBRioB KNOWLEDGE. If knowledge is power, 
knowledge is responsibility also. The light of wisdom or of science is entrusted to us 
that it may be diffused. In proportion to tlie practical value of the knowledge is the 
responsible duty to propagate it. Hence the special insight into man's fallen state, 
the subtlety of temptation, and the overwhelming results of impenitence — in brief, the 
special knowledge of God's intention with respect to guilty men — this entails on every 
prophet and preacher an imponderable responsibility to be faithful. Men might have 
been saved had they known both the generous and the judicial purposes of God ; we 
knew and might have instructed them. 

IV. Besfonsibility springs from possible influence. To the utmost extent that 
»e can touch the springs of motive and o*' action in out feUow-men are we responsible 
for them. Our responsibility does not begin and end with the message we deliver. 
We are to warn men. This mystic influence we possess over others is reflected from 
every smile and tone and feature. Hence temper, motive, fervour, earnestness, are 
elements of our power. We warn others by our own abstinence from sin, by our self- 
denials, our heavenly-mindedness, our fruitful goodness, our pious walk and converse. 
Responsibility ends only when we have exhausted every method to draw men 
heavenward. 

V. BbsponsibiIiITT springs from the known results of neglected trust. The 
God who has placed his servants in responsible positions has deigned to inform them 
what shall be the eflTects of neglect and cowardice. To the unwarned wicked the effect 
shall be destruction : " They shall surely die." To the unfaithful watchman the effect 
shall be dishonour and loss : " The blood of the unwarned shall be required at hia 
hand." The wicked might have died, though warned ; but he might have repented 
and lived. A diseased man may die, although the remedy be applied ; but if the 
known remedy be withheld, the blame of that death will fall on the slothful attendant. 
God has not seen it to be wise or fitting to make provision against unfaithfulness in 
his prophets. If they fail in the discharge of their momentous functions, no other 
agency will supply the room. The impenitent (who have no claim on God for any 
remedial measures) will, in such a case, die in their iniquity. For every position of 
influence, or honour, or usefulness we hold, "we must give account of ourselves 
before God."— D. 

"Vers. 22 — 27. — The silenced prophet, a calamity. The apparent success of wicked- 
ness is a seed of retribution. The people do not wish to hear, therefore their ears shall 
be hardened. They gnash their teeth on God's prophet, therefore God will remove him 
into a corner. 

L Seolusion from men beings nearer access to Ck)D. Such experience our Lord 
himself passed through. " I shall be left alone ; and yet I am not alone, because the 
Father is vfith me." " Arise, and go forth into the plain," said God to Ezekiel, " and 
I will there talk with thee." It is painful to be hindered and repulsed on a mission of 
mercy ; but the servant of God may remember that the opposition is not to him, but 
to his Master. We naturally love society ; we love success ; we love to feel that our 
influence is moving men in the right direction. Resolute and persistent opposition is 
painful ; but the friendship of God compensates for a thousand disappointments. If he 
smiles, it matters little who may frown. 

II. The opposition of men brings all God's host to the prophet's side. The 
glorious vision which Ezekiel had seen on the banks of the Chebar was repeated in 
the plain. Representatives of all the living forces of heaven appeared again as the 
prophetfs allies. In such a cause, and with such allied powers, triumph must eventu- 
ally ensue. Though repelled, the prophet is not defeated ; " Though cast down, not 
destroyed." If he pleased, God comd have secured outward and apparent success for 
ezekiel. T 



«b ihfi BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. ni. 1—27 

h» messenger. He could have smitten with sudden death the more rebellious, and 
made the calamity an instrument for impressing and silencing others. But his wisdom 
preferred another course. " His thoughts are not our thoughts." Bzekiel very likely 
required yet further training for his work. We see not the scope and grandeur of 
Jehovah's plans at present; but by-and-by we shall be able to say, "He bath done all 
things well." 

III. Thk deafness of men ouetails the bevelation fbom God. Men's pride 
osually becomes their pimishment. They scourge themselves with their own sins. 
If they make themselves deaf, God will make his servant dumb. The time will come 
when they shall earnestly desire to hear some message from the Lord, but they shall 
desire in vain. They may attempt to force the prophet into speech, but they will 
attempt in vam. Saul, the first King of Israel, was disobedient to the heavenly voice; 
yet when he was entangled iu thick dangers, he cried to God, but God answered not, 
neither by prophet, nor by vision, nor by Urim or Thummim. " Because I called, and 
ye refused ... I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your fear 
Cometh." Reproof was the kindest message the people could have from God, yet they 
onderstood it not. The hardened soil must be broken up by the plough before it is of 
any use to cast in the seed. The diseased man needs medicine, not sweetmeats. And 
when, at times, God does give his prophets a word to utter, it is only the word of 
reproof again. He will bring their self-will and pride again to remembrancei The 
pearls of his gospel he casts not before swine. — ^D. 

Vers. 4 — 7. — 2%e aiofui consequence§ of neglecting the Word of the Lord. "And he 
Hud unto me. Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel," etc. Here is a 
comparison between two possible spheres of prophetic service — ^between the Israelites 
and the heathen (ver. 5) ; between the one house of Israel and many heathen peoples 
(ver. 6). 1. Both these spJieres of service ivovld have presented diffietdties in the way of 
the fulfilment of the prophefs mission. In the case of the heathen nation or nations 
there would have been the linguistical difGculty. Ezekiel would not have understood 
their speech ; they would not have understood his. Eurppsan missionaries find this, 
and have to spend no inconsiderable time in acquiring the language of those to whom 
they are sent, before they can begin their great work. In the case of the house of 
Israel the difficulty was in their moral condition. It was not that the prophet's speech 
was unintelligible unto them, but that their hearts were hardened against the Word 
of the Lord. 2. The linguistical hindrance to the success of the prophefs mission was 
far lets serious than the moral. Time and patient application would enable him to 
surmount the former ; but what human skill or assiduity can overcome the strong 
prejudice or moral obstinacy of the heart ? 3. The moral hindrance to the success of the 
propheCs mission is sometimes humanly insuperable. (Ver. 7.) What is the reason of 
this, that the untaught heathen would have attended unto the prophet, while the 
privileged Israelites would not hearken unto him ? 

L The familiarity of the Israelites with the tbuths published bt the 
peophbt had depbived those tbuths of the interest which arises fbom noveltt. 
The unfamiliar and the new have great attractions for many minds (cf. Acts xvii. 
19 — 21). Ezekiel had no new fundamental truths to make known unto the house of 
Israel. What Moses and other prophets had taught he had to enforce and apply to 
their present circumstances. With the general principles of his teaching they were 
well acquainted. His message had no interest to them. But to the heathen his 
message would have been fresh and charged with interest. It would have awakened 
inquiry, etc. And alas 1 how many in Christian congregations to-day are so familiar 
with the gospel of Jesus Christ that they heed it not ! Things which, compared with 
it, are the trifles of an hour, secure their eager attention, while it is treated as an unim- 
portant and unprofitable thing. 

n. The long indiffeeence or the Isbaeliteb to the tbuths published bt the 
pbophet had rendered them insensible to the powee of those tbuths. They had 
heard them without heeding them, until heedlessness had become habitual in relation 
to them. They had refused to recognize their importance so long that now they 
seemed to them to have no importance. But the heathen would not have been thus 
indifferett to those trutlis. For them they would have had, not only the interest of 



OH. in. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 67 



novelty, but the influence arising from their practical relation to their hearts and lives. 
Is it not to be feared that in Christian countries at present there are many who, like 
the honse of Israel, have so long been indifferent to " the glorious gospel of the blessed 
God" that now it is natural to them not to feel any personal concern in it ? The offer 
which is repeatedly disregarded is ere long unnoticed. Warnings which are frequently 
unheeded at length cease to be heard. 
III. The practical opposition of thb Ibbaelitks to the tkuths pubushbd bt 

THE prophet had HARDENED THEIB HBABT8 AGAINST THOSE TRUTHS. They had 80 

long refused to do the will of God that they had become insensible to the power of his 
Word. They were " impudent and hard-hearted " — " stiff of forehead and hard of 
heart." They would not hear the Word of the Lord. But the heathen would have 
heard it if that Word had been sent unto them ; for they had not hardened themselves 
against it. They were accessible to its influence, etc. This solemn truth receives 
confirmation from other portions of Scripture. While the house of Israel rejected their 
prophets, the heathen of Nineveh repented at the preaching of Jonah. Qwc Lord also 
confirms this truth in solemn words (Matt. viii. 10 — 12 ; xi. 20 — 24 ; xii. 38 — 42). The 
history of modern missions supplies illustrations of the power of the gospel of Christ 
to interest and astonish, to attract and fascinate, to convince and convert, heathen 
peoples. Yet in this highly favoured land there are millions who are unmoved by that 
gospel. And of these many, many, we fear, have hardened themselves against the will 
«ad Word of God. They who persist in so doing become " past feeling." Moral power 
fails to impress them. They are " hardened through the deceitfulness of sin." When 
holy authority has no force for men, and Divine threatenings no awakening power, and 
truth and righteousness no sacred majesty, and death and eternity no solemnity, and 
the deepest, tenderest love no spell upon the heart, — when men are indifferent to these, 
harden themselves against these, what moral influences of a saving character can be 
brought to bear upon them ? 

CoNOLUBloN. 1. 1/ the heathen would have hea/rd the Word of the Lord, how it it 
that the prophet was not sent u,nto them f Our answer must be that of our Lord when 
considering a similar question : " I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth," 
etc. (Matt. xi. 25, 26). And it is important to remember that the heathen will be 
judged, not according to the light which they had not, but according to that which 
they had. 2. ^ the heathen, are thus disposed to hear the Word of the Lord, the gospel 
will most surely be published unto them. (Mark xvi. 15 ; Bev. xiv. 6, 7.) 3. But the 
chief voice of our subject is that of solemn admonition to all unto whom the gospel is 
pretiched. "Take heed how ye hear." "Despise not prophesyings." Beware of 
hearing the Word of the Lord with indifference ; for indifference may grow into 
obduracy of heart such as no moral force can penetrate. — ^W. J. 

Vers. 16 — 21. — The prophet a watchman. " And it came to pass at the end ot 
seven days, that the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Son of man, I have made 
thee a watchman unto the house of Israel," etc. Let us notice — 

L The oharacteb in which the prophet of the Lord is here befbesbnted. 
" Son of man, I have made thee a watchman imto the house of Israel." 1. The 
appointment of a watchman implies the peril of the Church. Watchmen in ancient 
times were posted on the walls or in the towers of cities in order that they might watch 
for the appearance or approach of an enemy, and give instant warning of the same. 
The house of Israel was exposed to dangers and enemies, or it would not have needed 
a watchman. And the Church of Christ to-day is opposed by " the gates of hell " 
(Matt. xvi. 18), by evil powers in the world, and by evil persons and erroneous teach- 
ings within itself (Acts xx. 29, 30). 2. The appointment of watchmen in the Chwch 
is the prerogative of Ood. " Son of man, I have made thee a watchman," etc. No 
man may constitute himself a watchman, and no Church may appoint a man to this 
ofSce apart from the call of the Lord thereto. Christian ministers are called of God 
(ct Heb. T. 4). 

n. The dutt of thb feophkt as a watchman. His business was " to take notice^ 
and to give notice." 1. To watch. " Hear the word at my mouth." It is a peculiarity 
of these watchmen that they have not to look around to obtain intelligence, but to 
look up. Their eyes and ears must be directed towards the Lord. They must receive 



68 THE BOOK OF THE FBOFHET BZEKIEL. [oh. m. 1—27. 

their message from Mm, and then proclaim it unto men. And the Christian prophet 
must ipeak the Word of the Lord Jesus Christ. We must " hear him " (Matt. xvii. 5) ; 
we must preach him (2 Cor. iv. 5). This part of a watchman's duty demands vigilance. 
Slothfulness and inattention may prove disastrous hoth to his charge and to himself. 
His ohservant faculties must he in active exercise. 2. To wwm. " And ^ve them 
warning from me." Ezekiel was to publish to the house of Israel what he heard from 
the Lord, and to publish it in his Name. The Christian preacher must warn and 
encourage, exhort and rebuke, in the Name of his Master, the Christ. He must receive 
from him ; he must testify for him (of. Matt. x. 40 ; Luke x. 16). 

in. The chabacters unto whom the watchman must addbess himself. He 
must warn both the righteous and the wicked (vers. 18 — 21). But four types of 
character are adduced here. 1. The wicked man who has not been warned by the 
watchman, and dies beca^ise of his iniquity. (Ver. 18.) God declares that " the wages 
of sin is death ; " that " the soul that sinneth, it shall die." And though this wicked 
man was not warned by the watchman, yet he was warned by his own conscience, 
and by voices of Divine providence, and by the sacred Scriptures. " Where the public 
ministry does not do its duty, Holy Scripture is still at hand, and it is each one's fault 
if he be not called to repentance by the voice of this " (Hengstenberg). 2. ITie wicked 
man who has been warned by the watchman, but still persists in sin, and dies because of 
kis iniquity. (Ver. 19.) His guilt is greater, and his punishment will be more severe, 
by reason of the warnings which he has despised. 3. The sometime outwardly righteous 
man, who has become a worker of iniquity, and has not been warned by the watchman, 
and dies because of his sin. (Ver. 20.) This verse calls for some remarks by way of 
exposition. (1) That in the providence of Grod the characters of men are tested. The 
words, "I lay a stumbling-block befure him," point to this. The expression signifies 
to subject one to trial by exposing him to difficulties and dangers, as in Jer. vi. 2L 
" God tempts no man in order to his destruction, but in the course of his providence 
he permits men to be tried in order that their faith may be approved, and in this trial 
■ome who seem to be righteous fall" (Dr. Currey). (2) That some characters fail 
beneath this test. Where the righteousness is only external, it is unable to endure 
the trial. But " the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ " will not be 
injured by the trial. (3) That when one who has done righteous acts fails under trial 
and becomes a worker of iniquity, he forfeits the reward of those righteous acts, and, 
if he persist in sin, he will die by reason thereof. " He shall die because of his sin, 
and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered." To obtain the 
reward of good works perseverance therein even to the end is necessary (cf. Heb. vL 
10 — 12 ; 2 John 8 ; Eev. iii. 11). 4. The righteous man who has been warned by the 
watchman, and, persevering in his righteousness, lives. (Ver. 21.) The sincerely right- 
eous need warning, exhortation, and counsel, and are likely to profit by them. 

IV. The diffeebnt eesults of the watchman's ministry. 1. As regards his 
hearers. (1) Some would not heed his warnings. In the examples given in the text 
there is a majority of this class. The result to them would be greater guilt and severer 
condemnation. How many, alas I treat the warnings of the Clnistian watchman in 
a similar manner 1 They hear them, but practically despise thuui. (2) Some would 
heed his warnings, and their salvation would be furthered by so doing. An example 
of this is given in ver. 21. And others, through him, might be led to turn from their 
iniquity, and live. Unspeakably blessed are such results. 2. As regards himself. 
(1) If the watchman should be unfaithful his guilt would be terrible. " His blood 
will I require at thine hand" (vers. 18, 20; cf. Gen. ix. 5; xlii. 22). "It is the 
life," says Schroder, " which is in the blood, of those in Israel which is entrusted to 
the prophet as a watchman. For this Jehovah, the Supreme Proprietor, demands a 
reckoning. The prophet who forgets his duty, which be owes to the unrighteous in 
God's stead, becomes a manslaughterer, a murderer of that man, and is regarded as 
such by God ; " and as a murderer, not of the body, but of the inestimably precious 
soul. The thought of such guUt is overwhelmingly dreadful. How awful is the 
responsibility of the Lord's watchmen 1 "Who is si&cient for these things?" (2) 
If the watchman is faithful, though unsuccessful, he would be clear from giiiilt, and 
be saved himself (of. Acts xviii. 6 ; xx. 26, 27). (3) If the watchman is faithful and 
■oecessfa], great would be bis joy and great his reward, as in the case stated in ver. 21. 



OH. m. 1—27.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 69 

And in the case which is not mentioned here, but is yet among the possible results 
of his work, viz. that the wicked should believe his message, and turn unto the Lord. 
" Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him," etc. (Jas. v. 
19, 20). Who can estimate the blessedness of a result like this? 

Conclusion. Our subject presents : 1. 2%e strongest reasons for fidelity on the part 
of the ministers of the gospel of Jesus Christ. 2. Z%« strongest reasons why the Ohwrch 
of Jesus Christ should constantly aid his ministers ly earnest prayers on their hehalf. 
(Of. Eph. vi. 18—20; CoL iv. 3, 4; 2 Thess. iii. 1, 2.)— W. J. 

Vers. 22, 23. — Ood communicating with man. "And the hand of the Lord wu 
there upon me ; and he said unto me, Arise," etc. The text presents for our notice — 

L The gracious preparation op man fob the reception of Divine ooMMnNi- 
OATIONS. "And the hand of the Lord was there upon me." (We have already briefly 
noticed the significance of this expression in dealing with ch. i. 3.) Ezekiel seems to 
have been grieved and saddened in spirit (vers. 14, 15). Such depression unfitted him 
for receiving communications from God. Therefore " the hand of the Lord," the power 
of the Lord, came upon him to quicken him for the reception of the revelation of his 
will. God prepares his servants for his service. He qualifies and enables them to 
sustain exalted privileges, to perform arduous duties, to bear severe trials. 

II. An IMPORTANT CONDITION, FOB MAN, OF THE BEOBPTION OF DiVINE COMMUNI- 
CATIONS. " Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee." Ezekiel 
is thus commanded to depart from Tel-Abib and his fellow-captives, and to go, not to 
the " plain extending to the river, but to a certain valley between the mountain-walls 
there" — ^for such is the signification of the word which is translated "plain "in the 
Authorized Version. Retirement was a condition of communion and communication 
with God. If the prophet would hear his voice and behold his glory, he must go into 
the lonely valley. " God makes himself known to the mind only when it has been 
entirely withdrawn from worldly influences. We must be in the valley ; but we may 
be in the bustling town, and yet in the valley " (Hengstenberg). (We have spoken 
of solitude and quiet as favouring Divine commimications in our remarks on ch. i. 1 : 
"By the river of Chebar.") 

III. The CONDESCENSION OF God in the bestowment upon man of Ditinb 
COMMUNICATIONS. With Ezekiel the Lord communicated in two ways. 1. By speech. 
" I will there talk with thee." God made known his will to his servant. Spiritually, 
he thus communicates with his people still. In infinite condescension, " the High and 
Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy, and who dwells in the high 
and holy place," also makes his abode in the hearts of his people (Isa. Ivii. 15; John 
xiv. 23). They have intimate fellowship with him (1 John i. 3). He will even visit 
them as then: Guest, and sup with them (Rev. iii. 20). They are blessedly conscious 
of his presence with them. By his Spirit he speaks unto them. 2. By vision. "Then 
I arose, and went forth into the plain : and, behold, the glory of the Lord stood there," 
etc. The glory of the Lord which the prophet beheld was like that which he saw 
before, and which he mentions in ch. i. 28. (We have already remarked on the grant- 
ing of Divine visions to man, on ch. i. 1 : "I saw visions of God.") And in our own 
times God opens the spiritual eyes of man, and grants unto him spiritual visions. 
Visions of truth and purity and beauty he exhibits to his people. He even reveals 
himself unto them. Our Lord promised to manifest himself unto his loving and obedient 
disciples (John xiv. 21). " Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God." 

IV. The immediate effect upon man op Divine communications. " And I fell 
on my face." 1. The sight of such glory humbles man with the sense of his own 
immeasurable inferiority. 2. The sight of sitcA glory overwhelms man by quickening 
his consciousness of sin into greater activity. 3. Such humiliation is a condition of 
hearing the voice of Ood.^ — W. J. 

Venu 24 — 27. — The temporary suspension of the active ministry of the prophet. 
" Then the Spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet," etc. Seclusion and 
silence were enjoined upon Ezekiel for a time. Our text teaches that the temporary 
suspension of his active ministry — 

' These three points are stutcd at gruater length in our homily on oh. i aS— iL 3. 



70 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. in. 1—27. 

L Was commanded by the Lord. " Then the Spirit entered into me, and set me 
upon my feet, and spake with me, and said unto me. Go, shut thyself within thine 
house " (of. oh. ii. 2). One would have been inclined to conclude that, when he was 
revived by the Spirit, the prophet would have been ordered to eater upon active 
service. But he was commanded to seclude himself wiihin his house. This seclusion 
was probably intended as : 1. A season of meditation for the prophet. Such seasons 
are requisite for those whose work for Gtod is public and arduous ; and in his provi- 
dence God so orders their lives that such seasons are attainable by them ; e.g. Moses in 
the desert of Midian (Exod. iii. 1) ; St. Paul in Arabia (Gal. i. 17) ; Martin Luther in 
the monastery of Erfurt, and in the castle of Wartburg. 2. As a silent admonition to 
the people. God would instruct them by symbol, that from a rebellious people the 
prophetic presence and voice may be withdrawn. If men will not heed the reproofs 
of his servants, the reprover shall be silent towards them (ver. 26). 

II. Was ocoasionbd by the obstinacy of the people in wickedness. "But 
thou, son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with 
them, and thou shalt not go out among them." This verse is a dif&cult one, and we 
cannot assert dogmatically what it means; but it seems to us that it should be taken 
metaphorically, and that it symbolizes the truth that the persistent sins of the people 
occasioned the seclusion and silence of the prophet. Dr. Pairbairn thus paraphrases 
the verse under consideration ; " Their obstinate and wayward disposition shall be felt 
upon thy spirit like restraining fetters, repressing the energies of thy soul in its 
spiritual labuurs, so that thou shalt need to look for thy encouragement elsewhere than 
in fellowship with them. The imposition of bands must be understood spiritually, of 
the damping effect to be produced upon his soul by the conduct of the people. It ig 
a marked specimen of the strong idealism of our prophet, which clothes everything it 
handles with the distinctness of flesh and blood." The persistent rebelliousness of the 
people occasioned the temporary suspension of the active work of the prophet. The 
unbelief of our Lord's own countrymen was as bands upon him, restraining the exer- 
cise of his benevolent power. " Aiid he did not many mighty works there, because of 
their unbelief." Obstinacy in wickedness deprives man of the most precious spiritual 
possessions. 

III. Was to be kigidlt enfobced. " And I will make thy tongue cleave to the 
roof of thy mouth, that thou sbalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for 
they are a rebellious house." This is to be taken metaphorically. " Because the people 
would silence the prophet, God, to punish them, will close his mouth." During the 
time of the suspension of his prophetic activity he would be as silent to them as a 
dumb man. When the Lord determines to deprive a people of any blessing which 
they have despised or persistently disregarded, his determination will certainly be 
enforced. 

IV. Was to be only tempobaby. " But when I speak with thee, I will open thy 
mouth, and thou shalt say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God," etc. The with- 
drawal of the messenger of the Lord was not to be permanent. The prophet would 
speak again when God willed him to do so. When his seclusion and silence had pro- 
duced their effect, he must go forth and proclaim the word of the Lord. The following 
observations are suggested by this verse : 1. The prophet is empowered fvr his vjorh ^ 
the Lord. " When I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth." Ezekiel received his 
message from the Lord, and was emboldened by him to deliver it. 2. The prophet is 
authorized in his work by the Lord. " Thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord 
God." Both the silence and the speech of Ezekiel were expressly ordered by God. In 
both he was under the control of his Divine Master, remaining silent when so directed 
by him, and proclaiming his word when commanded and enabled by him to do so. 
" This represents forcibly the authoritative character and Divine origin of the utter- 
ances of the Hebrew prophets." 3. The prophefs great concern in his work should he 
to he faithful to the Lord. "Thus saith the Lord God; He that heareth, let him hear; 
and he that forbeareth, let him forbear : for they are a rebellious house." Ezekiel was 
not responsible for the success of his work with the people. But fidelity in executing 
the commissions which he received from his great Master was required of him. For 
this he was responsible. And still " it is required in stewards that a man be found 
fiuthful"(10or.iT.2). 



OH.IV. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 



71 



Conclusion. Our subject addresses to us solenm admonition as to our treatment of 
the Word of the Lord. If we persistently despise or disregard that Word, he may with- 
draw it from US, or place us beyond the sphere of the ministry thereof. Neglected 
privileges may justly and reasonably be taken away firom those wlw have n^ected 
them (ct Amos viiL 4— 12).— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Prior to any detailed examination of the 
strange series of acta recorded in this and 
the following chapter, we are met with the 
question whether they were indeed visible 
and outward acts, or only imagined by the 
prophet in a state of ecstasy and afterwards 
reported by him to the people. Each view 
has been maintained by commentators of 
repute. I adopt, with scarcely any hesita- 
tion, the former, and for the following rea- 
•ons. (1) On the other interpretation the 
acts recorded were not signs to the people 
(ver. 3) till the prophet reported them; but 
the whole context shows that they were to 
be substitutes for spoken teaching. They 
belong to the period of the prophet's silence. 
(2) This mode of teaching, though not car- 
ried to the same extent, was part of the nor- 
mal method of a prophet's work. Zedekiah's 
horns of iron (1 Kings xiii. 11); Isaiah's 
walking "naked and barefoot" for tliree 
years (Isa. xx. 2, 3); Jeremiah's yokes of 
wood (Jer. xxvii. 2), probably even the latter 
prophet's journey to the Euphrates (Jer. 
liii. 4) ; and Hosea's marriage with a harlot 
(Hos. i — iii.), were all outward objective 
facts. We are only disposed to take a dif- 
ferent view of Ezekiel's acts because they 
are more startling and repulsive ; but to 
adopt a non-natural interpretation on this 
a priori ground of feeling is not the act of 
an honest interpreter. We have to admit 
that outwardly the life of the prophets of 
Israel might present analogies to the pheno- 
mena of other religions or other times. The 
acts of Ezekiel may find a parallel in those 
of Simeon Stylitesor George Fox; of Jesus 
the son of Ananus, who for seven years and 
five months walked to and fro in Jeru- 
salem, uttering his woes against the city and 
the holy house (Josephus, ' Bell. Jud.,' vi. 
6. 3); of Solomon Eagle, as he, in like man- 
oer, walked through the streets of London 
during the great Plague (Defoe, ' Hist, of 
the Plague,' p. 519, edit. 1869>. 



\er. 1.— The flnt sign In this method of 
unspoken prophet' was to indicate to the 
exiles of Tel-Abib that which they were 
unwilling to believe. The day of uncertain 
hopes and fears, of delusive dreams and 
promises (Jer. xxvii. 16 ; zxvlii. 1 — 3 ; xxix. 
21), was nearly over. The siege of Jerusa- 
lem, in spite of Zedekiah's Egyptian allianoe, 
was a thing decreed. Four years before it 
came — we are now between the fourth month 
of the fifth year (ch. i. 2) and the sixth 
month of the sixth year (ch. viii. 1) of Zede- 
kiah, and the siege began in the ninth year 
(2 Kings XXV. 1)— Ezekiel, on the eegniit* 
irritant principle, brought it, as here narrated, 
before the eyes of the exiles. That he did 
so implies a certain artistic culture, in pos> 
sessing which he stands alone, so far as wa 
know, among the prophets of Israel, and to 
which his residence in the land of the Chal- 
dees may have contributed. He takes a 
tile, or tablet of baked clay, such as were 
used in Babylon and Assyria for private 
contracts, historical inscriptions, astrono- 
mical observations (Pliny, ' Hist. Nat.,' vii. 
57), and the like, which were, in fact, the 
books of that place and time, and of which 
whole libraries have been brought to light in 
recent excavations (Layard, 'Nineveh and 
Babylon,' ch. xxii.),and engraves upon it the 
outlines of " a city " (Revised Version), in 
which the exiles would at once recognize 
the city of their Mhers, the towers which 
they had once counted (Isa. xxxiiL 18; Ps. 
xlviii. 12), the temple which had been their 
glory and their joy. Bricks with such 
scenes on them were found among the ruins 
of Nimroud, now in the British Museum 
(Layard, u( supra, oh. vii. p. 167). It is 
not difficult to picture to ourselves the won- 
dering curiosity with which Ezekiel's neigh- 
bours would watch the strange proceeding. 
In this case the sign would be more impres- 
sive than any spoken utterance. 

Ver. 2. — Lay siege against it, etc. The 
wonder would increase as the spectators 
looked on what followed. Either tracing 
the scene on the tablet, or, more probably, 
as ver. 3 seems to indicate, constructing a 
model of the scene, the prophet brings be- 
fore their eyes all the familiar details of a 
siege, such as we see on numerous Assyrian 
baa-reliefs; such also as the narratives of 
the Old Testament bring before us. There 
are (1) the forts (as in 2 Kings xxv. 1 : 



ts 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. [oh- »▼• 1— 17. 



Jer. lii. 4; ch. xvii. 17; xxi. 22; ixvi. 8), 

or, perhaps, tJie wall of dreumvallation, 
■which the besiegers erected that they misht 
carry on their operations in safety ; (2) then 
the meant, or mound (the English of the 
Authorized Version does not distinguish 
between the two) of earth from which they 
plied the bows or catapults (Jer. vi. 6 ; 
xxxii. 24 ; xxxiii. i ; Kzekiel, u( iupra) ; 
(3) the camps (plural in the Hebrew and 
Kevised Version), or encam'pmenia, in which 
they were stationed in various positions 
round the city; (4) the battering-rams. 
Here the history both of the word and the 
thing has a special interest. The primary 
meaning of the Hebrew word is "lamb" 
(as in Dent, xxxii. 14; t Sam. xv. 9, 
it al., Eevised Version), or, better, "full- 
grown wethers or rams " (Fiirst). Like the 
Greek xpios (Xen., ' Cyrop.,' vii. 4. 1 ; 2 Mace. 
xii. 15), and the Latin ones (Livy, xxi. 12 ; 
xxxi 32, et al.), it was transferred to the 
engine which was used to " butt," like a ram, 
against the walls of a besieged city, and 
which, in Roman warfare, commonly termi- 
nated in u ram's head in bronze or iron. 
Ezekiel is the only Old Testament writer 
who, here and in ch. xxi. 22, uses the word, 
for which the LXX. gives fi^KoaTdaeis, and 
the Vulgate arielea. The margin of the 
Authorized Version in both places gives 
" chief leaders," taking " rams " in another 
figurative sense; but, in the face of the LXX. 
and Vulgate, there is no reason for accept- 
ing this. Battering-rams frequently appear 
in Assyrian bas-reliefs of a much earlier date 
than Ezekiel's time, at Nimroud (Vanx, 
•Nineveh and Persepolis,' p. 456), Kon- 
yunyik (Layard, 'Nineveh and Babylon,' p. 
149), and elsewhere. They were hung by 
chains near the bottom of the besiegers' 
towers, and were propelled against the 
walls. 

Ver. 3. — An iron pan. The word is used 
in Lev. ii. 5 ; vi. 21, et al., for a flat or shal- 
low vessel in which cakes were baked or 
fried. Such a pan, like the Scotch " girdle," 
or our " gridiron," may well have formed part 
of the furniture of the prophet's house when 
it was taken for this strange use. It was to 
represent the kind of shield or fence set up 
on the ground, from behind which the be- 
siegers discharged their arrows. Such 
shields are seen, like the battering-rams, in 
Assyrian has - reliefs (Layard, ' Nineveh,' 
etc., ii. 34.'5). Other interpretations, which 
see in it the symbol of the ciroumvallation 
of the city, or of the impenetrable barrier 
which the sing of the people had set up 
between themselves and Jehovah, or of the 
prophet himself as strong and unyielding 
(Jer. i. 18), do not commend themselves. 
The flat plate did not go round the city, and 
tlie spiritual meaning is mit nf liinnnny 



with the context. This ihall be a sign, eto, 
(comp. like forms in ch. xii. 6, 11; xxir. 
24, 27). The exiles of Tel-Abib, who were 
the only spectators of the prophet's acts, are 
taken as representatives of "the house of 
Israel," that phrase being commonly used 
by Ezekiel, unless, as in vers. 5, 6, and ch. 
xxxvii. 16, there is a special reason for 
noting a distinction for Judah as repre- 
senting the whole nation. 

Ver. 4. — Lie thou also npon thy left side, 
etc. We find the explanation of the atti- 
tude in ch. xvi. 46. Samaria was on the 
"left hand," t.e. to the north, as a man 
looked to the east. So the same word 
yamin is both "the sonth" (1 Sam. xxiii. 
19, 24; Ps. Ixxxiv. 12) and "the right 
hand." Here, accordingly, the "house of 
Israel " is taken in its specific sense, as the 
northern kingdom as distinguished from the 
"house of Judah" in ver. 6. Thou shalt 
hear their iniquity; i.e., as in all similar 
passages (Exod. xxviii. 43; Lev. v. 17; 
vii. 18; Numb. xvJii. 1, et aZ.), the punish- 
ment of their iniquity. The words so taken 
will help us to understand the numerical 
symbolism of the words that followed. The 
prophet was by this act to identify himself 
with both divisions of the nation, by repre- 
senting in this strange form at once the 
severity and the limits of their punishment 
I adopt, without any hesitation, the view 
that we have here the record of a fact, and 
not of a vision narrated. The object of the 
act was to startle men and make them won- 
der. As week after week went on this, 
exceptU excipiendis, was to be Ezekiel's per- 
manent attitude, as of one crushed to the 
very ground, prostrate under the burden 
thus laid upon him, as impersonating his 
people. 

Ver. 5. — Three hundred and ninety days, 
eto. The days, as stated in ver. 6, stand for 
years according to the symbolism (with 
which Ezekiel was probably acquainted) of 
Numb. xiv. 34. How we are to explain the 
precise number chosen is a problem which 
has much exercised the minds of interpreters. 
I will begin by stating what seems to me 
the most tenable solution. In doing this 
I follow Smend and Comill in taking the 
LXX. as giving the original reading, and 
the Hebrew as a later correction, made with 
a purpose. (1) Jerome and Origen bear wit- 
ness to the fact that most copies of the 
former gave ISO years, some 150, and others, 
agreeing with the Hebrew, 890. The first 
of these numbers fits in with the thought 
that Ezekiel's act was to represent the 
period of the pimishment of the northern 
kingdom. That punishment starts from the 
first captivity under Fekah abont B.O. 734. 
Eeckoning from that date, the 190 years 
bring us to ubout B.O. 544. The punish- 



0H.1T. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 



78 



ment of Judah, in like manner, dates from 
the destruction of Jerusalem in b.o. 586, and 
the forty years bring us to B.o. 546, a date 
BO near the other, that, in the round numbers 
which Ezekiel uses, they may be taken as 
practically coinciding. It was to that date 
tliat the prophet, perhaps, unacquainted 
with Jeremiah's seventy years (Jer. xxv. 
12), with a different starting-point (b.o. 606) 
and terminus (b.o. 536), looked forward as 
the starting-point of the restoration of 
Israel. It is obvious that Ezekiel contem- 
plated the contemporaneous restoration of 
Israel and Judah (oh. xvi. 53—55 ; xxxvii. 
19 — 22; xlvii. 13), as indeed Isaiah also 
seems to do (xi. 13, 14), and Jeremiah 
(xxxi. 6, 12, 27). The teaching of Ezekiel's 
acts, then, had two distinct purposes, (a) 
It taught the certainty of the punishment. 
No plots, or rebellions, or alliances with 
Egypt, could avert the doom of exile from 
those who should survive the siege of Je- 
rusalem. (6) It taught the exiles to accept 
their punishment with patience, but with 
hope. There was a limit, and that not 
very far off, which some of them might 
live to see, and beyond which there lay the 
hope of a restoration for both Israel and 
Judah. If that hope was not realized to 
the extent which Ezekiel's language im- 
plies, the same may be said of the language 
of Isa. xl. — ixn., whether we refer those 
chapters to Isaiah himself, or to the " great 
unknown " who followed Ezekiel, and may 
have listened to his teaching. (2) Still 
keeping to the idea of the years of punish- 
ment, but taking the Hebrew text, the 
combination of 390 and 40 gives 480, and 
this, it is urged, was the number assigned 
in Ezod. xii. 40 for the years of the sojourn- 
ing in Egypt. Then the nation had been 
one, now it is divided. And the punish- 
ment of its two divisions is apportioned 
according to their respective guilt. For 
Israel, whose sins had been of a deeper dye, 
there was to be, as it were, another Egyp- 
tian bondage (Hos. viii. 13 and ix. 3 seem to 
predict a literal return to Egypt, but Hos. 
xi. 5 shows it to have been figurative 
only). For Judah there was to be another 
quasi-wandering in the wilderness for forty 
years— a period of punishment, but also of 
preparation for a re-entry into the land of 
promise (Currey, Gardiner). (3) A some- 
what fanciful variation on the preceding 
view connects the 390 days with the forty 
stripes of Deut. xxv. 3, reduced by Jewish 
preachers to " forty stripes save one " (2 Cor. 
xi. 24). Thus thirty-nine were assigned to 
each of the ten tribes, leaving forty for Judah 
standing by itself. With this addition (3) 
merges into (2). (4) The traditional Jewish 
interpretation, on the other hand (Kimchi), 
sees in the number of the yeai s the measure, 



not of the punishment, but of the guilt of 
Israel and Judah respectively. That of the 
formfT is measured (as in the margin of 
the Authorized Version) from the revolt of 
the ten tribes (b.o. 975) to the time at which 
Ezekiel received the commands with which 
we are now dealing (b.o. 595). This com- 
putation gives, it is true, only 380 years; 
but the prophet may be thought of as deal- 
ing with round numbers, the 390 being, 
perhaps, chosen for the reason indicated in 
(3), or as reckoning with a different chro- 
nology. The forty years of the guilt of 
Judah are, on this view, reckoned from 
Josiah's reformation (b.o. 624), which would 
bring us to B.C. 585-4. And the sin of 
Judah is thought of as consisting specially 
in its resistance to that reformation and its 
rapid relapse into an apostasy like that of 
Ahitz or Manasseh. It can hardly be said 
that this is a satisfactory explanation. (5) 
Yet another view has been suggested, to. 
that the siege of Jerusalem lasted, in round 
numbers, for 430 days — a day for each 
year of the national guilt, as measured in 
the last hypothesis. Against this there is 
the fact that, according to the statements 
in 2 Kings xxv. 1 — 3, the siege lasted for 
much more than the 430 days, tc. for nearly 
a year and a half. The conclusion to which 
I am led, after examining the several 
hypotheses, is, as I have said, in favour of 
(1). The text of the Hebrew, as we find 
it, may have risen out of the fact that the 
ten tribes had not returned as a body, and 
that there was no sign of their return, when 
Judah returned in b.o. 536, and therefore 
a larger number was inserted to allow time 
for a more adequiite interval. 

Ver. 6. — Each day for a year. The He- 
brew formula is that of iteration — '' a day for 
a year, a day for a year." It originates, as 
has been said, in Numb. xiv. 34. What 
has been known as the year-day theory 
of prophetic interpretation flows naturally 
from it, and has been applied (1) to the 
" seventy weeks " of Dan. ix. 24 — 27, and (2) 
the twelve hundred and sixty and the three 
days and a half of Eev. xi. 3, 9. 

Ver. 7. — Thine arm shall be nncoTered. 
This, as in Isa. lii. 10, was the symbol of 
energetic action. The prophet was to be, 
as it were, no apathetic spectator of the 
siege which he was thus dramatizing, but 
is as the representative of the Divine com- 
mission to control and guide it. The picture 
of the prophet's attitude, not merely resting 
on his side and folding his hands, as a man 
at ease might do, but looking intently, with 
bare outstretched arm, at the scene portrayed 
by him, must, we may well imagine, have 
added to the startling effect of the whole 
procedure. We note the phrase, ''set thy 
face," as specially charactpristic of Ezekiel 



74 



THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT EZBKIEL. [oh.it. 1—17. 



(here, and, though the Hebrew verb is not 
the eame, oh. xiv. 8; xv. 7). The words 
" prophesy against it " may imply some 
spoken utterance of the nature of a " woe," 
like that of tlie son of Ananus (see above), 
but hardly, I think, a prolonged address. 

Ver. 8.^-1 will lay bands upon thee, eto. 
The words point to the supernatural con- 
straint which would support the prophet in 
a po.sition as tiylng as that of an Indian 
yogi or a Sty lite monk. He would himself 
be powerless to move (exceptit ex(ripiendis,a,a 
before) from the prescribed position. There 
is, perhapa, a reference to ch. iii. 25. The 
poople would have "put bands" upon the 
prophet to hinder his work ; Jehovah will 
"put bands" upon him to help, nay, to 
construin, him to finish it. 

Yer. 9. — ^Take thou also onto thee, eto. 
The act implies, as I have said, that there 
were exceptions to the generally immovable 
attitude. The symbolism seems to have a 
twofold meaning. We can scarcely exclude 
a reference to the famine which accom- 
panied the siege. On the other hand, one 
special feature of it is distinctly referred, 
not to the siege, but to the exile (ver. 13). 
Starting with the former, the prophet is 
told to make bread, not of wheat, the com- 
mon food of the wealthier class (Deut. xxxiL 
14; Ps. Ixxxi. 16; cxlvii. 14; Jer. xii. 13; 
ili. 8), nor of barley, the chief food of the 
poor (ch. xiii. 19 ; Hos. iii. 2 ; John vi. 9), 
but of these mixed with beans (2 Sam. 
xvii. 28), lentils (2 Sam. xvii. 28 ; Gen. xxv. 
34) — then, as now, largely used in Egypt 
and other Eastern countries—millet (the 
Hebrew word is not found elsewhere), and 
fitches, I.e. vetches (here also the Hebrew 
word is found only in this passage, that so 
translated in Isa. xxviii. 25 — 27 standing, it 
is said, for the seed of the black cummin). 
The outcome of this mixture would be a 
coarse, unpalatable bread, not unlike that 
to which the population of Paris was reduced 
in the siege of 1870-71. This was to be 
the prophet's food, as it was to be that of 
the people of Jerusalem during the 890 
days by which that siege was symbolically, 
though not numerically, represented. It is 
not improbable, looking to the prohibition 
against mixtures of any kind in Deut. xxii. 
9, that it would be regarded as in itself 
unclean. 

Ver. 10.— Thy meat, etc. ; better, food, 
here and elsewhere. Coarse as the food 
was, the people would have but scanty 
rations of it. Men were not, as usual, to 
measure the corn, but to weigh the bread 
(Lev. xxvi 26). Taking <£e shekel at 
about 220 grains, the twenty shekels would 
be about 10 or 12 ounces. The common 
allowance in England for prison or pauper 
dietaries gives, I believe, from 24 to 32 



onnoes, besides other food. And this was 
to be taken, not as hunger prompted, but at 
the appointed hour, once a day. The whole 
scene of the people of the besieged city 
coming for their daily rations is brought 
vividly before us. 

Ver. 11. — The sixth part of an bin, etc. 
According to the varying accounts of the 
" hin " given by Jewish writers, this would 
give from -/{, to ^ of a pint. And this was, 
like the food, to be doled out once a day. 
Possibly "the bread of afiSlction and the 
water of affliction," in 1 Kings xxii. 27 
and Isa. xxx. 20, contains a reference to the 
quantity as well as the quality of a prison 
dietary as thus described. Isaiah's words 
may refer to the siege of Sennacherib, as 
Ezekiel's do to the siege of Nebuchadnezzar. 

Ver. 12. — Thon shalt bake it with dung, 
etc. The process of baking in ashes was as 
old as the time of Abraham (Gen. xviii S), 
and continues in Arabia and Syria to the 
present day. The kneaded dough was 
rolled into thin flat cakes, and they were 
placed upon, or hung over, the hot wood 
embers of the hearth or oven. But in • 
besieged city the supply of wood for fuel 
soon fails. The first resource is found, as 
still often happens in the East, in using the 
dried dung of camels or of cattle. Before 
Ezekiel's mind there came the vision of • 
yet more terrible necessity. That supply 
also might fail, and then men would be 
forced to use the dried contents of the 
" draught-houses " or cesspools of Jerusalem. 
They would be compelled almost literally to 
fulfil the taunt of Babshakeh (Isa. xxxvi. 
12). That thought, as bringing with it the 
ceremonial pollution of Lev. v. 3 ; vii. 21, 
was as revolting to Ezekiel as it is to us ; but 
like Dante, in a like revolting symbolism 
('Inf.,' xviii. 114), he does not shrink from 
naming it. It came to him, as with the 
authority of a Divine command, that he was 
even to do this, to represent the extreme 
horrors of the siege. And all this was to 
be done visibly, before the eyes of his 
neighbours at Tel-Abib. 

Ver. 13. — Even thus shall the children of 
Israel, eto. The strange command takes a 
wider range. It symbolizes, not the literal 
horrors of the siege, but the " defiled bread " 
which even the exiles would be reduced to 
eat. So taken, the words remind us of the 
risk of eating unclean food, which almost 
inevitably attended the position of the 
exiles (Hos. ix. 3 ; Dan. i. 8), and which, it 
may be, Ezekiel had already felt keenly. 
There is obviously something more than can 
be explained by a reference to " the bitter 
bread of banishment," or to Dante's " Oome 
sa di sale ..." ('Par.,' xvii. 58). 

Ver. 14. — Then said I, Ah, lord God t eto. 
The formula is, curiously enough, equally 



OH. IV. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



76 



oharaoteriatio of Bzekiel (oh. ix. 8; xi. 13; 

XX. 49) and of hia teacher and contempo- 
rary (Jer. i. 6 ; iv. 10 ; xiv. 13 ; xxxii. 17). 
The Vulgate represents it hy A, a, a. His 
plea, which reminds us at once of Dan. 
L 8 and Acts x. 14, is that he has kept 
himself free from all ceremonial pollution 
connected with food. And is he, a priest 
too, to do this? That be far from him! 
Anything but thatl The kinds of defile- 
ment of which he speaks are noted in Exod, 
xxii. 31; Lev. vii. 24; xi. 39, 40; xvii. 13. 
The " abominable things " may refer either 
to the unclean meats catalogued in Ueut. xiv. 
3 — 21 (as e.g. in Isa. Ixv. 4), or as in the 
controversy of the apostolic age (Acts xv. ; 

1 Oor. viii. 1 ; Eev. iL 20), to eating any 
flesh that had been offered in sacrifice to 
Idols. The prophet's passionate appeal is 
characteristic of the extent to which hia 
character had been influenced by the newly 
discovered Law of the Lord (2 Kings xxii. ; 

2 Chron. xxxiv.), i.e. probably by the Book 
of Deuteronomy. 

Ver. 15. — Lo, I have given thee, etc. 
The concession mitigatei t^e horror of the 



first command, though even this was pro- 
bably regarded as involving some ceremonikl 
nncleanness. It served, at any rate, to 
represent, in some measure, the pressure of 
the siege. 

Ver. 16.— The staff of bread. The phrase 
occurs again in ch. v. 16 ; xiv. 13, and also in 
Lev. xxvi. 26 ; Ps. cv. 16. la Isa. iii. 1 the 
thought is the same, but the Hebrew word 
is different. They shall eat bread by weight, 
etc. The phrase occurs, it may be noted, in 
Lev. xxvi. 26, one of the verses above re- 
ferred to. The care and astonishment, im- 
plying that the wonted cheerfalness of 
meals would have departed, meet na again 
in ch. xii. 19. 

Ver. 17. — Consnme away for their iniquity, 
etc. Another echo from the book wtiieh 
had entered so largely into the prophet's 
education (see Lev. xxvi. 39, where the 
Hebrew for "pine" is the same as that 
here rendered " consume "). To the wretched- 
ness of physical privation there was to be 
added the consciousness of the sufferers 
that it wag caused by their own evil deeds. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — A pictorial sermon. The method of this prophecy Is as Instmctive as 
the substance of it. Let us, therefore, consider this by itself. 

L It was novel. Hitherto prophets had usually preached by word of mouth, 
though indeed occasionally they had given visible illustrations of their sermons. Thus 
Jeremiah had worn a symbolical yoke of iron (Jer. xxviii. 10). But to draw a picture 
on a tile was a new method of prophecy. The pulpit is generally too conservative 
of old methods, too timid of innovation. The preacher should not be a slave of 
fashion. But, then, he should be careful not to be in bondage to an old fashion any 
more than to a new fashion. He ought to be ready to embrace any novel method that 
promises to make his work more effective. 

II. It was accokdinq to thk manner of the timbs. The great brick libraries 
which have been discovered in the very region where Ezekiel was living, and which 
include works of the very date of his ministry, contain similar pictorial representations 
— inscribed representations of sieges. Therefore Ezekiel was adapting his teaching to 
the manners of his contemporaries. It is as though a modern preacher, unable to 
reach all the persons he desired to address from the pulpit, should write in the news- 
papers. Therefore the most effective weapon of the day should be secured by the 
preacher. The enemy have breech-loading rifles: why should the friends of the 
truth be content with old flint muskets? 

III. It was EFFBonvB. Mere novelty for its own sake is childish. Eccentricity 
may win notoriety, but it will not honour truth. Erratic methods lower the dignity 
of truth. The preacher has to remember the solemn, the awful character of his mes- 
sage. But, then, a novel and almost alarming method may be most suitable for con- 
veying the message. In this matter the means must be subservient to the end. 
Now, Ezekiel's method was remarkably suitable for his purpose. 1. It made his 
message intelligible to all. People who cannot read may understand a picture, and the 
same picture may speak to men of different languages, Raphael's ' Transfiguration ' is 
intelligible to Englishmen who do not know a word of Italian. Pictorial preaching is 
easily understood. 2. It made the message vivid and impressive. We feel most 
strongly what we see in picture before our eyes. The failure of preaching is often 
owing to the &ct that the truth proclaimed is accepted only in words which do not 



7« THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. it. 1—17. 

snggest clear, strong ideas. It may be admitted by the reason, bnt it ii not embraced 
by the imagination. The truth which has power over us is not that which we consent 
to in cold, intellectual agreement, but that which stands to the eyes of the soul as a 
present reality. Therefore, after we have made our meaning clear and proved our 
proposition to demonstration, a large part of oar work remains, viz. to impress the 
truth on the imagination and the heart of our hearers ; and to be impressive, the truth 
must be vivid. There is always scope for pictorial preaching. All preachers who are 
effective with the multitudes resort to this method. 3. It made the message enduring. 
The brick libraries of Babylon which have been deposited in the British Museum are 
almost as fresh and sound to-day as when they were first produced three thousand years 
ago. It is just possible that some day.Ezekiel's tile may be dug up uninjured 1 Sermons 
may be forgotten, but truth endures; and it is the mission of the preacher so to bum 
the truth into the hearts of bis hearers that it shall even outlast Babylonian libraiies 
and be seen through all eternity. 

Vers. 4 — 6. — Sm-heartTig. Ezekiel is to bear the sin of his people, doing it indeed 
symbolically every night, by lying first on one side, with the idea that the sin of Israel 
is upon him so that he cannot move ; and then for a shorter period on the other side, 
with the idea of the sin of Judah resting on him and holding him down. This shows 
that a prophet is more than a messenger from G-od to men. He is one of the people, 
and his function involves his bearing somewhat of their sin. This must be the case 
with all servants of God who would be helpful to their brethren. Thus Christ's sin- 
bearing, while it stands alone in its tremendous endurance and its glorious efficacy, is 
anticipated and followed in a minor degree. 

I. SiN-BBARiNo 18 viOAEiouB. 1. It is bearing sin for others. Ezekiel took on him 
the burden of the sin of the guilty nation. Vicarious endurance of sin runs through all 
life. No man keeps his sin to himself. All who love the sinner bear some of the 
weight of his sin. Christ the Sinless bears our sin. 2. It is bearing sin for brethren. 
The prophet was to identify himself with his people, and thus to come to bear their 
sin. Christ became one of us that he might bear our sin for us. Pharisaical scorn for 
the sin of others betrays the spirit of Cain. 3. It is bearing sin in true proportion. 
The guilt of Israel is greater than that of Judah, and its punishment is accordingly of 
longer duration. These facts are recognized in Ezekiel's symbolical periods of endur- 
ance. As all sin is not equal, all sin does not produce the same distress on the 
sin-bearer. The aggravation of the world's sin leads to the aggravation of Christ's 
sufferings. How much has each added to that awful load? 

II. SiN-BEABuro IS A BEAL GND17BAN0E. Ezekiel's actiou was symbolical, but it 
suggested a true spiritual experience. 1. Sin is borne vicariously in the thought of it. 
We may refuse to note our brother's ill conduct, and if so we may pass it by with 
indifference. But the prophet must study the signs of the times ; the Christ must 
take the real state of the world into his thought and heart ; the man of Christian 
sympathy must consider deeply and sadly the great sin of mankind. 2. This is home 
in the shame of it. Each man is only guilty of his own misconduct. Yet we are all 
conscious of the shame of the sin of those who are closely related to us. A child's sin 
is his father's shame. The Christian spirit makes the shame of the sin of others felt 
by those who have escaped it. 3. This is borne in the suffering of it. We cannot 
but suffer for the wickedness of those who are near to us. One who would help and 
save his brethren must bear the suffering of their sins. Ezekiel in a lower degree 
anticipated that type of vicarious suffering set forth in Isa. liii., which Christ alone 
fully realized. The Saviour of men must ever be one who sacrifices himself for men 
by suffering the hurt of the sin of men. 

III. SiN-BBAEINO IS FOB THE PURPOSE OP DELIVERANCE rROM SIN. We Cannot SCO all 

the deep mystery of this ; but we can discern its glorious issue. 1. The sin-bearer is 
a propitiation to God. The Lamb of God who bears away the sin of the world is God's 
beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased. God cannot be pleased with mere suffering ; 
but he may well be delighted with the spirit of obedience, holiness, and love that is 
manifested in vicarious suffering, and may take this as an ample compensation and a 
glorious intercession. 2. The sin-hearing should move the guilty to repentance. The 
Jews were to learn a lesson from Kzekiel. Christ's cross preaches repentance. 



OH. IT. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. 77 

Ver. 13. — " Defiled hread." Among the many inconveniences of the exile this was to 
bo included, that the Jews would not be able to secure that their food should be cooked 
in their own manner, and so kept free from ceremonial defilement. But is there not a 
latent irony in the suggestion of such a thing as a serious calamity ? Does it not show 
that the spirit of the Pharisees, who would strain out a gnat and swallow a camel, had 
already appeared? These Jews, who would be so alarmed at the prospect of external 
defilement, had already corrupted and befouled their souls with the vilest sin. Never- 
theless, if they did feel the shame of the external defilement, it would come to them as 
a fitting retribution. Outward shame is the just penalty of inward sin. 

I. BsEAD IS DEFILED WHEN IT IS TAKEN BY A siNNEB. AU that a bad man touches 
turns to corruption. The sweetest food becomes foul in the mouth of the wicked. A 
morally bad musician desecrates the good music which he tries to interpret by 
breathing into it a corrupt feeling. The best book will be degraded by an evil-minded 
reader. Such a person will contrive to extract sinful suggestions from the Bible ; and 
then perhaps he will even denounce the sacred volume as immoral in its tendency. 

II. Bread is defiled when it is got by evil means. The finest wheaten loaf 
is a corrupt thing when it has been stolen. A dishonest style of business degrades all 
its proceeds. When a man grows fat on the gains which he has extorted from the 
helpless by cunning or force, he has brought moral degradation into his home and 
corruption to his table. The very bread with which he feeds his innocent children is 
a vile thing, and the hungry poor whom his wicked practices are starving may have 
the consolation of knowing that the crusts they gnaw in reeking cellars are cleaner in 
the sight of God than the dainties of his sumptuous banquets. 

III. Bebad is defiled when it is eaten in an unworthy spirit. If the hand of 
the Giver is ignored, the bread is at once degraded. It becomes but a dead mass of 
earth. The heavenly hand that gave it makes its highest value. Taken in faith and 
gratitude, the common bread of a daily meal has something of a sacramental nature in 
it. But ingratitude spoils all. The Israelites, loathing the manna in the wilderness 
and murmuring against their God, did their worst to corrupt the heavenly gift. 

IV. Bread is defiled when it is eaten foe an unworthy purpose. 1. It may 
he devov/red in, low animal greed and lust of food. Then the Divine sanctity of it 
vanishes, and it becomes a degraded thing. The glutton who lives to eat defiles the 
best bread. So, too, the man who accepts the other gifts of Providence which are 
bestowed upon him, solely for self-indulgence, lowers and vitiates all he consumes. 
2. It may he converted into energy for sin. The bad man goes forth and does wickedly 
in the strength of the bread whicli the holy God has given to fit him for the service 
of goodness. Can any act of defilement be worse than that ? To preserve our bread 
from corruption let us recollect the apostolic direction, " Whether therefore ye eat or 
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Yer. 2. — Siege. By the remarkable symbolism described in this chapter, Ezekiel was 
himself assured that the metropolis of his country was about to endure the horrors of 
a sice, and his action was intended for a sign to the house of Israel. Jerusalem, like 
many of the famous cities of antiquity, and indeed of modem times, underwent the 
calamity again and again. It was probably the siege by Nebuchadnezzar which was 
foretold by the symbol of the tile and the iron pan. To be besieged was a not 
uncommon incident of warfare. But the prophet of God treated this approaching 
catastrophe, not merely as a fact of history, but as a moral and Divine lesson. 

I. The general lessons vividly pebsbntbd by a city endueino a state of 
biege. 1. Community in civic life. Every city always has its own social character- 
istics. Citizens take a pride in the prosperity and glory of their city, especially if it be 
the metropolis of the nation. In our own time Paris was besieged by the German 
army and its unity was never so realized as when thus encompassed by the enemy. 
2. Commimity in resistance and hostility. Distinctions of rank and of social position 
aimost vanish when a common danger threatens every class alike. Each man takes 
his share in the defence of the city, in bearing the common burden. All are drawn 



78 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [ch. it 1—17. 

together by their community in dread or in defiaace of the foe. 3. Community in the 
experience of suffering. Hunger and thirst, privation and want of rest, are shared by 
all the citizens of a beleaguered city. Men who partake the same calamity are drawn 
together by their common experience. The annals of a siege will usually be found to 
contain the record of remarkable cases of heroic unselfishness and public devotion. 

IL The special lessons pebsbnted by the sieob or Jkeusalem. There may well 
have been manifested a community in spiritual discipline and profit. 1. The vanity 
of human pride and ambition was strikingly exhibited. The Jews were a vain- 
glorious people; they possessed many distinctive marks of superiority raising them 
above the heathen, and they knew and boasted that it was so. They took credit to 
themselves for much for which they ought to have offered thanks to God. Their self- 
confidence and glorying were rebuked in the most emphatic manner when their fair and 
famed metropolis was besieged and threatened with destruction. This lesson is 
impressed upon their countrymen with unsparing faithfulness by the ancient Hebrew 
prophets. 2. Equally pointed was the lesson conveyed as to the utter vanity of 
merely human help. The Jews did indeed sometimes seek alliances which might 
befriend and assist them in their distress; but against such alliances they were 
repeatedly warned by the prophets, whose duty it was to assure their countrymen of 
the vanity of the help of man. Especially were they rebuked for seeking friendship 
and aid from Egypt against the forces of the Eastern foe ; and they found such friend- 
ship hollow, and such aid inefTectual. 3. The inhabitants of Jerusalem and the people 
of Judah generally were, by the siege of the city, directed to seek Divine deliverance. 
The city might fall ; its walls might be levelled with the dust ; its defenders might be 
slain; its inhabitants decimated. But all this might be overruled for the nation'* 
real and lasting good, should calamity and humiliation lead to repentance, should 
Divine favour be entreated, and a way of salvation be opened up to the remnant of the 
people. — T. 

Yer. 4. — Substitution. In order to his being a religious teacher and guardian of hia 
nation, it was necessary that Ezekiel should enter into the state of his fellow-country- 
men, and even share the sufferings due to their unbelief and rebellion. The Christian 
reader cannot fail to discern in the prophet of the Captivity a figure by anticipation of 
the Lord Jesus, who himself "bare our sins and carried our sorrows." Doubtless 
Christ bore the iniquity of men in a sense in which no other can do so. Yet there is 
no possibility of benefiting those who are in a state of sin and degradation, except by 
stooping to their low estate, participating in their lot, enduring somewhat of their 
sorrow, and thus bearing their iniquity. 

L Whether willxnoly oe unwillinglt, in evert national oalauitt thu 
INNOCENT BUFFER WITH THE GUILTY. The guilt is the nation's, the suffering is the 
individual's. The righteous may witness against the city's sin and rebellion, but they 
are overtaken by the city's catastrophe. It is not always that the city is spared for 
the sake of the ten righteous who are found therein. One common ruin may, as in 
the case of Jerusalem, overwhelm the inhabitants, alike those who have erred and 
offended, and those who have raised their voice in protest and in censure. 

II. The RIGHTEOUS BEAR THE INIQUITT OF THEIR NEIGHBOURS BT SENSITIVENEBS 

TO THEIR SINS. As Lot was vexed with the filthy conversation of the dwellers in 
Sodom, as there were those in Jerusalem who sighed and cried for all the abominations 
done in the city, so in the midst of a corrupt and ungodly community there may be 
those who lay to heart their neighbours' iniquity, and who feel bitter distress because 
of conduct which to callous sinners brings no sorrow. It may be granted that this 
is to some extent a matter of temperament ; that a sensitive character will be afSicted 
by what a calmer, colder disposition bears with impunity. Yet every good man 
should watch himself lest familiarity with abounding sin should dull the edge of his 
spiritual perceptions, lest he should cease to be distressed because of the prevalence 
of iniquity, 

III. The righteous bbab by sympathy the bufferings which sin entails 
UPON THEIR neighbours. A siege is usually accompanied by most painful and heart- 
rending incidents; wounds and privations, pestilence and violent death, are all but 
inaeparable from so frightful an aspect of human warfare. The prophet wai not a man 



«H.iT. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 7» 

to think of such incidents, to realize them by vivid imagination and confident antici- 
pation, without being grievously affectert. Who is there, with a heart to feel, who can 
picture to himself the miseries, the disease, the want, the bereavements, which sin 
daily brings upon every populous city, without taking upon himself something of the 
burden? We are commanded to "weep with those that weep." And when the 
calamities which befall our neighbours are the unmistakable results of transgression 
of Divine commands, we do in a sense bear their iniquities, when we feel for them, and 
are distressed because of the errors and follies which are the occasion of afSictions and 
disasters. 

IV. The BIOHTE0U8 mat sometimes, by thus participating in the CON8BQ0EHOB8 
OV THBIB NEIGHBOUBS' INIQUITY, BE THE AGENTS IN BBINQINO ABOUT REPENTANCE AND 

DELIVERANCE. Our Lord Jesus Christ so identified himself with the sinful race whose 
nature he assumed, that he is said to have been "made sin" for us; he "bore our sins 
in his body on the tree." This was seen, by the infinite wisdom of our Father in 
heaven, to have been the one way by which salvation could be brought to this sinful 
humanity. Now we are reminded that, in his endurance of the results of men's sins, 
Jesus left us an example that we should follow in his steps. He is, indeed, the only 
Propitiation from sin, the only Eansom for sinners. But the principle underlying 
redemption is a principle which has an application to the spirit and to the moral life 
of all the followers of Christ. They are in this world, not simply to keep themselves 
pure from its evil, but to help to purify others from that evil. And this they can only 
do by bearing the iniquity of their fellow-men ; not by keeping themselves aloof from 
sinners, not by merely censuring and condemning sinners, but by taking the burden 
of their sins upon their own renewed and compassionate hearts, by entering into their 
temptations, and helping to rescae them from such snares ; and, above all, by bringing 
them, in compassion and sympathizing love, into the fellowship of that Divine Saviour 
who gave himself for us, and who bears and takes away the sin of the world. It is 
by him only that the world's iniquity is to be pardoned and to be abolished, and to 
be replaced by the love of anJ by obedience to a righteous and holy God. — T. 

Vers. 16, 17. — The chastisement of /amine. The striking and distressing symbolism 
described in this chapter must have brought with great vividness before the mind of 
the prophet, and before the minds of his companions in exile, the sufferings that were 
about to befall the metropolis which was the pride of their hearts. In the siege which 
wM to come upon Jerusalem, the citizens should endure the horrors of privation, of 
hunger, and of thirst. It was foretold that in a sense this should be God's appoint- 
ment, the effect of that retributive Providence which devout minds cannot fail to 
recognize in the government of the world. If such events took place in accordance 
with what are called general laws, since those laws are the consequence and expression 
of the very constitution of society, none the less must the Divine hand be recognized, 
none the less must it be understood that Divine lessons are to be learned with reverent 
submission. 

I. A LESSON OF CORPORATE UNITT. As a city, Jerusalem had sinned by rejecting 
Jehovah's worship, and by honouring the gods of the nations; by disobeying Jehovah's 
laws, and following sinful impulses and indulging in sinful practices. As a city, 
Jerusalem sinned; as a city, Jerusalem suffered and fell. The innocent, no doubt, 
suffered with the guilty ; those who mourned over the defection of Judah with those 
who were prominent agents in that defection. No man can live apart from his neigh- 
bours ; least of all is this possible in the life of the city, which is characterized by a 
unity that may be designated corporate. 

IL A LESSON or PHYSICAL DEPENDENCE. Bread, water, and fuel are mentioned in 
this chapter as necessaries of life; without them men are condemned to famine and to 
death. The body is in correlation to nature — to the provision made for its sustenance 
and strength. If the supply be cut off, the body perishes. Familiar and common- 
place as this truth is, men need, in their pride and self-confidence, to be reminded of 
it. The haughty Jews stood in need of the lesson. Let an army invest the city, and 
it is only a question of time ; for the besieged, if unable to beat back the besiegers, 
must sooner or later surrender to the force of hunger, if not of arms. 

III. A l^so}; 0^ Divine retribution. It is in this light that the calamities 



80 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. iv. 1—17. 

attending a siege are presented by tlie propliet. Men may see in a beleaguered city 
only a political fact, a military incident, the consequence of well-known causes, the 
cause of well-understood effects. To see all this is justifiable; to see nothing but this 
is blindness. A thoughtful and pious mind will look through, will look above, all that 
is phenomenal. There is purpose in human affairs, there is Divine meaning, there is 
revelation. When men, oppressed by adversity and threatened with ruin, are "astonied 
one with an3ther, and pine away in their iniquity," it is possible that they may be so 
stupefied as to recognize no moral kw in their experience, their fate. But the enlight- 
ened discern in such events indication of the Divine displeasure and indignation with 
sin. Chastisement, punishment, is no chimera invented by a heated imagination; it 
is a sober, albeit a painful fact, from wliich there is no escape and no appeal. The 
judgments of God are abroad in the earth ; and this is that the inhabitants thereof 
may learn righteousness. 

IV. A LESSON OP HEPENTANCB AND OF MERCY. This lesson is uot, indeed, explicitly 
presented in this passage; yet the whole prophetic symbolism leads up to it. Why 
are men hungry but that they may call for the bread of life ? and upon whom shall 
they call but upon God ? Whither shall the parched and thirsting turn but to him 
who has the water of life, for the quenching of their thirst and the satisfaction of their 
souls ? To whom shall the aflSicted address themselves but to him who can turn the 
outward curse into a spiritual blessing, who can make the scourge the means of healing, 
and the sword the means of life? In the midst of wrath God remembers mercy; and 
it is ever true that they who call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved. — ^T. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Vica/rious suffering. Every true prophet is > forerunner of Jesus 
Christ. We do not detract from the work of the Saviour — we magnify it — when we 
discern that the same kind of work (though not equal in measure or effectiveness) had 
been done by the prophets. Ezekiel was called of God, not only to teach heavenly 
doctrine, but also to suffer for the people. " Thou shalt bear their iniquities." No 
one can be a faithful servant of God who does not suffer for the cause he serves. 
Suffering is the badge of a Divine commission. 

L Every prophet is a vicab. He represents God before the people; he represents 
the people before God. In his whole person, action, suffering, mission, he is a type of 
Jesus Christ. When men will not listen to his words, he is commanded to speak to 
them by deeds. The life of the prophet is a prophecy. Ezekiel deals with these 
captives as with sullen children. To the ignorant he became as ignorant. He con- 
descended to their low estate. Being made dumb by reason of their perversity, he 
pursues his heavenly task in another way — ^he teaches them by pictures, object-lesson, 
deed-symbol. It is " line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a 
little." So long as there remains an avenue to the heart, God will not abandon men. 

II. His suffering is vicaeious. This prophet was not himself free from sin, and 
suffering was its effect. Yet the suffering described in this chapter is wholly vicarious. 
What was justly due to others was laid upon him by God. " I have laid upon thee 
the years of their iniquity." Yet this was impossible without the prophet's willin" 
consent. In proportion as the prophet's mind had expanded under the Divine afflatu^ 
he had considered and comprehended the magnitude of Israel's sin. Their past and 
their present iniquity was clear and vivid to his mind. He saw its extent and aggra- 
vation. He jierceived the moral turpitude. He felt its baseness and criminality. He 
foresaw its bitter fruits. The burden of a nation's sin pressed upon his conscience. 
He drew it in upon himself and confessed it before God. But, further, Ezekiel repre- 
sented in himself the severity of Divine judgment — God's sense of sin. Hence he was 
required to lie upon one side for the space of three hundred and ninety days — a pain to 
himself, a passive rebuke to the people, in order to represent in visible form God's 
indignation. Yet there was pictured forth also Divine compassion. Just severity was 
alleviated ; there was but a day for a year. Jerusalem was sacrificed, but it was in 
order that the people might be saved. Not an item was overlooked by God. The 
pioportionate guilt of Israel and Judah was vividly symbolized in the seve.al acts of 
tlie prophet. The one end sought was — repentance. 

III. His action is vicarious. The prophet was a Hebrew, a priest; te loved 
Jerusalem. Possibly affection was bestowed on the city, which be'ongerf aloM to 



OH.IV. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 81 

God. For Bzekiel to represent the Babylonian invaders, for him to invest the city 
with fire and sword, this must have been gall and wormwood. Yet, in vision, he had 
eaten the roll of God's behests, had digested and assimilated the knowledge of his will. 
Therefore, in his vicarious character, he has to set his face against the city as the 
impersonation of the foe ; he has to " make bare his arm " to typify the resolute ener>:y 
of the spoiler. Be the effect upon the Jewish chiefs, already in captivity, what it may ; 
be the effect to exasperate feeling against the prophet or to produce repentance ; the 
prophet is constrained to fulfil his task by a Divine necessity. " B;mds are upon him." 
IV. His enditbanoe of eidiculb is vtcarious. We can well suppose that many 
who visited Ezekiel in his dwelling would fail to perceive the propriety or utility of 
this long and irksome penance. They would sneer and laugh at this toy-siege, at this 
childish exposure of an outstretched arm, at this constant recumbence on one side. 
Be it so ; the prophet continues his task unmoved. " The foolishness of God is wiser 
than men." Littleness and greatness are matters about which men egregiously err. 
Ezekiel, in his humiliation, was as magnanimous and noble an actor in life's drama 
as Elijah on Carmel vindicating in solitary sublimity Jehovah's power. What could 
be baser to the vulgar eye of the world than to boar a felon's cross through the streets, 
and then to hang in nakedness and pain thereon? "But God hath chosen the weak 
things of the world to confound the mighty . . . and things which are not, to bring 
to nought things which are." Like his Divine Master, Ezekiel "despised the 
shame." — D. 

Vers. 9 — 17. — A sytriboUe famine. The moral intention for which Gkid imposed 
this series of painful privations on his prophet was this, viz. to convince the people 
that their expectation of a speedy return to Jerusalem was vain and futile. Their 
honoured city, around which God had so long thrown the shield of his protection, 
could not (so they thought) long remain in the power of the heathen. To explode this 
bubble-delusion, God represented before their eyes the rigours of a military siege, the 
privations and hardships of the heleagiureil inhabitants, along with the final discom- 
fiture of the city's guilty defenders. The prophet in Babylon is still a scapegoat for 
the people. On him the weight of the stroke at present rests. The bonds of sympathy 
with the people's best interests constrained the prophet to suffer with them and /or 
them. Hence, during three hundred and ninety days he ate no pleasant bread ; he 
lived on the narrowest rations. In the midst of surrounding plenty, he fared (for sub- 
lime moral reasons) with the hard-pressed and beleaguered Jews. Now, famine has its 
moral uses. 

I. It bbinos to mbmoky the fobmbk affluence of God's provision. If it is 
possible to sustain our life with ten ounces of bread per diem, and this bread' of the 
coarsest description, then all that we obtain beyond this is proof of the exuberant 
kindness of our God. As transgressors against God's Law, we should not expect more 
than bare subsistence — mere prison fare ; we have no right to claim even that. Taking 
this scale with which to measure our former possessions and comforts, we may gain 
some conception of the amazing love of God. Would that, side by side with a clear 
idea of his goodness, there was also adequate impression } Every gift of Providence, 
in excess of bare sustenance, is a token of God's tender affection ; brings a message of 
kindness — is a gospeL 

II. Famine mat well convince us or oue sins. We may safely conclude that 
it is not for small reason that God deprives men of nature's kindly gifts. The internal 
monitor, as well as the external prophet, teaches us that this interruption of providential 
supplies is God's act. Many and strange factors may intervene, but a clear eye looks 
through and beyond all inferior causes, until it discovers the rule of the great First 
Cause? The pride of earthly kings, the march of armies, the scrutiny of martial sen- 
tinels, biting frosts, blustering winds, inroads of insects — ^a thousand things may serve 
as the nearest visible cause of famine ; but a devout mind will regard sdl these as the 
agents and administrators of the most high God. For no other reason would he mani- 
fest his anger, save for moral transgression, wilful disloyalty ! He would have us to 
see and to feel how great an evil is sin, by the serious mischief it works — yea, by the 
severity of his own displeasure. Even famine serves as the Master's ferule, if it brings 
ui back to childlike obedience. 

MZZSJXL. * 



82 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. it. 1—17. 

III. Famine proves to ub how bast it is fob God to afflict. Very obvious 
is it that frail man bangs on God by a thousand delicate threads. Ten thousand 
minute avenues are open by which an enemy can approach, chastisement come near. 
We almost shudder as we think of the manifold forms, and of the majestic ease, with 
which the avenging God could scourge his rebellious creatures. Let him but change 
one ingredient in the all-nurturing air, and instead of inlialing health, we should, with 
every breath, inhale fiery poison, if but the appetite fail, if the digestive organs 
become weak, if secretions stay their process, lassitude and decay speedily follow. It 
is enough that God should speak a word, and life for us would be stripped of charm. 
We should crave to die. 

IV. This scarcity proves that present chastisement is disciplinaet. It is 
not sudden and irremediable death. If God intended that, he would have chosen 
some other punitive weapon. But this reduction of food to a minimum, this suspen- 
sion of enjoyment, these obnoxious necessitieg in preparing a meal, all indicate 
correction with a view to repentance. If only the sighs of true penitence arise, then 
quicker than flashing light does God run to remove the burden from our shoulders. 
To punish men is a grief to God; to pardon is his delight. Yet if present corrections 
avaU nothing to produce righteous obedience, the final infliction will be irrevocable and 
overwhelming. 

V. Prayer modifies, if it dobs not ebmovb, the severity of the strokk. 
The windows of heaven were shut and opened again at the breath of Elijah's prayer, 
Ezekiel humbly remonstrates with God that he may not be required to violate cere- 
monial puiity. At once the command of God is modified. The tenderness of the prophet's 
conscience is to be respected. God alters not bis plans without sufficient cause ; this 
is sufficient cause. This particular step in his procedure was clearly foreseen ; and it 
was to bring out this request from Ezekiel that the first demand was made. Prayer 
not only expresses mental desire ; it strengthens it also. It does us good every way. 
It fits us to enjoy, and to improve, the blessing. It softens chastisement. — D. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — The siege of Jerusalem and the sufferings of the people Bynibolized. 
" Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and portray upon it 
the city, even Jerusalem," etc. This chapter presents difficulties to the student. 
There is the question whether it is to be understood literally or metaphorically ; or, 
more correctly, whether the things here set forth were really done or were only visional. 
The commands given in vers. 1 — 3 might have been literally executed ; but the direc- 
tions of vers. 4—8 could not have been literally carried out. Hence Fairbairn and 
others conclude that the actions must have taken place in vision. " It is enough to 
suppose," says Dr. Currey, " that when the prophet was bidden to do such acts, they 
were impressed upon his mind with all the vividness of actual performance. In spirit, 
he grasped the sword and scattered the hair (ch. v. 1 — 4), and saw herein the coming 
events thus symbolized. They would only have lost force by substituting bodily for 
mental action. The command of God gave to the sign the vividness of a real trans- 
action, and the prophet communicated it to the people, just as it had been stamped on 
his own mind, with more impressiveness than could have been conveyed by the language 
of ordinary metaphor." Again, it is by no means easy to decide what is the precise 
reference of the three hundred and ninety days, and the forty days, each day lor a year. 
The different interpretations have been so ably sustained by their respective advocates, 
that it seems to us that it would be presumptuous dogmatically to assert that it must 
mean either one or another. But let us endeavour to discover the homiletic aspects ot 
this chapter. 

I. Inquieb the reason why, in this chapter and elsewhere, God has hadk 
KNOWN HIS WILL BY REMARKABLE SYMBOLS. There are many such symbols in the 
prophecies by Ezekiel. And in those by Jeremiah we have the rod of an almond tree, 
and the seething pot (i. 11 — 16), the linen girdle, and the bottles of wine (xiii.), 
the potter's earthen vessel (xix.), the two baskets of figs (xxiv.), and the yoke 
of iron (xxviii.). Many other examples might be cited from other portions of the 
sacred Scriptures. We cannot think that these striking symbols were employed to 
conceal truth, or to make the apprehension of the truth more difficult. That would 
have been inconsistent with revelation — the contradiction of revelation. And it seems 



OB. IT. 1—17.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 83 

to us that it would have been out of harmony with the character of God to have used 
remarkable symbols to obscure his Word. They were intended rather, we conceive, to 
arouse attention, to stimulate inquiry, and impress upon the mind the truths shadowed 
forth by them. Fairbaim has well said, " As the meaning obriously did not lie upon 
the surface, it called for serious thought and inquiry regarding the purposes of God. 
A time of general backsliding and corruption is always a time of superficial thinking 
on spiritual things. And just as our Lord, by his parables, that partly veiled while 
they disclosed the truth of God, so the prophets, by their more profound and enigma- 
tical discourses, sought to arouse the careless from their security, to awaken inquiry, 
and stir the depths of thought and feeling in the soul. It virtually said to them, ' You 
are in imminent peril ; direct ordinary discourse no longer suits your case ; bestir 
yourselves to look into the depths of things, otherwise the sleep of death shall overtake 
you.'" 

II. EtlDEAVOnB TO BET FOBTH THE MEANINa OF THESE BEMABKABLE 8TMB0LB. 

1. Here is a representation of the siege of Jerusalem. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Directions are given 
to Ezekiel to portray a siege of the holy city; and to prepare the fort or siege-tower, 
and the mound, and the encampments, and battering-rams, and lay siege to it. Notice : 
(1) The great Agent in this siege. The prophet was to besiege it, acting as the repre- 
sentative of Jehovah. " If the prophet, as commissioned by God, enters on such a 
siege, the real besieger of Jerusalem is the Lord God ; and the Chaldeans appear as 
mere instruments in the Divine hand" (Schroder). Nebuchadnezzar and his army 
unconsciously did the work of God. And the prophet was to do his work with resolu- 
tion and might (ver. 7). The uncovered arm indicates one about to engage in vigorous 
exertion (cf. Isa. lii. 10). So the siege here foreshadowed would be prosecuted with 
determination and power. (2) The cause of this siege. The sin of the people has 
brought it upon them. This is indicated by the iron pan or plate which Ezekiel was 
to set up between himself and the city (ver. 3). " It is clear from the expression, 
between thee and the city, that a relation of separation, of division, between Jerusalem 
as portrayed upon the brick and the representative of God is meant to be expressed. 
Only on the ground of such a relation between God and Jerusalem can we explain alike 
the hostile attitude of the prophet's face, and especially the clause, and it is in siege, 
and along with that, vers. 1 and 2 " (Schroder). " Their iniquities had separated 
between them and their God " (Isa. lix. 2). That their calamities were caused by their 
sins appears also from the prophet being called to bear the iniquity of the house of 
Israel and the house of Judah (vers. 5, 6). And in the last verse it is expressly stated 
that they should "consume away for their iniquity." Sin is the one great cause of 
Buffering and sorrow, of calamity and loss. 2. Here is a representation of the sufferings 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. (1) These are symbolized by the prostrate attitude 
of the prophet bearing the sins of the people (vers. 4 — 6). In the former portion of 
the chapter Ezekiel represents the Lord ; but here and in subsequent verses he repre- 
sentB the besieged and suffering people. His lying down, and imbUity to turn from one 
side to another, " is » figure of the wretched condition of the people during the time of 
the siege" (cf. Ps. xx. 8; Isa. 1. 11; Amos v. 2). (2) The miseries of the people are 
also represented by the scarcity of food and its loathsome associations. The prophet is 
directed to " take wheat, and barley, and beans," etc. (ver. 9). " It is suggested in this 
way that the besieged will in their distress be compelled to gather together everything 
that can possibly be turned into bread. This state of matters is represented yet more 
strongly by means of the one vessel, which shows that of each separate sort not much 
more is to he had " (Schroder). Ezekiel, moreover, has to take his food by weight and 
measure, and only at long intervals (vers. 10, 11). And although in that country less 
is needed to sustain life than in our colder climate, yet the quantity allowed the prophet 
is not more than half what is usually regarded as necessary. The quantity, as some 
one observes, was too much for dying, too little for living. So would the people suffer 
want and hunger during the long siege. From the scarcity of food we proceed to its 
impurity. It is represented as having been baked with fuel of the most offensive 

kind with human ordure (ver. 12). But in answer to a pathetic appeal of the prophet, 

he IB allowed to use the dried ordure of cattle instead thereof. To this he made no 
objection. "He was, in fact, used to it; for the dried dung of beasts is used for fuel 
throughout the East wherever wood is scarce, from Mongolia to Palestine. It* nse. 



84 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. [oh. t. 1—17. 



indeed, extends Into Europe, and subsists even in England." ^ The significance of 
this symbol is stated : " Even thus shall the children of Israel eat their defiled bread 
among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them." The reference is to the impurities of 
heathenism. Those who in their own land had disregarded the commands of God would 
in their exile find the corruptions of heathenism a grievous ofience unto them. And 
then in its close (vers. 16, 17) the chapter recurs to the sufferings during the siege. 
The misery was to grow and to become so great as to cause amazement and dismay. 
The people would take their scanty portion in deep sorrow ; and so great would be the 
scarcity of the prime necessaries of life as to strike them dumb with anguish. Such 
were the miseries which they had brought upon themselves by their long course 
of sin. 

III. Apply the instbdotionb which this subject has fob us. 1. An impressive 
illustration of the omniscience of God. Nothing less than infinite knowledge could 
have foretold to Ezekiel the things symbolized in this chapter. They did not seem in 
the least degree probable when he published them. " If we accept," says Dr. Currey, 
•' the fifth year of Jehoiachin's captivity (as is most probable) for the year in which 
Ezekiel received this communication, ... it was a time at which such an event would, 
according to human calculation, have appeared improbable. Zedekiah was the creature 
of the King of Babylon, ruling by his authority in the place of Jehoiachin, who was 
still alive ; and it could scarcely have been expected that Zedekiah would have been so 
infatuated as to provoke the anger of the powerful Nebuchadnezzar." Tet he did so; 
and this prophecy was fulfilled. Nothing can be hidden from God (Ps. cxxxiz.). To 
him the future is visible as the present. This is exhibited by Isaiah as an evidence 
that the Lord is the true God (Isa. xli. 21—29; xliv. 6—8; xlvi. 9—11). 2. Sin 
transforms persons and places in the sight of Ood. Think of what Jerusalem bad 
been before him: "the city of God;" "the faithful city;" "the holy city;" "the 
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth." But now, alas, bow changed it is I 
Formerly he had been its Defender ; now he has become its Besieger. Sin darkens and 
deforms human character ; it takes away the glory of cities and covers them with 
shame. 3. The certainty of the punishment of sin. The chosen people shall not 
escape punishment if they persist in sin. The sacred city, with the temple which God 
had chosen as his dwelling-place (Ps. cxxxii. 13, 14), will a£ford no protection to a 
people who have obstinately rebelled against him. "Though hand join in hand, the 
wicked shall not go unpunished;" "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reap," etc. Sin carries within itself the germ of its own punishment. 4. The power 
of Ood to inflict punishment v/pon the obstinately rebellious. He can use the heathen 
as his instruments for this purpose. He can break the staff of bread, and dry up the 
springs of water, etc. 5. The heinousness and perilousness of sin, (Of. Jer. iL 19 ; 
xliv. 4.) Let us cultivate hearty obedience to the Lord God. — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER V. 



Ver. 1. — Take thee a barber's razor, etc. 
The aeries of eymbolio acts is carried fvu:- 
ther. Becollections of Isaiah and Leviticus 
mingle strangely in the prophet's mind. 
The former bad made the " razor " the sym- 
bol of the devastation vrrought by an in- 
vading army (Isa. vli. 20). The latter had 
forbidden its use for the head and beard of 
the priests (Lev. xix. 27; xxi. 5). Once 
again Ezekiel is commanded to do a forbid- 
den thing as a symbolic act. He is, for the 
moment, the representative of the people of 
Jerusalem, and there is to be, as of old, a 
great destruction of that people a£ "by a 



razor that is hired." The word for " barber " 
(perhaps " hair-cutter") does not occur else- 
where in the Old Testament, but its use 
may be noted as showing that then, as now, 
the " barber " was a recognized institution 
in every Eastern town. The word fur 
"knife" (Josh. v. 2; 1 Kings xviii. 28) is 
used in ver. 2, and commonly throughout 
the Old Testament, for " sword," and is so 
translated here by the LXX. and Vulgate. 
The prophet is to take a " sword " and use 
it as a razor, to make the symbolism more 
effective. 

Ver. 2.— Thou shalt bum with Are, eta 
The symbolism receives its interpretation in 
ver. 12. A third part of the people (we 



' See Kitto's 'Daily Bible UlustrationB.' 



OH. V, 1.-17.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 



86 



need not expect numerical exactness) was to 
perish in the city of pestilence and famine, 
another to fall by the sword in their attempts 
to escape, yet another third was to be scat- 
tered to the far-off laud of their exile, and 
even there the sword was to follow them. 
The words, in the midst of the city, and the 
days of the siege, find their most natural 
explanation in ch. iv. 1, 5, 6. 

Vers. 3, 4.— Then shalt also take, etc. The 
words may point (1) either to tliose in Jeru- 
salem who had escaped the famine and the 
sword, and were left in the laud (2 Kings 
XXV. 22; Jer. xl. 6; lii. 16); or (2) to those 
who should go into exile, and yet even there 
suffer from the "fire" of God's chastening 
judgments. They were, if saved at all, to 
be saved "so as by fire" (1 Cor. iii. 15), to 
be as "brands plucked from the burning" 
(Amos iv. 11 ; Zech. iii 2). Isaiiih's thought 
of the "remnant" (Isa. x. 20—22; xi. 11— 
16) seems hardly to come in here. The 
whole utterance is one of denunciation. The 
act of " binding in the skirts " implies only 
a limited protection. Omit ''for," and for 
"thereof" read "therefrom," «.o. from the 
fire (Bevised Version). 

Ver. 5. — ^This is Jerusalem, etc. The 
strange acted parables cease, and we have 
the unfigurative interpretation. The words 
that follow point to the central position of 
Jerusalem in the geography, and therefore 
in the history, of the ancient East : Egypt 
to the south, Assyria and Babylon to the 
north, and in the nearer distance Moabites 
and Ammonites, and Edomites, and Phoeni- 
cians, and Philistines ; to all of these Jerusa- 
lem might have been as a city set on a hill, 
as the light of the Gentiles. That had been 
her ideal position from the first, as in the 
visions of Micah iv. 1 and Isa. ii. 1 it was to 
be in its ideal future. The words are not 
without interest, as probably having sug- 
gested the thought, prominent in mediaeval 
geography (Dante, 'Inf.,' xxxiv. 115, and 
the Hereford 'Mappa Mundi'), that Jerusa- 
lem was physically the central point of the 
earth's surface. So Moslems believe Mecca 
to be the earth's centre, and the Greek 
word omphalot was applied to Delphi as 
implying the same belief. 

Ver. 6. — She hath changed, etc. To that 
calling Jerusalem had been unfaithful. Cor- 
ruptio optimi pettima, and she had sunk to 
a lower level than the nations round about 
her. For changed my judgments into 
wickedness, read, with the Revised Ver- 
sion, liaih rebelled against my judgments in 
doing viicJcedness. The pronoun refers, not 
to the nations, but to the inhabitants of Je- 
rusalem, and so in the next clause. 

Ver. 7. — Because ye multiplied, etc. ; bet- 
ter, with the Bevised Version, because ye 
•re turbulent. The verb is cognate with 



the noun translated "tumult " in 1 Sam. iv. 
14 ; Ps. Ixv. 7 ; Isa. xxxiii. 3, though it is 
more commonly rendered "multitude." It 
is not (as stated by Ourrey and Gardiner) the 
verb rendered "rage " in Ps. ii. 1. The for- 
mer meaning fits in fairly here, but some 
critics cSmend) suppose that the text is cor- 
rupt. A conjectural emendation gives, "ye 
were counted with the nations." Ifeither 
have done according to the judgements; 
better, with the Revised Version, ordinanoe$. 
Taking the words as they stand, the words 
find their explanation in Jer. ii. 10, 11. In 
doing as the nations (ch. xi. 12 ; ivi. 47)i 
Jerusalem had not done as they did, for they 
were at least true to the gods whom they 
worshipped, and slie had rebelled against 
her God. Some Hebrew manuscripts and 
some versions omit the negative, but this is 
probably a correction made in order to bring 
about a verbal agreement with ch. xi. 12. 

Ver. S.^Therefore, etc. The conjunction 
is emphatic. It was because Jerusalem, in 
her high estate had sinned so conspicuously 
that her punishment was to be equally con- 
spicuous (comp. Lam. iv. 6; Amos iii. 2). 

Ver. 9. — I will do in thee, etc. The like 
words were spoken by our Lord of the de- 
struction of the city that was then future 
(Matt. xxiv. 21); but the words of Ezekiel 
manifestly refer to that which was within 
the horizon of his vision, and find their 
parallel in Dan. ix. 12 ; Lam. i. 12 ; ii. 13. 

Ver. 10. — The fathers shall eat their sons, 
etc. An echo from Lev. xxvi. 29 and Deut. 
xxviii. 53. The words of Jer. xix. 9 and 
Lam. iv. 10 imply that horrors such as these 
occurred during the siege of the city by the 
Chaldeans, as they had occurred before in 
the siege of Samaria (2 Kings vi. 28, 29), 
and were to occur afterwards in that by the 
Romans ( Josephu.9, ' BeU Jud.,' vi. 4. § 4). 
The whole remnant, etc. (comp. ver. 2). 

Ver. 11. — Because thou hast defiled my 
sanctuary, etc. For the full account of the 
nature of the abominations which are thus 
spoken of, see notes on ch. viii. This was, 
after all, the root-evil of all other evils. 
Pollution of worship, the degradation of the 
higliest element in man's nature, passed into 
pollution and degradation of his whole life. 
Even in our Loid's acted teaching, in John 
ii. 15, 10 and Matt, xxi. 12, we have the 
same principle implied. Therefore wiU I also 
diminish thee, etc. The italics show that 
the last word is not in the Hebrew. The 
Revised Version margin suggests two other 
renderings. (1) Therefore will I alio with- 
draw mine eye that it shall not spare; and 
(2) Therefore will I hew thee down. To these 
we may add the LXX. I will reject, and the 
Vulgate I wiU break in pieces, which appa- 
rently, like (2), imply a different leamng. 
Most leoent critics suggest oonjeotonl em en - 



86 



THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEEIEL. [oe.t.1— 17. 



dationa of the text I incline to rest 
eatiafied with the Authorized Yersion, and 
to explain it by oh. xvi. 27. The word im- 
plies not only the decieaae, but the entire 
withdrawal of Jehovah'a favour. Possibly 
there is an implied reference to the command 
of Deut. iv. 2; xii. 32. Jerusalem had 
" diminished " from the Law of God, had, aa 
it were, erased the commandments which 
were of supreme obligation, and therefore, 
aa by a lex tcdionis, God would diminish her. 
Neither will I have any pity. TLe words 
are, of course, anthropomorphic, and have 
therefore to be received with the necessary 
limitations. Aa the earthly minister of jus- 
tice must not yield to a weak pity which 
would be incompatible with the assertion of 
the eternal law of righteousness, so neither 
will the Supreme Judge. There is a time 
for all things, and justice must do ita work 
first, in order that there may be room for 
pity afterwards. For other assertions, which 
seems strange to us, of tbis unpitying cha- 
racter of God, see ch. vii. 4, 9 ; Tiii. 18 ; ix. 
10, et al. ; Jer. xUi. 14. 

Ver. 12. — A third part of thee, etc. (see 
note on ver. 2). The strange symbolic act 
is now interpreted. I will draw out a sword, 
ete. The phrase recurs in ch. xii. 14, and is 
found in Lev. xxvi. 33 — an echo, like so many 
other passages in Ezekiel, from what seems 
to have been his favourite storehouse of 
thouglit and language (Lev. xvii. — xxvi.). 

Ver. 13. — I will cause my fary to rest upon 
them, etc. ; Revised Version, I will satisfy, 
etc. The phrase meets us again in ch. xvi. 
42 ; xxi. 17 ; xxiv. 13. To " rest" here is to 
"repose" rather than to "abide." The 
thought is that a righteous anger, like that 
of Jehovah, rests (i.e. is quieted) when it 
has done its work, and that in this sense 
God is "comforted," either as rejoicing in 
the punishment of evil for its own sake (as 
in Deut. xxviii. 63; Isa. i. 24), or because 
the punishment does its work in leading 
men to repentance. Israel may be comforted, 
because God is comforted as he sees that his 
judgments have done their work, and that 
hifl wrath can iind repose. Have spoken in 
my leal. The thought implied is that what 
ia apoken in the earnest purpose of "zeal" 
vrill assuredly be carried into execution 
(oomp. Isa. ix. 7; ixxvii. 32). Men might 
deride the prophet's warning as an idle 
threat. It would prove itself to have come 
from God. 

Ver. 14. — In the sight of them that pass 
by. The phrase reminds as of Lam. i. 12 ; 
it 1&: and the latter wai probably • con- 



icioiu repiodnction of it The scorn and 

mockery of the heathen who rejoiced in her 
humiliation were to be the keenest pang in 
the punishment of the guilty city. 

Ver. 15. — A. reproach and a taunt, eto. 
An echo of Deut. xxviii. 37. The accumu- 
lation of synonyms in both clauses of the 
verse is eminently characteristic of Ezekiel's 
style. Word followa word, like the strokea 
of a sledge-hammer. The word for " instruc- 
tion" is that which occurs so often in the 
Book of Proverbs (i. 2, 3, and in twenty-two 
other passages). In Deut xi 12; Isa. liii. 
5 ; Jer. xxx. 14, the Authorized Version ren- 
ders it "chastisement," and that sense is 
manifestly implied here. Jerusalem was, aa 
it were, to be the great object-lesson in 
God's education of mankind. And the final 
stroke of all is that the words were not the 
prophet's own, but " I the Lord have spoken 
it" The words reappear in ver, 17. 

Ver. 16. — The evil arrows of fiunine, etc 
The thought of the " arrows " of God's judg- 
ment may have been taken from Deut. zxxiL 
23, 42, and occurs frequently also in the 
Psalms (Ps. vli. 13 ; xxxviiL 2, et al.). Clothed 
in the language of poetry, the attributes 
of Jehovah included those of the Far-darter 
of the Greeks, Which shall be for their 
destruction, etc. ; better, as Eevised Version, 
that are for destruction. Ewald looks on 
the noun as a personification, like Abaddon, 
also translated " destruction " in Job xxviii. 
22 and Prov. xv, 11, and renders the words, 
" that are from hell ; " but there seems no 
special reason fur assuming such a meaning 
here. It is noticeable that, as in the sym- 
bolism of ch. iv. 9 — 17, the famine is more 
prominent in Ezekiel's thoughts than the 
other punishments. 

Ver. 17. — Evil beasts, eto. These appear 
in like connection in EzeMel's fevourite text- 
books (comp. Lev, xxvi 6, 22 ; Deut. xxxii, 
24). They reappear in oh. xiv. 15, 21. His- 
torically, we have an example of the suffering 
thus caused in the lions of 2 Kings xviL 25, 
when towns and villages were deserted, and 
the unburied carcases of those who had died 
by famine, or pestilence, or the sword, were 
everywhere to attract them from afai. This 
was, of course, the natural and inevitable 
result. Pestilence and blood, eto. As this 
is followed by the work of the sword, 
" blood " probably points to some special form 
of plague, possibly dysentery (Aots xxviii. 
8, Bevised Version), or carbuncles, like 
Hezekiah's boil (Isa. xxxviii. 21). The same 
combination appean in di. ziv. 19; xxviii. 
23. 



OKT. 1— IT.] THE BOOK 07 THB PBOPHKT VZEiKOSU ST 



HOMILETICSL 

Vers. 1 — 4. — " A lorW* razor." The coming siege and destruction of JeruMtem 
are described under the image of the prophet shaving his head and then disposing of 
his hair in various ways. The razor stands for the Divine judgment, the hair for the 
people, the different treatment of the hair for the difference in the doom of the people. 

I. Divine jttdgment is keen as a razob. Some judgments crush, others eut 
The latter do not dispose of their victims at a blow. More is reserved for the hair 
that has been shaved o£f ; for it is to be burnt, etc. But first of all the bead is shorn. 
Thus judgment is progressive. Now, the first stage throws down pride, breaks up the 
established order, and casts the miserable sufferers into a state of dismay. This is 
irresistible. Slender hair cannot resist sharp steel. Feeble man cannot stand up 
against the penetrating judgment of Heaven. 

II. In puNisHiNa a nation God punishes indiyidualb. Each hair is a separate 
growth, and in shaving the whole head the razor cuts through individual hairs. It is 
too commonly imagined that burdens can be shifted from the individual to the nation. 
But if this were imiversally done there would be no gain, as the nation is nothing 
more than the aggregate of the individuals that compose it; and if it were only 
partially done, injustice would be inflicted on the many for the relief of the few. In 
Divine judgments there is no escaping on account of the wholesale and national 
character of what happens. Great general wars lay homesteads desolate, bring mourn- 
ing to separate households, impoverish private businesses, kill individual men. 

III. Lr A GBNEBAL JDDQMENT THBBB ABB VABIBTIE3 OP DOOM. The hair is tO be 

divided out, and the several portions are then to be dealt with in different ways. The 
siege of Jerusalem results in a variety of dreadful calamities. Some of the citizens 
perish from fire, famine, or disease ; some are killed by the sword ; some are driven 
into exile. No doubt there will be varieties of doom in the future world. All will not 
Buifer the same penalties, and yet the just punishment of sin m\ist be unspeakably 
awful in every instance. 

IV. Ih the most heavy judgment some are spared. Bzekiel is to take a few 
hairs and bind them in his skirts. Eight people were saved from the Flood. Three 
were saved from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. The Christians who fled 
to Fella escaped the horrors of the Boman siege of Jerusalem. Thus the doctrine 
•f the " remnant " is repeatedly exemplified. None are so obscure as to be overlooked 
l>y God. He is not indiscriminate in his judgment. The faithful are safe in the most 
OTerwhelming destruction. Those who are God's true people are well guarded and 
cared for by him. Such have no occasion to fear any future judgment-day. 

V. Escape fbom one judgment is no assurance of final safety. Ver. 4 seems 
to teach that some who escaped from the horrors of the siege would yet be cut off by 
some later calamity. God's forbearance is no excuse for man's indifference. Judg- 
ment deferred is not judgment destroyed. It is possible to turn aside from God in 
one's later days after serving him truly in one's earlier life, and then the safety of the 
past must give place to peril. 

Ver. 5. — A central position. Jerusalem was in a central position. Palestine was in 
the very midst of the nations. The highway between Assyria and Egypt ran through 
her territory. Seated on the shores of the Mediterranean, she was midway between 
the great empires of the East and the mysterious world of the West. England is now 
in a position like that of ancient Palestine, but with a much larger sweep of circum- 
ference. This island looks eastward to Europe and Asia, and it is in the highway from 
the Old World to America. London is the commercial capital of the world. England, 
more than any other country, has interests and infiuence in the four quarters of tiie 
globe. Then there are individual men in central positions. This is so of all persons 
fai posts of authority. It is also true in a very real sense of everybody. Bach man is 
the centre of his own horizon ; the range of his vision and voice extend in a circle all 
round him. Throw a stone where jou will into a pond, and at once it become* a 
eentra d spreading oiroles of waveleti. We are afl centres of influenoa. Thi* oentral 
poritiea lUTolrw great oonsefUMCM. 



88 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. v. 1—17. 

I. A HIGH PEiviLEOB. Jerusalem was privileged in her position; so is England 
to-day. The products of all the world pour into our markets. The garnered experience 
of the ages and the wide wealth of thought that grows in many minds are at our 
disposal. Jerusalem in the days of the prophets had many faults, but narrow-mindfed- 
ness was not one. We see her seated on the great plain of the world's history. In 
like manner there is a happy richness, a variety and breadth of knowledge^ of which we 
in England to-day are able to avail ourselves. As individuals, we are in the midst of 
many enriching sources. Tennyson's Ulysses says, " I am a part of all that I have 
met." We are able to profit by multitudinous influences from many quarters. We 
should not stultify these influences by parochial narrowness, but welcome and use all the 
helps God sends, e.g. in good books, inspiriting lives, wise and good public movements. 

II. A UKIQUE POSITION. Jerusalem was in the midst of the nations, yet she was 
separate from them. She was not to follow the example of her neighbours. She was 
called to a unique destiny. Alone knowing the true God, she was to serve him in the 
full blaze of the world, but in separation from the contamination of neighbouriftg 
religions. This is the Christian destiny ; not to forsake society and cultivate religion 
in seclusion, but to live in the world, yet free from the spirit of the world — a citizen 
of heaven residing as God's ambassador on earth. 

III. A OBEAT MISSION. Jerusalem was planted in the midst of the nations to be a 
power for good among them. God did not convey his chosen people to some distant 
"Isles of the Blessed." They were set down in the centre of the great stage of the 
world's history. They were a separate people, it is true — a sort of Belgium between 
Egypt and Assyria — the France and Germany of those days. But they had their 
mission in the end, to give the true religion to all nations. England is most advan- 
tageously situated for blessing other nations. We of all peoples should be a missionary 
nation. The Church of Christ is in the midst of the people, not like Noah's ark, only 
destined to secure the safety of those shut up inside it, but like leaven put into 
the meal to leaven the whole lump. Every Christian Church is in the midst of the 
people, in a neighbourhood for which it should be a centre of light. So also individual 
men, according as they are in any sort of central positions, are there for the good they 
can confer. Ko life can be pure in its purpose or strong in its strife, and all life not be 
purer and stronger thereby. 

IV. A HEAVY KEBPONSIBILITT. Jerusalem is called to account. England will have 
her day of reckoning. We shall all be judged, especially as to our conduct in places 
of privilege and influence. 1. We are responsible for our privileges. Assyria was not 
judged as Judtea; Africa and England will not be measured by the same standard. 
Much is expected of them to whom much has been given. 2. We are responsible foi 
our influence. The effects of our work, word, and example will come back upon om 
own heads in blessings or in curses. 

V. A SHAMEFUL FAILUEB. Jerusalem missed her great mission and fell from her 
high estate. The fall of favoured Palestine is a warning to favoured England. It is 
possible to have every advantage and yet to make shipwreck. Then the bigger the 
ship the greater the wreck. There is something inspiriting in the thought of a mission. 
It helps one to make th^ best use of life. The idea that we are useless will certainly 
lead to indifiference and paralyze our energies. But to accept a place of influence and 
its privileges and then to fall, is the most culpable of aU things. 

Ver. 8. — Opposed hy Ood. We are more familiar with the idea of our opposition to 
God than with that of his opposition to us, because he is long-suffering and slow to 
anger, while we are rebellious and self-willed. But there is a point where infinite 
patience cannot restrain just wrath ; where, indeed, without any conflict of Divine 
attributes, the very love of God must acquiesce in his resistance to our sinful conduct 
by stem measures. Then God is against us ! 

L God's opposition is pbovokbd by man's eebbllion. 1. Ood is not origincdly 
opposed to amy of Ms creatures. " He hateth nothing that he hath made." Nor can 
we suppose that God turns against his children for reasons of his own apart from their 
conduct. There is no caprice in the heart of the Immutable. It seems to some men 
in their deepening adversity, as blow after blow falls upon them, that God has become 
their wismy. This is a trial to faith ; but true faith should survive and cry in tha 



OH.V. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 8» 

tempest of trouUe, « Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." 2. The cause of Qo^t 
opposition lies in men alone. Ours is the change, not his. The Israelites in the 
wilderness "provoked" him to wrath. As he is always graciously inclined, it always 
lies with us to determine whether he shall he our Friend orour Enemy. It is fearful 
to make an Enemy of our best Friend. But can we expect that persistent neglect, 
deepening into disobedience, and disobedience pushed to the extremity of rebellion, 
should be regarded with indifference by the Lord of heaven and earth ? 

II. The opposition op God is itnspbakablt drbadpui.. It is dangerous for man to 
run counter to the will of God ; it is fatal for God to rouse himself in opposition to man. 
The man who falls on the chosen Stone is bruised, but he on whom it falls will be 
ground to powder (Matt. xxi. 44). There is in this a Divine activity. The sinner 
does not suffer only negatively, by privation, by the loss of Divine grace. His doom 
is more than to be cast into the outer darkness, and to be left there in a God-deserted 
solitude. That would be bad enough. But it must be remembered that God is active, 
and is ever making his will felt by his children. If a man swallows arsenic, the poison 
will work in him by the exercise of its own corrosive properties. In opposing the law« 
of nature we bring those laws into active play against us. It is like running in face of 
an express train. The result is incomparably worse than running against a dead wall. 
The dreadfulness of the Divine opposition thus encountered is only to be measured by 
the might and energy of God. The very fact that he loves us, instead of mitigating 
the horror of the opposition, must heighten it, for no plea can soften the blow when 
love itself acquiesces in it. If a hard master punished we might hope to soften him, 
but if a God of love is against us there is no further appeal. 

III. The Divine opposition is a lesson fob all who witness it. The judgments 
were to be executed " in the sight of the nations." This would add to the humiliation 
of the Jews. It would be a shock to the self-complacency that was founded on the 
notion that for the sake of his own honour among the heathen God would uphold his 
chosen people. That notion was a delusion. God's honour is not maintained by 
protecting his people in their sin. It is more manifest in the impartial execution of 
justice without any rebate on the ground of favouritism. God is not honoured now 
by the simple security of his Church, but by the purity of it. It is better for the 
cause of righteousness that fallen Christians should be shamed and cast out, than that 
they should be petted and spared and their wickedness hushed up. The fall and 
judgment of the Jews proclaimed to all the world the unbiassed righteousness of God. 
Certainly, if the chosen people were not spared, no sinners can hope to escape — except 
by the way of deliverance God has made through Christ. 

Ver. 9. — A unique event. No doubt the intention of this prophecy is to express tho 
horror of a judgment that is so exceptionally dreadful that history may be searched in 
vain for a precedent, and futurity will never behold its equal. But the very possibility 
of such an event suggests truths of wider significance. There are principles involved 
in this prediction which the modern reverence for the uniformity of law has led us to 
pass by too hastily. 

I. Theee abb unique facts and events. Many things happen but once. They 
appear as novelties to surprise us, and they perish without issue. The world is full of 
singularity, individuality, and consequent variety. There is but one Niagara, one 
' Iliad,' one Shakespeare. Innocence can be lost but once ; the soul's fall is an event by 
itself, not to be compared with innumerable subsequent sins. Jesus said, " Ye must 
be bom again" — not many times; for one act of regeneration suffices, though many 
experiences of forgiveness and purification may follow. " It is appointed unto men 
once to die." That dread Jordan has to be crossed but once. There is one Christ, and 
"none other Name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved" (Acts 
iv. 12). " Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many " (Heb. ix. 28). 

II. This uniqueness is not contbakt to the unifobmitt of law nob to thh 
IMMUTABELITT OP GoD. 1. Laws may converge to one result. It might be according to 
regular laws that slowly gathering fires should suddenly burst out into one great final 
conflagration, or that, after vast ages of slow approach, two worlds should at length rush 
into violent collision. Such awful occurrences would be unique, but would involve 
no breach of uniformity. 2. Varying circumstance$ will bring out new an4 singular 



•0 THB BOOK 07 THB PBOFHBX EZQEIBL. [oe. t. 1—17. 

effects. With ehangeless laws we see changing events. The novel situation gires a 
nen bearing to the old law. 3. Human wills had to new conditions. We cannot 
abrogate any law of nature ; but we can change the venu of the forces that surround 
us, as the steersman may alter the course of the ship by turning the rudder, although 
he cannot shift the direction of the wind by a point. If, then, God works through 
uniform laws and so proves to us his eternal constancy, he may yet send novel events 
without precedent and without following. 

III. This uniqueness of facts and events should widbn dub concbption of thb 
Divine aotivitt. 1. It opens a door for miracles. We cannot explain the cause and 
process of a miracle, but we may see that the most tremendous and unparalleled events 
might happen by some novel Divine action without any breach of natural laws, 
perhaps even through the operation of them. It will then be no less of God, for every 
act of nature and law is Divine. It will be above nature still, for the very conception 
of a miracle involves the thought of a specially purposed Divine action. Yet it may 
be in harmony with law and uniformity of method. 2. This uniqueness warns us 
against a slavish adherence to the inductive method in theology. It shows that here 
an induction can never be perfect. There may be facts left out of account. There- 
fore we cannot in all cases predict what God will do in the future by considering 
what he has done in the past. Assuredly he will be consistent with himself. But in 
entirely novel circumstances he may reveal entirely fresh forms of judgment or 
redemption. 3. This uniqueness should strengthen our faith in special, providence, 
God does not feed his children on fixed rations. To some he may send exceptional 
chastisement, to others peculiar blessings. Justice does not imply equality; it means 
fairness. It would not be fair to give the same allowance to all. Here is scope for 
God's discriminating action, and therefore room for our individual prayer, faith, 
and hope. 

Ver. 11. — JDiminishment. The wicked nation is to be punished by being diminished 
(«.«. if we accept the Authorized Version, confirmed as it is by the majority of the Kevisers). 

I. Population is diminished. After the exile Palestine was thrown back almost 
to the condition of a wilderness, and lions came up from the desert to the once thickly 
peopled country (2 Kings xvii. 25). But even before the exile, war, famine, and plague 
reduced the population. Professor Seeley has shown that the chief cause of the over- 
throw of Rome by the Teutonic invaders was the groat depopulating of Italy that took 
place under the empire. France is now threatened by decreasing population. The 
strength of a nation is in its people more than in its wealth. 

II. Globy is diminished. Instead of the growth of honour and fame among the 
nations which was seen under Solomon, the Hebrew nation is now to shrink in impor- 
tance, and so to fall into a position of insignificance. This has happened to Greece, Kome, 
Spain, Holland. It may happen to England. We have no assurance that our proud 
British fiag shall always float in glory. For our national sins God may permit it to be 
trampled in the mire. 

III. FowEB IS diminished. In regard to national movements this runs parallel 
with the previous thought, but in individuals it has a wider scope. The final punish- 
ment of sin is death. The prior penalties of sin are dying, t.«. a reduction of spiritual 
life, activity, and power. The once fruitful tree is now barren. He who was most 
successful in spiritual work now feels himself failing in all he attempts. His influence 
shrinks into insignificance. Sin has paralyzed his soul. 

IV. The vision of tbuth is diminished. Doubts succeed to the formerly growing 
knowledge of truth. The eyes of the soul become dim. God, who was once near, 
seems to withdraw himself into the darkness. The whole spiritual world, which had 
shone on the soul in full-orbed splendour, wanes and fades, and passes in gloom out of 
sight. The things unseen and eternal, which bad been the very universe of existence, 
melt into vague shadows, and float out of consciousness like the summer clouds that 
disappear while we gaze at them. 

V. The joy of spiritual expebiencb is diminished. That joy can only be bright 
when the soul's life is fresh and strong. A dull apathy cnmes with the reduced 
mirituality. A very weariness succeeds to the old earnest gladne.ss of service. The 
Jl»y-time of the sovd has gone, and a November gloom has taken its place, 



OH. T. 1—17.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET BZEKUSL. n 

CoNOLUBioir. There is hope still. Diminution is not extinction. The tree la hawn 
down, but the stump may sprout (Isa. vl. 13). The Jews diminished by Nebuchad- 
nezzar were restored under Cyrus. It is good in some way to feel diminution if pride 
is thereby also diminished. In the humility of shame the penitent may hope ibr his 
restoration to_ a new mnd more sound vigour by the merciful Saviour, who will not 
break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax (Iia. xlii. 3). 

Vers. 14, 15. — !Z%e shame of moral shipwreek, and it» lessons. All the nations round 
about were to be witnesses of the shipwreck of Israel. The eyes of the world are upon 
the Church. No single Christian man can fall without his ruin being observed by 
many neighbours. The city set on a hill cannot be hid in its prosperity and splendour; 
much less will it be unnoticed when it is wrapped in flames, and even later when its 
melancholy ruins tell the world a tale of fallen greatness. The spectacle is striking; 
the thoughts which it suggests should be instructive. Let us note four things alxiut 
this moral shipwreck. 

I. It is culpable. The condition of Israel is to bo "a reproach," ».e. blame will be 
attached to it. Nations must stand the chance of war, in which the most just and 
brave may suffer grievous loss ; and yet history rarely, if ever, shows an instance of a 
people crushed and exterminated without any fault of its own. Moral corruption 
precedes total national overthrow. This was certainly the case with Israel, which fell 
in its wickedness, and was scattered for its sin. Misfortune may visit the Church, or 
an individual good man — such as Job— without guilt on the part of the sufferer, because 
a wholesome discipline or some other high and distant Divine purpose of love is to be 
wrought out through this means. But utter shipwreck of life does not come without 
moral delinquency. Unhappily, the reproach does not cease with the guilty person ; 
it is laid against the cause of Christ, and it brings dishonour on his Name. This new 
" reproach of Christ " is the greatest hindrance to the progress of the gospel, and far 
more of a stumbling-block than the old shame of the cross. 

IL It is shamefxtIi anb deobasimci. The evil condition of the laUen nation will 
be " a taunt." Contempt will succeed to the old respect. The Church may expect to 
meet with opposition from the world, but she is indeed in an evil state when she has 
earned its contempt. To be despised wrongfully through the pride and superficial 
judgment of oth«rs is a fate which brave men can learn to endure. But to merit 
contempt is to lie in abject wretchedness. When Christian men fall from their pure 
profession, they sink into this most shocking ignominy. Even godless people can look 
down upon them, and taunt them with their high pretensions and boasted attainments 
and prized privileges. 

III. It is iNSTEUcnvB. The condition of the people will be " an instmction." As 
"no man liveth to himself," so also "no man dieth to himself." The ruin of nations 
is a lesson to the world. History is studded with beacon-warnings. The greatest 
riations have been defeated and destroyed. The prosperity of the Church in one age 
has been succeeded by corruption and shame in another. Men called "pillars" of the 
Church have fallen. People praised as "ornaments" of society have left tarnished 
reputations. Such sights not only warn us against pride and self-assurance; in 
searching for the expUination of them we may learn many a lesson as to the causes 
of success and failure, e.g. that secret sin leads to open shame, that past prosperity will 
not prevent present failure, that a good name is not an impregnable bulwark, that to 
forsake God is to court ruin. 

IV. It is astonishing. Israel's state will be "an astonishment" L It turpriies 
the suftrers. They never expected such a fall. Living m a fool's paradise, they spent 
their days at their ease till the crash came. Careless Christians are surprised at their 
own shipwreck. 2. It surprises the onlookers. It is contrary to expectatioi founded 
on previous observation and confident pretensions. Can the long-successful nation &11, 
and the people favoured of Heaven be abandoned to ruin? There will be many sur- 
prises in the fiiture judgment, because ignorance of the awful power of moral law and 
of the just retribution of God destroys men's expectations of the punfshment of sin. 
To some it will com* wUk « ilux^ of tmasemeut^ unleai thcgr now taia to tha 
T«d«B.ftion of ObrisW 



92 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. v. 1—17. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 6, 6. — Privileges abused. Himself an exile, and far from the city which was 
the gioiy of his nation and the seat of the worship of his God, Bzekiel nevertheless 
felt keenly and bitterly the reproach which was coming upon the mttropolis, the ruin 
which the sins of her kings and her citizens had brought upon her, the forsaking of 
her God, her abandonment to her foes. Yet he would not question the justice dis- 
cernible in these calamities. Jerusalem was her own enemy and her own destruction. 

I. The peculiak and pre-eminent advantages or Jebusalbm. 1. Political. 
" Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth," was Mount Zion. " In the midst 
of the nations, and the countries are round about her." The commanding position of 
the city of the great King strikes every beholder who looks at its walls and towers 
from die hill of Olivet, over the intervening valley. And ■whoever studies the map 
will recognize how central a station Jerusalem occupies: "Egypt to the south, Syria 
to the north, Assyria to the east, and the isles of the Gentiles in the Great Sea to the 
west." There were providential purposes in the selection of such a site, and in the 
consequent contact of the Jewish state, now with one neighbour and anon with 
another. What lessons Judah might learn from such associations ! 2, Beligious. In 
this regard, what nation of antiquity could compare with the Hebrew people? In 
Jewry God was known ; his Name was great in Israel. God dealt not so with any 
people. In Jerusalem stood the temple, where sacrifices were offered and festivals were 
celebrated. Here lived and ministered the priests, who maintained the visible inter- 
course between God and man ; the projAets, who now and again spoke as the repre- 
sentatives of Jehovah, especially in critical times, and whose words were often as the 
fire, and as the hammer that breaketh the rook in pieces ; the scribes, whose profession 
it was to preserve and to expound the Law of God for the enlightenment and admo- 
nition of the people. Signal were the privileges enjoyed by Jerusalem, and by the 
people who gloried in Jerusalem as their metropolis. 

II. The abuse of privileges with which Jerusalem was chargeable. By hta 
prophet the Lord brought home this fault to the guilty nation. Jerusalem is charged : 
1. With rejection of God and of his judgments. 2. With rebellion in doing wickedness. 
3. With error from God's ways. The language is strong, but not too strong for the 
case, for the circumstances. The Eternal was Israel's King ; and his lawful subjects, 
though distinguished by his favour and exalted to honour by his clemency and con- 
descension, had turned against the Sovereign to whom they owed everything that they 
possessed and gloried in. In the circumstances, reprobation could not be too severe. 

III. Comparison with other cities and other nations enhanced the guilt 
OF Jerusalem. 1. Their privileges had been inferior in kind and fewer in number. 
Politically, indeed, they were in several instances great; but religiously they stood 
upon a distinctly lower level than did the Jews. 2. Their guilt was not so enormous. 
Tixese nations round about sinned indeed, but they sinned against the light of nature, 
not against the clearer light of revelation. They did not break the written Law, for 
they did not possess it; they did not blaspheme Jehovah, for they knew not his Name; 
they did not despise his prophets, for the prophets were not sent to them. All these 
comparisons serve to aggravate the heinous guilt of the people of Judah and Jerusalem. 
When attention is given to the pre-eminent position of Jerusalem in comparison with 
surrounding cities and countries, the justice of the denunciations of the prophets is 
unquestionable. 

" Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Exalted once on high. 
Thou favoured home of God on earth, 
Thon heaven beneath tiie sky I " 

IV. Qod'b observation or Jerusalem's sin and follt, and his fubposes of 
BETEiBDTioN. 1. The Lord represents himself as pained by the contempt with which 
Jerusalem has treated his distinguishing mercy and favour. 2. He is displeased with 
those who have shown so little appreciation of all that he has done for their well- 
being. 3. He threatens judgments upon the disobedient, rebellious, and impenitent.— T. 



CH. T. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIBL. W 

Ver. 8. — Divine antagonism. That is a lawless state of society In wWoh every man'g 
hand is against his neighbour. Yet no observeT of human life is insensible to the 
prevalence of enmity, rivalry, opposition of various kinds, among all communities of 
men. " There are many adversaries " is a complaint which every man has made in his 
time. Men become accustomed to this, and regard it as a natural accompaniment of 
social life. But it is something very different when the almighty and righteous Lord 
addresses a man or a community, and says, " Behold I, even I, am against thee." 

I. The steanqbness and wondbb op this attitude. That the heathen, who 
construct the character of their gods upon the lines of their own character, should 
depict them as hostile, seems natural enough. But that enlightened theists should 
be surprised at such a representation as that of the text, is a consequence of the con- 
ceptions which reason and revelation alike have taught them to form of God. Is not 
God on our side? Does he not represent himself as favourable to the sons of men — 
using his power for their protection, their deliverance, their aid? 5ow, then, can a 
merciful and benevolent God be in any sense against us ? 

II. The explanation and beasonablenesb of this attititdb. It is clear that 
the Creator and Lord of all cannot be expected to alter the principles of his govern- 
ment in order to accommodate himself to the follies and the caprices of his creatures. 
If a man throws himself into mid-ocean, or into the crater of a burning volcano, nature 
is against him, and he must perish. If a man by his own action contracts disease, he 
must suffer. Gravitation is not to be suspended because a foolhardy fanatic fiinga 
himself from a tower. Nor are chemical laws to be abolished because one ignorantly 
swallows poison. In all such cases, we may say with reverence, " God is against those 
who act in such and such a manner." Similarly in the moral realm. The spiritual 
universe is so constituted that men cannot violate moral law without sufiering, cannot 
defy God with impunity. Those who sin must sooner or later learn the fact, which 
no reasoning of theirs can affect, that God is against them. 

III. The immediate pubpose of this attitude. It is evident that, if all things 
were made easy and pleasant for the sinner, if there were no check and no chastisement 
for his sin, such an arrangement would not be for the sinner's real good. On the 
contrary, he would be encouraged to persevere in his evil courses. But the sinner, 
finding that God is against hira, is in many cases by this very fact led to consider his 
ways. His experience " gives him pause." There follows from this consciousness of 
punishment the state of mind known as " conviction of sin," and conviction of sin 
may lead to repentance and to submission. Finding that, by setting himself against 
God, the sinner sets God against him, he may be led to submission; he may ask 
himself, "Why should I not have God with me instead of against me ? " The beginning 
of the process may partake of a selfish regard for his own interests, but he may be led 
on to see something better than this — to discern the justice, the propriety, the moral 
excellence of subjection to and harmony with the will which ever accords with 
perfect righteousness, wisdom, and love. 

IV. The ultimate consequence and bbsult of thib attitude. No one who 
reflects upon the character of the God of infinite justice and benevolence can suppose 
that he can take a pleasure in a posture of antagonism and hostility against anything 
that he has made, far less against man, whom he created in his own likeness, to show 
forth his own glory. His aim is ever to bring his intelligent and voluntary creatures 
into harmony with his own nature; to recover and restore, not to overwhelm with 
destruction ; to bring his children to exclaim, " If God be for us, whe can be against 
as?"— T. 

Yen. 14, 15. — A reproach and a Usson. The symbolical prediction recorded in this 
chapter was evidently intended to convey to the minds of the Jews the Divine purpose 
that their city should be destroyed, and their nation dispersed and politically extin- 
guished. A third part should perish by pestilence and famine, a third part should 
be slain, and the remaining third part should be scattered throughout the earth. So 
far, all seems vengeance. There appears, for the present, no ray of light to irradiate 
the gloom, i.e. so far as the once favoured and now depressed and threatened Hebrew 
people »re concerned. But, however calamity may affect the Jews, the prophet was 
assured that it should not be in vain with respect to neighbouring nations. They 



M THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. v. 1—17. 

ihonld learn the lesson, whether the ecourged and scattered seed of Jacob would hear 
or forbear. This purpose, at least, the fate of Jerusalem and the calamities of the 
Jews in their exile and dispersion should not fail to accomplish ; a lesson should be 
taught to the nations of the earth concerning the sinfulness of sin and the justice and 
truth of God, which should not be forgotten down to the end of time. 

I. The desolation of Jbeusalem was designed to be a kepeoaoh and a. 

TAUBT, AND THUS AN EXHIBITION TO ALL THE NATIONS OF THE DiVINB JCSTIOB. 

The attribute of justice has its punitivo side ; and this was displayed in the fate of 
the proud and once highly favoured city. If this purpose was answered by the fall 
of Jerusalem and the calamities which followed, it may surely be acknowledged that 
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Bomans, which followed upon the rejection of the 
Divine Messiah, and the dispersion of the Jews during the following centuries of 
history, have constituted a lesson of similar import for the warning of mankind. 

II. The same event was an instruction and an astonishment, and thus an 

INCULOATION UPON THE NATIONS OF THE DiVINE LAW AND AUTHOEXTT. JuBticO haS 

its distributive as well as its corrective side. Not only is Law to be vindicated by the 
sanction of penalty inflicted upon the disobedient ; the excellence and glory of the Law 
has to be displayed as the proper rule for the moral guidance and government of man- 
kind. Thus the nations were not only to wonder and to tremble, when they beheld 
the Just indignation of outraged Divine authority manifest itself in a city's siege, 
capture, and subjection ; they were to learn to inquire into the Law which had been 
broken, the authority which had been defied. There is an aspect of construction, as 
well as an aspect of destruction, in the government of the world. It is the part of 
wisdom, not merely to recognize the power which avenges infraction of Divine decrees, 
but to admire the holy Law, to submit to the righteous Lawgiver, to forsake evil, and 
to do good. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — The prophetic office involves gelf-sacrifiee. The prophet in every age 
has to be himself a sign. It is not so much what he says, not so much what he does, 
but what he is, that impresses others. In this enterprise character is everything. 
Ezekiel was a servant of God to the very core. He completely identified himself with 
the nation. Its misery became his misery. Thus he became a type and symbol of 
the Saviour ; and, in his measure, suffered vicariously for the people. 

L The suerendbe of personal beautt a sign of national deqbadation. 
The hair and beard are man's natural adornments. To be shorn of these, in earlier 
times, was a signal mark of dishonour. No greater contempt could the King of Ammon 
have cast upon King David, than to despoil his ambassadors of their beards. But the 
ornaments of nature may well be sacrificed for moral advantages. It is an act of 
genuine wisdom to make the body servant to the soul. If bodily mortifications will 
deepen our sense of sin, sever the roots of pride and worldliness, or impress others with 
our zeal for righteousness, it is a wise expenditure. To save men from sin, it is worth 
while to sacrifice much that we hold dear. 

II. The sense of grief was deepened bt the destination of hib haie. Every 
hair had been the workmanship of God, and all the hairs of his head had been numbered 
by God. They were not lightly to be sacrificed. Every hair was to be a sermon. It 
declared that God was willing to sacrifice what was of lesser value, if thereby he could 
save what was incomparably more precious. The various destinations of the prophet's 
hair were pregnant with moral significance. We cannot too much admire the conde- 
scension of God in employing such simple methods for instructing and impressing men. 
If, to any modem readers, these methods should seem childish, we can only say that 
other methods would have missed the end. The methods by which God seeks to 
educate and bless men now may equally seem condescensions to other races of intelli- 
gent life. To fire, to the sword, to dispersion, was the bulk of the nation doomed I 

IIL The acoueatb allotment of righteous penalty was foreshadowed. 
Even amid the hurly-burly of war, there is no miscarriage of Divine justice. With 
an invisible shield, God covers, in the day of battle, those whom he designs to save. 
Those who are destined for the fiame will not perish by the sword, and those who 
may escape from Nebuchadnezzar's hand do not escape from the hand of Almighty 
justice. The eye of man may not be keen enough to detect the exact admeasurementa 



OH.T. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. »5 

of God's penalties ; this matters not. But a clearer eye might discern that there was 
an accurate weighing-out of desert to unrighteousness. In the invisible hand of God 
there is a balance exquisitely true, absolutely exact; and the day will yet dawn 
when human intellit^ence haying developed, and human conscience being quickened 
in its action, men will join in saying, "Just and true are thy ways, thou King of 
saints." 

IV. Pbesent protection dobs not SEcaRE PINAL SAFKTT. The prophet was 
enjoined to deal in a different manner with a few of these hairs. They were to bs 
bound carefully in the skirt of his robe. This would be understood by all to imply 
that, in the midst of judgment, God would not forget mercy. A remnant should be 
spared. Tet this was only a temporary and an external privilege. So long as the 
hearts of the people remained rebellious and obdurate, deliverance was impossible. 
Prosperity cannot last that does not spring from the root of righteousness. To be 
spared in the day of general disaster, aud then to be overtaken by a worse calamity, 
is tenfold more grievous. This is equivalent to being first lifted up and then thrown 
down. Yet the intention was to bless. God will not neglect any possibility of doing 
good to men. If there be on our part the least disposition to receive, there is on his 
part the readiest disposition to give. But take heed 1 To spare now does not secure, 
of necessity, ^raasJ salvation 1 — D. 

Vers. 6 — ^10. — Abuted privilege produces condign punithment. This doctrine is 
repeated and emphasized in myriad forms. It is written, not in sand, but on rock, 
aud written with a pen of steeL If the men of England do not read this lesson, the 
reason is evident — they are wantonly blind. 

I. Wk have HEBE AN INSTANCE 07 EUiNENT PRIVILEGE. Jerusalem was placed 
in a most central position. What the heart is to the body, what the sun is to the 
solar system, Palestine was among ancient empires. Hers was special advantage for 
getting good and for doing good. She was within easy reach of the civilization of 
Egypt, the martial power of Babylon, the science and art of Greece, the commercial 
enterprise of Phoenicia, the law-making might of Rome. On every side there were 
patterns to be imitated, follies to be avoided. Of all the intellectual, meral, and com- 
tnercial life of primitive man, the Jews occupied a central place. Intercourse between 
the distant nations passed, in large measure, through Palestine. Hence she had 
splendid opportunities for diffusing the light of true religion far and wide. Inquirers 
after God ought to have found at Jerusalem a solution of all their doubts. 

II. Privilege entails eesponsibilitt. Every man lives under the wise and 
righteous government of God, and every possession he holds he holds in trust. He 
is a steward, who holds and uses his Master's goods. In proportion to the good he 
enjoys is the service he is required to render. For every faculty of body and of mind, 
for every special advantage and gift, he is accountable to his Maker. God has never 
intended that any donation of his should terminate in the man himself. We receive 
in order that we may give. The wealthy man has more service to render than the 
poor man. The sage has more to account for than the fool. A man is not in the 
same position morally at the close of the sabbath as at the dawn. He must, in the 
nature of things, be either better or worse for every advantage he obtains. The tree 
that does not bear good fruit is something worse than useless. Each man adds some- 
thing to the piety, or to the impiety, of the age. As God had dowered the Hebrews 
with special privilege, he rightly expected from them fruitful service. 

III. Responsibility abused creates deadly sot. The sin of the Hebrews was 
inexcusable. They rebelled against the light — the light of nature, the light of con- 
science, the light of supernatural revelation. 1. There was hose neglect. God had 
made known to them his infallible wisdom ; but they preferred their own foolishness. 
God had deigned to weigh difficult matters for them, and to give them the benefit of 
his superior judgment ; but they refused to follow. They would, at all risks, fling off 
restraint, and yield to none but self. 2. There was positive perversion of God's good- 
ness. They changed his judgments into wicltedness. They made even religious ordi- 
nances an occasion of sin. They transmuted truth into falsehood, the house of prayer 
into a den of thieves. Better, far better, not to have the sabbath, than to profane its 
sacred hours. Better not to have a message of kindness than to treat it with scorn. 



96 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBI* [oh.t. 1— 17. 



3. Hieir guilt was extraordinary. It exceeded that of the nations round ahout thenu 
While they enjoyed special restraints, they not only went to the same lengths of 
profane idolatry as other nations, they went beyond them 1 Although the fact of one 
spiritual Deity was clearly made known among them, yet they borrowed the idol- 
deities of every adjacent nation, until their Eeprover could declare, "According to the 
nnmber of tliy cities are thy idols, Israel ! " 4. Public warnings were lost upon 
them. That God had spoken by the mouth of prophets was dear, because their pre- 
dictions had come to pass. That God was uniformly faithful in maintaining his Word, 
no sane mind could question. His judgments had fallen, like hail, upon all the sur- 
rounding empires, and manifestly, because of idolatry; therefore nothing short of 
sheer insensibility of mind prevented their taking heed. What more could God do 
for them, to bring them to repentance, than he had done? Every mouth is silent. 
Their guilt had come to a head, had reached a final climax. 

IV. Special guilt bears its pbopbe feuitagb of punishment. It is not possible 
that anything can sever the link between sin and punishment. That link has been 
wrought by Eternal Justice. 1. This punishment should ma/nifestly proceed from 
God, "They shall know that I the Lord have spoken it," etc. Too often men 
regard their sufferings as chance effects, misfortunes that have come about in a hap- 
hazard way. Not so here. Even those who would not believe that God had done 
them former kindness, and sent them faithful monitors — even these shall be compelled 
to feel that this punishment is from God. It shall be so public, so severe, so intimately 
connected with the sin, so precisely in accordance with prophetic warning, that God 
shall at length be acknowledged as the righteous Author. So self-willed are some 
children that nothing but the rod will induce submission. 2. This retribution shall 
he public. Though the sin be done in secret, the chastisement shall be public. In 
every age, impartial justice has sought the fullest light for its deeds. Among the 
ancients, law was administered, and wisely so, in the gate. God has nothing to con- 
ceal. To the extent that his creatures have capacity to understand, he is prepared 
to reveal. It is his intention that the universe shall behold the retributions of guilt 
and be awed thereby. The destruction of one may thus turn to the salvation of many. 
3. 7%is punishment shall be extremely severe. " I will do in thee that which I have 
not done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like," etc. Yet, though severe, 
it was not too severe. It was not more severe than the case required. The cause of 
justice would not have been satisfied with less. When God holds the scales, punish- 
ment will be exact ; it will neither be too great nor too lenient. Guilt is proportionate 
to previous advantage, and retribution is in precise measure with guilt. If we prove 
unfaithful, the higher we have been lifted up by acts of kindness, the deeper will be 
our fall. Capernaum and Bethsaida deserve a heavier sentence than Tyre and Sidon. 
" There are first that shall be last." 4, The guilty are to be the executors of their own 
fate. "The fathers sliall eat the sons . . . and the sons shall eat their fathers." The 
famine shall press sore; but this is not the worst feature in the doom. Natural affection 
shall so decay that the father will not shrink from slaying his own boy, and feeding 
on the human flesh. Sons shall be so far lost to filial reverence that they will do the 
like to their fathers. When once love to our heavenly Father is dead, love to our 
natural kin soon decays. Man, cut off from God, becomes a monster. The beasts of 
the field never sink so low as man does in his last depravity. It is an impressive fact 
that guilty men often execute God's judgments upon themselves, while yet they know 
it not. A heavenly glory emanates from the cross of Jesus Christ, but eternal shame 
encircles for ever the gallows of Judas. — ^D. 

Vers. 11 — 17. — The Divine Bemonstrator. It is clear as daylight that the root-sin 
of the Jews was unbelief. Although the prophets of Jehovah brought incontestible 
evidence that they spake in Coil's Name, and spake only words of truth, the people 
closed their ears, and treated the warning with contempt. They were in love with edn, 
and were resolved not to part from it. Proofs that God spake through the lips of these 
prOT)hets were abundant. 

L These was the bbpeated abbbrtion of honest men that God spake by 
THEM. Ezekiel was known to be a true man. It was known that he had no private 
interests to serve. It was acknowledged that in all the relations of human life he was 



0H,v. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 97 

honourable and faithful. He was known to he a devout man, a man of prayer. What 
other explanation, therefore, could men put upon his earnest, heart-stirring appeals 
than that Grud spake by him ? If his reproof of sin was true, then God spake through 
him. If he made known the might and righteousness of Jehovah, Jehovah spake 
through him. If his purpose was to deter from sin and induce repentance, it was 
evident to every honest mind that it was true, as Ezekiel said, "I the Lord have 
spoken it 1 " / 

II. The paeticularization op coming jodombnts proved that the messen&be 
8PAKB IN God's Name. The retribution was not announced in vague, general terms. 
There was revealed a wise discrimination in dealing out judgment to wrong-doers. 
'' A. third part shall die with the pestilence ; " " A third part shall fall by the sword ; " 
"I will scatter a third part into all the winds." Severe as the threatening was, there 
was nothing Improbable or unnatural in it. Pestilence was a common disaster, and 
if a hundred families, now and again, were carried off by its virulence, why may not 
a third of the nation? So with famine; so with the sword. In a time of severe 
drought, famine and pestilence often went hand-in-hand. The flower of the nation 
being destroyed, some martial neighbour would gladly seize the opportunity for inva- 
sion. Resistance would end in terrible defeat; and, for the residue, banishment was 
decreed. Both man and nature are the servants of God ; often are they combined to 
execute his will. If we escape one minister of vengeance, it is only to be overtaken 
by another. 

III. The revealed purpose of the retribution was to satisfy God's btohteous- 
kess. "Then shall mine anger be comforted." God accommodates himself, in his 
speech, to the manners of men. There can be no rest for him so long as guilt stalks 
abroad unpunished. There is disturbance in his moral universe. There is pain in 
every loyal angel's breast. Fallen spirits are encouraged in their rebellion. The 
moral force of law is weakened. His own veracity is at stake while sin is unpunished. 
Therefore, to maintain the interests of universal justice, to maintain in tranquillity his 
own throne, to uphold order everywhere, sin must be stamped out. There is disease 
in the system, and do rest can be enjoyed until health be restored. The principles 
and attributes of God's natiu'e can only then settle into complete harmony when sin is 
chastised. 

IV. The evident intention op the remonstrance proved that it was from 
God. " I the Lord have spoken it." No sane mind could doubt that the motive of 
such repeated remonstrance was love — wise and far-reaching love. The ancient 
Greeks had a proverb, " The gods have feet of wool." They were supposed to overtake 
men noiselessly and without warning. Not so Jehovah. In his most severe retribu- 
tions kindness is yet manifest. Faithful expostulation and tearful warning precede 
final destruction. The good of his creatures is a superlative motive in his bosom — a 
motive that reigns side by side with the maintenance of law. If the good of the 
sinner himself be hopeless, then the good of others is sought. These earnest pleadings 
with men declare most emphatically his condescension, his patience, his self-sacrificing 
love. This is not after the manner of men. If offenders gainst God would only 
reflect, they would confess that such remonstrance was a remonstrance of eternal Love 
— the counsel of the living God. — D. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — The sword of the Divine judgment. " And thou, son of man, take thee 
a sharp knife, take thee a barber's razor," etc. In this paragraph the prophet repre- 
sents both Jehovah and the people. In taking the sharp sword he represents the 
former ; and in having his hair shaved off, the latter. Notice — 

I. The exercise op the Divine judgment. " And thou, son of man, take thee a 
sharp sword, as a barber's razor thou shalt take it, and cause it to pass upon thy head 
and upon thy beard." Here is a picture of the judgment of God upon his sinful 
people (cf. Deut. xxxii. 41, "If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take 
hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them 
that hate me "). When God's will has long been set at nought by any people, and hia 
forbearance has long been exercised towards them, and they stiU persist in rebellion 
against him, he will arise to the exercise of judgment upon them. There are stem 
aspects of the Divine character, which we are sometimes in danger of overlooking. 

EZEEIEL. H 



98 THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT EZEKIEL. [oh. t. 1—17. 

Gk>d is good and kind ; he is also just and terrible. We may see this in nature. We 
have the beautiful and the beneBcent — the warm and brilliant sun, genial ain, lovely 
Sowers, enchanting scenes, and bountiful harvests. We have also the dreary and the 
destructive — wintry skies, dreadful tempests, devastating floods, engulfing earth- 
quakes, and depopulating famines. If we turn to the providence of God, here also we 
discover evidences not only of his goodness, but also of his severity. The sword of 
Divine justice has sharply smitten corrupt nations. Inveterate moral depravity has 
been quickly succeeded by national ruin. History abounds in examples of the stern 
exercise of the judgment of God. And his judgments are awful and irresistible. He 
executes them witb a sharp sword. "Thou, even thou, art to be feared; and who 
may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?" "Who can stand before hia 
indignation ? " etc. (Nah. i. 6 ; Bom. ii. 2—11). 

II. The subjects of the Divine judqment. The jud°;mentB of the text were to be 
inflicted upon the house of Israel. The head of the prophet which was to be shaved 
probably represents Jerusalem ; and the hair certainly represents those of the people 
who yet remained in their own land. Upon them the avenging hand of God was 
about to descend. If the people of God become obstinate in rebellion against him, he 
will not fail to send against them the sword of punishment. "If his cluldren forsake 
my Law, and walk not in my judgments ; if they break my statutes, and keep not my 
commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity 
with stripes " (Ps. Ixxxiz. 30 — 32). When those who have been exalted in privileges 
become persistent in wickedness, their exaltation, so far from protecting them from 
punishment, renders their fall the greater and the doom the more terrible (cf. Matt, 
xi. 20 — 24). Religious privileges should prove an incentive and aid to holiness of 
character and usefulness of life, and not an encouragement to presumption and sin. 

HI. The equitable distbibution op the Divine judombnt. "Then take thee 
balances to weigh, and divide the hair. Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the 
midst of the city," etc. The balances to weigh symbolize the righteousness with 
which the punishment is allotted (cf. Isa. xxviii. 17). And as to the three portions 
into which the hair was divided, the third part which was to be burnt in the midst of 
the city represents those who perished in Jerusalem dnring the siege. In those days 
famine and pestilence claimed many for their prey (ver. 12). The second third part, 
which was to be smitten about by the prophet with the sword, represents those who 
were slain in fight during the siege, or in the endeavour to escape when the city was 
taken (Jer. lii. 5 — 11). And the last third part, which was to be scattered to the 
wind, represents those who, after Jerusalem was taken, were dispersed in foreign lands; 
some of them fled and escaped, and many others were taken as captives by the 
Chaldeans. Of this part some are represented by a few hairs bound in the skirts of the 
prophet's garment. These are they who were left in the land by their conquerors. 
" Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the land for vine-dressers 
and for husbandmen " (Jer. lii. 16). Over these the King of Babylon made Gedaliah 
governor. But even of this poor remnant some were to be " cast into the midst of the 
fire; " i.e. they had yet to pass through severe trials; they had not yet done with the 
judgment of the Lord. The fulfilment of this is recorded in Jer. xL — xliiL ; and is 
thus briefly stated by Dr. Milman : " The miserable remnant of the people were placed 
under the command of Gedaliah, as a pasha of the great Assyrian monarch ; the seat 
of government was fixed at Mizpeh. Yet ambition could look with envy even on 
this eminence. Gedaliah was assassinated by Ishmael, a man of royal blood. Johanan 
attempted to avenge his death. Ishmael, discomfited, took refuge with the Ammon- 
ites ; but Johanan and the rest of the Jews, apprehensive lest they should be called in 
question for the murder of Gedaliah, fled to Egypt, and carried Jeremiah with them." 
And even they were doomed to sufferings and shame and death (Jer. xliv. 11 — ^14). 
Now, in this distribution of punishment the Lord acted righteously. The hair was 
weighed; the triple division was accurately made; and the appropriate retribution 
assigned to each portion. We cannot always discover the equitableness of the Divine 
judgments in individual cases. But let us remember that there is much of suffering in 
this world which is not of the character of judgment Or punishment; and in this the 
good often share as largely, or even more largely, than the wicked. There is also a 
suffering with others and for others ; and in this Ohristians, like their great Lord and 



OH. T. 1—17.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. W 

Exemplar, deeply participate. And If there be painful retributions, which involve 
saint and sinner in one common outward doom, let us give due weight to the precious 
fact that such outward suffering comes to them witli essentially different spiritual 
significance. And for the rest, we rejoice that though " clouds and darkness are round 
about the Lord, rigiiteousness and judgment are the habitation of his throne." And in 
the distribution of awards in the great future, God " will render to every man according 
to his deeds" (Rom. ii. 6; of. Matt. xvi. 27 ; Luke xii. 47, 48; 2 Cor. v. 10).— W. J. 

Vers. 6 — 17. — Pre-eminent privilege, perversity, and punishment. "Thus saith the 
Lord Ck)d ; This is Jerusalem," etc. In these and some succeeding verses we have the 
interpretation of the symbolism of the previous part of the chapter ; or " an authorita- 
tive commentary on the preceding allegory." The text presents to our notice — 

I. A POSITION OF PBB-EMiNENT PRIVILEGE. " Thus saith the Lord God ; This is 
Jerusalem : I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round 
about her." The position here stated may be viewed : 1. Oeographically. We are not 
to interpret this as asserting that Jerusalem was situated in the centre of the earth. 
But Palestine really occupied "a central position with regard to that group, or those 
groups, of nations which to it practically constituted the world." On the north of it 
wag byria, on the south Egypt, on the east Assyria, on the west Europe. "It stood 
midway between the two great seats of ancient empire, Babylon and Egypt." And, 
as Fairbaim observes, " viewing the world as it existed at the time of Israel's settle- 
ment in Canaan, and for a thousand years afterwards, we believe it would be impossible 
to fix upon a single region so admirably fitted, at once to serve as a suitable dwelling- 
place for such a people, and to enable them, as from a central and well-chosen vantage- 
ground, to act with success upon the heathenism of the world." 2. Eeligitmsly. The 
Israelites were placed in the midst of the nations, as in a position of honour by their 
possession of higher and fuller religious privileges. They had been blessed with more 
illustrious men than other nations ; mightier and more wonderful deeds had been done 
for them than for any other people ; a clearer and brighter revelation of God had been 
given to them ; a purer and nobler worship had been instituted amongst them. 
3. InfluentiMy. The Israelites had been thus favoured and stationed, in order that 
they might be a blessing to other nations. Not selfishly were they to enjoy their 
privileges, but fur the benefit oi' others. Their light was to shine for the illumination 
of other peoples. They were specially blessed, that others might be blessed through 
them. With unmistakable clearness is this expressed in the sixty-seventh psalm: 
" God be merciful unto us, and bless us ; and cause his face to shine upon us ; that thy 
way may be known upon earth," etc. (cf. Deut. iv. 5 — 8; John iv. 22). In like 
manner. Christians are called to be " the salt of the earth," and " the light of the 
world ; " and they are exhorted, " Let your light so shine before men, that they may 
see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven " (Matt. v. 13 — 16 ; 
cf. 1 Pet. ii. 9). 

II. Sins of pre-eminent wickedness. 1. Their rejection of Ood'a commands, 
" She hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the nations," etc. 
(vers. 6, 7). The word "judgment " is here equivalent to " commands" or "ordinances." 
Two degrees of rebellion against the Divine will are clearly indicated. (1) Disobedi- 
ence of Divine commands. " They have refused my judgments and my statutes, they 
have not walked in them. ... Ye have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept 
my judgments." (2) Hostility to the Divine commands. "She hath changed my 
judgments into wickedness" is not an accurate translation. Hengstenberg renders it, 
" She opposed my judgnrients worse than the heathen; " and SchrSder, "She quarrelled 
with my judgments more wickedly than the (heathen) nations." The spirit of 
disobedience had grown daring and defiant. The seventh verse presents the same 
idea : " Ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you." Here also 
the translation is incorrect. Hengstenberg, " Ye raged more than the heathen who 
are round about you." There is a reference to Ps. ii. 1, " Why do the heathen rage ? " 
The chosen people had grown more fierce in their reliellion against God, even than the 
heathen nations. 2. Their desecration of Qod!t iwndwiry. " Thou hast defiled my 
sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations " (rer. 11). 
Heathen idoli, altars, and ceremonies had been introduced into the temple and 



100 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, [ch. v. 1—17. 

worship of the Lord Jehovah. We have some account of these abominations in 
ch. viii. and 2 Kings xvi. 10 — 18; xxiii. 4 — 14. The favoured Israelites had corrupted 
their highest and holiest things. 3. Their exceeding even the heathen in wickedness. 
" She quarrelled with my judgments more wickedly than the (heathen) nations," etc. 
(ver. 6) ; " Ye raged more than the (heathen) nations which are round about you " 
(ver. 7). In two ways the house of Israel had exceeded the heathen in wickedness. 
(1) Because they sinned against greater and clearer light. The heathen had the light 
of conscience, " the law written in their hearts " (Rom. ii. 14, 15) ; but Israel had the 
Law in statutes and ordinances. The will .of God had been made known to them by 
lawgiver and seer, by poet and prophet. They sinned against the Law of God, both as 
spoken within themselves and as proclaimed by inspired men. (2) Because their 
standard of moral attainment was lower than that of the heathen. " Neither have ye 
done according to the judgments of the nations that are round about you." The 
charge conveyed in these words seems to be " that the Israelites have not even been 
as faithful to their one true God as the nations have been to their false gods." The 
heathen clung to their worthless idols, while Israel forsook the living God, who had so 
mightily wrought for them and so richly blessed them (cf. Jer. ii. 11 — 13). Thus 
mournfully had the exalted people fallen ; thus wickedly had the highly favoured 
people rebelled against their gracious Lord God. 

III. Punishment of pkb-bminent severity. "Therefore thus saith the Lord God; 
Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in 
the sight of the nations," etc. 1. The great Agent in this punishment. Jehovah 
represents himself as inflicting every form of the dread judgment upon his sinful 
people. Prom ver. 8 unto the end of the chapter, every verse contains a distinct 
statement showing that the punishments were to proceed from him. He is the great 
Agent throughout. The Chaldeans were but instruments unconsciously working 
out his purposes. How inexpressibly terrible is it when the Lord God declares, " 1, 
even I, am against thee " I When he is agaiust any one, what can profit such a one? 
When he makes bare his arm for judgment, who can stand against its strokes ? 2. 
The nature of this punishment. It takes three chief forms. (1) Famine. " A third 
part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in 
the midst of thee " (vers. 12. Ifi, 17). And the famine was to be of dread severity, 
bringing in pestilence and leading of. the most horrible cannibalism (ver. 10). It is to 
be feared that such revolting aoiiuus were not infrequent in the sieges of antiquity (cf. 
Lev. xxvi. 29 ; Deut. xxviii. 53 ; 2 Kings vi. 28, 29 ; Jer. xix. 9 ; Lam. ii. 20). (2) 
Sword, "A third part shall fall by the sword round about thee" (of. ver. 2; Jer. xv. 
2, 3). (3) Dispersion. " And I will scatter a third part into all the winds." The 
majority were carried captives into Chaldea ; some were " scattered abroad and dis- 
persed among the people in all the provinces of" the Persian empire (Esth. iii. 8; 
ix. 2) ; and others went down into Egypt (Jer. xliii. 4 — 7). And even when thus 
scattered, it is said of them, " And I will draw out a sword after them," indicating that 
even in the country of their exile the Divine judgments would still afSict them. 3. 
The retributionary character of this punishment. We have seen (in vers. 6, 7) how 
resnlutely the Israelites had set themselves against the Lord God : " Therefore thus 
saith the Lord God ; Behold, I, even I, am against thee." He had set them " in the 
midst of the nations," to be an example unto them of his righteousness and kindness ; 
they had utterly failed in this respect; therefore he "will execute judgments in the 
midst of them in the sight of the nations," and they shall be an example of his 
righteous retributions. Again, they had exceeded the heathen in wickedness, and he 
would bring upon them judgments exceeding in their severity anything before or after 
(cf. ver. 9 ; Matt. xxiv. 21). This retributionary character of the Divine dealings is 
affirmed by the prophets (Isa. iii. 10, 11), by our Lord (Matt. x. 32, 33), and by 
St. Paul (Gal. vi. 7, 8; 2 Tim. ii. 12). 4. The exemplary aspect of this punishment. 
" I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, 
(n the sight of all that pass by," etc. (vers. 14, 15). The design of the Lord in placing 
his people in the land which he gave unto them was that they should be patterns of 
excellence to the neighbouring nations; too often they had been the opposite of this; 
for this reason he would make them, as the bearers of his wrath, a warning (Authorized 
Version, " instruction ") to those nations. They would not be patterns, therefore they 



OH. VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



101 



shall be beacons. If they who have extraordinary privileges fail to walk in a manner 
worthy of them, God will probably make them a warning to less-favoured peoples, by 
reason of the just judgments which overtake them. The punishment which some 
suffer because of their sins should powerfully admonish others that they sin not. 5, 
The awful certainty of the ■punishment. This is stated with great impressiveness. 
" As I live, saith the Lord God ; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary," etc. 
(ver. 11). And at the close of the dread announcements of this chapter, we have the 
solemn asseveration, " I the Lord have spoken it." Thus " God subscribes the 
threatening with the royal monogram of his Name." By his own existence, and his 
own Word, the Lord binds himself to fulfil the awful declarations of this chapter. 
Nothing is more certain than this, that the sinner, unless he forsake his sins, must 
receive the righteous retribution of them. God's Word declares this; his holiness 
necessitates it, and human experience confirms it. 

Conclusion. Our subject is charged with solemn admonition to those who have 
great privileges. Our advantages involve corresponding obligations; and unless they 
are faithfully improved, they will be to us the occasion of terrible condemnation (cf. 
Matt. xi. 20—24; Luke xii. 47, 48).— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VL 



Vers. 2, 3. — Set thy face toward the mons- 
tains, etc. The formula is eminently charac- 
teristic of Ezekiel. We have had it with a 
difl'erent verb in the Hebrew, in oh. iv. 3. 
It will meet us again in ch. xx. 46 ; xxi. 
2; XXV. 2; xxviii. 21; xxix. 2; xxxv. 2; 
xxxviii. 2. la this case it probably implied 
an outward act, like that of Daniel, when 
be, with a very different purpose, looked 
towards Jerusalem (Dan. vi. 10). In con- 
trast with the widespread plains of Meso- 
potamia in which Ezekiel found himself, this 
was the chief characteristic of the land which 
he had left. The mountains represent the 
whole country, inclmling the rivers (Bevised 
Version, here and throughout, renders the 
Hebrew "water-courses," tn distinguish it 
from the " river " (nahar) of ch. i. 1, 3, ei 
al., and the " river " (nachal) of ch. xlvii. 5. 
Its strict meaning is that of a " ravine " 
or " gorge," the wady of modern Arabic, 
through which a stream rushes in the win- 
ter, but is dried up in the summer). All 
the localities are named as having been 
alike polluted by the worship of idols For 
mountains and hills as the scenes of such 
worship, see Daut. xii. 2 ; 2 Kings xvii. 10, 
11; Jer. ii. 20; iii. 6; Hos. iv. 13; for the 
ravines and valleys, 2 Kings xxiii. 10 and 
Jer. vii. 31 (the Valley of Hinnom); and 
more generally, Isa. Ivii. 5, 6. The same 
combination meets us in ch. xxxv. 8 ; xxxvi. 
i, 6. In his address to the mountains, 
Ezekiel follows in the footsteps of M.cah 
vi. 2. X will destroy your high places. The 
words point to the most persistent, though 
not the worst, of all the idolatries by which 
the worship of Jehovah as the God of Israel 
had been overshadowed. The words of 



Ezekiel are identical with those of Lev. 
xxvU 30. The Bamoth, or high places, of 
Baal, are mentioned in Numb. xxii. 41 and 
Josh. xiii. 17, and are probably identical 
with the high places of Arnon in Numb, 
xxi. 28. There they are named only in- 
cidentally, not in the way of prohibition or 
condemnation. So, in like manner, in Deut. 
xxxii. 13 and xxxiii. 29, if the technical sense 
exists at all, it is referred to only as included 
in the triumph of tlie worship of Jehovah 
over the hill- fortresses as the sanctuaries of 
other gods. The absence of the word from 
the Book of Judges is difficult to explain, 
as it was precisely in that period of the his- 
tory of Israel,, irregular and unsettled, that 
we should have expected to find the people 
adopting the oultus of their neighbours. A 
probable solution of the problem is that, so 
long as the tabernacle and the ark were at 
Shiloh, that was so pre-eminently tlie centre 
of the worship of Jehovah, that the people 
were not tempted to forsake it, or to set up 
the worship upon the high places side by 
side with it. When, after the capture of the 
ark, Sliiloh was a deserted sanctuary, we 
meet for the first time with the worship of the 
high places, not as a thing forbidden, but as 
sanctioned by the presence of Samuel, as 
the judge and prophet of the people (1 Sam. 
ix. 12 — 14 ; X. 5), the " high place " in the 
last passage being, apparently, the same as 
" the hill of God." In 2 Sam. i. 19, possibly 
from the Book of Jashar, we have the older, 
less technical sense of Dent, xxxii. 12 and 
xxxiii. 19. It would seem, accordingly, as 
if Samuel had acted ou a policy like that 
of the counsel which Gregory I. gave Augus- 
tine. He found the worship of the high 
places adopted by the Israelites from the 
neighbouring nations. He sought to turn 



102 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ti, 1—14. 



them to the worship of Jehovah. So the 
writei of 1 Kings iii. 2 records the fact that 
"the people sacrificed in high places," be- 
cause aa yet, though the ark had been 
brought to Jerusalem, " there was no house 
built unto the Name of Jehovah until those 
days," and that Solomon himself also " sacri- 
ficed and burnt incense in the high places." 
At the chief of these, the great high place 
of Gibeon, Solomon offered a thousand burnt 
offerfngs, and had the memorable vision in 
which lie made clioice of wisdom rather than 
length of days, or riches and honour, return- 
ing from it, as though the cultus of the two 
places stood nearly on an equal footing, to 
offer other burnt offerings before the ark 
of God at Jerusalem (1 Kings iii. 3—15). 
With the erection of the temple the state 
of things was, in some measure, altered, and 
the temple was the one legitimate sanctuai-y. 
When the ten tribes revolted under Jero- 
boam, they were, of course, cut off from the 
temple services, and the king accordingly, 
besides the calves at Bethel and Dan, set 
up high places, with priests not of the sons 
of Aaron, in the cities of Samaria (1 Kings 
xii. 31 ; xiii. 32). From tliat time forward 
the high places are always mentioned by both 
historians atid prophets in u tone of con- 
demnation, whether they were in Israel or 
Judah (1 Kings xiv. 4), but they had be- 
come so deeply rooted in the reverence of 
the people that even the better kings of 
Judah, who warred against open idolatry, 
like Asa (1 Kings xv. 14), Jehoshaphat 
(1 Kings xxii. 43), Jehoaeh (2 Kings xii. 3), 
Amaziah (2 Kings xiv. 4), Azariah (2 Kings 
IV. 4), left them undisturbed ; while in the 
history of the northern kingdom the cultus 
of the Bamoth reigned paramount (2 Kings 
xvii., passim). It was not till Hezekiah, 
presumably under Isaiah's influence, re- 
moved the "high places" (2 Kings xviii. 
4) that we find any serious attempt to put 
them down. They had been tolerated, ap- 
parently, because, as in Rabshakeh's taunt 
(2 Kings xviii. 22), they were nominally 
connected with the worship of Jehovah. 
Under the confluent polytheism of Manasseh 
they naturally reappeared (2 Kings xxi. 3 ; 
2 Ohron. xxxiii. 3). The reformation of 
Josiah was more thorough (2 Kings xxiiL, 
passim; 2 Chron. xxxiv. 3), and was pro- 
bably stimulated by Hilkiah and Huldah. 
The discovery of the book of the Law (pro- 
bably Deuteronomy), with its condemnations 
of mountain sanctuaries, though, as we 
have seen, the Bamoth were not prohibited 
by name, roused the zeal of the prophets, 
especially of the priest-prophets Jeremiah 
and Ezekiel, and when the Bamoth-cultug 
revised, after the death of Josiah, the former 
wag strong in his protests (Jer. vii, 31, et 
ttl,), all the more so because now, as in the 



earlier stages of their history, they had be- 
come high places of Baal (Jer. xjx. 5; 
xxxii. 35), and were associated with abomi- 
nations like those of the worship of Moloch 
in the Valley of Hinnom. So it was that 
Ezekiel, writing on the banks of the Ohebar, 
is now led to place them in the forefront of 
the sins of his people. 

Ver. 4. — Your images, eto. The "sun- 
images " of the Bevised Version shows why 
these are mentioned as distinct from the 
" idols." The (^mmanim were pillars or obe- 
lisks identifled with the worship of Baal as 
the sun-god, standing on his altars (2 Cliron. 
xxxiv. 4), coupled with the "groves," or 
AsTierim (Isa, xvii, 8; xxvii. 9), and with the 
" high places " in 2 Chron. xiv. 5. I will oast 
down your slain men before your idols. Aa 
in the prophecy against Bethel (1 Kings 
xiii. 2), and in Josiah's action (2 Kinga 
xxxiii. 16), this was the ne plus ultra of de- 
secration. Where there had been the sweet 
savour of incense there should be the sick- 
ening odour of the carcases of the slain. 
The word for "idols" (giUuliin), though found 
elsewhere, notably in Ezekiel's favourite 
text-bjiiks (Lev. xxvi. 30; Dent. xxix. 17), 
is more prominent in his writings (where it 
occurs thirty-six times)tljan in any other book 
of the Old Testament, and means, primarily, 
a cairn or heap of stones, which, like the 
"sun-images," came to bo associated with 
Baal. Ezekiel repeats both words in ver. 6, 
with all the emphasis of scorn. He predicts 
the coming of a time when the work of de- 
struction should be done more thoroughly 
than even Josiah had done it. When that 
time came, the familiar formula, " Ye ahall 
know that I am the Lord," should receive 
yet another fulfilment. 

Ver. 8. — Yet will I leave a remnant, eto. 
The thought, though not the word, is that 
of Isa. i. 9 ; x. 20 ; Zeph. ii. 7 ; iii. 13 ; Jer. 
xliii. 5. For these, at least, the punishment 
would, in greater or less measure, do its 
work ; and, in remembering Jehovah, they 
would find the beginning of conversion. 

Ver. 9. — Because I am broken with their 
whorish heart. The words have been very 
differently rendered. (1) The Bevised Ver- 
sion mainly follows the Authorized Version, 
but gives, they shall rememher . . . kow I 
have been broken, eto. So taken, the words 
are boldly anthropomorphic, and ascribe to 
Jehovah the word which implies the 
strongest form of human distress. The 
"whorish heart" of the people has made 
Jehovah himself "broken-hearted." (2) 
Must recent critics, however, follow the 
rendering of the Vulgate (contrim), and take 
the verb, which is passive in form, as being 
like a Greek verb in the middle voice, 
transitive in form, with an implied reflex 
force. 8o we get, as in the margin of 



OH. VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL, 



103 



the Revised Version, " I have broken their 
whorish heart." So taken, thought and 
words are both connected with Ps. li. 17, and 
the Belf-loathing that follows has its counter- 
part in Job xlii. 6. The thought is emi- 
nently characteristic of Ezekiel (xx. 43; 
xxzyi. 31), and, we may add also, of 
Leviticus (xzvi. 39 — 42). 

Ver. 10. — I have not said in vain, etc. 
The thought of that self-loathing and 
repentance reconciles Ezekiel to his work. 
To '* labour in vain " is the great misery of 
all workers for God. A time will come 
when he shall see that Ood has not sent 
him to such a work " in vain." What before 
was dark will be made clear unto him 
(comp. ch. xiv. 23). Bzekiel's words, " not 
in vain," are echoed frequently by St. Paul 
(1 Cor. XV. 14, 58; 2 Cor. vi. 1; Phil. ii. 
16, et al,). The corresponding phrase, " I 
have broken their eyes," sounds strange to 
us ; but, after all, the heart is not literally 
broken more than the eyes, and figuratively 
the same words may be applied to either, so 
that there is no need for supposing, with 
some critics, that a more appropriate verb 
has been dropped out. Eyes and heart 
were alike involved in the sin (ch. xx. 7, 
8, 24 ; Numb. xv. 39), and both came under 
the same chastisement that waa to lead 
them to repentance. 

Ver. 11. — Smite with thine hand, etc. The 
outward gestures were to give a dramatic 
emphasis to the mingled indignation and 
sorrow with which the prophet was to utter 
bis woe. A like action meets us in ch. xxi. 
12. Instances of its use for other feelings 
meet ua in oh. xxii. 13; Numb. xxiv. 10 
(anger) ; Jer. xxxL 19 (shame). 

Ver. 12.— He that is far off, etc. The 
three forms of judgment named in ver. 11 
have each their special victims. Pesti- 
lence comes chiefly on those who are 
outside the city, exposed to the weather 
changes and the taint of unburied corpses 
(ver. 5); the sword of the Chaldeans on 
those who venture on a sally, or try to 
escape from the city; famine presses heaviest 
on those who are besieged within it. None 
can escape the judgment. The word be- 
sieged is the same as in Isa. i. 8; but it 
may have the sense, as in Isa. xlix. 6, of 
"kept," or "preserved," for the worst evil 
of the three. 

Ver. 13. — The thought is the same as in 
ver. 6, but the localities are given in greater 
detail. The "hills" and "mountains" 
were naturally the scenes of the worship of 
the " high places," and these were commonly 
associated with groves of trees, as in Jer. ii. 



20; lii. 6; Isa. Ivii. 5. In Hos. iv. 13, oaks 
(or terebinths), poplars, and elms are specifi- 
cally named (comp. Deut. xii. 2; 2 Kings 
xvi. 4). Where they did offer sweet savour, 
etc. The phrase is eminently characteristic 
of Ezekiel as a priest (ch. xvi. 19 ; xx. 28, 
41), and is specially prominent in the books 
which be must have studied. It meets us 
three times in Exodus, seventeen in Levi- 
ticus, seventeen in Numbers, and seldom 
elsewhere. The crowning sin, from the 
prophet's point of view, was that the in- 
cense which was due to Jehovah had been 
lavished on the false gods of the nations. 

Ver. 14. — More desolate than the wilder- 
ness towards Diblath; better, with the 
Authorized Version, from the wildemest. 
The name does not appear elsewhere, and 
has not been identified. Assuming the 
Authorized Version rendering, we must 
think of Ezekiel as naming, as Dante 
names the Valdichiana ('Inf,' xxix. 47), 
some specially horrible and desolate region. 
For such a region the name of Diblah (a 
cake of figs) does not seem appropriate. 
Taking the Bevised Version translation 
("from the wilderness toward Diblah"), 
we have a phrase analogous to " from Dan 
to Beersheba," as denoting the extent of 
the desolation. The "wilderness" is usually 
applied to the nomad region south of Pales- 
tine, and this would lead us to look for 
Diblah in the north, and so to look else- 
where than to the two places Beth-dibla- 
tbaim (Jer. xlviii. 22) and Almon-diblathaim 
(Numb, xxsiii. 46), both of which are in 
Moab. The difficulty was solved by Jerome 
by the conjectural emendation of Eiblah, 
the two Hebrew letters for d and r being 
often written by copyists for each other. 
Biblah (it is a suggestive fact that the two 
chief manuscripts of the LXX. the Alex- 
andrian and the Vatican, have DMatha, 
or Deblaa, in 2 Kings xxiii. 33; xxv. 6) 
was a fortified town on the north road from 
Palestine to Babylon, where the Babylonian 
kings used to take up their position during 
their invasions of the former. Within a 
short time after Ezekiel wrote this chapter, 
it became memorable in its connection with 
Zedekiah's sufferings (comp. 2 Kings xxiii. 
33; xxv. 6, 20, 21 ; Jer. xxxix. 5, 6; lii. 9, 
10, 26). Its probable site is fixed on the 
banks of the Orontes. The evidence, on 
the whole, is, I think, in favour of this 
interpretation. It is adopted by Ewald, 
Gornill, Smend, Gesenius, and most recent 
critics. An additional fact in its favour is 
that Hamath, in the same region, appears aa 
an ideal northern boundary is ch. xlvii. 16. 



104 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vi. 1—14 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The doom of the mountains. After leaving the low flat shores of Egyptj 
the traveller is struck by a great contrast of scenery as he approaches the Holy Land, 
and sees the purple mountains rising one behind another from the sandhills of Jaffa 
in the foreground to the distant uplands of Judnh far away in the interior of the 
country. On landing he finds that travelling in Palestine is a rough experience in 
mountaineering, for the territory of Israel is a mountain country. Though Ezekiel 
could not see his native land from the plains of Mesopotamia, he could turn his face 
westward, and, looking across the great Syrian desert, fix his eyes in imagination on the 
old familiar beacons — the more memorable from their contrast with his present tame 
surroundings — and picture to himself his mountain home, with the passion of a high- 
lander banished to the plains. In prophesying against Israel he then denounces a doom 
on the mountains. 

I. The mountains are conspicuous. They were and are to this day the leading 
features of the Palestine landscape. God's judgment does not fall in obscure comers. 
He is not confined to secret places. The most public scenes witness his work. He 
paints his warning pictures on a broad canvas, and lifts them up for all to see. 

II. The mountains are lost. Men in high places do not escape the power of 
God. No position is so exalted as to be above the reach of the Divine government. 
The waters of the Flood covered the mountains, and drowned the people who vainly 
expected safety by climbing (Gen. vii. 20). Kings are called to God's bar of judgment. 
Exalted rank, high intelligence, fame, power, influence, all come under the great sweep 
of God's rule, and may suffer punishment from his just anger. 

III. The mountains abb histobio. They carry memories of many a glorious age. 
Moriah is sacred to the education of Abraham ; the very stones that now lie scattered 
on the hills of Bethel once shaped themselves in Jacob's dream as a heaven-scaling 
stairway; Gilboa witnessed the death of Saul; the hills of Judah are fresh with 
associations of the shepherd-king. The changeless, venerable mountains enshrine the 
national story. The doom of the mountains is a doom of history. It declares failure 
and ruin after a glorious past — a splendid day ending with a stormy sunset. Happily 
there was a new sunrise when these same mountains were trodden by the feet of the 
Saviour, and upon them the feet of the messengers of peace were seen. 

IV. The mountains are massive. They are the bulwarks of Israel. The old 
Amorites defended themselves in their mountain fastnesses against the Israelite invasion. 
When I.srael was in possession she found these mountains to be natural fortresses. 
They were also hiding-places. Men in danger fled to the mountains for safety. But 
now the mountains themselves are doomed. The best earthly refuge fails. The curse 
of sin breaks the soul's stoutest shield. 

V. The mountains are sacred. They were "high places" on which old altars 
had been built. There Abraham sacriflced, there Elijah invoked the attesting fire. 
But the sacred associations were defiled by later idolatrous rites, and the high places 
became evil places. Then no sacredness could protect them. There is no asylum 
at a defiled sanctuary. Religion joined to sin does not save the sinner; it only pro- 
cliiims him a hypocrite, or at best one who sins against light. 

VI. The mountains are fruitful. Cut into terraces, their slopes were formerly 
converted into vineyards, but now all round Jerusalem the ragged lines of stone tell 
the tale of neglected culture and long-destroyed productiveness. A blight has fallen 
on the doomed mountains. The very land has shared in the sufferings of its people. 
All things external as well as spiritual suffer from the curse of sin. No ancient fruit- 
fulness will stay this curse. Under its ban, the garden of Eden becomes a waste 
howling wilderness, and the fertile mountain-side a desolation. 

Ver. 6. — A ruined dviUzation. Palestine is now a land of ruins, and the prophecy 
before us predicted that condition. But there is more behind. Houses broken down, 
altars overthrown, streets grass-grown, inhabited places made desolate, — these are the 
outward and visible signs of a decayed and broken civilization. The destruction of the 
civilization is the real disaster. This happoued in Israel when wild beasts came out 



OH. vi. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 105 



from the forests and prowled over the once safe and populous country ; and it happened 
in another form in Europe when the hardy barbarians poured oVer the plains of Italy, 
and destroyed, not only buildings, but also the whole fabric of ancient society, and so 
ushered in the gloom and disorder which took possession of the early part of the 
Middle Ages. 

I. Civilization mat be buinbd. It is more tenacious of life than physical existence. 
Cities may be overthrown, and yet civilization may outlive the shock. Eome, burnt 
in the days of Nero, rose again in greater S|ilendour; the fire of London swept away 
wretched tenements and prepared for a nobler city; the great conflagrations of Chicai;o 
was followed by the building of a new city in the smouldering ashes. But a wide- 
spread desolation affects the sources of intellectual life and the means of social inter-r 
course. Eoads are neglected, bridges are broken down, lonely districts are infested 
with robbers and rendered unsafe for travel ; there is neither time nor energy for menial 
culture. Christian civilization has been lost on the north coast of Africa, where 
TertuUian, Cyprian, and Augustine were once shining lights ; it has almost vanished 
from the site of the seven Churches of Asia. Modern Egypt is far below the Egypt 
of the Pharaohs in civilization : the fellaheen of to-day build mud hovels ; their 
ancestors forty centuries ago constructed the great Hall of Columns at Karnak — one of 
the wonders of the world. The ancient civilization of Mexico had entirely vanished 
before the discovery of South America by the importers of a new Eoman Catholic 
civilization. 

II. The bitin of civilization is unspeakably debadful. Frightful physical 
Bufferings often accompany it, and gross moral outrages are then rife and go unchecked 
and unpunished. The refined and delicately nurtured people are put to the most 
exquisite torture of mind, if not of body. The hideous experiences of the Indian 
mutiny may give us some idea as to what this means. When such violent methods 
are not pursued, and a slow decay takes the place of a sudden destruction, the chronic 
and ever-deepening misery of the more cultivated people must be heart-rending. But 
apart from the question of suffering, the very act of throwing back the car of progress 
for some centuries involves a disastrous loss to the world. The Christian civilization 
that has grown out of the experience of ages and slowly ripened through generations 
of culture is the most precious heritage we have received from our forefathers. Let us 
guard and treasure it as a sacred trust. 

III. Nbvbethblbss such a buin op civilization mat become a moral necessity. 
While outwardly brilliant, society may be inwardly corrupt. This was the case with the 
old heathen nations and to a frightful extent. Civihzed wicl?edness means elaborate 
and inventive wickedness, which bears fruits of evil ten times worse than any that grow 
on the wild tree of untutored barbarism. This was evidently the case in the histories 
of Egypt, Greece, and Home. Beneath the glitter of a splendid civilization, and in 
spite of the high cultivation of art and philosophy, the human character was rutting to 
death. Something like this was approached by Israel. The very religion was cor- 
rupted. Then it was best that the altars should be overthrown, the cities destroyed, 
and the people scattered. There is no more horrible wickedness in the present day 
than that of those dwellers in centres of culture who have abandoned themselves to 
vice. When civilization has become effete, it is a hotbed of moral disease, and it is 
best for the health of society that it should be broken up and destroyed utterly. We 
cannot put new wine in old bottles. 

Yer. 8. — The remnant. The remnant that is to escape in the greatest destruction 
appears repeatedly in Hebrew prophecy. Its existence is evidently regarded as of deep 
significance, over and above the value of the individual lives spared, as a ray of light 
in the otherwise universal gloom, a glimmer of hope amidst the deepening depair. 

I. The ebmnant is a sign op God's mbbct. He did not utterly destroy his guilty 
people. Not loving the work of judgment, he spared all whom it was safe to spare. 
God is never given over to wholesale and indiscriminate wrath. In his darkest hours 
of anger he makes a way of escape. Perhaps few as yet can avail themselves of it- 
only a " remnant." Still it is provided by God, since he loves to heal, and hates to 

destroy. 

II. The bbmnant ib bound to sebve God. All who are saved out of great 



lOe THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vt 1—14 

destruction by the merciful hand of God should consider themselTes the redeemed of the 
Lord, who belong to the God who has delivered them. God does not spare that we may 
be negligent or indifferent. Every Christian is like a part of this remnant, delivered 
by God from the doom of a guilty world; therefore every Christian has reason to 
acknowledge that his life belongs to God, and to spend it in God's service. 

IIL The bemnant is a seoubity ron historical oontinuity. This remnant 
treasures up the tradition of the fathers. If all Israel had been cut off, there would 
have been an end to the development of Hebrew revelation, the Scriptures would have 
been lost, the line of descent in which the Christ was to appear would have been 
stopped, and God's great purposes for blessing the world through Israel would have 
been frustrated. But the thin thread of the "remnant" carries down the ancient 
tradition, and becomes the invaluable link of connection between the venerable glory 
of the past and the even greater glory of the future. It thus illustrates the con- 
tinuity of history, revelation, and religion. This continuity is an essential condition 
of progress. Had there been no remnant, the Divine education would have needed to 
begin again de novo. In the dark ages a remnant of the better days before still 
lingered, and though it was but as a smouldering spark, it was sufficient to be fanned 
into a new flame by the fresh winds of the Benaissance and the Befurmation. It is 
plainly according to God's purpose that future enterprises for the good of the world 
should be linked on to the attainments of the past. The danger of a democracy lies in 
being too blind and self-satisfied to see this Divine method of continuity. 

IV. The behhant is a seed of a labqeb futdbe. It is not to be always only 
a remnant. The old stump will sprout and grow into a tree again. The remnant of 
Israel became a nation once more in the days of Cyrus. Thus like the " elect," first 
as a nation and later as a Church, this "remnant" is not favoured exclusively for its 
own sake, as especially meritorious, or as arbitrarily chosen for a privileged position. 
Every Divine privilege is given that they who receive it may be the better able to 
convey the blessing of God to their felluw-men. The Church is chosen out of the 
world that she may labour for the good of the world, and, by bringing the gospel to all 
men, enlarge her own borders and ultimately share her privileges with all mankind. 

Yer. 10. — The contdousness of Ood. To know that God is the Lord, ijt. Jehovah, Li 
very different from knowing that Jehovah is God. In the latter case the true God 
is distinguished from false gods, as in Elijah's great appeal (1 Kings xviii. 21, 39). 
But in the former case, though there is no question of what Ood shall be worshipped, 
the being and presence of the one true God need to be believed and realized. Jehovah 
means, " He who is," the Eternal, the one true self-existent Being. When we know 
that God is Jehovah we are assured of his true, present, living existence. 

I. What things hindeb us fbom knowing that God is the Lobd? 1. His 
invisibility. " No man hath seen God at any time." We sweep the sky with the tele- 
scope, but it reveals no God sitting on the circle of the heavens. His voice is not heard 
in the crash of the winter storm, or the whispering of the summer leaves. We feel 
after him in the darkness and silence, but we cannot touch him. Can he be if no one 
ever sees, hears, or touches him ? 2. The disorder of the world. (1) Men seem to be 
free to do as they will, lawless wickedness triumphing over innocence, vice victorious 
and virtue confounded. If there is a Judge of all the earth, why does he permit such 
crime against the highest law to go unchecked and unpunished? (2) Nature is now 
known to be a battle-ground of fierce contending selfishness in animal life, the vege- 
table world a wilderness in which the strongest plant, though the coarsest, kills the 
weakest though it be the most beautiful. Where is the God of nature? 3. Tie earthly 
mindedness o^ men. Here is the secret of the lost vision of God. " He is not far from 
any one of us." But "our eyes are holden." A constant traffic with things material 
darkens our sight of the supersensual. Sin completes the fatal work, and turns tne 
dim vision into total spiritual blindness. 

II. What influekoeb will bbino us to enow that God is thx Lobd? Ecekiel 
tells us that this knowledge was to be brought about by the judgment of God on Israd. 
1. The fulfilment of prophecy. God had threatened punishment. The Jews had 
doubted the warning. When it was fulfilled, they would discover the genuineness of 
the message, and the real existence of him who sent it. The accomplished prophedai 



CH. TLl— 14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 107 

of the Bible show tbe working mind of Ood. The life of Christ confirms the presence 
of Gbd in Messianic propliecy. Christian history Terifies Christ's word about the leaven 
hidden in the meal. Moreover, the present fulfilment of ancient prophecy reveals the 
existence among us of the same Gcid who inspired the prediction. 2. Z%e exercise of 
power. The foolish Jews were self-confident and boastful. They thought that they 
were free to choose their own religion. The great invasions and the consequent break- 
up of the nation humbled them to the dust, and awoke in their hearts an alarmed 
consciousness of the higher power of God who had sent this doom' upon them. "We 
cannot see God, but we can see his work, and in this discern the energy which 
witnesses to his being. 3. The vindication of righteousness. Sin does not triumph 
eternally. Our induciion is too narrow, our survey is too biief. A wider grasp and a 
larger patience would teach us that God is in history punishing guilty nations and 
advancing what is true and good and great, just as he is in nature raising the type of 
being through the very struggle for existence which, to the short-sighted gaze of the 
unthinking spectator, looks as purposeless as it is painful. The grand vindication of 
ri^^hteousness and the establishment of the kingdom of heaven in the advent of the 
Sou of man are to us the greatest proofs that God is the Lord. 

Yer. 14. — The outstretched hand. We usually picture to ourselves God'a hand 
stretched out to help and heal. Here, however, we see a prediction of the same axer- 
tion of Divine energy for a contrary purpose — to smite and make desolate. The 
prediction suggests certain features ol Divine chastisement. 

I. It 18 OCCASIONAL. " 1 iotM stretch out my hand." This refers to one definite act, 
not to a perpetual treatment. " He will not always chide." " The mercy of the Lord 
endurethfor ever." But his anger and punishing are limited to occasion and necessity. 
The very fact that men refuse to believe in the wrath of God bears testimony to his 
long-sufiering. In life-giving energy God works unceasingly, so that " in him we live, 
and move, and have our being." It is an eternal truth, not represf uting a sudden inter- 
position, but the normal order of providence, that " underneath are the everlasting 
arms." Nevertheless, there are occasions when another mode of action is necessary, 
and the hand of God must smite in anger. 

II. It belongs to the future. God says he urill stretch out his hand. It is not 
yet done. Future punishment will be far worse than any present suHerings of sin. 
It is impossible for us to measure that punishment by what we now experience, 
because sentence is not yet executed. But if the punishment is future, thera is a 
possibility of its being averted, or of the sinner finding some means of escape. The 
warnings of Scripture are not written in order to fix our doom, but for the very opposite 
purpose, to drive us to the refuge of repentance and pardon. 

ILL It IB FAR-BEACHiNa. The hand stretched out signifies God'a action at a dis- 
tance. Though locally close to all, he is spiritually far off from those who have 
forgotten his presence, lorsaken his way, and wandered into remote tracks of sin. Yet 
God can reach the most distant sinner. He met Jonah on the ocean. It is impossible 
to flee Irom God. Our utter neglect of God does not cause his utter neglect of us. 
The godless will be judged by God. This is a most merciful fact. To be abandoned 
by God would be worse than to be punished by him. Left alone to our self-chosen 
fate, we should perish in the outer darkness. The outstretched hand of God, which 
extends to the most remote, is their one ground of hope, even though at first it only 
reaches them to smite. 

IV. It is wide in its obasp. It is not said that Qoi's finger will touch a distant 
people, but that his hand will be outstretched. There is bieadth and comprehensive- 
ness in the image. It suggests a large sweep of Divine energy. There is to be a 
national judgment. The greatness of the number of guilty persons will bo no safe- 
guard in the day when God comes to judgment. There is, indeed, a sense of security in 
the consciousness of companionship. But if the many sin, the many must suffer. On 
the other hand, the wide grasp will reach those who seek to elude it by subtlety, 
singularity, and subterfuge. There is no possibility of escaping general punishment by 
a secret withdrawal from the scenes of ordinary evil to a peculiar region of our own 
wickedness. 

V. It is FOWEBFaii. When God stretches out his hand he is evidently about to 



108 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vi. 1—14. 

exert some mighty energy. He is awake and active in our midst. Then the fertile 
land may become a desert. This fearful manifestation of God will assuredly prove his 
present power. Woe to them who wait for such a proof hefore giving heed to God I 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The idolatry of the land avenged. Turning from the city of Jerusalem 
to the land generally, the Prophet Ezekiel addresses himself to Israel, the nation whom 
God had chosen, and who had rejected God. By a striking figure of speech, lie 
delivers his message to the mountains and hills, the water-courses and ravines of 
Palestine. How dear all these features of the land of his fathers must have heen to 
the prophet, we can easily imagine; national and religious associations must, in the 
course of centuries, have gathered round every portion of the territory which Jehovah 
had given to the descendants of Abraham. The apostrophe to the country was at the 
same time a word to the nation ; the people and the land were identified. The artist, 
the poet, may deal with scenery apart from the living inhabitants who dwell amidst it. 
But the patriot, the prophet, the preacher, love the land for the people's sake who 
make it their home. To Ezekiel the land of Israel was — 

I. A SCENE OP IDOLATRY. Before its possession by the Israelites, the land of 
Canaan was a stronghold of idolatry and of idolatrous rites and practices of the foulest 
and cruellest kind. The commission which the children of Israel received was a com- 
mission to extirpate the idolaters, and to purge the land of its heathen abominations. 
Yet the candid and faithful record of Old Testament Scripture informs us that from the 
first the chosen people were led away by the example and influence of the ancient 
dwellers in the land, and learned to practise the abominations they were appointed to 
repress. One great aim of the seers and prophets was to reproach the nation because 
of prevailing idolatry and superstition, and to summon them to return to their 
allegiance, ever due to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is evident that the 
worship of the deities adored by the surrounding nations was prevalent even among those 
who were called to a purer faith; and that some of the kings, both of Judah and of 
Israel, sanctioned and encouraged idolatrous observances and idolatrous priesthoods. 
Thus the high places and the ravines of Palestine were defiled by the rites of folly, 
Ciaelty, and lust. These heathen deities were embodiments in imagination of the 
lasts which corrupt the human heart. 

II. A SCENE OP PEOPHETic PROTEST AND REBUKE. It was a token of Divine mercy 
and forbearance that the apostate Israelites were not left to the delusions and errors, 
the defection and rebellion, into which they had suffered themselves to be led. The 
voice of the Lord's prophets was heard upon the mountains, and throughout the valleys, 
which had been abandoned to those who practised the fanatical, bloodthirsty, and 
polluted observances distinctive of Canaanitish and Phoenician idolatry. Impressions 
were produced upon individuals which resulted in a return to the service of Jehovah. 
There were temporary reformations, distinguished by penitence and by vows. But the 
reader of the prophetic Scriptures cannot but admit that there was no great national 
movement in the right direction. Notwithstanding faithful rebuke, severe denuncia- 
tion, rompassionate promise, the people returned again and again to their former follies. 
It was as though Israel had resolved that no exhortation and no threat should avail to 
keep the nation faithful to him who had exalted, defended, and prospered it, and who 
bad borne with the manners of the rebellious people, not only in the wilderness, but in 
the land of promise. It was as though nothing short of captivity and exile, conjoined 
with tlie desiruotion and desolation of the capital, could teach the lesson which it 
was Israel's vocation first to acquire, and then to communicate to the world around. 

HI. A SCENE OP DESOLATION AND OP DEATH. The Prophet Ezckiel speaks here with 
conviction and certainty. There rises before his mind a vision which can only fill his 
heart with grief and mourning. It is a satisfaction, indeed, to his righteous soul to 
foresee the high places destroyed, the altars desolate, the images broken, and the works 
of idolaters abolished. But this is not all. He sees the dead carcases of the children 
of Israel, the scattered bones, the slain in the midst of the city, etc. And the vision ol 
the depopulated land, the deserted and silent city, the vanquished and decimated 



fik«. VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 109 

nation, profoundly affects his patriotic and sensitive nature. It is a stern lesson, this 
which he has to teach ; it is a terrihle punishment, this which he has to anticipate 
ftnd to foretell. Yet the lesson and the punishment are the Lord's. It is the word of 
the Lord which the prophet has to declare, the Lord of Israel who is at the same time 
the King of righteousness and of judgment. God brings the sword upon his own 
people; covers his own land with ruin and desolation. For hia authority must not be 
defied, his laws must not be broken ; his name must not be dishonoured with impunity. 
I' The way of transgressors is hard." "The wages of sin is death." Until this lesson 
is learned, there is no place for the publication of clemency, for the proffer of mercy. 
The Law comes before the gospel ; and they who do not honour the Law will not 
appreciate the gospel. It is in the midst of wrath that God remembers mercy. 

Application. 1. There is such a thing as national guilt and apostasy. In our 
own time, individualism is carried to such an extreme that this fact is apt to be over- 
looked. A nation sins by its collective acts, and a nation suffers the just punishment 
of its evil-doing. History is ever teaching this lesson, which men — good and bad — in 
their absorption in personal interests, are prone to overlook. 2. The Church has 
responsibility for witnessing against national errors, for warning the people of the 
inevitable consequences of apostasy from God, and for uttering clearly and boldly the 
mind and will of him who is eternal righteousness and eternal love. — T. 

Ver. 7. — Conviction. It seems at first hearing most extraordinary and unaccount- 
able to be told that the end and issue of such a series of national disasters and 
judgments as those described in the verses preceding this is that Israel may know. 
Can the end be regarded as corresponding to the means? Is not such a result one to 
be secured by lessons less severe and calamitous? But in order to answer such 
questions we must consider the object of knowledge, which is not by any means of 
an ordinary kind. The "judgments" were the work of God's providence; and the 
purpose was to produce a conviction in the mind of the nation, Israel, that God lives 
and reigns, administers a moral government, and will not endure the disobedience and 
reliellion of those who are of right his subjects. This lesson must be taught, however 
distressing the discipline which leads to its acquisition. " Ye shall know that I am 
the Lord." 

I. Such knowledge is of the highest spiritual importance. Knowledge of 
every kind is to au intellectual being desirable, precious, and valuable. Knowledge of 
great, venerable, noble, or interesting persons, is of all knowledge the most precious ; 
for personality exceeds in interest all that is material. But there is no knowledge which 
can compare in dignity and value with the knowledge of him " in whom we live, and 
move, and have our being." The phenomena and laws of nature are of interest to the 
inquiring intelligence ; but their chief interest, to the thoughtful mind, lies in their 
being a revelation of him who is the Source, the Creator, the Upholder, of all. If God 
is to be found in nature, how much more manifestly, and less incompletely, in man — 
the noblest work of the Eternal and Supreme I To know God is to satisfy tiie intellect, 
and is to find a centre for the emotions, and a law for the will. Ko knowledge can 
compensate the absence of this; all knowledge is completed by it. 

II. The knowledge of God is lost sight of in times or national pkospbbitt and 
SELF-INDULGENCE. So it w as with the inhabitants of Judah and Israel; so has it 
been in the experience of many nations. This may easily be explained. Man is a 
compound being, body and soul ; he is connected both with the scenes, occupations, 
and experiences of earth, and with the great realities of eternity. There is much in 
the world to absorb and engross human attention, interest, and concern. And it is 
quite in harmony with all we know of human nature, that those whose minds are 
engaged in the pursuits of time and sense should be forgetful of the higher truths and 
laws of the eternal prospects, in which they may not deliberately disbelieve. How often 
has it happened that, when God has satisfied a nation's temporal cravings, he has sent 
leanness into their sonlsl Their very blessings, as they deem them, become the 
occasion of their forgetfulni ss of the Giver. It is with nations as with individuals — 
the satisfaction of earthly needs may silence the aspiration for heavenly good. 

III. The KNOWLEDGE OF GoD MAT BE ACQUIKED IN THE TIME OF RETRIBUTION AND 

BUFFERINQ. If there is purpose in Divine providence, what so reasonable as to helieva 



110 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [ch. vi. 1— 14. 

thnt the corrections admioiBtered to individualg and to nations are designed to awaken 
juster and higher thoughts — thoughts of God's wisdom and righteousness? How many 
have found that it was good for them to be afflicted ; since before they were afflicted 
they went astray, whilst in affliction they have learned to observe God's WordI It may 
be objected that the highest and fullest knowledge of God is not thus to be acquired. 
And this is true ; yet this knowledge may be indispensable as a stage to a knowledge 
yet more precious. It may be that the first lesson to be acquired is a lesson of sub- 
mission to God's will, of reverence for God's righteousness. Only after the acquisition 
of this lesson, it may be, does that of the Divine mercy and compassion come within 
reach. When men have forgotten that the universe is ruled by a just, wise, almighty 
King, from whose authority none can escape, they must be brought to acknowledge 
this fact, that they may lay down the arms of rebellion, and may seek forgiveness and 
find reconciliation. 

IV. Such knowledge should, and often dobs, lead to sincere and acceptabi-b 
PIETY. Custom, tradition, superstition, are a poor and unstable foundation for true 
religion. Men must know God, must know his chRraoter, his mind, his will, in order 
that they may devoutly love him and acceptably serve him. Whilst there is 
undoubtedly a kind of knowledge, merely speculative, wliich is compatible with 
hatred of God and of his Law, there is, on the other hand, a knowledge which leads 
men to appreciate and adore the Divine attributes, and to seek participation in the 
Divine nature and in Divine favour. — T. 

Ver. 8. — " A remnant." When the com is threshed by the flail, or by the teeth of 
the threshing-implement, as in the literal " tribulation," its bulk is reduced ; for the 
grain is separated from the straw and the husk. It is so with a nation visited by the 
calamities which came upon the Hebrew people. Pestilence, famine, and sword are 
the means by which multitudes may perish ; yet some may be left, and these are " • 
remnant." 

I. The calamities and judgments which left the few as a bemnant. These 
were they who escaped. When the horrors that came upon the land are considered, the 
wonder is that there were survivors. As he who is saved from a fire looks back upon 
the sudden and furious conflagration, surveys the smoking ruins from which he has 
been rescued ; as he who is the sole survivor from a shipwreck remembers with shudder- 
ing the violence of the tempest by which his comrades were engulfed in the ocean; — go 
may those who have been spared in time of national calamity profit as they recall the 
circumstances of peril and terror by which they, with others, were encompassed, from 
which they, as distinguished from others, have been delivered. Who is there who, 
looking back upon the past scenes of even an uneventful life, cannot call to mind many 
of his early companions who have been the victims of disease, of misfortune, of 
accident, of temptation, whose earthly probation has been brought to a sudden close, 
whilst he himself, and a few others with him, are, as it were, " a remnant," and that 
through no personal merit ? 

II. The meeot that spakes them as a remnant. The same inscrutable wisdom 
which suffers some to be overtaken and overwhelmed, provides that others shall be 
spared and saved. As Noah and his family were spared, whilst a vast population was 
engulfed in the Flood ; as Lot and his household were spared, whilst the inhabitants 
of the guilty city were consumed by fire from heaven ; — so again and again has the 
forbearance of God been revealed in providing for the escape of " a remnant," who have 
remained to witness to Divine justice, and to use aright the opportunity afforded by 
Divine mercy towards themselves. 

III. The fuepose fob which a ebmnant is permitted to survive. This is only 
very partially explained in the context. The mind of the prophet was so absorbed 
with the consideration of the guilt of his idolatrous and rebellious fellow-countrymen, 
and with their impending fate, that for the time he was not able to reflect upon the 
ultimate ends for which some were spared amidst the awful catastrophe. Yet this was 
present to his mind as one immediate result of the mingled judgments and mercies of 
God ; those spared from the calamities of the nation should know and acknowledge 
that Jehovah was the Lord. As a matter of fact, the lesson was learnt; and the 
remnant who returned to Palestine returned free henceforth from all inclination to 



OH. VL 1—14] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. Ill 

idolatry. And if they did not cease to sin, at all events they were henceforth free 
from sin of this form. They lived to remember for themselves, and to witness to their 
children, that the nations are ruled by a God of righteousness, and that in subjection 
to his authority and in obedience to his Law man's true welfare must ever lie. Their 
song was of mercy and of judgment. If they were few in numbers they were purifled 
and strengthened, and fitted to fulfil the peculiar vocation of the sons of Abraham 
among the nations of the earth. 

Application. Who is there who has not experienced the sparing mercy and long- 
suffering kindness of the Lord? Who has not been delivered from danger, from 
calamity, from destruction ? Let all who acknowledge themselves to be, as it were, 
" a remnant," indebted to God's compassion, acknowledge the peculiar obligation 
under which they have been laid, to witness to the mercy of their heavenly Father, 
and by their practical loyalty to him to prove that they have not been spared in 
vain.— T. 

Ver. 9. — Self-loathing. This very strong and very remarkable assertion concerning 
the remnant of Israel that should be spared amid the destruction and desolation about 
to overtake the nation and its metropolis, is a proof to every thoughtful reader that the 
mind of the prophet was occupied not so much with the external and political aspects 
of history as with the moral. In his view supreme importance is attached to the result 
of experience upon character. So regarded, calamity may be " blessing in disguise." 
If the chastisement of God awakens repentance and self-loathing, one purpose at all 
events, and that a most important purpose, has been answered. 

L Self-loatuinq is m contrast with formeb self-satisfaotion aks self- 
COMFLAOENOT. It is uot natural to men to loathe themselves, however they may be 
tempted to loathe their fellow-men, where there has been infliction of injury or want 
of sympathy and congeniality. It is too common for men to look at their own 
character and their own conduct in the most favourable and flattering light ; and to 
speak, or at all events to think, of themselves with approval and admiration. In most 
cases a great change must come over a man's mind in order that he may regard his 
character and his life with dissatisfaction, in order that he may hate himself. 

II. Self-loathing is an indication of self-knowledge. Those who admire and 
approve themselves are, in many instances, if not in all, the victims of illusion. It is 
a rude, and yet it may be a wholesome, awakening, which sets a man face to face with 
his true self. His fancied excellences and virtues are seen to'be faults. The blemishes 
which he has been accustomed to extenuate appear in their real deformity. He 
wonders how he could have misinterpreted his actions and misunderstood his character. 
He learns to know himself, not as he has imagined himself to he, but as he really is. 

in. SELF-LOATHHra HAS ABUNDANT JUSTIFICATION IN THE EBBOBS AND FOLLIES OF 

THE PAST. When a man sees himself, in some measure, as God sees him to be, then 
trivial faults — as they were once deemed — become, in his apprehension serious and 
culpable. Sin is the abominable thing which God hates ; and it is an evidence of true 
enlightenment when a man loathes his own offences against the laws of God and the 
dictates of his own conscience. The unspiritual detest deformities of body, defects of 
manner or of speech ; the spiritually minded are more distressed at what is morally 
evil than at anything of a more external character. 

IV. Self-loathing mat lead to tbue itEPENTANCE, and so to foboiteness and 
ACCEFTANOE. To remain in a state of mind in which repugnance to evil absorbs the 
whole nature is to be abandoned to despondency. Sin is to be loathed in order that it 
may be forsaken ; and that it may be forsaken it must be forgiven. The Scriptures 
abound in denunciations of sin, but they abound also in invitations to repentance and 
in promises of forgiveness. " Let the wicked forsake his way," etc. Reconciliation 
and purity are by the gospel assured to every penitent and believing sinner. 

y. Thus self-loathing mat be a means towabds the removal of what 

OCCASIONED it, AND OF THE SUBSTITUTION OF WHAT CAN BE BEOABDGD WITH THANKFUL- 
NESS AND DELIGHT. It may be said thus to work its own cure. Or, more properly, it 
may induce the repenting sinner to apply to the great Physician, by whose remeidial 
treatment the unsoundness may be removed, and spiritual he*lth, vigour, and happi- 
ness may bo restored. — ^T. 



m THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vi. 1—14. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The land involved in man's punishment. We have here a dramatic 
appeal to the stony hills of Palestine. Canaan is emphatically a mountainous country ; 
ind Ezekiel, speaking as the mouth-piece of God, addresses himself to the high places of 
"anaan, as the scenes of flagrant idolatry. Prom his residence by the banks of Chebar 
ae could not see with his bodily eye these renowned, but now desecrated, hills; yet he 
sees them with the clear eye of imagination. His fervid appeal to these loved hills 
would naturally produce a new and wholesome impression on the minds of his hearers. 
The very mountains .ud rivers of the sacred land were stained with the people's sin 
and cursed with their curse. This dramatic address — 

I. Indicates man's vast responsibilities. Constituted as man is, the sovereign 
lord of this material globe, the fortunes of the land are indissolubly linked with the 
fortunes of its ruler. If man prospers, the fields smile with beauty and plentifulness ; 
in man's curse, the hills and valleys participate. Guilty man cannot circumscribe the 
limits within which his misdeeds shall fall. Obedience makes our earth a paradise; 
transgression blasts it with barrenness and desolation.1 

II. This appeal is a humiliation to the people. It implies that appeal to the 
stony ears of men is useless; appeal to the unconscious hills is more likely to succeed. 
When trees shall intelligently listen, and granite rocks shed tears of penitence, then 
may the expectation arise that the stolid hearts of the Hebrews will respond. When 
God speaks to the material elements, they do respond in their own proper way ; but 
the corrupt nature of men resists all Divine appeals. " The ox knoweth his owner, 
and the ass his master's crib : but Israel doth not know " (Isa. i. 3). If God shed his 
sunshibe on grass and flowers, fragrant incense spontaneously flows forth; yet, though 
Divinest love shines on every part of man, no effect is seen. 

III. This appeal is a mbabttre of God's displeasure. Wherever, im God's 
universe, there is a mark of sin, there shall be a mark of Divine displeasure. If the 
stones which God's hand has fashioned be employed in the service of idolatry, they 
shall be desecrated ; they shall be stained with human blood ; they shall bear a lasting 
mark of dishonour. The hill-tops and forest groves, which have been forced by man 
into this unholy alliance with idols, shall be maiked by the symbols of death — shall 
be devoted to oblivion and to lizards. Becoming a scene of dead men's bones, they shall 
be associated, in the minds of the living, with slaughter, defeat, and ruin. Nothing 
shall last that does not bear the seal of God's favour. "The idols shall cease." And 
ceased they have I Where now is Moloch, and Dagon, and Baal, and Jupiter? 

IV. This appeal demonstrates the vanity of idols. It was clear as the sun in 
the heavens that Israel's chosen idols had not protected them frum famine and invasion. 
So long as the idols were preferred to Jehovah, there was safety nowhere. The temples 
and the altars of the gods had always been regarded as a sanctuary, fleeing to whicii 
human life was secure. But this custom was to cease. So fierce and destructive were 
God's avengers, that they would not respect the vicinity of altars, nor groves devoted 
to idol-gods. Even in the act of idolatrous sacrifice these delinquents should be slain, 
and it should be manifest that not the slightest modicum of power appertained to 
dumb idols. 

V. This appeal exhibits the ingbnuitt of God's lovb. This dramatic sppeal to 
the hills of Canaan was a gracious design of love, to find some entrance irato the hearts 
of the people. As the skilful leader of a besieged city will go round it on every tide, 
if haply he may find some gate or point by which access may be gained, so does God 
try every method which his eternal love can invent to gain admission to the hostile 
heart of the sinner. By speaking to the stolid mountains, does he not impress us 
with the callousness of our guilty nature? The devices of his compassion are inex- 
haustible. He will not give us over to destruction so long as a single ray of hope 
remains. Every threat of coming woe is a tear of Divine pity. God would not fore- 
warn with such variety of argument if he did not deeply love. This is God's method 
—God-like.— D. 

Vers. 8 — 10. — Many lost ; few saved. The prospects of God's kingdom on the earth 
have never been wholly dark. A glint of light has always pierced the heavy clouds ol 
gloom. Among the diseased grapes of the cluster, a solitary sound one is found. A 
thousand acorns are on the oak in autumn-time; three or four only take root and 



OH VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 113 

flourish. The elect are still the few. But it shall not always be so. The turning- 
point in their fortune is repentance. The internal change must always precede the 
external. 

I. The ocoasion of this ebpbntanob. The occasion was affliction. Until disaster, 
defeat, and exile came, no change of mind appeared. The ploughshare of calamity 
broke up the hard and stolid soil, so that the sweet energies of grace might find an 
entrance. Judgment alone will not soften and subdue the proud will of man ; but 
judgment and mercy combined have an almighty efficacy. No teacher is so effective 
as experience. The scattered few, who had escaped the all-devouring sword, pondered, 
reflected, mourned. 

II. The eealitt of their repentanob. There is a spurious repentance which is 
only remorse — i.e. regret that the sin has been detected. But real repentance has 
respect to God. The sorrow does not so much respect self. It is grief that God ia 
pained — that hii heart is broken by our perversity and folly. The old selfishness has 
disappeared, and God has obtained his proper place in the souL If so, repentance 
is reaL 

III. The pkoop of bepbntancb. The proof indicated is self-loathing, self-condem- 
nation. The things formerly loved are now hated. More than this, the penitent 
passes sentence on himself. He censures himself more severely than others censure 
him. His past deeds are as obnoxious to him as a dunghill, and that dunghill is 
within him. His own former self is detestable. He hates himself. No penalty seems 
for him too heavy. His chief fear is lest such sin as his should be beyond the possi- 
bility of mercy. 

IV. The effect op repentance. The result is intimate acquaintance with God — 
inward conviction of his truth and faithfulness. This knowledge of God is knowledge 
gained by experience. Such knowledge brings with it trust, admiration, love, peace ; 
yea, life itself. " They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee." Formerly 
they were the dupes of falsehood ; they wandered in darkness self-created. Now 
they are smitten by the charms of truth, and loyally follow the Truth. — D. 

Vers. 11 — ^14. — Ministerial earnestness. Earnestness is simply a fitting sense of 
duty. Earnestness is the outcome of reality. If a man has real conviction of his duty, 
and real compassion for others, he must be in earnest. Genuine earnestness is not 
equivalent to noise, display, hysterical excitement. It is wise and appropriate expres- 
sion of feeling, and suitable to the occasion. 

I. Earnestness is manifest in gesture and act, as well as in speech. The 
man who has a due sense of his momentous office will adopt every device that will 
gain a hearing or leave due impression upon his hearers. Earnestness is contagious. 
If the speaker is in earnest, the hearer will feel the glow. There is eloquence in a 
look, in a tone, in a movement of the hand, in a gesture of the body. Tears are 
impressive appeals. God commands this whole-souled earnestness. To get an entrance 
for God's message into human hearts, every door must be tried, every avenue explored. 
To the extent that we can reach and move the obdurate souls of men, we are responsible 
for the result. 

II. Earnestness is seen in dntirino repetitions of God's messaob. It may be 
SD irksome task to the prophet to repeat often the same facts and counsels ; but he is 
not to think of himself, nor of his own tastes. He is a servant, not a master. To 
repeat the same things is proof of their real and vital importance. We cannot 
substitute other messages, because other messages have not the same importance. The 
constant dropping of water wears out even granite rocks ; and, to conquer the callous 
natures of men there is required "line upon line; precept upon precept ; here a little, 
and there a little." 

HI. Earnestness is seen in addressing evert side of man's nature. Some men 
are moved by fear, some by shame, some by the prospect of public dishonour. Many 
principles of human character are common to all men, yet do not dwell in men in 
equal proportions. In some, the moral sense is paramount. In some, feeling is pre- 
dominant. In some, judgment and the logical faculty are supreme. The earnest 
prophet will appeal to each principle in turn. The approaching overthrow of the idols 
would impress some minds. The slaughter of their brethren and children beside tha 

EZEKIEIu I 



lU THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. ti 1—14. 

idolatrous altaiB would affect others. Exile and plague and premature death would 
touch the hearts of many. And the prospect of desolation in their own loved land 
ought to have moved the souls of all true Israelites. The exact pattern. Every face 
of the rebellious citadel must he assailed. 

IV. Earnestness is seen in UNSELnsH concern fob the honoub of God. Over 
and over again is the statement repeated, as if on this the prophet delighted to dwell, 
" They shall know that I am the Lord." Not for a moment did the man of God forget 
that he was standing in the stead of God, and spake as the " Spirit gave him utter- 
ance." He was identified with God's cause indisBolubly.- God and he were one. 
And although the interval of disorder and disloyalty might be long, the final outcome 
was glorious to contemplate — an object pleasing to every devout eye — Ood shall he 
known and honoured I The certainty of ultimate success fosters present courage, and 
inspires true earnestness. — ^D. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The impotence of idol*. " And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying, Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel," etc. The former 
prophecies related chiefly to the city of Jerusalem and the land of Judah. But this 
one relates to the whole of the land of Israel. Hence the Lord God, through his 
prophet, addresses "the mountains and the hills," etc. (ver. 3). The burden of this 
chapter is a proclamation of Divine judgment because of the idolatry of the people. 
This, also, is a reason why certain geographical features of the country are mentioned. 
Mountains and hills, ravines and valleys, were chosen as localities for the worship 
of idols (cf. Deut. xii. 2 ; 2 Kings zvii. 10, 11 ; zxiii. 10). The Israelites should have 
sternly opposed and utterly abolished the idolatry of the land. They were explicitly 
and solenmly commanded to do so (Deut. ziL 1 — 3, 29—32 ; ziii.). But instead of 
doing this, they had themselves become idolaters; and they persisted in idolatry. 
Therefore God himself will take the work into his own hands, and will make an utter 
end of their idols and images, their altars and sacrifices. " Behold, I, even I, will bring 
a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places," etc. (cf. Lev. xxvi 30 — 33). 
And by the execution of bis dreadful judgment the impotence and vanity of the idols 
would be conspicuously exhibited. The text shows — 

I. The inability of idols to peoteot thbib worshippers. " I will cast down your 
slain before your idols. And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel 
before their idols. . . . And the slain shall fall in the midst of you." The dead bodies 
of the idolaters, slain for their idolatry, and cast down before the idols, constituted a 
striking testimony to the impotence of the idols to succour or defend thdr worshippers. 
But there are idols and idolaters in our age and in Christian lands. A man may be 
an idolater who never bows down to any image, or statue, or anything else. A man's 
god is that which he loves supremely ; and in this sense he may make an idol of his 
wife, or his child, or of riches, power, popularity, success in business, or even of himself. 
" And an idol in the heart is as bad as one set up in the house." And these things, 
viewed as gods, are as impotent as the idols of the Israelites. They cannot ennoble 
human nature ; they rather crush its highest aspirations, degrade its best affections, 
and dwarf its noblest faculties. They are altogether incapable of satisfying the crav- 
ings of the soul. Its hunger is too great, its thirst too intense, to be satisfied with any 
of the gods of modem civilization, or with all of them, or with anything less than 
God himself. " My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God." Only in him can the 
religious heart of man find true rest. And these modern idols cannot protect their 
votaries. There are circumstances and conditions in life in which neither riches nor 
rank, popularity nor power, relatives nor friends, can render man any aid. There are 
trials which none of them can ward off; dangers which none of them can shield us 
from ; and none of them can save us from death, or give us hope beyond it. 

II. ThB INABILITT OF IDOLS TO PBOTBOT THEMSELVES AND THEIB ALTABB. 1. TTiey 

cannot protect themselvei and their altart from desecration. " I will cast down your 
slain before your idols. And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel 
before their idols ; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars." Thus were 
the idolatrous images and altars polluted by dead bodies and decaying bones (cf, 1 Kings 
xiii. 2; 2 Kings xxiii. 16, 16). 2. They cannot protect themselvei and their altar* 
frvm detiruotion. " I will destroy your high places. And your altars shall be desolate, 



OH. VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 115 

and your images shall be broken. . . . And the high places shall be desolate, that your 
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, 
and your images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished." And these 
idols, which the Israelites worshipped, were utterly powerless to avert their own 
destruction. How often does God in mercy destroy our idols ! The riches which we 
are almost worshipping he makes to slip from our tightening grasp. Our worldly 
successes, which were drawing our hearts away from him, he turns into disastrous 
failures. The man who has made feme his god, and endeavoured to satisfy his soul 
with the fickle breath of popular applause, has found his idol broken into fragments ; 
he is no longer greeted with plaudits, but with execrations. And when our love to any 
one has been growing into idolatry, God has taken from us the desire of our eyes with 
a stroke. And in all these cases the Divine intent has been that we should discover 
the vanity of our idols, and turn unreservedly to the one living and true God. And 
in all, the idols are powerless to save themselves, and we are powerless to save them. 

III. The inability of idols leadiko idolatebs to enow and aoenowledqi; 
THE TBUE God. " And ye shall know that I am the Lord." When these judgments 
had been executed, and the vanity of their idols thus demonstrated, the Israelites 
would know by experience that Jehovah is the true God. 1. That he is the true God 
as distinguished from the false gods — the idols. 2. That he is the almighty Ood as 
contrasted with the impotent idols. 3. That he is the living and eternal Ood as con- 
trasted with the dead idols which had heen demolished. Israel would not learn this 
lesson in seasons of peace and prosperity, though it had been taught them in many 
forms, and with the reiteration of infinite patience. But they would learn it, and, as 
a matter of fact, they did learn it, when it was impressed upon them by the stern 
judgments of siege and famine, sword and captivity. And still there are those who 
need trial and si^ering to teach them the same lesson. They will not in heart and 
life acknowledge the true God Until they have been taught, by bitter and painful 
experience, the vanity of the idols which they had set up in their hearts. Blessed are 
they, if even thus they learn that only the Supreme Being is worthy of the soul's 
supreme love and reverence. 

CoNOLUsioN. " Little children, guard yourselves from idols." " Wooden idols are 
easily avoided, but take heed of the idols of gold. It is no difficult matter to keep 
from dead idols " in the form of statues or images, but guard yourselves against the 
manifold forms of modern and civilized idolatry. Yield not even the least to anything 
or any person who would contend for the throne of your heart. " Thou shalt have no 
other gods before me ; " " Hear, Israel : the Lord our God is one Lord : and thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all 
thy might."— W. J. 

Vers. 8 — 10. — Stages in the sCuTs progress from sin unto salvation. " Yet will I 
leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall escape the sword among the 
nations," etc. These verses exhibit the exercise of mercy even in the execution of 
judgment; and they indicate certain stages in the restoration of a remnant of the 
people to the Lord Jehovah. 

L SiH leadino to punishment. In dealing with previous paragraphs we have 
already spoken of the sin and of the punishment of the Israelites. Their chief sin was 
idolatry. It is spoken of in our text as whoredom. The chosen people are looked 
upon as the wife of Jehovah (cf. Jer. ii. 2 ; Hos. ii. 19, 20). And in turning from 
him to worship idols, they played the part of a vrife that is unfaithful to her husband 
(of. Jer. iii. 9, 20). And when they persisted in this infidelity, despite exhortation, 
remonstrance, and warning, the righteous judgment of God came upon them — siege, 
famine, pestilence, sword, captivity. Sin ever leads to suffering. Sooner or later 
penalty follows transgression. "Be sure your sin will find you out;" "Whoso 
breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him." 

n. Punishment leading to kbcollection. "They that escape of you shall 
remember me among the nations whither they shall be carried captives." The good- 
neis of God is designed to lead men to repentance (cf. Bom. ii. 4); but sometimes it 
fails to do 80 by reason of the perversity ot the heart of man. Some men partake of 
the gifts of the Divine goodness without any thought of the bountiful Bestower. But 



116 THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET EZBKIBL. [oh. vi. 1—14. 

affliction not unfrequently accomplishes that which prosperity failed to effect. It was 
in the far country, in poverty, degradation, and destitution, that the prodigal son 
came to himself, and remembered his father's house (Luke xv. 14 — 17). And though 
Israel had forsaken the Lord, he had not forsaken them. Even his judgments were an 
evidence of this (cf. Hos. ii. 6, 7). In wrath he remembers mercy. In his terrible 
visitation for their sins he spares a remnant of them. And in the miseries of captivity 
that remnant remembers him. As a faithless wife who has deserted a good husband 
will almost certainly have occasion to remember in bitterness of soul him whom she 
has so basely and cruelly wronged, so the remnant of the Israelites, in the sorrows of 
their exile, would remember the Lord Jehovah, whom they had rejected for vain idols. 
Suffering should induce recollection and reflection. Trials should lead us to review our 
life and consider our ways. 

III. Recollection leading to repentance. " When I have broken their whorish 
heart, which hath departed from me, and their eyes, which go a-whoring after their 
idols ; and they shall loathe themselves for the evils which they have committed in all 
their abominations." Where this rendering differs from that of the Authorized 
Version it is supported by Hengstenberg, Bchioder, and the 'Speaker's Commentary.' 
Amongst the remnant of the Israelites, recollection prepared the way for repentance, of 
which three aspects are here indicated. 1. Repentance in its origin. "When I have 
broken their whorish heart." Whatever may be the means by which it is brought 
about, penitence is the product of Divine grace (cf. Acts v. 31; xi. 18). In this 
Christian age, God brings gracious gospel influences to bear upon the hearts of men by 
the operation of his Holy Spirit, in order to quicken them into penitence for sin. 
2. Repentance in its seat. " When I have broken their heart." Eepentance is not 
merely a change of mind, but a change of feeling. It is godly sorrow on account of 
sin (cf. 2 Cor. vii. 9, 10). " The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit : a broken and 
a contrite heart, God, thou wilt not despise." 3. Eepentance in its expression. 
" They shall loathe themselves for the evils they have committed in all their abomina- 
tions." The true penitent never seeks to excuse himself on account of his sins, or to 
explain them away, or to extenuate the guilt of them. He takes shame to himself on 
account of them; and humbly confesses them to Gorl. He says, "I acknowledge my 
transgression, and my sin is ever before me," etc. (Ps. li. 3 — 5) ; " my God, I am 
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God," etc. (Ezra ix. 6) ; " God be 
merciful to me a sinner." It is well when recollection thus leads to repentance unto 
life. It did so in the case of the psalmist : " I thought on my ways, and turned my 
feet unto thy testimonies," etc. (Ps. cxix. 59, 60). And David prophesied that it 
should be so throughout the world : " AH the ends of the world shall remember and 
turn unto the Lord," etc. (Ps. xxii. 27). 

IV. Eepentance leading to devout recognition of God. "And they shall 
know that I am the Lord, and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil 
unto them." " The Lord would have spoken in vain, or to no purpose, if the event had 
not corresponded with the utterance. By the correspondence of utterance and event, 
they know that he who has spoken by the son of man is Jehovah — ^is God in the fullest 
sense " (Hengstenberg). They shall know him as the living and true God in contrast 
to the dead and vain idols (see on ver. 7). And more than this, true repentance leads 
to forgiveness and reconciliation with God ; and thus the penitent soul comes to know 
him by devout sympathy and hallowed communion with him. 

Conclusion. Learn that pain and trial are blessed when by Divine grace they lead 
to earnest reflection, and sincere repentance, and saving knowledge of God (cf. Ps. cxix. 
67, 71 ; Heb. xii. 10, 11).— W. J. 

Ver. 11. — The sorrow of the servant of God on account of the sins of his people, 
" Thus saith the Lord God ; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot," etc. 
Almost everything contained in the paragraph of which this verse forms a part (vers. 
11 — 14) has already come under our notice in preceding portions of this book. But 
our text presents matter for profitable meditation. It teaches— 

I. That the true servant of God regards the oharactee and conduct oy 
SINNERS WITH DEEP SORROW. " Alxs for all the evil abominations of the house ot 
Israel 1 " Idolatry was the great sin on account of which the prophet grieved. But 



OH. VI. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 117 

our text suggests that idolatry is a multitudinous sin. It comprises many " abomina- 
tions." In the worship of Peor the worshippers committed fornication ; and in the 
worship of Moloch they committed homicide. In proportion as we participate in the 
spirit of Jesus Christ, we shall regard sin neither with levity, " Fools make a mock 
at sin ; " nor with iDdifference ; nor with extenuation of its guilt ; but with deep grief. 
To the holy, sin must ever cause regret and pain of heart. Ezra mourned over it 
bitterly (Ezra ix. 3 — 6) ; so did the psalmist (Ps. cxix. 136, 158), the Prophet Jeremiah 
(Jer. ix. 1 ; xiii. 17), the Apostle Paul (Rom. ix. 1 — 3), and our blessed Lord and 
Saviour (Mark iii. 5 ; Luke xiii. 34 ; xix. 41, 42). And in our text, grief for the sins 
of the people is expressed first, and for the miseries caused by their sins afterwards. 
There are many who mourn the losses and sufferings which result from sin, but com- 
paratively few who mourn because of the sins themselves ; yet these should awaken 
our sharpest sorrow. 

II. The true bebvant op God reoabds the judgments which come upon sinners 
WITH DEEP sorrow. " Alas 1 ... for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, 
and by the pestilence." "The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous alto- 
gether ; " and therefore his people should at least heartily acquiesce in them. But 
while consenting unto them, and cordially approving their righteousness, the godly will 
look with sorrow upnn the woes which the wicked bring upon themselves by their sins. 
Nor is there anything wrong or unbecoming in this ; for so our Lord viewed the 
miseries which he saw gathering over the guilty Jerusalem (Luke xix. 41 — 44), and 
so the pious and patriotic Jeremiah contemplated the captivity of the Lord's flock 
(Jer. xiii. 17). One cannot look upon calamity and suffering without sorrow, even 
when we know that these are the righteous retributions of sin. And if we could do so, 
there would not be anything either commendable or desirable in so doing. 

III. The true servant of God endeavours to impress others with the 

WICKEDNESS OP SIN AND THE DREAD PENALTIES THEREOF. " ThuS Saith the Lord 

God; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy foot." These gestures indicate 
strong emotion, which may be of various kinds. Thus Balak "smote his hands 
together" in anger (Numb. xxiv. 10); the Ammonites are represeuted as clapping 
their hands and stamping their loet in derision of the land of Israel (ch. xxv. 6) ; and 
in the text these gestures are intended to express keen sorrow, as we see from the 
words with which they were accompanied : " Alas for all the evil abominations of the 
house of Israel ! " Thus the prophet would denote his Arm conviction of the certainty of 
the judgments which he announced, his earnest desire to impress the people with the 
reality and solemnity of these judgments, and his grief by reason of them. His entire 
being was, as it were, engaged in this expression of woe. " Words are transient," says 
Greenhill, " and leave little impression, but visible signs work more strongly, aflfect 
more deeply, and draw the spirits of beholders into a sympathy." And the servants of 
God in our own times cannot feel too deeply the wickedness of sin, or express their 
abhorrence thereof too strongly, if that abhorrence be genuine, or manifest too great a 
concern that sinners should flee from the wrath to come. If we realized the essential 
heinousness of sin, the unspeakable value of the soul, and the awful significance of its 
loss, we should deem no action unworthy, and no effort too great, if they were likely to 
lead sinners to turn from sin to the Saviour. " I know not," says Richard Baxter, 
" what others think of these concerns, but for my own part I am ashamed of my 
insensibility, and wonder at myself that I deal no more with my own and other men's 
souls, as becomes one who looks for the great day of the Lord. I seldom come out of 
the pulpit but my conscience smites me that I have not been more serious and fervent. 
It is no trifling matter to stand up in the face of a congregation and deliver a message 
of salvation or damnation, as from the living God in the name of the Redeemer : it is 
no easy thing to spc ak so plainly that the most ignorant may understand ; ao seriously 
that the deadest may feel ; and so conceruingly that contradictory cavUlera may be 
silenced and awakened." — ^W. J. 



118 



THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZBKIEL. t™- vn. 1—27. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER VIL 



Ter. 1. — The absence of any fresh date, 
and the fact that it is simply tacked on to 
the previous chapter by the copulative con- 
junction, shows that what follows belongs to 
the same gioup. The use of the phiase, the 
word of the Lord came unto me, shows, 
however, that there was an interval of 
silence, perhaps of meditation, followed by 
a fresh influx of inspiration ; and, so far as 
we may judge from the more lyrical character 
of the chapter, a more intense emotion. 

Ver. 2. — An end, etc. The iteration of 
the word once more gives emphasis. The 
words read like an echo of Amos viii. 2. 
The four comers (Hebrew, " wings ") were 
probably, as with us, the north, east, south, 
and west. The phrase had been used 
before in Isa. xi. 12, and the thought meets 
us again, in the form of the " four winds," 
in Dan. xi. 4 ; Zech. ii. 6 ; Matt. xxiv. 31 ; 
Mark xiii 27. The " end " in this case is 
either that of the siege of Jerusalem, or 
that of the existence of Israel as a nation. 
It was now drawing nigh — was, as we say, 
withia measurable distance. 

Ver. 3. — Now is the end upon thee, etc. 
We note the repetition of this aud ver. 4 in 
vers. 8, 9, as a kind of refrain in the 
lamentation. Stress is laid, and for the 
time laid exclusively, on the unpitying 
character of the Divine judgments. And this 
is followed as before, in ch. vi. 14, by " Ye 
shall know that I am the Lord." Fear 
must teach men the lesson which love had 
failed to teach. 

Ver. 4. — Thine abominations shall be ia 
the midst of thee, eto. These are, of course, 
primarily the idolatries of Israel. The 
people are to reap what they have sown. 
Their bins should be recogaized in their 
punishment. 

Ver. 5. — An evil, an only evil, eto. The 
words imply that the evil would be unique 
in character, attracting men's notice, not need- 
ing repetition. OornUl, however, following 
Luther, gives " evil after evil," changing one 
letter m the Hebrew for " one," so as to get 
the word "after." For is come read, with 
the Eevised Version, it cometh. It is the 
nearness, not the actual arrival, of the end, 
that is ill the prophet's thoughts. Ho writes 
in B.o. 595-4. Jerusalem was not taken till 
B.C. 588. 

Ver. 6. — ^It watoheth for thee; better, 
with the Eevised Version, t( awdketh against 
thee. So the LXX, Vulgate, Luther. The 
Hebrew presents a paronom^isia between 
the noun and verb — hahkett, hekitt — which 
eannot be leproduoed in English. The 



destined doom la thought of as rousing 
itself to its appointed work. The word is 
cognate with that rendered " awaketh " in 
Ps. Ixxviii. 65. 

Ver. 7. — The morning is oome onto thee, 
eto. In the only other passage in which the 
Hebrew noun occurs (Isa. xxviiL 5), it is 
translated "diadem," the meaning being 
strictly a circular ornament. Here the 
LXX. gives ttAok^, something twirled, out of 
which may come the meaning of the changes 
of fortune. Possibly, as in the familiar 
"wheel of fortune," that thought was 
involved in the circular form by itself. In 
the Talmud it appears as the name of the 
goddess of fate at Ascalon (Fiirst). On 
the whole, I follow the Bevised Version, 
Keil, and Ewald, in giving "thy doom." 
The " morning " of the Authorized Version 
probably rises from the thought that tlie 
dawn is, as it were, the glory and diadem of 
the day. The Vulgate gives contritio. The 
day of trouble ; better, with the Bevised 
Version, of tumuU. The word is specially 
used of the noise of war (Isa. xxii. 5 ; Amus 
iit 9; Zech. xiv. 3). Not the sounding 
again upon the mountains. The first noun 
is not found in the Old Testament, but a 
closely allied form appears in Isa. xvi. 9 ; 
Jer. XXV. 30 ; xlviii 33, for the song of the 
vintage. Not that, the prophet says, shall 
be heard on the mountains, but in its place 
the cry of battle and the noise of war. The 
LXX. "not with travail-pangs," and the 
Vulgate non glorias montium, show that the 
word was in both cases a puzzle to the trans- 
lators. 

Vers. 8, 9. — The veises repeat, like the 
burden of a lyric ode, but end more 
emphatically, ye shall know that I am 
Jehovah that smiteth. 

Ver. 10. — It is come. Bead, as before, tl 
eometh ; and for morning, doom (see note on 
ver. 7). The rod hath blossomed, eto. The 
three verbs imply a climax. The " doom " 
springs out of the earth ; the rod of ven- 
geance blossoms (the word is the same as that 
which describes the blooming of Aaron's rod 
(Numb.xvii. 8), and the phrase was probably 
suggested by the history); pride (either 
that of the Chaldean ministers of vengeance, 
or of Israel as working out its own punish- 
ment; I incline to the latter) buds and bears 
fruit. In Isa. xxvii. 6 the word follows on 
"blossom," and therefore seems applicable 
to the formation of the fruit rather than the 
flower. (For the image of the rod, comp. 
Ps. ex. 2 : Isa. X. 26 ; Micah vL 9.) 

Ver. 11. — Violenoe is risen up, eto. The 
"violence" admits of the same twofold 
interpretation aa tha ** pride" ot Tar. 10. 



OH. vn. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 



U9 



Nont of them shall remain, The interpo- 
lated verb^ thongh grammatically necessary, 
weakens the force of the Hebrew. "None 
of them ; none of their multitude ; none of 
their wealth." Neither shall there be wail- 
ing for them. The noun is not found else- 
where. Taken, as the Authorized Version 
takes it, the thought, like that of oh. xxiv. 
16 and Jer. xvi. 4, is tliat the usual rites of 
burial would be neglected, and that there 
would be " no widows to make lamentation" 
(Ps. IzxTiiL 64). The Revised Version 
*' eminenoy " implies the loss of all that 
constituted greatness. Cornill and the 
LXX. (" beauty " or " gaiety ") practically 
agree with this. The Vulgate gives reguiea, 
and Furst "a gathering, or tumult of the 
people." Probably the text is corrupt. 

Ver. 12.— Let not the buyer rejoice, etc. 
We have to read, between the lines, the 
story of Ezekiel's oompanious in exile. 
They belonged, it will be remembered, to 
the nobler and wealthier class (2 Kings 
XXT. 19). They, It would seem, had been 
compelled to sell their estates at a price 
which made the " buyer rejoice and the 
seller mourn." In each case the joy and 
the sorrow would be but transient. Wrath 
had gone out against the whole multitude. 
In Micah ii. 2 and Isa. t. 8 we have 
parallel instances of the advantage taken 
by the rich of the distress of the old free- 
holders. In the story of Jer. xxxii. 6 — 16 
we have, though from a very different point 
of view, the history of a like purchase, while 
the city was actually surrounded by the 
Chaldeans. The neglect of the sabbatic 
year (Jer. ixxiv. 8 — ^17) makes it probable 
that the jubilee year also (if, indeed, it had 
ever been more than an ideal) had fallen 
into desuetude, and that the buyers comforted 
themselves with the thought that the land 
they had got, on cheap terms, would belong 
to them and their children for ever. 

Ver. 13.— for the seller shall not return, 
etc. At first the thought seems only to add 
to the sorrow of the seller. He is told that 
he, at least, shail not return to his old 
estate. Even though they should be alive 
at thr year of jubilee, their exile had to last 
its appointed time, Ezekiel's forty (oh. iv. 
6) and Jeremiah's seventy years (Jer. xxv. 
11). This, however, did not exclude the 
return of their children (Jer. xxxii. 44), and 
in the mean time all private sorrow would 
fall into the background as compared with 
the great public woe of the destruction of the 
holy city. The vision is touching, etc. The 
noun is used as a synonym for prophecy, as 
elsewhere (Isa. i. 1 ; Nah. i. 1 ; Hab. ii. 1). 
It may be noted that it is specially charac- 
teristic of Ezekiel (seven times) and Daniel 
(eleven times). For the Authorized Version 
read with the Bevised Version, ntme $liaU 



return, or better (with the Vulgate and Keil), 
the vision touching the whole multitude shall 
not return, i.e. shall go straight onward to 
do its work (comp. Isa. It. 11). So taken, 
there is a kind of play upon the iterated 
word: "The seller shall not turn his foot- 
steps back, neither shall the prophecy." 
Vestigia nulla rebrortwm shall be true of botli. 
I take the other words, with the Revised 
Version, no man in the iniquity ofhi$ life shall 
etrengthen himself, noting the fact that the 
word for " strengthen " is that which enters 
into Ezekiel's name. It is as though he 
said, " God is the only true source of strength 
to thee, as thy very name bears witness." 

Ver. '14. — They have blown the trumpet. 
The word for "trumpet" is not found else- 
where, but the corresponding verb is used 
continually in connection with the trumpet 
of war, and Ezekiel seems to have coined 
the ciirresponding substantive, not, perhaps, 
without a reminiscence of Jer. vi. 1. There 
may possibly be an allusion to the trumpet- 
blowing with which the jubilee year (see 
ver. IB) was ushered in. The trumpet 
should sound, not for each man's return to 
his own estate, but for the alarm of war, and 
even then the consciousness of guilt will 
hinder men from arming themselves for 
battle (comp. Lev. xxvi. 36 ; Deut. xxviii. 
25 ; xxxii. 80). 

Ver. 15. — The sword is without (see oh. 
V. 12 ; vi. 12). Here there seems a more 
traceable fitness in assigning the pestilence 
as well as the famine to those who are shut 
up in the besieged city. 

Ver. 16. — They that escape, etc The 
sentence is virtually conditional. They that 
escape shall, it is true, in one sense, escape 
the immediate doom ; but if so, it shall only 
be to the mountains. These were, in all 
times (Gen. xix. 17; Judg. vi 2; 1 Sam. 
xiii. 6; Fs. xi. 1; 1 Maco. ii 28; Matt. 
xxiv. 16 ; Mark xiii. 14), the natural refuge 
for those who fled from danger, but even 
this should fail those of whom the prophet 
speaks. They should be like the doves of 
the mountain-gorges, that are fluttered at 
the appearance of the eagle or the fowler, 
and seem by note (Isa. xxxviii. 14; lix. 11) 
and gestm-e (Nah. ii 7), to be mourning for 
evermore. There also they shall lie, every 
man in his iniquity, and wailing for its 
punishment. We are reminded of Dante's 
similitudes in ' Inf.,' v. 40, 46, 82. 

Ver. 17. — All knees shall be weak as 
water ; literally, shall flow loith water. So 
the Vulgate. The LXX. is yet stronger, 
shaU be defiled, etc. The words may point 
to the cold sweat of terror which paralyzes 
men's power to act. The phrase is pe- 
culiar to Ezekiel, and meets us again in 
ch. xxi. 7. The thought finds a parallel in 
Isa. xiii. 7 ; Jer. Ti 21. 



120 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. vn. 1—27. 



Ver. 18. — Tbey ehall also gird, etc. The 
words become more general, and include 
those who should remain in the city as well 
as the fugitives. For both there should be 
the inward feelings of horror and shame, 
and their outward symbols of sackcloth 
(Gen. xxxvii. 34 ; 2 Sam. iii. 31, 32 ; 2 Kings 
vi. 'M; lea. xv. 3; Jer. iv. 8, et al.) and 
baldness (Isa. iii. 24 ; xv. 2 ; xxii. 12 ; Amos 
vili. 10). 

Ver. 19. — They shall oast their silver, etc. 
The words remind us of Isa. ii. 20 and xxx. 
22, with the difTerence that here it is the 
silver and gold as such, and not the idols 
made of them, that are to be flung away. 
They had made the actual metal their idol, 
and their confidence in it should be power- 
less to deliver them (Zeph. i. 18). Their 
gold shall be removed ; better, with the Ke- 
vised Version, as an unclean thing. The 
word implies the kind of impurity of oh. 
xviiL 6 ; xxii. 10 ; xxxvi. 17 ; Isa. xxx. 22. 
Instead of gloating, as they had done, over 
their money, men should shrink from it, as 
though its very touch brought pollution. 
The Vulgate gives in sterquilinium, " to the 
dunghill." They shall not satisfy their souls. 
In the horrors of the siege, with everything 
at famine prices (2 Kings vi. 25), and little 
or nothing to be had for them, their 
money would not stop the cravings of 
hunger. It is characteristic that he applies 
to riches as such the very same epithet, 
stumbling-block of their iniquity, as he had 
applied before (ch. iii. 20) to actual idolatry 
(eomp. Col. iii. 5). 

Ver, 20. — As for the beauty of his orna- 
ment. The latter word is commonly used 
of the necklaces, armlets, etc., of women 
(Exod. xxxlii. 4—6 ; Isa. xlix. 18 ; Jer. ii. 
32; iv. 30). So again inch. xvi. 7, 11; xxiii. 
40. The singular is used of the people 
collectively, or of each man individually, like 
German man or French on. He set it in 
majesty; better, he—ot to give the sense 
they — turned it to pride. Wealth and art had 
ministered, as in Isa. ii. 16, first to mere 
pride and pomp ; then they made out of 
their ornaments the idols which they wor- 
shipped, and which were now, the same 
emphatic word being repeated, as a pollution 
to them. 

Ver. 21. — I will give it. The * it " refers 
to the silver and gold, the " beauty of the 
ornaments " tlius desecrated in tlieir use. 
The strangers, i.e. the Chaldean iuvaders, 
should in their turn pollute (better, with the 
Revised Version, profane it) by making it 
their prey. For them the idols which Israel 
had worshipped would be simply as booty 
to be plundered. 

Ver. 22. — My secret place. The work of 
the spoiler would not atop at the idols of 
silver and gold. Jehovah would surrender 



hii own "secret place" fyeeret treaeure in 
margin of Revised Version), that over which 
he tiad watched, se. the sanctuary of his 
temple, to the hands of the spoiler. In Ph. 
Ixxxiii. 4 the same adjective is used of 
persons, the " hidden " or protected ones of 
God. In the name of Uaal-zephon, " Lord 
of the secret place," we have possibly a 
kindred thought. In Fs. xviL 14 we hiave 
"hid treasure." 

Ver. 23.— Make a chain; better, the chain. 
The word is not found elsewhere, but a 
kindred form is thus translated in 1 Kings 
vi. 21. Looking to the force of the verba 
from which it is formed, its special mean- 
ing is that of a coupling-chain, such as 
would be used in the case of captives marched 
off to their place of exile (Nah. iii. 10). AH 
previous sufferings were to culminate in 
this. The if>vpii6v of the LXX. and the 
fae condmionem of the Vulgate show that 
the word perplexed them. Full of bloody 
crimes. The only passage in the Authorized 
Version of the Old Testament in which the 
English noun occurs. Jjiteislly, Judgmetiti 
of hlood. The words may be equivalent 
either (1) to " blood-guiltiness " (compare , 
the "judgment" in Jer. Ii. 9), or (2) to 
judgment perverted into jndicial murder. 
The latter finds support in ch. ix. 9. In 
either case it is noticeable that Ezekiel 
points not only to idolatry, but to violence 
and wrong, as the sins that had cried for 
punishment (comp. Jer. xxii. 17 as a con- 
temporary witness). 

Ver. 24. — The worst of the heathen; 
literally, evil ones of the nationi — with the 
superlative implied rather than expressed. 
For the thought, cump. Deut. xxviii. 50; 
Lam. V. 11 — 13 ; Jer. vi. 23. The Chaldeans 
were probably most prominent in the 
prophet's thoughts, but ch. xxxv. 5 and 
Ps. cxxxvii. 7 suggest that there was a 
side glance at the Edimiites. The pomp of 
the strong, etc. Another echo of Lev. xxvi. 
(ver. 31). The "pomp" is that of Judah 
trusting in her strength. The " holy places " 
find tlieir chief representative in the temple, 
but, as the word is used also of a non- 
Jehovistio worship (ch. xxviii. 18; Amos 
vii. 9), may include whatever the people 
looked on as sanctuaries — the " liigh places" 
and the like. The Vulgate gives possi(ie6u»j< 
sanctuaria; the Eevised Version margin, 
they that sanctify them ; but the Authorized 
Version is probably right in both cases. 
Luther renders ihre kirclKn, which reminds 
us of Acts xix. 37. 

Ver. 2.5.— They shall seek peace, etc. The 
noun is probably to be taken in its wider 
sense as including safety and prosperity, 
but may also include specific overtures for 
peace made to the Chaldean generals. 

Ver. 26.— Mischief . . . rumoui-. Th« 



0H.vn. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 



121 



oombination remindg us of tbo "wars and 
rumours of wars" of Matt. xxiv. 6. The 
floating uncertain reports of a time of 
invasion aggravate the actual misery (comp. 
Lsa. xxxvii. 7; Jer. li. 46; Obad. ver. 1). 
Ih«y shall seek a vision of the prophet, etc. 
The words paint a picture of political chaos 
and confusion. Tlie people turn in their 
distress to the three representatives of 
wisdom— the prophet as the bearer of an 
immediate message from Jehovali, the priest 
as the interpreter of his Law (Mai. ii. 7), 
the " ancients " or " elders " as those who 
had learnt the lessons of experience,— and 
•U alike in vain. (For Illustrative facts, see 
Jer. V. 31 ; vi. 13 ; xxi. 2 ; xxiii. 21—40 ; 
xxvii. 9 — 18; xxviii. 1—9, and generally 
Mioah iii. 6 ; Amos viii. 11 ; 1 Sam. xxviii. 
6 ; Lam. ii. 9.) 

Ver. 27.— The king shall mourn, etc. The 
picture reminds us of Jehoram in 2 Kings 
vi. 30. The action of Zedekiah in Jer. 
Kxt 1 and zxxiv. Smakesit probable enough 



that it was actually reproduced. A solemn 
litany procession like that of Joel i. 13, 14 and 
ii. 15—17 would have been quite in keeping 
with liis character. The prince shall clothe 
himself, etc. The noun is specially charac- 
teriotio of Ezekiel, who uses it thirty-four 
times. In ch. xii. 12 the " prince " seems 
identified with the "king." Here it may 
mean either the heir to the throne, or the 
chief ruler under the king. The people of the 
land, etc. The phrase is perhaps used, as 
the Jewish rabbis afterwards used it, with 
a certain touch of scorn, for the labouring 
class. All the upper class had been carried 
away captive with Jehoiachin (2 Kinss 
xxiv. 14). Compare Jjlzekiel's use of it in 
ch. xxxiii. 2; xlvi. 3, 9. I will do unto 
them, etc. The chapter, or rather the 
whole section from ch. i. 1 onwards, ends 
with an iterated assertion of the equity of 
the Divine judgments. Then also they 
shall know that I am the Lord, .^mighty 
and all-righteouB. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 2. — " The end is come." I. The end that suhblt comes. Time is broken 
into periods; and every period, long or short, has its certain end. The tale of life is 
written in many chapters, each with its own appropriate conclusion ; in some cases the 
conclusion is violent, abrupt, and startling. We are surprised out of an old settled 
course. The mill stops suddenly, and then the silence is alarming. 'J'here are the greater 
epochs of life, when a whole volume of experience is closed, and another must be 
opened, till at length we reach Finis. But every day has its sunset. Every year runs 
out to December and dies its wintry death, in spite of all the festivities of Christmas. 
Youth is fleeting ; its sweet spring-time fast melts, its blossoms fade and fall. Life 
itself runs out and reaches an end. As each period goes it vanishes, never to return. 
Thus Christina Eossetti writes — 

" Come, gone, — gone for ever ; 
Gone as an unreturniug river ; 
Gone as to death, the merriest liver; 
Gone as the year at the dying fall. 
To-morrow, to-day, yesterday, never : 
Gone once for all." 

1. There is an end to the day of work. " The night cometh, wherein no man can work." 
The opportunity will pass. Let us make the most of our strength and time while we 
have them. 2. There is an end to the freedom of sin. The orgies of mad self-indul- 
gence will not last for ever. They burn themselves out in folly and shame. Then comes 
the end, and after that the reckoning. 3. There is an end to the discipline of sorrow. 
The pain will not last for ever. The doubt and mystery and darkness are not eternal. 
The Christian pilgrimage is long and weary, but it is not an infinite, endless course. 
The wilderness is wide, and the goal far off. But the way will end at last in the 
heavenly city, the home of the soul. 

II. The end that should come. There are some things which we should do well 
to end, yet still they are with us, 1. An end should come to our life of sin. The old 
sin has beeu our companion for years, a bad companion, corrupt and corrupting. It is 
time we and it [larted. It is time we turned over a new leaf and began a better way. 
The old self has lived too long. Let it die and be buried. 2. An end should come to 
our indecision. "How long halt ye between two opinions?" This hesitation has 
lasted too long. " Choose you this day whom ye will serve." 3. An end should come 
to the gloom of doubt, the coldness of half-hearted service, the lethargy and paralysis of 



122 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vn. 1—27. 

en unspiritual religum. " The night is far spent ; the day is at hand ; " " Awaken thou 
that sleepest I " 

III. The end that hat ooub. We contemplate possible endings wUch we would 
fun avert, but which seem to be approaching. 1. Some of these endings are within 
oar power, and should be kept off. We should guard against an end to our early faith 
and zeal. Ephraim's goodness, which was like the morning cloud, was soon dissipated. 
Of some it must be said the end has come to their fervent devotion and self-sacrificing 
service. Once they were bright lights of the Church, but they have waned, and are 
approaching spiritual night. 2. Some of these endings are leyond ow control. The 
home circle may be broken, the dear countenances of the loved may smile upon us no 
more. For the old fulness of friendship we may have left only blankness and vacancy, 
and a bitter sense of loss. The very freshness of our soul may lie lost too, and ther 
we look back to the old sweet years, and wonder how we could have taken them so 
quietly. 

lY. Tme eitd that will keveb come. 1. There will never be an end to the 
righteovi Law of Ood. Eight and truth are eternal. We can never outlive their 
claims. If we continue for ever in opposition to them, their pains and penalties must 
be always ours. 2. The love of God will never end. Modes of Divine operations 
may change as circumstances alter, and new dispensations may succeed to old dispensa- 
tions — ^new covenants taking the place of old covenants. But God does not change. 
There is no end to him. He abideth faithfuL In the wreck of the universe the Bock 
of Ages remains unshaken. Love in his essence, God never wearies in helping and 
blessing. There is no end to his grace. " The mercy of the Lord endureth for ever." 
Whenever the helpless, penitent prodigal returns, he will find his Father waiting to 
welcome him. 3. The eternal life can have no end. The body dies. Happily there 
will be an end to that. But the life in God abides for ever. In that life many things 
thought to be ended here on earth will be recovered and will revive. Thus our past 
experience is not utterly lost. It lives in memory and in what it has made us. A 
German poet writes— 

" Yesterday I loved; 

To-day I suffer ; 

To-morrow I die. 

But I shall gladly. 

To-day and to-morrow 

Think on yesterday." 

Ver. 10. — '• The day i$ come." This chapter opened with a propheoy of "an end." 
It now proceeds to the annunciation of a new beginning. No end is absolutely finaU 
In the night which sees the death of one day a new day is born. 

I. The future becomes present. The much-anticipated day at length arrives. 
We are thus for ever overtaking the future. However far the future event may be, it 
will surely he reached, if time is the oply impediment to be got over. The day of 
death may be far ahead, but most assuredly it will come. The dreaded day will come 
only too swiftly. The hoped-for day will also dawn, though we become weary in 
waiting for it. God's great day of doom will arrive, though the sinner mock at its 
tarrying. Christ's glorious day of triumph will also appear, though the Chnrch grow 
faint and wonders at its slow approach. 

II. The new day will be revealed by its own advent. No prediction can 
exactly describe the coming day, for no words can paint the thing that has not been. 
We vainly try to anticipate the future, and we blunder into the greatest mistakes. We 
cannot know what sorrow is till the day of sorrow breaks, nor can we understand the 
joy of the Lord till a glad day of heavenly love smiles upon us. We shall not know 
death till we are in the day of death. When the new day of the life beyond dawns 
we shall know its meaning as we can never guess now. 

III. The coming day will have a new chabactbr. No two days are exactly 
alike. Ezekiel was announcing a day of doom. The awful thunders of that day are 
to roll over the heads of guilty and impenitent men with a surprise and a horror cover 
anticipated in easier times. Thus it was in the doom of Israel under the Babylonian 
invasion. But there are brighter days to anticipate. There is the day of light after 



CH.vn. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEI*. 123 

the night of donbt ; the day of joy's suoshhie succeeding the n^ht of sorrow's weeping ; 
the day of penitent new beginnings after the night dT sin ; the day of busy lerrice 
alter the night of lest and waiting. Carlyle writes — 

** Lo t here hath been dawning 
Another blue day : 
Think, wilt then let it 
Slip nseless away 7 

" Out of eternity 

This new day is bon; 
Into eternity 
At night will return. 

" Behold it aforetime 
No eye ever did; 
Bo soon it for ever 
From all eyes is hid." 

IV. The chabacteb of the new day is determined by oub condtjot dt thb old 
DAYS. The day of doom is not the day of fate. It is a day of judgment, t.e. of 
examination, discrimination, and consequent decision. Therefore it is determined by 
the character of the old days it judges. The new day may come to us as a surprise, 
but it wiU not fall out by chance as one of storm or one of sunshine. When it 
arrives we shall see that, in its deepest character, it bears the record of our own past. 

Ver, 12. — Buyer and seller. I. Religion has a bight to be oonoebnbd with 
COHMEBOE. Religion is spiritual, but it aims at filling the secular sphere, as the soul 
fills the body. The Church may be its centre, as the brain is the centre of the soul's 
consciousness ; but every region of life is a scene for its operation, as every limb of 
the body is for the action of the souL Religion claims a place in the shop, in the 
factory, in the mine, on the highway of the sea, in the noisy streets and markets of 
the city. She does not claim this place as a mere spectator or guest, to be respected 
in name, but not followed with obedience, like the statue of s deceased citizen set up 
in a public place to honour his memory, although his principles are derided and 
travestied by the throng of present-day men who crowd about it. Religion claims to 
be a living presence, guiding and controlling commerce. The relations of buyer and 
seller are too often treated on the ground of pure self-interest — self-interest of the lowest 
kind, mere money profit. Religion should inspire higher motives. 1. A respect /or 
truth and justice. A Christian merchant's word should be as good as his bond in his 
counting-house as well as in his home. It is scandalous that " trust" can only go with 
" security." Christian honour should pay the debt that cannot be exacted by law. The 
bankrupt who listens to the teachings of Christ will not be content to scrape through 
the courts by the aid of technicalities which only enable him to cheat his creditors. 
The Christian seller will not deceive the buyer, nor the Christian buyer take advantage 
of the difBculties of the seller to drive an unfair bargain. Justice means more than 
keeping the law — it means fair dealing and equal treatment. 2. A reeognitiop of 
human brotherhood. If I recognize my neighbour as a brother when at church, can I 
pounce upon him as my prey in the world? The "golden rule" belongs to commerce 
as much as to any other part of life. But it will not be effective till a spirit of 
cooperation takes the place of one of cruel, hard, selfish competition. 3. A reverence 
for the rights of God in the fruits of commerce. Over the Royal Exchange, in London, 
there ruos, in great and bold letters, the legend, " The earth is the Lord's, and the ful- 
ness tbereofl" How far is that the text of the words and deeds of the men who throng 
the streets ronnd this public building ? If all in the earth belongs to God, we shall 
have to give him an account of onr trade transactions. 

II. Commerce without beligion will not seodbe the wxlfabb or a feoplk. 
People who prefer Mammon to God will find they have chosen a hard master. L Whan 
commerce is prosperous, it will not satisfy the greatest needs of men. Man does not 
live by breaa alone, and certainly he cannot subsist on bankwa^ aooounte. In Jeru- 
■alem the buyer and seller would cease to rejoice over thdr baigsfau, wwiU even not 



124 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. [ch. vn. 1—27. 

care for Iobs or gain, glad if only they escaped with their lives. The beat things cannot 
be bought with money ; but, happily, they can be had " without money and without 
price." 2. When national calamity comes, commerce fails. The commercial barometer 
is a most sensitive test of approaching political storms. ' Wickedness in business is 
deservedly punished in the general calamity of a nation by the collapse of trade that 
is certain to be one of the first results 6i the adversity. 3. Commercial sin will he 
justly punished with commercial ruin. This does not necessarily happen to the indi- 
vidual trader who may die rich with ill-gotten gains ; but history proves it to be true 
in the long run with nations. 

Ver. 16. — Mourning as doves. The fugitives from Jerusalem flee to the mountains 
and hide themselves there, like the doves in the valleys below, whose melancholy notes 
seem to be a suitable echo to their own sad feelings. 

I. Nature intebprbts man to himself. There is an interpretation of nature by 
man ; there is also an interpretation of man by nature. The glad sights and sounds of 
spring are commentaries on the fresh joyousness of youth. We should not know the 
hope and beauty of life so well if May never came. So, also, storra, night, winter, 
desert, mountain, and raging torrent open the heart of man's grief and despair, and 
reveal its desolation. The key to human passion is there. Wordsworth, the prophet 
of nature, who saw deepest into her secret, discerned among the woods and hills " the 
still, sad music of humanity." 

II. Sorrow ib believed by oongbnial scenes of natueb. The mourning exiles 
will note the melancholy tones of the doves of the valley. To the happy these sounds 
come as a touching variation from the generally pleasing aspect of nature; but to the 
sorrowful fugitives among the mountains they express the sympathy of nature. It is 
well to cultivate this sympathy, which is not all imaginative ; " for there is a spirit in 
the woods," and hills and valleys are filled with a Divine presence. 

III. In the seclusion of nature the deeper feelings of the soul FOro VENT. 

While among the mountains the exiles utter their lamentations. In the city, scenes 
of warfare, bloodshed, fury, and terror absorb all attention. These are the immediate 
and the coarser experiences in a season of great calamity. For the time they destroy 
the power of reflection. But in solitude and silence men have leisure to think. Then 
the sadness of the soul wakes up, and takes the place of the agitation and distress of 
external circumstances. 

IV. The borrow of man is deeper than the melancholy of nature. While the 
doves coo in plaintive notes that suggest to the hearer a feeling of grief, though they 
are not really mourning', the exiles from Jerusalem respond to the natural notes of the 
doves with utterances of true sorrow. Man is greater than nature. He has self-con- 
sciousness and conscience. He knows his trouble and he knows his sin. He pays 
the penalty of his higher endowments in the greater depth of his fall and shame and 
sorrow. The whole range of nature's experiences is slight by the side of the lofty 
aspirations and profound griefs of man. Going from the one to the other is like leaving 
the soft, undulating landscape of England for the cliffs and chasms and dark vallejs 
and the awful mountain-peaks of Switzerland. The chief difference is moral. Mna 
alone has conscience ; he only can mourn for sin. This grief for sin — and not merely 
grief on account of its penalties — is one of the deepest experiences of the human heart. 
It puts leagues of space between the men who mourn like doves, and the innocent, 
simple birds whose notes suggest a grief they can never feel. But in this deeper grief is 
man's hope. Mourning for sin is a part of repentance, and it points to the day of better 
tilings, when God has forgiven his guilty children, and when the mourning doves will 
be forgotten, and the singing of the lark at heaven's gate will be the key to a new 
experience of heavenly gladness. 

Ver. 19. — Oold and silver. Gold and silver are here referred to as precious things 
that have become worthless in the confusion consequent on the sack of .lerusalem. 
Inasmuch as they are usually regarded as of great value and guarded with especial 
care, kept in purses and safe places, to throw them in the streets is to reverse the normal 
treatment of them. 

L Thb value or sold Ain> silver is not stable. Financially, this fact a 



OH. vn. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 125 

recognized in the Money Market, but it goes further than men of business generally 
admit. The precious metals have a certain utility and beauty of their own ; but there 
are circumstances under which they become mere iocumbrances ; e.g. on board a sinking 
ship, in a besieged city, on a desert island, in great sickness, at death. They are 
chiefly valued as money, i.e. as a medium of exchange. But when there is nothing to 
exchange them for, their money value is lost. This must be the case in a state of 
social insecurity, when no one can depend upon holding his property from one day to 
another. Then the purchasing power of money will fall, even though there be plenty 
of articles for sale, because the purchase of goods may be nullified by the loss of 
them. In a famine at first the rich man may buy dear food which the poor man can- 
not afford to get ; but when all the food is exhausted, he cannot feed on his gold and 
silver. In times of great sori-ow the value of gold and silver falls almost to nil. It 
will not supply the vacant place of the dead, nor will it heal the smart of unkindness 
or ingratitude. He is poor indeed whose wealth consists in nothing better than gold 
and silver. The worship of Mammon is a miserable idolatry, certain to be most fatal 
to the most devoted worshipper — and, alas ! how many such our money-loving age pro- 
duces 1 What Wordsworth wrote of the plutocracy of his day is little less true now, 

** The wealtliiest man among us is the best: 
No grandeur now in nature or in book 
Delights us. Bapine, avarice, expense. 
This is idolatry : and these we adore: 
Plain living and high thinking are no more: 
The homely beauty of the good old cause 
Is gone ; our peace, our fearful innocence. 
And pure religion breathing household laws." 

n. Thebe abb circumstances which lead to the abandonment of oold and 
8ILVEB. 1. Necessity. " All that a man hath will he give for his life." The drowning 
man will drop his money-bags rather than be dragged down to death with them. Yet there 
are men who behave as slaves to their money, consenting to a slow death of exiiaiistion 
from devotion to business rather than preserve health and life at the cost of pecuniary 
loss. 2. Folly. Extravagant people " cast their silver in the streeis." Money spent 
in sin is worse than lost ; it is invested in funds from which the dividends will be pain 
and death. 3. Charity. There are the poor of the streets, and the rich and well-clad 
man who sees his brethren shivering and hungry has a good call to cast his silver in 
the streets — ^not, indeed, for a loose scramble in which the moStworthless will seize most, 
not in indiscriminate charity which breeds idle paupers and neglects modest poverty, but 
in wise and thoughtful alleviation of misery. The young man whom Jesus loved was 
bidden to sell all and give to the poor (Matt. xix. 21). St. Francis of Assissi and 
many another did so. Those who do not practise this " counsel of perfection " should 
see the duty of making real sacrifices for their brethren as for Christ (Matt. xxv. 40). 4. 
Consecration. Men may cast aside their care of wealth, and even let the proceeds lie 
in nclect while they devote themselves to a higher ministry ; or they may bring their 
wealth and lay it at the feet of Christ, to be spent on his work in the streets of earth. 

Ver. 26 (first part). — Bumour. " And rumour shall be upon rumour." One element 
of the dark times of the destruction of Jerusalem is the constant accession of new and 
terrifyin'' rumours— one contradicting another, yet all presaging fearful events. This 
is alwavs an accompaniment of times of unrest, and Christ referred to it in his picture 
of coming evils (Matt. xxiv. 6). We may have seen some such thing in our own 
happier days ; but the telegraph and the newspaper have done immense service in 
substituting authentic news for vague and floating rumour, so that it is difficult for us 
to understand the distress of less rapidly informed ages, which must have been far 
more the prey to uncorroborated reports and chance rumours. 

1. The MISCHIEF of eumoub. I. Bumour distresses by its prophecy of coming evil. 
There may be rumours of good, to cheer. But in the present instance" we have only 
rumours of evil brought to our attention. Such reports cloud the present with dijii 
visions of a possible dark future. It is hard enough to face the difficulties of to-day ; 
add to these the portents of to-morrow, and the load maybe crushing. "Sufficient 



126 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. th. 1—27 

unto the dny is the evil thereof," 2. Bumour dlarm» hy it» vagiteneu. Bumour is not 
news, not the picture of the distant, hut only its shadow. If we knew the worst, we 
might know now to prepare for it ; hut rumour comes with large, general adumbra- 
tions, leaving us to fill in the details with imaginaiy horrorg. 3. £umour confuses us 
hy its contradictoriness. Eumour is to follow "upon rumour." There is to he a 
succession of reports. Possihly these might confirm one another. But general expe- 
rience would suggest that they are more likely to conflict one with another. The 
result is a chaos of impressions and a paralysis of energy. 4. Rumour exaggerates 
evU. It is rarely, if ever, true to fact. It is like the snowball, that grows as it rolls. 

II. OuE DUTY IN BEOABD TO EUMOUE. 1. We should be core/ul how we spread a 
rumour. First, it is necessary to ascertain that we receive it on good authority. Then 
it is important to guard against adding our reflections and impressions as parts of the 
original report. If the rumour be one calculated to do harm it may he well to keep it 
to ourselves. No good comes of scandalmongery. A vulgar sense of self-importance 
delights in telling shockins; news ; hut the motive is a low one, and the action may 
be most unkind. Panics spring from rumour. When a thoughtless person cries "Fire I " 
in a public place, he cannot answer for the consequences of his rash and perhaps fatal 
folly. We need self-restraint to prevent the mischievous spread of rumour. 

" Bnmonr is a pipe 
Blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures; 
And of so easy and so plain a stop. 
That the blunt monster with uncounted heads, 
The still-discordant wavering multitude. 
Can play upon it." 

2. We should Se on our guard against yielding to rumowr. It wants oonrage and 
strength to resist this influence, especially when our neighbours are carried away by it. 
But past experience should teach caution. We have better than rumour to follow in 
seeking our highest interest. " We have not followed cunningly devised fables." We 
have " the more sure word of prophecy," and the inward personal experience of the soul 
with God. Christianity is not based on a rumour of ghost-stories ; it stands on the 
historical facts of gospel history and on Christian experience. 

Ver. 26 (latter part). — A vain search. " Then they shall seek a vision," etc. 
Ezekiel describes the vain search for the assistance of a prophet's vision in the dark 
days of Israel's overthrow, and the utter failure of that search, as one of the features of 
the dreadful time. 

L The beabch. The words of true prophecy were not much valued by the careless 
people in their hours of ease ; but when trouble came natural anxiety and superstitious 
terror combined to drive them to the sacred oracles. The question arises — What did they 
wish to learn from the prophets ? There is no indication that they desired to know 
the will of God and to be directed back into his way. More probably they were simply 
consumed with a morbid curiosity as to their approaching doom. Was it certain that 
the nation must be scattered ? Now, little good can come from such inquiries. A 
search into the deep mysteries of the future is not likely to give us any very helpful 
results. It is in God's most merciful method of educating his children, to keep the 
future hidden, for the most part, and to give just so much light as is needed for the day. 
There is, however, a better side to this search. Trouble breaks through the thin crust 
of worldliness, and reveals the esspntially spiritual character of man and his needs. 
Then it is not possible to be satisfied with things seen and temporal. The unseen 
world that has been slighted in prosperous times is felt to be supremely real and of 
profoundest interest. So the sorrow-stricken soul searches for some voice out of the 
darkness beyond. 

II. The loss. The search proves to be vain and useless. The oracle Is dumb ; the 
prophet sees no vision ; the Law perishes ; counsel ceases. This is a disappointment 
for the boasting confidence of the people (Jer. xviii. 18). 1. There is no new in^ra- 
tioH, Bevelation did not continue to come in an unbroken stream of light. There 
were periods of darkness in the history of Israel, when no new word of God was ^ven. 
The completion of the Bible has put an end to this kind of revelation. Yet there is 



CH. vii. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 127 

the inspiring guidance of God's eternal Spirit and the opening of the eyes of spiritually 
minded men to a personal knowledge and to new aspects of truth. If this ceases, 
though the letter of revelation remains, the quickening spirit is lost. 2. The old written 
word M lost. Not only is there no prophet's vision ; even the ancient Law perishes from 
the priest. The ceremonial of the temple was stopped by Nebuchadnezzar's destruction 
of Jerusalem. This was very different from the final cessation of it when the Jewish 
economy had passed away. Now the loss of the Law was premature. It would be 
paralleled by our loss of the whole Bible and its guidance — a thing that happened 
practically in the Middle Ages. 3. Tradition fails. This counsel of the ancients is 
lost in the confusion of the scattered people. There are floating beliefs and customs of 
religion that help and influence us unconsciously. In a broken, disordered condition 
even these advantages may be lost. 

IIL The bin. The lamentable condition was part of the punishment of Israel's sin. 
This wai the abuse of Law and prophecy. The law of the ritual had been followed as a 
mere form, and trusted without moral obedience (Isa. i. 10 — 15). Such a desecration of 
religion may be justly punished by the loss of its aid. Perhaps this would be the most 
merciful way to bring people to appreciate eternal verities. If all our Bibles were lost, 
should we value them more, and crave the recovery of them with a new relish ? With 
Israel, prophecy was degraded till the popular prophets became mere echoes of popular 
opinions. Then they were deceivers of the people, and not only did they deserve to 
be swept away, but the loss of them was a merciful deliverance to the deluded nation. 
There u a teaching which can be well spared, especially in new of a higher gospel. 

"Bingonttheold, 
Bing in the new ; 
Bing out the false, 
Bing in the true.* 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 4. — Beeompense. All earthly government presumes the ideas of responsibility 
and retribution. Human nature itself contains what may be regarded as their condi- 
tions and elements. The welfare, and indeed in certain stages the very existence, of 
society renders recompense a necessity. What is true of human relations has truth also 
in reference to those that are Divine. The parallel, indeed, is not complete, but it is real. 

I. Reoomfensb implies a free and responsible natdbe on the past of man. 
There can be no recompense where there is no accountability ; and there can be no 
accountability where there is no intelligence, no freedom. Natural objects, Eant tells 
us, act according to laws ; spiritual beings, according to representation of laws. Man 
18 capable of apprehending and approving moral ordinances prescribed for his guidance 
and control ; he can recognize moral authority. And he is distinguished from unin- 
telligent and involuntary natures in that he can obey or disobey the laws which he 
apprehends. If this were not so, consequences might indeed ensue from action; but 
recompense would be an impossibility. 

II. Eecompbnbe presumes that there is on the part of God no indiffebhnob, 

BUT DEEP CONCERN, WITH REGARD TO MAN's MORAL OHARAOTEB AND CONDUCT. If We 

think chiefly of law, or uniformity of action, we cannot but remember that law does 
not account for itself; if we think of the Lawgiver, we are constrained to recogcize 
purpose in all his proceedings and provisions. It cannot be imagined that the great 
Buler of all inflicts suffering for any delight in seeing his creatures suffer, or even that 
he regards their sufferings with perfect indifference. There must be a governmental, a 
moral end to be secured. The Lawgiver and Judge has what, in the case of a man, we 
should call a deep interest in the condition and action of the children of men. 

III. Recompense implies the possession by the Supreme Governor op fes 

ATTRIBUTES WHICH QUALIFY FOR THE EXERCISE OF JUDICIAL FUNCTIONS. Noue but 

an omniscient Ruler can be acquainted with all the secret springs of action, as well as 
with all the varied circumstances of life ; yet without such knowledge, how can 
recompense be other than imperfect and uncertain? None but a perfectly impartial 
Ruler can administer justioa which shall be undisputed and indisputable: who but 



128 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vii. 1—27. 

God is stainlessly and conspicuously just ? All earthly retribution is open to suspicion, 
for the simple reason that every human judge acts upon partial knowledge, and is 
liable to be influenced by prejudice. But as from the Divine tribunal there is no 
appeal, so with the Divine decisions can no fault be found. The Judge of all the earth 
will surely and in every case do right. 

IV. Recompense as a pbacticai. pbinoiplb operating in his life was bxbmpli- 
riBD IN THE history OF THE CHOSEN PEOPLE. The Old Testament has been written 
to little purpose for those who do not recognize the action of retributive Providence ; 
the narrative would be meaningless apart from this moral signiflcance. The position 
of Bzekiel compelled him to trace the hand of God in the life and fortunes of his 
nation. For the Captivity in the Bast was an unmistakable instance of God's judicial 
interposition. And if this was the most striking instance, others occur in abundance, 
witnessing to the fact that this earthly state is a scene of moral government, incomplete, 
indeed, yet not to be denied as real. 

V. Recompense is a principle of univbrsai. prevalence in God's administration 
OF THE affairs OP MANKIND. Doubtless the history of the children of Israel is 
intended to teach, among other lessons, in a very especial manner, the lesson of Divine 
government and human responsibility. Not only is the story told, but its moral 
significance is expressly set forth. Tet the great principles which are explicit in Old 
Testament history are implied in all history — ^in the history of every nation which 
exists upon earth. Go where we may, we do not and cannot go beyond the sphere of 
Divine retribution. Everywhere " the way of transgressors is hard," and " the wages 
of sin is death." 

VI. Recompense is a principle of the Divinb government which, when its ends 

ABE ANSWERED, ADMITS OF BEING TEMPERED WITH MBBCT. It is observablc that, in the 

prophetic writings, we find no unqualified denunciation. Threats of severe punishment 
are met with ; but they are followed by offers of mercy and promises of pardon to the 
penitent. The gates of hope are not closed upon the sinner. And if the most complete 
and glorious manifestation of God's character is to be found in the gospel of Christ, it 
must be remembered that, whilst that gospel was occasioned by man's ruin by sin and 
his liability to punishment, it was intended to secure man's salvation and deliverance 
" from the wrath to come." — T. 

Ver. 16. — Mourning. This chapter has justly been termed rather a dirge than a 
prophecy. Whilst its language is in some respects special to the experience of the 
children of Israel, such representations as this may well be applied to all those who have 
forsaken God, and have turned every man to his own way. 

I. There is abundant occasion for mourning on the part of those who have 

BINNED AND WHO ENDURE THE CONSEQUENCES OP SIN. 

II. It is ONLT a nature in some MBASUBE sensitive and susceptible of BETTER 

PEELING WHICH IS CAPABLE OP MOUBNINQ. How truly has it been said that "the 
worst of feeling is to feel all feeling die " 1 " They that lack time to mourn lack time 
to mend." 

III. Mourning for sin is mingled with self-ebproach and horrob. They who 
mourn because they have lost what was precious to them, especially because they have 
been bereaved of such as they held dear, may mourn tranquilly and holily, and with 
a jaatient submission to the will of God. But they who " mourn, every one for his 
iniquity," cannot but feel conscience-stricken because of their personal participation in 
sin, and their personal guilt for sin ; they cannot but accuse themselves, and pass 
judgment, as it were, upon their own wrong-doing and folly. 

IV. Such mourning is aggravated by the number op those partioipatino is 
it. The prophet compares the conscience-stricken remnant, distressed and weeping 
because of their own and their nation's iniquities, to a flight of doves uttering theii 
doleful lamentations. It is no exceptional, singular case; multitudes are involved ic 
the common fate, the common trouble. The feeling is heightened by sympathy. 
When all heads are bowed in confession, when the utterance of contrition rises frore 
many afflicted hearts, when a contRgion of sorrow and distress passes through a vast 
congregation of humble and penitent worshifpers, each is the better able to realize his 
own and the common distress, and to unburden the over-laden heart. 



CH. vn. 1— 27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 129 

V. Sincere mourning may lead to true repentance, and mat issue in newness 
OF LIFE. There is a "godly sorrow which worketh repentance" — a sorrow which is 
not only or chiefly because of the painful results of sin, but because of the very evil 
itself which is in sin, and because it is an offence agait]st a forbearing and gracious 
Uod. Where such sorrow Is, there can be no despair. The rainbow of hope spans the 
cloud, dark and heavy though it be. — T. 

Ver. 19. — The limitations to the power of wealth. The description of the text is 
remarkably picturesque. We seem to behold the panic-stricken remnant escaping 
from the city with trembling forms and anxious countenances. Horror and shame 
impel their flight, as, girded in coarse sackcloth, they hurry away, barely hoping that 
they may save their lives. As they go, in their terror they cast away their silver and 
gold, the burden of which may impede their flight, and which have lost their interest 
in the all-al sorbing endeavour to escape from the hands of the foe. The action thus 
graphically described is suggestive of a gnat principle. 

I. The wealthy are usually pbone to place too oreat reliance upon their 
riches. Money can purchase many things, and it is not surprising that the rich should 
have a latent belief that it can procure for them everything that thpy may need. 

II. The vanity or such resources becomes manifest even in ordinary BABTHliY 

calamities. In sickness, in sorrow of heart, in many calamities, especially in 
distressing bereavement, the powerlessness of wealth to deliver or to aid is made pain- 
fully appaient. In how many ciicumstances are the rich and the poor almost upon a 
level 1 How often would the wealthy be glad to exchange their riches for the poor 
man's poverty, might they enjoy the poor man's health ! 

III. Such powerlessness is yet more evident in the presence of such calamities 
AS ARE THE SIGN OF DiviNE DISPLEASURE. Judah was fated to experience the cata- 
strophe designated by the prophet as " the day of the wrath of the Lord." This awful 
expression conveys a distinct declaration concerning the Divine government, concern- 
ing human responsibility for rebellion and defection. From this wrath no worldly 
agency could possibly deliver. In the day when the Eternal enters into judgment with 
the sons of men, earth can offer no immunity, no protection. Release, exemption from 
righteous judgment can be purchased by no treasures, no gifts, no sacrifice. 

IV. Wealth, when abused, may even be a disadvantage and hindrance to its 
POSSESSOR. In a shipwreck, in a fire, in flight from a besieged or captured city, men 
have been known, by clutching their gold and burdening themselves with its weight, 
to lose their chance of escape, and consequently miserably to perish. Their wealth has 
been their stumbling-block. Such action and such a fate are a picture, a figure, of 
the conduct and the doom of not a few. They trust in uncertain riches instead of 
trusting in the living God. They make an idol of their possessions. That which 
they might hav used for good ends they misuse to their own destruction. 

V. Hence ai-pears the reasonableness, the wisdom, of seeking better 
resources and making better provision fob the day of trial. Silver and gold 
must fail their possessor; the time must come when they will be cast aside. But 
there are true riches; there is a steadfast and unfailing prop; there are riches of Divine 
mercy and compassion. It is not what a man has, it is what a man is, which is of 
supreme concern. He who has repented of sin and forsaken sin, who has sought and 
obtained through Christ acceptance with God, whose attitude towards the great King 
is no longer an attitude oi upposii-iou and rebellion, but one of subjection and obedience, 
he only can look forward with calm confidence to the day of trial ; for he knows whom 
he has trusted, and is persuaded that the Lord will keep that which he has committed 
to him against that day. — ^T. 

Ver. 22. — The averted face. In the figurative but natural and expressive language 
of the Hebrews, the shining of God's countenance means his good pleasure and good 
will towards those whom he favours, and the hiding or averting of his countenance 
means his displeasure. Prayer often shaped itself into the familiar expression, "The 
Lord cause his face to shine upon us ; " and the displeasure of Heaven was deprecated 
in such terms as these: "Turn not thy face from thy servants." The child dis- 
tinguishes at once between the smile and the frown of the parent ; the courtier is. ^t 

XZEKIEL. X 



130 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vii. 1—27. 

no loss to discriminate between the welcome and favour and the displeasure apparent 
upon the monarch's face. To the mind at all sensitive to the moral beauty and glory 
of God, no sentence can be so dreadful as that uttered in the simple but terrible 
language of the text, "My face will I turn also from them." 

I. In the shinino op God's countenance is life and jot. When the sun arises 
in his strength, and floods the hills and the valleys, the rivers and the forests, the corn- 
fields and the meadowsj with his glorious rays, nature returns the smiles, glows in the 
sunbeams, rejoices in the warmth and the illumination. Where the sun shines brightly, 
there the colours are radiant, the odour delicious, there the music of the grove is sweet 
and the harvest of the plain is golden, there life is luxuriant and gladness breaks forth 
into laughter and song. And in the moral, the spiritual realm, it is the sunlight of 
God's countenance, the manifestation of God's favour, which calls forth and sustains 
all spiritual life, health, peace, and joy. "In thy favour is life." 

II. Man's dnbbliep and sin occasion the hiding and wiTHDKAWiNa of God's 
COUNTENANCE. The change is not in him ; it is in us. When the sun is not seen in the 
nky, it is not because he no longer shines, but because clouds, mists, or smoke, ascending 
from the earth, come between the orb of day and the globe which he illumines. So 
if God turns his face from an individual, a city, a people, it is because their sins have 
risen up as a dense, foul fog, intervening between them and a holy, righteous God. 
" Your iniquities have separated between you and your God." So it was with those 
against whom the Prophet Bzekiel was called upon to testify. So it is vdth multitudes 
whom the ministers of Christ are required to address in language of tender sympathy, 
yet of expostulation and reproach. 

IIL The aversion of God's countenance is the worst op all calamities. It 
is not to be wondered at that men with their composite nature, absorbed as they are 
in things which affect the body and the earthly life, should think chiefly of the stifTer- 
ings and privations in which the moral laws of the universe involve them. And these 
sufferings and privations are realities which no thoughtful man can fail to perceive and 
to estimate with something like correctness. Yet he who is enlightened and in an)' 
measure spiritually sensitive cannot fail to see that it is the regard of God himsell 
which is of chief import. It is better to enjoy the Divine loving^kindness, even in 
|)Overty, privation, spoliation, and weakness, than to possess luxury, honour, and the 
delights of sense, and to know that God's countenance is turned away, is hidden. 

IV. A MERCIFUL God will turn again his pace and cause it to shine UPON 

penitent and believing SUPPLIANTS. It is sin which conceals the Divine counten- 
ance; it is repentance which seeks the shining anew of that countenance; and 
salvation consists in the response of God to the prayer of man. Yet the turning of his 
face towards us is the work of his own mercy, tjie levelation of his own nature — com- 
passionate, gracious, and forgiving. — ^T. 

Ver. 25.— Peace sought in vain. No feature of distress and horror is omitted in this 
prophetic description of the effects of God's displeasure manifested towards the Jewish 
people. The burden of predicting such judgments must have been too heavy to bear : 
what can be said of the state of those upon whom the judgments came? They mi<'ht 
well ask, "Who can abide the day of his coming?" What more appalling than the 
account given in these few words of the state of the people in the time of their dis- 
asters : " They shall seek peace, and there shall be none"? 

I. The great blessing op peace. This may be misunderstood. Warfare with 
ignorance, error, and iniquity, is characteristic of the condition of the good man here 
upon earth. Our Lord Jesus saw this, and declared, " I am not come to send peace, 
hut a sword." The presence of evil requires that the attitude of the righteous should 
be one of antagonism. But this is for a season and for a purpose. A state of con- 
troversy and hostility 'is n6t a state in itself perfectly desirable and good. Peace 
of conscience, peace with God, peace with Christian brethren, as far as possible peace 
with all men, — these are blessings devoutly to be desired and sought. 

IT. The incompatibility op bin with peace. If peace results from the harmony 
of the several parts of a man's nature among themselves, and from harmony between 
"an as a moral being and his God, it is not to be expected that, when the ]iassions are 
iiiiiijcd agiiinst the reason, interest against conscience, the subject against the rightful 



OH. vn. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIBL. 131 

and Divine Ruler, there can be peace. It is mercifully ordered that peace should flea 
when iniquity prevails. " There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked." 

III. The punishment appkopriatb to sin often leads to a desibb fob the 
BLESSINGS OF PEACE. Men seek peace, and there is none. Thus they are led to reflect 
upon the unreasonableness of their expectatioa that the moral laws of the universe 
should be changed for their pleasure. Tossed to and fro upon the stormy waters, they 
long for the haven of repose. 

IV. Peace is only to be obtained upon God's own terms of complete bub- 
bender AND submission. It Is uot to be found either by endeavouring to stifle the 
voice of conscience within, or by withdrawing from a world of outward strife to some 
seclusion and isolation. Both these methods have often been tried, but in vain. The 
conciliation must take place within. The heart must find rest and satisfaction in the 
gospel of Jesus Christ, " our Peace.'' The whole nature must, by the power of the 
Spirit, be brought into subjection to God. The fountain of peace must thus be divinely 
opened, and "peace will flow as a river." — T. 

Ver. 26. — The prophetic vision dimmed, and the prophetic voice silenced. In seasons 
of national calamity and disaster, evils abound which are apparent to every observer. 
Famine, pestilence, and slaughter, the ruin of industry and the cessation of trade, the 
breaking-up of homes and the departure of national glory, — such ills as these none can 
fail to notice and to appreciate. But the worst is not always what meets the eye. 
Beneath the surface, harm is wrought, and the very springs of the national life may 
perhaps be poisoned. Ezekiel, in predicting the disasters that shall come upon his 
countrymen, mentions as among them bonds, death, the destruction of city and temple, 
the overthrow of king and prince. But he does not fail to refer to what may perhaps 
strike the imagination less, but what may upon reflection appear to be an evil more 
lamentable and injurious. The time shall come when, in their distress, the smitten 
people shall turn for counsel and guiiiance, comfort and succour, to the priest, the 
prophet, the ancient, of the Lord. And then, to crown their sorrow, to deepen it into 
despondency, they shall find that the vision has perished, that " the oracle is dumb." 

I. Thebb abb in a nation men specially qualified and commissioned to be 

THE guides of THE PEOPLE, AND TO INSPIEE THEM TO A LIFE OF VIRTUE AND RELIGION. 

Among the Jews, the priests performed the sacrifices, and in this represented the 
nation before God ; whilst the seers and prophets spake to the people of righteousness, 
temperance, and judgment to come, and in this represented God to the nations. Others, 
too, there were who lived and taught among their felluw-countrymen as witnesses of 
God. In every community there are raised up by Divine Providence just and fearless 
servants of God, who testify to the law which a nation ought to obey, and who summon 
their fellow-countrymen to obedience. There was doubtless what was special in the 
case of the religious leaders of the Jews, but the principle is the same wherever there 
exist soldiers of righteousness whose endeavour it is to lead the people in the holy war. 

II. In the time of a nation's trouble it is natural that THE PEOPLE SHOULD 
HAVE EECOUBSE TO THEIB BELIQIOUS AND MOEAL TEAOHEBS AND LEADEBS. It is with 

nations as with individuals; in time of prosperity and of that distraction which is 
produced by absorption in things of earth and sense, the soul's interests are often 
neglected, and God himself is often forgotten. But let affiiction befall either a man or 
a people, let earthly success come to an end, let earthly props be removed, let earthly 
visions be shattered, — tlien it is seen that consolation and succour are sought in direc- 
tions long forsaken and despised. The counsellor, whose warnings were formerly 
ridiculed, is now besought to guide and to help. The neglected oracle is sought unto. 
Unwonted petitions are presented for help. " Is there," is the cry, " is there a word 
from the Lord?" 

III. In such SEASONS, AND IN SUCH CIBOUMSTANCES, IT MAT BE FOUND THAT 
APPLICATION FOB COUNSEL AND FOB SUCCOUB IS MADE TOO LATE. The prophet may 

be dead ; he may be slain, the innocent with the guilty ; he may share the fate of 
those whom he warned in vain. Or his voice may be judicially silenced ; no word may 
be given him whereby to relieve anxiety or to encourage hope. And recourse may be 
had even to the proper quarter when it is too late to be of any service. 

IV. Yet it ever bemains tuue that au ai'peal is oi'en to him who is th« 



132 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vii. 1— 27. 

SonscK OF ALL LIGHT AND CONSOLATION. God has not forgotten to be gracious. 
Certain opportunities which have been neglected may never recur ; certain ministers 
- of wisdom and sympathy, whose ministrations have been despised, may no more be 
available. But the Lord's ear is not heavy that it cannot hear, nor his hand shortened 
that it cannot save. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 15. — The hand of the dock on the hour of doom. The bulk of men persist 
in thinking of God as if he were such a Oue as themselves. Bejecdng the revelation 
of God's nature contained in Scripture, they conceive of him as a man greatly mag- 
nified — the infirmities of man magnified, as well as his virtues. They Isnow the 
pioneness of man to threa'en and not to perform ; hence they conclude that the 
judgments of God, because delayed, will evaporate in empty words. God will not be 
hasteneil. Proportionate to his immeasurable power is his immeasurable patience. 
Nevertheless, equitable justice will be meted out. The wrath accumulates as in a 
thunder-cloud, until it is overburdened, and the storm all the more violently breaks 
forth. Never yet in the history of men has God failed to vindicate his righteousness. 
Never yet has the transgressor escaped, and never will he. As surely as the sun 
shines, vengeance will come. 

I. Eeteibdtion, though appabentlt taedt, has its own sbt time. For the most 
part it is not acco.-ding to human expectation. " God seeth not as man seeth." A 
thousand things enter into God's calculation which do not enter into man's reckoning. 
Ti e clock of heaven does not measure days and years; it measures events and neces- 
sities. The well-being of other races has to be pondered beside the race of men. Very 
often the doom of the ungodly is a fixed and irreversible fact long before that doom is 
felt and endured. From that moment gracious help is withdrawn, and the doomed 
man becomes the victim of his folly. To God's eye, the end is seen long before it is 
seen by man. While he is yet promising himself much delight, lo! by an invisible 
thread the sword is suspended over his head. 

II. Retribution is not a haphazard accident. It is the outcome of infallible 
wisdom and righteous deliberation. The Supreme Ruler of heaven says, " I send." 
As nothing is too great for his management, so nothing is too minute to engage his 
notice. He who nnurishes myriads of myriads of blades of grass, and clothes the hills 
with majestic forests, counts every hair of our heads. Too often men are so stunned 
with the blow of retribution that they count themselves only the victims of a great 
catastrophe, and look on every side for sympathy. But when conscience awakes and 
connucts the calamity with previous sin, then at length — too late to avert the crushing 
evil — they confess that it is " the Lord that smiteth." " God is not mocked." The 
seed we sow to-day will bear its proper fruit to-morrow. 

III. Retbibution fkom God is most equitable. There are no scales so delicately 
true as those in the hands of God. The judgment is precisely " according to thy ways." 
It is exact " recompense for aJl thine abominations." Often men are so blinded by the 
deceitfulness of sin that they do not perceive this. But when the transient pleasure of 
sin has ceased, men awake to the fact that the retribution is well deserved. This will 
be the keenest sting of the suffering — that it is a jmt desert. If men could only persuade 
themselves that they were unjustly treated, it would be an alleviation of the woe — it 
would be a sweet consolation in their misery. But such alleviation is denied them. 
Their own consciences will confirm the sentence, anl out of the dark abyss the cry will 
rise, "Just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints." 

IV. Retribution, ib clearly foreseen by the riqhteodb. The unbeliever has no 
eye with which to see the kingdom of God. The organ of vision he has first blinded, 
then destroyed. So, too, he is blind to the significance of passing events. He does 
not perceive the moral aspect of things — does not see that God's hand is behind the 
smoke and din of war. But the man of God has learnt to see God in everything. In 
all the sunshine of life he sees God, whose presence gives a brighter lustre to all 
earthly joy. And in all the adversities of life he learns to see the rod and the hand 
that wields it. Standing by the side of God, and in full sympathy with him, Ezekiel 
saw clearly every minute detail of the retribution that was preparing, and, imtil the 
latest moment, implored fhtni to escape. But he foresaw also that they would delude 
ihemsulvch to the very last — would buoy thumselves with false hopes. 



CH. II. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPBET EZEKIEL. 133 

V. Eetkibution, when it comes, is most complete. On every side there is bitter 
disappointment. The earthly props oa which men were wont to rely, fail them. All 
the bonds of society relax and dissolve. To resist invasion the summoning trumpet is 
blown; but, alas! none respond. Anarchy is everywhere. The day itgelf becomes 
night, and every fount of joy is poisoned. Amid previous corrections and afflictions 
there were many forms of gracious compensation — silver linings on the black cloud. 
But no relief comes now. There is defeat and disaster on every side. Weeping 
endures through a long night, without any prospect of joy in the morning. It is 
darkness without a beam of light, despair without a vestige of hope. Not even shall 
there be the sweet relief of tears ; for the hearts of men have been rendered insensible 
by the cursed power of sin. They are at length " past feeling " — incapable of repent- 
ance. "Neither shall there be any wailing for them." It is abasement the most 
profound. The first has become the last. 

VI. This eetmbution is the natural fruitage of sin. Our wise and gracious 
God has constructed his universe on this principle, that every form of rebellion shall 
bear in itself the seed of penalty. The pivot on which everything turns is righteous- 
ness. There is no occasion for Grod to issue any code of penalties commensurate with 
acts of transgression. Sin and punishment are one and the selfsame thing. Retribu- 
tion is simply full-grown sin. It is often sweet in the bud, but the ripened fruit is 
bitterne.is absolute. As gunpowder is, in its nature, explosive, so that it is madness to 
set alight to it and expect it not to explode ; so sin is, in its very nature, destructive, 
and can lead to nothing else than destruction. Love cements and unites ; transgression 
dissolves and separates. And separation from God is ruin. Where God is, there is 
life ; where God is not, there is death. Where God is, there is heaven ; where God is 
not, there is blackest hell. — D. 

Vers. 16 — 22. — Fallaciout deliverance. Plight is not deliverance. If the invading 
army is God's army, no escape is possible, save m submission. We cannot elude God's 
detectives. Lonely mountains, no more than crowded cities, serve as an asylum, il' 
God be our Foe. As we cannot get beyond the limits of his world, neither can we 
get beyond the reach of his sword. 

I. Theie misery. They may escape, for a moment, sword-wounds and bodily 
captivity ; yet they have not escaped from inward distress and wretchedness. Exposure 
to hunger and cold and nakeiiness on the mountains is scarcely to be preferred to 
violent deaiih. God, the real Avenger, has smitten them in their flight. Their sense- 
less cowardice has added to their pain. Even though they live, they are dishonoured 
among men. The heathen nations will point at them with a finger of scorn. The 
common moralities of men reflect, though it be feebly, the just displeasure of God. 
Honour is lost, though life is yet continued. 

II. Their remorse. Tears are on all faces, and sorrow is an occupant of every 
breast. Yet it is a selfish sorrow, which bears the fruit of death. It is not repentance, 
it is only remorse. Had this sorrow earlier come, and had it sprung from a better • 
motive, it would have availed to deliver them. They mourn, not because they have 
sinned, but because their sin has been found out. When retribution comes, repentance 
is impossible. 

III. The collapse of false trust. In the day of their prosperity they had made 
their riches their trust. They reposed their faith in idols of silver instead of the 
living God. For gold they imagined they could hire mercenaries or buy the favour of 
kings. Such wealth as theirs seemed to them an impregnable security. They could 
make gates of brass and towers of iron. Yet how sudden and how complete was the 
collapse of their proud hope I Their gold, instead of a protection, became a snare. 
It attracted the cupidity of their foes. As hounds scent the prey, so foreign soldiers 
scented from afar Israel's riches. The gold and silver lavished on .lehovah's temple 
drew, like a magnet, the avarice of the Babylonian king! To rely on material 
possessions is to rely on a broken reed — is to slumber on the edge of a volcano. 

IV. Their religious degradation. Their temple had been their pride; now it 
shall be their shame. They had gloried in its external beauty, and had forgotten that 
the Lord of the temple is great;er than the building. They had neglected the 
spirituality of worship, and had profaned the holy place with human inventions and 



134 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vn. 1—27. 

with idolatrous symbols. In their folly they had deemed it politic to set up, side by 
side with Jehovah, the shrines of other deities. But their policy was rotten. It was 
based cm atheistic selfishness. And now the profanation they had commenced shall 
be completed by their foes. They had admitted a trickling stream of idolatry into the 
temple; now it shall become a flood. Thus God makes our sins to become our 
punishments ; at length they sting like hornets, they bite like adders. Once our sin 
tasted like a sweet morsel ; when once in the veins it works like poison. Rebellion is 
but a seed, of which retribution is the ripe fruit. 

V. The climax of disaster is God's departoee. " My face will I turn also from 
them." This is the crowning disaster, the bitter dregs of misery, the knell of doom. 
If, in our hour of crushing affliction, God would turn towards us as a Friend, the wheel 
of ill fortune would be reversed; all loss would be recovered. If he would only move 
upon our hearts with his mighty grace, and reduce our self-will and pride, disaster 
would be changed into dowry, night into day. The hurtling clouds would burst into 
showers of blessing. But when God departs, the last ray of hope departs, and man's 
prosiieots set in blackest night. — D. 

Vers. 23 — 27. — The even halances of Jehovah. The penal judgments of God are not 
haphazard events. The minds of thoughtful men discover in them a marked feature of 
retribution. Striking correspondences occur between the transgression and the punish- 
ment. "I will (io unto them after their way." 

I. Violence is met by violence. The Law of God had been despised; and, 
instead of a just administration of Law, the rule of violence had prevailed. Therefore 
by violence they shall be mastered. " Make a chain." The arm of power had domi- 
nated over the hand of justice ; therefore a mightier ann shall master it. Often has 
it been seen that they who ruthlessly use the sword themselves perish by the sword. 
Men are often " hoisted on their own petard." The gallows which Haman had prepared 
for another served for himself. 

II. Idolatry assimilates men in likeness to the idols. "I will bring the worst 
of the heathen upon them." The objects of their worship had reputed attributes of 
lust, cruelty, oppression, violence ; these attributes shall appear in the worshippen. 
It is a law of nature, as well as a law of Scripture, that "they who make them are 
like unto them; so is every one that bows down to them." As the stream cannot rise 
above its fount, so man cannot rise above the object of his adoration. Worshippers of 
idols rapidly deteriorate in character and in moral quality. If God is driven out of the 
heart, demons will speedily come in. " Nature abhors a vacuum." 

III. Opportunities abused are at length closed. " They shall seek peace, aD<l 
there shall be none." " They shall seek a vision from the prophet ; but the Law shall 
perish from the priest." Had they sought earlier, they would have found ; now proba- 
tion has ceased, the Judge has ascended his throne. All forbearance has its limits. 
Many men are always one day behind. The tide has ceased to flow. Ebb has begun. 
In middle life they are weeping over a wasted youth. In old age they are lamenting 
the decay of vigorous manhood. On a death-bed they regret the neglect of yesterday's 
opportunity. When the last shilling is spent men learn the value of money. To-day 
there is the sunlight of hope ; to-morrow there will be black despair. 

IV. Tee leaders in rebellion incur the heaviest chastisements. " The kius^ 
shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation." In proportion to the 
station any man occupies in society, in proportion to his talents and strength of 
character, is the influence he exerts, whether for good or for evil. The king will 
always have a crowd of servile imitators. Princes, by virtue of their exalted rank, 
wield an extc nsive influence. For the right employment of influence every man is 
responsible. He is daily sowing now ; and, as the sowing is, so will be the harvest. 
The mourning of a king will have an intensity of bitterness that never acerbates the 
tears of a peasant. 

V. Justice shall finally be pabamount. "They shall know that I am the 
Lord." Although they would not know bim as Friend and Benefactor, they shall 
know him and acknowledge him as the Vindicator of right. The spirits in hell 
confess him, while blind and ungrateful men ignore him. " We know thee who 
thou art." Righteousness is endowed with a deathless life ; and out of all present 



CH. vn. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THfi PEOPHET EZEKIBL. i3S 

Cdnfusiiin and strife it shall come to the surface and be by all honnure!. The lesson 
which men will not learn in the days of prosperity they shall learn in the dark 
hours of adversity. They shall know that Jehovah is supreme. Facile princeps. Yet 
such knowledge does not save ; it leads only to deeper despair. It had been a long 
fight between self-will and Grod's will; and men often flatter themselves they are going 
to conquer. But the termination is always the same : Ood over all. — D. 

Vers. 1—4. — The punishment of the wicked. "Moreover the word of the Lord 
came unto me, saying, Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord God unto the land 
of Israel ; An end, the end is come," etc. " This chapter," says Dr. Currey, " is a dirge 
rather than a prophecy. The prophet laments over the near approach of the day 
wherein the final blow shall be struck, and the city be made the prey of the Chaldean 
invader. Supposing the date of the prophecy to be the same as that of the preceding, 
there were now but four, or perhaps three, years to the final overthrow of the kingdom 
of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar" ('Speaker's Commentary'). Our text leads us to 
observe— 

I. That the ptwisHMBNT of the wicked, though long delayed, is cektain, 
UNLESS it be averted bt theie REPENTANCE. " Thus saith the Lord God unto the 
land of Israel ; An end, the end is come upon the four comers of the land. Now is the 
end come upon thee." The land is looked upon as a garment, and by the end coming 
upon the four comers thereof the prophet indicates the fact that the approaching 
judaiment will cover the entire coimtry. The punishment of their sins had been 
repeatedly and solemnly announced to the Israelites; and they had disregarded the 
announcement, and persisted in their sinful ways ; and now " the end " was at hand. 
They would not consider that end while there was hope for them; and now the 
execution of the Divine judgment cast its dark shadow across their path (cf. Lam. i. 9). 
The delay in the infliction of the punishment of sin is sometimes construed as an 
assurance that it will never be inflicted. " Because sentence against an evil work is 
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do 
evil." Perilous and, if persisted in, fatal mistake! If in the time during which 
punishment is held back the wicked do not truly repent, that pimishment will be all 
the more terrible when it comes (cf. Eom. ii. 4 — 11). The holiness of God arrays him 
in resolute antagonism against sin. 

II. That the punishment of the wicked proceeds from the Lord God. " I 
will send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways," etc. The 
Chaldeans were as a weapon in the hand of the Almighty for inflicting deserved 
punishment upon Israel. (We have noticed this point in our homily on ch. v. 5 — 17.) 
When the stroke had fallen it was looked upon as having come from the band of the 
Most High (cf. Lam. i. 14, 15 ; ii. 1 — 9, 17). All persons and all powers are at God's 
disposal, and can be employed by him for the execution of his judgments. Very 
impressively is this illustrated in the plagues and calamities witb which he visited 
Egypt by the hand of Moses. 

III. That the punishment of the wicked bears exact relations to their 
sins. 1. Their sins are the cause of their punishment. " I will judge thee according 
to thy ways." They had brought upon themselves the severe impending judgments. 
They could not truthfully charge the Lord with injustice or harshness in thus visiting 
them, for their punishment was the just consequence of their sins. " Wherefore doth 
• living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?" With frequent 
reiteration Bzekiel declares that their sins have evoked their sufl'eiings. With pathetic 
sorrow Jeremiah acknowledges the same truth (Lam. i. H, 9, 18; iii. 42; iv. 13, 14). 
And it is ever true that the sins of men are the reasons of the judgments of God. 
2. Their sims are the measure of their punishment. " I will judge thee according to 
thy ways, and will recompense upon thee all thine abominations." Their sins were 
persistent, and were aggravated by many advantages and privileges conferred upon 
them; therefore their punishment was terrible in its severity. In the distribution of 
the Divine judgments a strict proportion is observed between the guilt and the penalty 
of sin. God inflicts his judgments equitably (cf. Luke xii. 47, 48). 3. ITieir sins 
determine the character of their punishment. " I will recompense thy ways upon thee, 
and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee," t.e. in their dire consequences. 



136 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vii. 1—27. 

According to the order which God has established, the punishment grows out of the 
sin. Punishment is "ripened sin." "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reap," etc. Sin, says Hengstenherg, " has an active and a passive history. When the 
latter begins, that which was before the object of gratification becomes the object of 
terror." "Let the sinner know that he binds for himself the rod which will smite 
him." " His own iniquities shall take the wicked himsflf, and he shall be holden with 
the cords of his sins." 

IV. That the punishment of the wicked will be inflexibly executed. " And 
mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity." The holy Scriptures magnify 
tlie mercy of God — its infinity, its pei'petaity, its tenderness, and his delight in it. 
And sometimes the wicked have drawn from these representations the unwarrantable 
conclusion that he is so merciful as to be devoid iif justice, so gentle as to be incapable 
uf anger. But " our God is a consuming Fire." He will be as firm in the punishment 
of the persistently wicked as he is gracious in pardoning the penitent. He who merci- 
fully spared repentant Nineveh ruthlessly destroyed incorrigible Sodom and Gomorrah. 

V. That the punishment of the wicked witnesses to the Divine existence 
AND SUPEBMACT. " And ye shall know that I am the Lord." (We have dealt with 
these words as they occur in ch. vi. 7, 10.) " Every one must know the Lord in the 
end, if not as One that calls, allures, blesses, then as One that smites, is angry, 
punishes" (Schroder). Be it ours to know him as the God of all grace, and to obey 
and serve him with loyal hearts and devoted lives. — W. J. 

Vers. 5 — 11. — Aspects of the execution of the Divine fudgments. " Thus saith the 
Lord God; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. An end is come," etc. Nearly 
eveiything contained in these verses we have already noticed in previous paragraphs. 
Vers. 8 and 9 are almost a literal repetition of vers. 3 and 4, which came under con- 
sideration in our preceding homily. But certain aspects of the execution of the Divine 
judgment are here set forth which we have not hitherto contemplated. We shall con- 
fine our attention to a brief consideration of these. 

I. The delibeeation with which the execution of the Divine judgments is 
prepared. " The rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded. Violence is risen up into 
a rod of wicliedness." The rod is the emblem of power to execute the judgment; and 
pride, of disposition to execute it. Nebuohadnezziir the Chaldean monarch is thus 
indicated. And the text suggests that his power had long been in preparation for the 
stern work which he was about to do, and that now it was in readiness for it, like a 
rod which has been planted, taken root, and grown into vigorous development. " It 
illustrates," says Kitto, " the Lord's deliberateness in executing his judgments, as con- 
trasted with man's haste, impatience, and precipitancy. Man, so liable to err in 
judgment and action and to whom, slow deliheration in inflicting punishment upon 
transgressors might seem naturally to result from his own consciousness of weakness, 
is in haste to judge and prompt to jict; whereas he who cannot err, and whose imme- 
diate action must be as true and right as his must delayed procedure, works not after 
the common manner of men, but after the manner of a husbandman in sowing and 
planting. When the sin comes to that state, which must in the end render judgment 
needful for the maintenance of righteousness upon the earth, and for the vindication of 
the Lord's justice and honour, the rod of punishment is planted ; it grows as the sin 
grows; and it attains its maturity for action at the exact time that the iniquity 
reaches maturity for punishment. When Israel entered upon that course of sin which 
ended in ruin, the rod of the Babylonian power was planted ; and as the iniquities of 
Israel increased, the rod went on growing, until, under Nebuchadnezzar, it became a 
great tree, overshadowing the nations ; and when the full term was come, it was ripe 
and ready lor the infliction upon Israel of the judgments which had so often been 
denounced, and were so greatly needed " (' Daily Bible Illustrations '). This principle 
of the Divine action in human history may be traced in the relation of the Israelites 
to the ancient Canaanites. And in the Babylonian power it receives twofold illustra- 
tion. One of these we have in the text, where Babylon is the rod of judgment for 
Israel. And afterwards Babylon itself was smitten by the rod of the Medo- Persian 
power, which had been gradually growing into maturity and strength. And the same 
piinciplc is in operation to-day in relation both to nations and tc individuals. If by 



cB. vii. 1— 21] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 137 



either sin be persisted in, the rod of God's judgment for that sin will be planted, and 
when it has grown into power, Gnd will sorely smite the uaiiuu or lue iniiiviuual with 
it. What the poet saj's of nature we may say of God. 

"Nature has her laws 

That will not brook infringement ; in all time, 

All circumstance, all state, in every clime, 
She liolds aloft the same avenging sword, 

And, sitting on her boundless throne sublime. 
The vials of her wriith, with justiofi stored. 

Shall, in her own good hour, on all that's ill be pnured." 

(J. G. Percival.) 
n. The suddenness with which the bxeoution of the Divine judgments 
TAKES PLACE. " An end is come, the end is come : it watcheth for thi'e; behold, it is 
come." Instead of "it watcheth for thee," the Hebrew is, as in the margin, "it 
awaketli against thee." The end which had long seemed to sleep, now awakes and 
comes; it comes in sharp judgments. "The repetition indicates the certainty, the 
greatness, and the swiftness" of the approaching end. The judgment which had so 
long and frequently been announced to Israel, would come upon them at last suddenly 
and unexpectedly. That which seemed to sleep, awakes, arises, and draws near, to their 
confusion and dismay. How often do the judgments of God come unexpeciedly, and 
with a great shock of surprise ! Thus came the Deluge upon the old world, and the 
fiery flood upon the cities of the plain (IVIatt. xxiv. 38, 39 ; Luke xvii. 26 — 29). Thus 
came the awful summons to the fool in the midst of his temporal prosperity and 
spiritual destitution (Luke xii. 16 — 20). And so will come the last, tiie great day of 
judgment. " The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night," etc. (2 Pet. iiL 10). 
Although the wicked may persuade them:ielves that the Divine retribution lingers ami 
slumbers, it is ever awake and active, and, unless they repent, it shall come upon them 
in "swift destruction." 

III. The teansfobmation which the execution of the Divine judgments 
PRODUCES. " The time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again 
of the mountains." Schroder translates more correctly, " The day is near, tumult, and 
not joyous shouting upon the mountains." Upon some of their hills the Israelites 
planted vines, and in the time of the gathering of the vintage the labourers made the 
hills to echo with shouts and songs of gladness (cf. Isa. xvi. 10). Perhaps the prophet 
refers to this in the text. Or the relerence may be to the altars which were upon the 
mountains (ch. vi. 3, 13 ; Jer. iii. 21, 23), and from which the shouts and songs of 
revelling worshippers echoed far and wide. And instead of these shouts of joy there 
should arise the wild tumult of war, and the lamentable cries of the distressed, 
imploring succour or seeking deliverance. Terrible are the transformations wrought 
by the judgments of the Most High. The selfish rich man passed from his luxurious 
home, his purple and fine linen, and his sumptuous fare, " and in Hades he lifted up 
his eyes, being in torments," and was unable to obtain even a drop of water to cool his 
parched tongue. Blessed are they who, through repentance and faith in the Lord 
Jesus Christ, are delivered from condemnation, and made heirs of eternal life. — W. J. 

Vers. 12, 13, 19. — The limitation of the power of riches. "The time is come, the 
day draweth near : let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn," etc. It is not wise to 
despise riches, or to affect to do so, or to depreciate them. They have many uses ; they 
may be made the means of promoting the physical well-being and the mental progress 
I'i their possessor, of enabling him to do much good to others, and of furthering the 
highest and best interests of the human race. When wisely employed, they produce 
most excellent results. On the other hand, it is foolish and wrong to over-estimate 
them, to make their attainment the object of our supreme concern and effort, to trust 
in them, to make a god of them. The verses chosen as our text suggest the following 
observations. 

I. 'iHAT CIKCUMSTANCES MAY ARISE BEDUCING THE VALUE OF EICHBS UNTIL THET 

ARE ALMOST WORTHLESS. "Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn : for wrath 
is upon all the multitude thereof. For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, 
although they were yet alive : for the vision is touching the whole midtitude thereof; 



138 THE BOOK OF TflE PROPHET EZEKIEL. tea. vn. 1—21. 

he shall not relurn." The reference seems to be to a compulsory sale of their estates 
by the Jews at the time of the troubles dow impending. As the ' Speaker's Com- 
mentary ' points out, " it was grievous for an Israelite to part with his land. But now 
the seller need not mourn his loss, nor the buyer exult in his gain. A common rain 
should carry both away ; the buyer should not take possession, nor should the seller 
return to profit by the buyer's absence. Should he live, it will be in exile. All should 
live the pitiful lives of strangers in another country." The sad changes about to 
transpire would so depreciate the value of the commodity sold, that the seller need not 
mourn over a bad bargain, or the buyer rejoice over a good one. Circumstances and 
events producing similar effects frequently arise, and will readily occur to every one 
upon reflection. The commercial value of properties and possessions fluctuates; and 
that to which a man may be looking confidently for the means of subsistence may 
become almost or altogether worthless. There is no absolute and permanent value in 
the riches of this world. ' 

II. That there abb evils in life feom which etches abb utterly foweblebs 
TO DELIVER THEIR POSSESSORS. (Ver. 19.) Noticc : 1. Their indbiUty to satisfy their 
souls. "They shall not satisfy their souls." Schroder interprets this that their 
silver and gold were testhetically worthless to the Israelites in the day of their 
calamity ; they were not able to minister to their taste or promote their enjoyment in 
their season of bitter woe. It is true that in the day of sore distress aU that can be 
bought with money will not afford relief. Esthetic gratifications — pictures and 
statues, poetry and music — cannot adequately minister to the soul in its deepest sorrows. 
But may we not discover in the words a deeper meaning ? Gold and silver cannot 
supply the soul's greatest needs, or satisfy its most importunate cravings. The gifts 
of God cannot be purchased with money. 2. Thwr inahility, in ee/rtain circumstances, 
to procure even the necessaries of bodily life. "They shall . . . neither fill their 
bowels." When no food was left in the beleaguered city, the Israelites could not 
appease, or even mitigate, their hunger with their riches. I have read of an Arab who 
lost his way in the desert, and was in danger of dying from hunger. At last he found 
one of the cisterns out of which the camels drink, and a little leathern bag near it. 
" God be thanked I " he exclaimed. " Here are some dates or nuts ; let me refresh 
myself." He opened the bag, but only to turn away in sad disappointment. The bag 
contained pearls. And of what value were they to one who, like Esau, was " at the 
point to die"? 3. jTheir inahility to deliver from the retributions of the Divine 
government. " Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day 
of the wrath of the Lord " (cf. Zeph. i. 18). Riches can neither set a man so high 
that God's judgments cannot reach him, nor surround him with such panoply that 
God's arrows cannot pierce through it. We have striking illustrations of this in the 
cases of two rich men of whom our Lord spake (Luke xii. 16 — 20 ; xvi. 19 — 31). And 
there are some of the ordinary afflictions and sorrows of this life from which we can 
secure neither immunity nor deliverance by means of riches. "A golden crown 
cannot cure the headache, nor a velvet slipper give ease of the gout, nor a purple robe 
fray away a burning fever." All the royal wealth of King David could not ward off 
death from one of his children (2 Sam. xii. 15 — 18), or exempt him from the heart- 
breaking treachery and rebellion of another (2 Sam. xv.). 

III. That certain evils of life abb aggravated by the possession of riches. 
In circumstances like those indicated by the prophet riches are calculated to increase 
the evils in two ways. 1. They may endanger life by enkindling the cupidity of 
enemies. Greedy of booty, the invaders of Jerusalem would be likely to direct their 
unwelcome attentions to the rich, and not to the poor. As Matthew Henry quaintly 
observes, "It would be a temptation to the enemy to cut their throats for their 
money." Hence Ezekiel says, "They shall cast their silver in the streets, and 
their gold shall be removed," or "shall be as filth." They would cast it away as an 
unclean thing, because their life was imperilled by it. 2. They may endanger life by 
hindering flight from enemies. Riches would be an encumbrance to those Israelites 
who sought to escape from the Chaldean soldiery by flight, and would retard their 
progress. Therefore, to be more free and swift in their movements, " they shall cast 
their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be as filth." How many human lives 
have been lost in the attempt to save richest When the steamer Wathingfon wm 



OH. VII. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 189 



burnt, one of the passengers, on the first alarm of fire, ran to his trunk, and tuuk frum 
it a large amount of gold and silver coin, and, loading his pockets, ran to the deck and 
jumped overboard. As a necessary consequence, he went down immediately. His 
riches were his ruin. 

IV. That biohes mat be the ocoasioit op sin. "Because it is the stumbling- 
block of their iniquity." Their silver and gold had been the occasion of sin to the 
Israelites, especially in the manufacture of idols. " Of their silver and their gold have 
they made them idols" (Hos. viii. 4). And there are many in our age and country to 
whom riches are an occasion of sin ; they set their affections upon them, they repose 
their confidence in them. " How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the 
kingdom of God ! " etc. (Luke xviii. 24, 25). " The deceitfulness of riches chokes the 
word " of the kingdom. " They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare," 
etc. (1 Tim. vi. 9, 10, 17—19). 

CoKCLDSlON. 1. Let US endeavour to form a true estimate of ricTies. 2. If lae posiets 
them, let us «se our riches, not as the proprietors, hut as the stewards thereof, who wili 
one day he called hy the great Owner to render the account of our stewardship. — W. J. 

Ver. 13 (last clause). — The impossibility of hecoming truly strong in a life of sin. 
" Neither shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life." This clause has 
been variously rendered and interpreted. Fairbairn translates, "No one by his 
iniquity shall invigorate his life." Schroder, "Nor shall they — ^in his iniquity is 
every one's life — show themselves strong." And the ' Speaker's Commentary, " And, 
every man living in his iniquity, they shall gather no strength." The meaning seems 
to be — Let no one think that in these impending judgments he can invigorate himself 
in " his iniquity ; from such a source no such strengthening or invigoration of life 
can be derived; on the contrary, it is this very iniquity which is bringing all to 
desolation and ruin." Two observations are authorized by the text. 

I. That wicked men sometimes endbavouk to stbenothen themselves m thbib 
iNiQtriTT. This is frequently and variously done. Take a few common examples of 
it. The dishonest bank-manager or book-keeper attempts to hide his defalcations by 
manipulating the accounts, making false entries in them, etc. Many try to conceal 
vice or crime by falsehood, as did Gehazi the servant of Elisha (2 Kings v. 20 — 27). 
A man who has got into monetary difficulties through betting or gambling seeks to 
escape from them by theft or forgery. Or a man has been in a position of privilege or 
power, and by reason of his own misdoing he is losing that position, but he seeks to 
retain it by further wrong-doing. When Saul, the King of Israel, realized that the 
kingdom would not descend to his heirs, and saw his own popularity waning and 
David's growing, he endeavoured to secure the kingdom to his family by repeated 
attempts to kill David. Or when a person has obtained riches or power by fraud, 
oppression, or cruelty, and finding that possession failing him, he seeks to retain it 
firmly by perpetrating other crimes. The Macbeth of Shakespeare is a striking 
illustration of this. When he feels himself insecure on the throne which he had 
committed murder to obtain, he says to Lady Macbeth, the daring partner of his dread 
guilt — 

« Things bad begnn, make strong themselves by ill." ' 

And later, when he had incurred the guiU of another murder, and was tormented by 

terrible fears, he says to her — 

" For mine own good. 
All causes shall give way ; I am in blood 
Stepp'd in so far, that, should I wade no more, 
Betuming were as tedious as go o'er." 

And thus he endeavoured to strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life. 

II. These efforts to stbengthen themselves in theib DfiQUiTT must inevi- 
tably END IN FAILUBB. Let US try to show this. We have seen that men try to 
strengthen themselves in iniquity by means of falsehood. But falsehood is opposed to 
the reality of things, and by its very nature cannot give lasting strength or security 
to any one. Carlyle says forcibly, " No lie you can speak or act, but it will come, after 
longer or shorter circulation, like a bill drawn on nature's reality, and be presented 



140 THE BOOK. OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. [0=- '^^ 1—27. 



then for payment, with the answer— J7b effeds^ Again, " For if there be a Faith from 
of old, it is this, as we often repeat, that no Lie can live for ever. . . . All Lies have 
sentence of death written down against them in Heaven's chancery itself; and, slowly 
or fast, advance incessantly towards their hour." " The lip of truth shall be estab- 
lished for ever ; but a lying tongue is but for a moment." " He that speaketh lies 
shall perish." And turning from falsehood in particular to sin in general, iniquity, so 
far from invigorating man, by its essential nature strips him of strength and courage. 
Thus the guilty and aforetime brave Macbeth cries — 

•' How is't with me when every noise appals me ? " 
And elsewhere, Shakespeare says truly — 

" Suspicion always hannts the guilty mind; 
The thief doth fear each bush an officer." 

To the same effect writcb Wordsworth — 

"Prom the body of one guilty deed 
A thousand ghostly fears and haunting thoughts proceed." 

And our prophet, " How weak is thine heart, saith the Lord God, seeing thou doest 
all these things 1" (oh. xvi. 30). "The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the 
righteous are bold as a lion." The consciousness of truth and uprightness inspires the 
heart with courage and nerves the arm with power. 

" What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted ? 
Thrice is he arm'd that hath his quarrel just ; 
And be but naked, though locked up in steel. 
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted." 

(Shakespeare.) 

And the throne which is based on injustice, cruelty, or blood, and maintained by 
oppression and tyranny, is founded upon sand and supported by feebleness. Wicked- 
ness is weakness. " It is an abomination for kings to commit wickedness ; for the throne 
is established by rifihteousness." " The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his 
throne shall be established for ever." No man can ever truly strengthen himself in 
iniquity ; neither can any number of men do so. The only way by which the wicked 
may become truly strong is by resolutely turning from sin and trusting in the Saviour. 
"Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts," etc. 
(Isa. Iv. 7).— W. J. 

Vers. 20 — 22. — The perversion of desirable possessions punisJied hy the derivation 
of them. " As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty," etc. In these 
words we discover — 

I. Desirable possessions sinfully pervertbd. (Ver. 22.) This verse has been 
differently translated and interpreted. Hengstenberg renders it, " And his glorious 
ornament he has set for pride ; and they made the images of their abominations and 
detestable idols of it : therefore have I laid it on them for uncleanness." Some refer 
this to the temple, which " by way of eminence was the glory and ornament of the 
nation." Others, connecting it with the preceding verse, refer it to the riches, or to 
the elegant ornaments made of gold and silver, which the Israelites possessed. With- 
out presuming to speak dogmatically on the point, we incline to the latter view. The 
Israelites were an opulent people. The Prophet Isaiah said, "Their land is full of 
silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures." God had enabled them to 
accumulate riches (cf. Deut. viii. 18). And now they misused their wealth against 
him. 1. Their desirable possessions they turned into an occasion of pride. " His 
glorious ornament he has set for pride." The " he " signifies the people, who are called 
either he or they. They perverted their riches into a parade of their own self-suf^cient 
power ; they misused them for their self-glorification. The prosperity, which should 
have enkindled their gratitude to the Lord their God, led to their presumption and 
self-exaltation (cf. Isa. ii. 11, 17). This is not a solitary case, but a representative 
one, of the way in which the gifts of God are perverted by the sin of man. When 
spiritual privileges lead to supercilious pharisaism (cf. Luke xviii. 11); when the 



OH. vn. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEU 141 



possession of personal gifts and abilities generate self-conceit ; or when the possession 
of richesis made the occasion of self-laudation (of. Deut. vii. 17 ; Daa. iv. 30) ; — when 
these things occur, we have a similar abuse of the gifts of God. " Thus saith the 
Lord, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom," etc. (Jer. ix. 23, 24). 2. Their 
desirable possessions they turned into detestable idols. " They made the Images of their 
abominations and detestable idols of it." In Isa. ii. 7, 8 the abundance of riches and 
the prevalence of idolatry stand in close connection. To a great extent the idolatry 
proceeded from the self-exaltation. Pride would choose even its own god, rather than 
accept and serve the true God as he has revealed himself and his will. "All 
idolatry," says Hengstenberg, " is at bottom egoism, the apotheosis of self, that sets up 
its god out of itself —first makes and then adores." The gold and silver, which the 
Lord had enabled them to acquire, they abused auainst his express commands, and to 
his dishonour. Nor is this sin of perverting God's gifts to sinful and base uses without 
its modern illustrations. When the poet employs his glorious gift of song for the 
pollution of the imagination ; or the philosopher his powers for the propagation of 
scepticism and the destruction of faith; when riches are expended for the gratification of 
pride, the love of vain show, or for any sinful object ; when a nation uses its power 
oppressively, tyrannically, or to the injury of others; — when these things are douf, the 
principle of the sin dealt with in our text receives fresh illustration. 

II. Perverted possessions taken from their pervertobs and given to their 
ENKMiES. " And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the 
wicked of the earth for a spoil ; and they shall pollute it." Notice : 1. The trite 
Proprietor of man's possessions. " I will give it into the hands of the strangers." In 
these words, by implication, the Most High asserts his claim to dispose of the riches of 
the Israelites according to his own pleasure. The richest man is but the steward or 
trustee of the riches. God alone is absolute Proprietor. The ablest man is inc'.ebted 
to God for his abilities, and is solemnly accountable to him for the use of them. 
"For who maketh thee to differ? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive?' 
etc. (1 Cor. iv. 7). God has the right to do with our gifts and goods how and what he 
will. 2. Man deprived of the possessions which he has abused by the true Proprietor of 
them,. God was about to give the riches of the Israelites to the Chaldeans, who are 
here spoken of as " strangers, and the wicked of the earth." They could not have 
conquered and spoiled the Israelites but for the permission of the Lord Jehovah. The 
victory of the Chaldeans was his penal victory over his sinful people. Is it not 
reasonable and righteous that the gifts which have been perverted should be withdrawtj 
from their pervertors ? that the possessions which have been abused should be taken 
away from their abusers ? (of. Matt. xxi. 33—43). 

III. The perversion of desirable possessions leading to the aversion op the 
Divine favour. " My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my 
secret : for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it." 1. Persistence in sin leads to 
the withdrawal of the favour of Ood. Turning the Divine face to any one is an 
expression denoting the favourable regards of God (of. Numb. vi. 25, 26 ; Ps. xxv. 16 ; 
Ixvii. 1 ; Ixix. 16 ; Ixxx. 3, 7, 19 ; Ixxxvi. 16). " The face of God," says Schroder 
suggestively, " is the consecration of our life : our free upward look to it, its gracious 
look on us." In his favour there is life and peace, prosperity and joy. The turning of 
his face from any one is a token of his displeasure. He was about to turn it away 
thus from Israel. 2. The withdrawal of the favour of Ood leaves man without adequate 
defence. " They shall pollute my secret : for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile 
it." Very different meanings are given to the words, "my secret." Some would 
translate it, " my treasure," and apidy it to Jerusalem ; others to the holy land in 
generah Ewald interprets it, " the treasure of my guardianship, i.e. of my country or 
my people." It seems to us probable that Jerusalem is meant. When God turns 
" away his face from any, the face of calamity and destruction is towards them, nay, 
destruction is upon them. No sooner doth God turn away from a nation, but destruc- 
tion steps into that nation." He is both the Sun and the Shield of his people ; and if 
he turn his face away from them, they are in darkness, and defenceless before their 
enemies and dangers. And this was the punishment of idolatry most solemnly announced 
by Jehovah through his servant Moses : " I will hide my face from them, and they 
shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them ; so that they will gay 



142 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vii. 1— 27 



in that day. Are not these evils come upon us, because our God is not among us ? " 
(Deut. xxxi. 16—18). 

CoNCLnsioN. Here are solemn admonitions as to our use of the privileges and 
possessions, the gifts and goods, which God has bestowed upon us. — W. J. 

Vers. 23 — 27. — 7%e dread development of moral evil. " Make a chain : for the land 
is full of bloody crimes," etc. This paragraph suggests the following observations. 

I. That pbesistbnce in sin leads to plbnitode op sin. "Make a chain: for the 
land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence."* The wickedness of the 
people had grown to such an extent that the darkest crimes were evcrywlieie prevalent 
and predominant. The city was filled with outrage, and the country with blood- 
guiltness. Sin, unless it be striven against and resisted, increases both in measure and 
in power, until it attains unto terrible fulness and maturity. As in holiness, so also in 
wickedness, full development is reached gradually. Peoples and nations arrive at 
thorough moral corruption not with a bound, but step by step. But unless checked, 
wickedness ever tends to that dreadful goal (cf. Gen. xv. 16; Dan. viii. 23; Matt. 
xxiii. 32 ; 1 Thess. ii. 16). 

II. That pi.bnitude or sin ushbbs in the awful jddoments of God. Because of 
the fulness of wickedness, the calamities announced by the prophet were coming upon 
the people. This is explicitly stated in both the twenty-third and twenty-fourth 
verses. The prevalent iniquities of Israel were the meritorious cause of the stern 
judgments of the Lord. Several features of these require notice. 1. 2%ey were of 
dread severity. They were to be carried into captivity. To set forth this truth 
Ezekiel is summoned to " make a chain." And, as a miitter of fact, Zedekiah the king 
was bound with fetters of brass, and carried to Babylon (2 Kings xxv. 7). And a 
post-exilian poet speaks of the miserable captivity of the people (Ps. cvii. 10 — 12). 
Their homes were to be seized and held by their enemies. " I will bring the worst of 
the heathen, and they shall possess their houses." Their sanctuary was to be profaned. 
"Their holy places shall be defiled." The reference is to the temple, their " holy and 
beautiful house." The prophet speaks of it as theirs, not God's, probably to indicate 
that Gnd had already forsaken the sanctuary which they bad defiled. "Woe be to us 
when our s,anctuaries are nothing but our sanctuaries ! " Anguish was to take hold upon 
them. " Destruction oometh ; " literally, " standing up of the hair cometh " (Professor 
Cheyne). If we accept this view of the word, it denotes extreme anguish or horror by 
one of the physical manifestations thereof, as in ' Hamlet' (act L sc. 5) — 

" I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word 
Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blond ; 
Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres: 
Thy knotted and combined locks to part, 
And each particular hair to stand on end. 
Like quills upon the fretful porpeutine." 

(Shakespeare.) 

2. They were to come in terrible succession. " Mischief shall come upon mischief, and 
rumour shall be upon rumour." " Mischief" fails to fully express the force of the 
original word. Pairbairn renders it " woe ; " Cheyne, " ruin ; " Schroder, " destruction." 
Woe upon woe, misery upon misery, would befall them. Calarhities would rush upon 
them in troops. As the king of Egypt was visited with plague after plague, so the 
strokes of the Divine judgments are sometimes sternly repeated, each stroke for a time 
being the harbinger of others. 3. Even the mightiest would be unable to stand against 
them. " I will also make the pomp of the strong to cease." Jehovah by his servant 
Moses had threatened the Israelites with a dreadful series of punishments if they 
persisted in rebelling against him, including this, " I will break the pride of your 
power " (Lev. xxvi. 19). When the Omnipotent arises for judgment, the most powerful 
creature is impotent to withstand him. " Hast thou an arm like God?" 

III. That in times of sobk distress the wicked seek help of the Lobd or of 
BIS servants. "They shall seek peace, and theie shall be none; . . . they shall seek 
a vision of the prophet." "Peace" is not an adequate rendering of the Hebrew here. 
Professor Cheyne translates, " safety ; " and SchiiJder, " salvation." In their overwhelm!- 



cm. vin. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 143 

ing calamities the Israelites would seek the help which they had despised in the time of 
their prosperity. So the proud Pharaoh, when the plagues were upon him and his 
subjects, repeatedly called for Moses and Aaron, and besought them to entreat the Lord 
on his behalf. So also the perverse and rebellious Israelites applied untx) Moses when 
they were smarting under the Divine chastisements (Numb. xi. 2; xxi. 7; cf. Ps. 
Ixxviii. 34 — ^37). And the presumptuous Jeroboam, soon as his hand was smitten 
with paralysis, entreated the prayers of the prophet whom a moment before he was 
about to treat with violence (1 Kings xiii. 6). By thus seeking deliverance from God 
in the time of their distress, the wicked bear witness to their sense of the reality of his 
Being, and of their need of him. And by seeking the intercession of his faithful 
servants they unwittingly testify to the worth of genuine religion. 

IV. That men who have kbjectbd God in seasons of peace mat seek help from 
HIM IN seasons of distbess, YET NOT OBTAIN IT. " They shall seek peace, and there 
shall be none ; . . . then shall they seek n vision of the prophet ; but the Law shall 
perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients. The king shall mourn," etc. The 
following points require brief notice. 1. Deliverance from trouble, and direction in 
trouble, sought in vain. The Israelites seek for safety, but find it not ; for prophetic 
guidance, but it fails them. The prophet or seer has no vision for them ; the priest 
has no instruction in the Law or in religion ; the ancients or wise men have no counsel 
for their life and conduct. Saul, the King of Israel, presents a mournful illustration of 
this (1 Sam. xxvili. 6, 15). " Because 1 have called, and ye refused," etc. (Prov. i. 
24 — 31). 2. Failure to obtain help in trouble producing great distress. " The king 
shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with desolation," etc. The distress is 
general. The king, the prince, and the people all feel it. The calamities are not 
partial or sectional, but national. The distress is very great. The king mourns in 
deep inward grief; the prince clothes himself with horror, is as it were wrapt up in 
terror; and the h'*nds of the common people tremble. 3. 2%e righteousness of these 
judgments. " I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts will 
I judge them." The dealings of the Lord with them would be regulated by their 
conduct. His judgments would correspond with their lives and works. They 
would reap the fruit of their doings. 4. The righteous judgments of God leading to the 
recognition of him. " And they shall know that I am the Lord." In this day of 
their calamity they will feel and acknowledge the supremacy of Jehovah. (See our 
remarks on ver. 4, and on ch. vi. 7, 10.) Let us seek to know him, not in his 
judgments, but in his mercies ; not in wrath, but in love. " And this is life eternal, 
that they should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou didst send, even 
Jesus Christ."— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEK Vin. 



Ver. 1. — ^And it came to pass, etc. We 
i)egin with a fresh date. One year and one 
month liad passed since the vision of Chebar, 
Hud had been occupied partly by the acted, 
partly by the spoken, prophecies of the pre- 
ceding chapters. In the mean time, things 
had gone from bad to worse in Jerusalem. 
In the absence of the higher priests, idolatry 



port may have led to the visit from the 
elders of Judah, if we understand by that 
term the exiles of Tel-Abib. I venture, 
however, on the conjecture that possibly 
those who came to the prophet were actually 
visitors who had come from Judah. Else- 
where, as in oh. xiv. I and xx. 1, those who 
thus came are described as "elders of 
Israel," or the captives (ch. i. 1), " they of 
the Captivity " (ch. iii. 15). In either case. 



was more rampant, and had found its way the visions that follow gain a special sig- 

even into the temple. It is probable that nificance. The prophet becomes the seer, 

tidings of this had reached Ezekiel, as we It is given to him to Imow, in a manner 

know that frequent communications passed which finds a spurious analogue in the 

between the exiles and those they had left j alleged mental travelling of the clairvoyant 

behind (Jer. xxix. 1 — 3, 9, 25). Directly j of modern psychology, what is passing in 

or indirectly, Elasali the aon of Shaphan, the city from which the messengers had 

and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, may come — and to show that he Icnows it. With 

have ODDveyed a message, orally or written, such facts before his eyes, what other 

from Jeremiah himself. Some such re- I answer can there be than that evil musi 



144 



THE BOOK OF THE PKOPHET EZEKIEL, [oh. viii. 1—18. 



meet ite doom? And so we pass into the 
Becond series of prophecies which ends with 
ch. xiii. 23. It would seem as if the en- 
quirers had kept silent as well as the pro- 
phet. We are not told that they aaked 
anything. His look and maimer, peihaps 
also attitude and gesture, forbade utterance. 
The hand of the Lord — the trance-state — 
was in the act to fall on him (see notes on 
oh. lii. 14, 22). When the trance-state was 
over, we may think of him as reporting and 
recording what he had thus seen in vision. 

Ver. 2. — I beheld, and lo a likeness, etc. 
The vision opens with a theophany like that 
of ch. i. ; but here, as there, Ezekiel uses 
the word which emphasizes the fact that 
what he had seen was but a " likeness " of 
the ineffable glory, an image of the Unseen. 
(For " amber," see ch. i. 4, 27.) In this case 
we note tlie absence of the cherubic figures. 
It is simply the "appearance of the likeness 
of tlie glory of Jehovah," seen now in the 
glow of fire, without the milder, more hope- 
ful brightness of the rainbow (ch. i. 28). 

Ver. 3. — The form of an hand (comp. ch. 
ii 9 ; Dan. v. 6). For the mode of transit, 
see Bel and the Dragon, ver. 36, as probably 
a direct imitation. The touch of the " hand " 
was followed by the action of the Spirit, 
in visions which he knew to be more than 
dreams, visions that came from God (oomp. 
ch. i. 1 ; xl. 2). The word is not the same 
as that commonly used by Daniel (chazon), 
and often by Ezekiel himself (ch. vii. 13 ; 
xii. 22, 23, et al.), but mareh, which implies 
a more direct act of intuition. The word 
appears again in ch. xi. 24 ; xliii. 3, and in 
Dan. viii. 26, 27, et al. To the door of 
the gate, etc. From the first we trace the 
priest's familiarity with the structure of the 
temple. He is brought, as it were, after his 
journey in the spirit, to the doOr of the gate 
of the inner court that looketh towards the 
north (Kevised Version). This is identified 
in ver. 5 with the " gate of the altar." It may 
probably also be identified with the "upper 
gate " of ch. ix. 2 ; the " high gate " of Jer. 
XX. 2; the "higher gate" of 2 Kings xv. 35, 
built by Jotham ; the " new gate " of Jer. 
xxxvi. 10. Obviously it was one of the most 
conspicuous portions of the temple, where 
the people gathered in large numbers. And 
here the prophet sees what he calls the 
image of jealousy. The words that follow 
probably give his explanation of the strange 
phrase, not found elsewhere, though it might 
naturally be suggested by Dent, xxxii. 16, 
21 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 58. What this image was 
we can only conjecture. The word for 
"image" is a rare one, and is found only 
here and in Deut. iv. 16; 2 Chron. xxxiii. 
7, 15. It may have been the Asherah (the 
" grove " of the Authorized Version), or 
conical stone, such as Manasseh had made 



and placed, with an altar dedicated to it, in 
the house, of the Lord (2 Kings xxi. 3; 
2 Chron. xxxiii. 3), or one of Baal, or of 
Ashtaroth, or even of Tammuz (see ver. 14). 
As the word "grove" does not occur in 
Ezekiel, it may be sufficient to state that 
the A shera was a pillar symbolical either ot 
a goddess of the same name, or, as soma 
think, of the Phoenician Astarte. The wor- 
ship seems to have first become populai 
under Jezebel (1 Kings xviii. 19), and took 
deep root both in Israel and Judah. The 
oultus, as in 2 Kings xxiii. 7, seems to have 
been connected with the foulest licence, like 
that of the Babylonian Mylitta (Herod., i. 
199 ; Baruoh vi. 43). The work of Josiah 
had clearly had but a temporary success, 
and the people had gone back to the con- 
fluent polytheism of the reign of Manasseh. 
In such a state of things the worst was 
possible. For recent discussions on the 
Ashera, see Kuenen, 'Eelig. Isr.' (Eng. 
transl.), i. 88 ; Schrader ; Robertson Smith, 
'Eelig. of Semites,' p. 172; and T. K. 
Cbeyne, in the Academy of December 14, 
1889. 

Vers. 4, 5. — And, behold, etc. In appalling 
contrast with that "image of jealousy," 
Ezekiel saw what he had not seen, as he 
first became conscious that he was in the 
court of the temple — the vision of the Divine 
glory, such as he had seen it on the banks 
of Chebar (ch. i. 4 — 28). He was to look 
first on this picture and then on that, and 
the guilt of Judah was measured by that 
contiast. 

Ver. 6.— That I should go far off, etc. 
The lesson taught was that already implied 
in the fact that the glorious vision had come 
to him from the north (ch. i. 4). The temple 
was already as a God-deserted shrine. His 
return to it now was but the coming of the 
Judge and the Destroyer. We are reminded 
of the M£Tay3aW|uei/ ivTevBev ("Let us de- 
part hence"), which was heard in the dark- 
ness of the night befoie the later destruction 
of Jerusalem (Josephus, 'Bell. Jud.,' vi. 
5. 3) Bad begins, but worse remains behind. 
The prophet is led onward as through the 
successive stages of an inferno of idolatries. 

Ver. 7.— To the door of the court. What 
follows suggests that the prophet was led to 
the gate that opened from the inner to the 
outer court. This was surrounded by 
chambers or cells (Jer. xxxv. 4). The term 
for " wall " (Jcir) is that specially used for the 
wall which encloses a whole group of build- 
ings (Numb. xxxv. 4). Behold a hole in 
the wall. The fact was clearly significant. 
The worship here was more clandestine than 
that of the " image of jealousy." We are 
not warranted, perhaps, in insisting on 
minute consistency in the world of visions, 
but the question naturally arises—How did 



OH. Tin. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. 



145 



the woTghippera enter the chamber if Ezekiel 
had to enlargo the hole in the wall iti order 
to get in ? We may surmise that the entrance 
from the temple court had been blofked np 
all but entirely in the days of Josiah, that 
the idolaters now entered it from without or 
through some other chamber, while Ezekiel 
thinks of himself as coming upon them like 
a spy in the dim distance of the covered 
passage through which he made his way. 

Ver. 10. — Every form of creeping things. 
The words obviously paint the theriomorphio 
worship of Egypt, the scarabseus probably 
being prominent. The alliance between 
Jehoiakim and Pharaoh (2 Kings xxlv. 
33 — 3.")), and which Zedekiab was endeavour- 
ing to renew, would naturally bring about 
a revival of that cultus. Small chambers in 
rock or tomb filled with such pictured 
symbols were specially characteristic of it 
(Gosse, 'Monuments of Esjypt,' p. 6; 
' Ammian. Maroellin.,' xxii. 15). 

Ver. 11. — Seventy men, etc. The number 
was probably chosen with reference to the 
" elders " who had seen the Divine glory in 
Ezod. xxiv. 9, 10. The Sanhedrin, or 
council of seventy, did not exist till after 
the Captivity. The number can scarcely 
have been accidental, and may imply that 
the ellers were formally i epresentative. 
Anothir Jaazaniah, the son of .leremiah, ap- 
pears in Jer. xxxv. 3 ; yet another, the son 
of Azur, in ch. xi. I. If the Shaphan men- 
tioned is the scribe, the son of Azaliah, 
under Josiah (2 Kings xxii. 3), the father 
of Ahikam (2 Kings xxii. 12), of Elasah 
(Jer. xxix. 3), and of Gemariah (Jer. xxxvi. 
10, II, 12), and the grandfather of Gedaliah 
(Jer. xxxix. 14, et at), all of whom were 
prominent in tiie reform movement under 
Josiah, or as friemls of Jeremiah, and no 
other Shaphan appears in history, the fact 
that one of his sons is the leader of the 
idolatrous company must have had for 
Ezekiel a specially painful significance. 
Ho fOuM scarcely have forgotten the mean- 
ing of his name, " The Lord is listening," 
and probably refers to it in ver. 12. As 
the climax of this chamber of horrors, the 
seventy elders were all acting as priests, 
and were offering to their pictured idols the 
incense which none but the sons of .^aron 
had a right to use, and which they offered 
to Jeh3vah only. 

Ver. 12, — Every man, etc. Ami this, after 
all, was but a sample of the prevalence of 
the Egvpiian influence. Other elders had, 
in the dark, a like adytum, a like chamber 
of imagery, like the Latin lararium, filled 
with a like cloud of incense. And though 
the name of the leader of the band might 
have warned them that the Lord was listen- 
ing, they boasted, in their blindness, that 
Jehovah did not seu them ; he had forsaken 

jafSK-IEli, 



the temple, and had gone elsewhere. They 
thought of Jehovah as of a local deity who 
had abdicated. They were free to do as 
they liked without fear. The words are 
worth noting further as the first of a series 
of popular half-proverbs, in which the 
thoughts of the people clothed themselves 
(see oh. xl. 3 ; xii. 22 ; xviii. 2, 19 ; xxxiii. 
10 ; xxxvii. 11). All these imply some per- 
sonal knowledge of what was passing in 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 14. — Behold, there sat women wailing 
forTammnz. The point of view is probably 
the same as that of ver. 3, but the womsn 
were apparently in the outer porch of it, as 
he has to be brought to the gate in order to 
see them. We are led to note two things : 
(1) the general prominence of women in the 
later idolatry of Judah; (2) the specific 
character of the Tammuz-worship. Under 
(1) we have the women who wove hangings 
for the Ashera (2 Kings xxiii. 7), those who 
had hnmt incense to other gods, especially 
to the queen of heaven (Jer. xliv. 9, 15 — 19), 
probably, i.e., to Ashtaroth. (2) The name 
Tammut does not meet us elsewhere in the 
Old Testament. All interpreters^ however, 
agree that it answers to the Adonis of Greek 
mythology. So Jerome translates it, and 
expressly states ({n loo.} that what Ezekiel 
saw corresponded to the Arlonis festivals. 
It may be enough to state, without going 
into the details of the story, that Adonis, the 
beantifnl youth beloved of Aphrodite, was 
slain by a wild boar; that after his death he 
was allowed to spend six months of each 
year with her, while the other was passed 
with Persephone in Hades. The cultns 
thus became the symbol of the annual 
decay and revival of nature ; but the legend 
rather than the inner meaning was in the 
thoughts of the worshippers. The emotions 
of women poured themselves out in lamenta- 
tions over the waxen image of the beautiful 
dead youth who had perished in his prime, 
and in orgiastic joy over his return to life. 
Milton, deriving his knowledge, probably, 
from Selden'i ' De Diis Syris,' has painted 
the whole scene in words which may well 
be quoted — 

" Thammnz next came behind. 
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured 
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate 
In amorous ditties all a summer's day ; 
While smooth Adonis from his native rock 
Ran purple to the sea, supposed with blood 
Of Thammuz yearly wounded : the love-tale 
Infected Sion's daughters with like heat ; 
Whose wanton passions in the sacred porch 
Ezekiel saw, when, by the vision led, 
His eyes surveyed the dark idolatries 
Of alienated Jndah." 

(•Par. Lost," 1446, ete.) 



U6 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vui. 1— 1& 



The chief oentie of the Tammuz- Adonis 
worship was Byblo8, in Syria, bnt it spread 
widely over the shores of the Mediterranean, 
Hnd was fashionable both in Alexandria and 
Athens. One of the practices of the fes- 
tival, that of planting flowers in vases for 
forced cultivation, has been perpetuated by 
Plato's allusion to " the gardens of Adonis " 
as the type of transitoriness ('Phadr.,' p. 
S76, 2>). Cheyne, following Lagarde, finds 
a refejence to the eultus in Isa. xvii. 10; 
Ixv. 3; Ixvi. 17. The festival of Ishtar and 
Tammuz (or Tam-ti) at Babylon presented 
a, marked parallel. Adonis is, with hardly 
a doubt, identical with the Hebrew Adonai 
(equivalent to "Lord"). Tammut has been 
explained as meaning " victorious," or " dis- 
appearance," or " burning ; " but all etymo- 
logies are conjectural. Lastly, it is not 
without interest to note (1) that wlien 
Jerome wrote, the Gave of the Nativity at 
Bethlehem was overshadowed by a grove 
of Tammuz ('Ep. ad Paul.'); and (2) that 
the later Jewisli calendar included the month 
of Tammuz, which corresponded to July. The 
festival seems to have been celebrated at 
the summer solstice. The time of Ezekiel's 
vision was in the sixth month, «c. about the 
time of the autumnal equinox (see 'Diet. 
Bible,' art. " Tammuz "). Mr. Barins-Gould, 
treating the legend as a solar myth, finds 
the old Phoenician deity represented in the 
" St George of Merrie England " (' Curious 
Myths,' pp. 277—316). An exhaustive mo- 
nograph, "Tammuz Adonis," has been 
published by Liebreclit, in his ' Zur Volks- 
knnde ' (1879), rtprinted from the Zeitechnft 
Deuttehen Morgeu-GeteUtehaft, Tol. xvii. pp. 
897, etc. 

Ver. 16. — He brought me into the inner 
oonxt. The last and the worst form of dese- 
cration follows. It was the " inner court " 
(Joel iL 17) which, after the exile, was 
entered only by the priests. During the 
monarchy, however, it seems to have been 
accessible to kings and other persons of 
importance, as in the case of Bolomon 
(1 Kings viii. 22, 64 ; ix. 25) in the revolu- 
tion against Athaliah (2 Kings xi. 4 — IS), 
and Hezekiah (2 Kings xix. 14), and Josiah 
(2 Kings xxiii. 2). Ezekiel does not say 
that the men whom he saw were priests, 
though the number twenty-five suggests 
that they were taking the place of the high 
pripst .nnd the heads of the twenty-Pmr 
'■oii]B(B of the priiHlhood (1 Chron. xxiv. 
1 — 19), and so sy mboU2ed the whole order 



of the priesthood as the seventy elders re- 
presented the laity. In 2 Chron. xxxvi. 14 
the chief of the priests is spoken of as 
having been prominent in "polluting the 
house of the Lord." They were seen turn- 
ing tlieir backs to the temple of Jehovah, 
i.e. the sanctuary. The very act was sym- 
bolical of their apostasy (2 Chron. xxix. 6 ; 
Isu. i. 4 ; Jer. vii. 24). And they did this 
in order that they might look to the east 
and worship the rising sun. That, and not 
the temple (Dan. vi. 10), was the Kibldh 
of their adoration. The sun-worship here 
appears to have had a Persian character, 
as being ofiered to the sun itself, and not 
to Baal, as a solar god. Of such a v\ orship 
we have traces in Deut. iv. 19; xvii. 3; 
Job xxxi. 26 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 5, 11. 

Ver. 17. — For returned read, with the 
Bevised Version, turned again. The woid 
seems chosen with special reference to the 
attitude of the idol-worshippers. It may be 
noted that even here the prophet speaks not 
only of the idolatry of Judah, but of its 
yiolenee also, as bringing down the judg- 
ments of Jehovah. Lo, they put the brandi 
to their nose. The opening word expresses 
the prophet's burning indignation. 'The aot 
described probably finds its best explanation 
in the Persian ritual of the Avesta. When 
men prayed to the sun, they held in their 
left hands a bouquet of palm, pomegranate, 
and tamarisk twigs, while the priests for 
the same purpose held a veil before their 
mouth (Spiegel, ' Iran. Alterth.,' iiL 571, 
572, in Smend), so that the bright rays of 
the sun might not be polluted by human 
breath. And this was done in the very 
temple of Jehovah by those who were pol- 
luting the whole land by their violence^ The 
LXX. gives, as an explanation, i>s luiK-nipi- 
Qovres, as though the act was one of scomfiil 
pride (comp. Isa. Ixv. 5), the sign of a temper 
like that of the Pharisee as he looked upon 
the publican (Luke xviii. 11). Lightfoot 
takes the "nose" as the symbol of anger, 
and looks on the phrase as proverbial: 
" They add the twig to their anger, fuel to 
the fire ; " but this has little to commend it. 
The word for " branch " is used in oh. xv. 2 
and Numb. xiii. 23 for a vine-branch. 

Ver. 18. — The verse serves as a transition 
to ch. ix. The unpitying aspect of the 
Divine judgments is again prominent. Such 
sins deserved, iind cnuld only be expi»ted 
by, the judgments to which we now pass 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. %—A r*9*UMon of fin. The prophet is Tisited with a series of new Tisiou 

under fresh circumstances. No longer walking among the weeping captives by the 
winters of Babylon, or standing in solitnde upon the great jilaiu, Ezekiel is now in hit 



OM. vin. 1— 18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 147 



own house receiving a deputation of Jewish leading men, who have evidently heeii 
impressed hy his earlier prophecies, and who have come to consult him on the condition 
and prospects of his nation, when he is seized with an inspired rapture. The house 
and the visitors melt away from his consciousness, and there in the very presence of 
these waiting and astonished guests the prophet's eyes are opened to a vision of God, 
and he is carried in imagination to scenes of sin and shame in the temple at Jerusalem. 
Was ever there a, more unlikely time and setting of revelation ? Truly the Spirit 
breatheth where it listetb. God may visit a soul in company as well as in solitude, in 
tlie home as well as in the temple or in the seclusion of nature. He is ever-present. 
The only question is — When and how will the veil be lifted ? 

L A VISION OF God. It is evidently a Divine appearance, a theophany, ttiat is hei a 
portrayed. Not that man at any time can see God with the outward eye, for flesh 
cannot see spirit. But in vision and representative form God now manifests himself to 
Ezfkiel. 1. The vision of Qod precedes the revelation of truth. It was usual for this 
great seer of visions, Ezekiel, to have a new series of revelations opened by some over- 
whelming manifestation of God's presence. The same occurred with St. John's visions 
in the Apocalypse. We must know God before we can understand Divine truth. 
The vision of God in the soul must come first. Then truth can be seen in his light. 
2. The vision of Qod precedes the revelation of man. Ezekiel is about to see awful 
sights of sin. He must first behold the pure fire of God's presence. We cannot know 
man till we see him in the light of God. The Bible that gives us our highest know- 
ledge of God also gives us our deejiest insight into man. Vague ideas of God lead to 
light thoughts of sin. When about to visit the haunts of wickedness, the Christian 
should first come into communion with God. This will help him to see the horror of 
sin, to keep himself from contamination, and to feel the right commiseration for the 
fallen. 

II. A VISION OF FiBE. The Divine manifestation seems to have been lu a nLLinan 
shape, but in one of fire — burning flames below, brilliant radiance above. 1. The fire 
heUnv suggests wrath against sin. "Our God is a consuming Pire''(Heb. xii. 29). 
Christ came to baptize with fire, and to burn up the chafif with unquenchable fire 
(Matt. iii. 11, 12). There is a righteous indignation against sin, the lack of which 
would mean moral feebleness. God burns to consume all evil. 2. The brightness above 
suggests the supreme glory of Ood. The crowning characteristic of God is not wrath. 
Above the fire is the serene radiance. There is terror in the holiness of God when this 
touches the sin of man. Yet God himself is supremely calm and beautiful. If we can 
rise from the flaming wrath about his feet, and behold the beauty of his countenance, we 
shall see on it the expression of eternal goodness. 

Ver. 3. — " The image of jeahmsy." Ezekiel in vision imagines himself plucked up by 
a lock of hair and carried from the land of his exile back to Jerusalem, there to behold 
the abominations that are being practised in the temple of Solomon. In the sacred 
enclosure he sees an idol that provokes the jealousy of the true God. 

I. God 18 JUSTLY jealous. The Old Testament idea of the jealousy of God has 
been grossly misapprehended. It has been taken as meaning that God was regarded as 
narrow, self-seeking, harsh. Such criticisms reveal a total misapprehension of the 
Old Testament position, according to which the jenlousy of God is a necessity of his 
nature and righteousness. 1. A necessity of Ood'a nature. There is but one God wlii« 
fills all things. When he is represented as jealous, this cannot be because he gruilges 
a certain amount of honour to a rival — as Zeus mijjht be jealous of Apollo — for God 
has no possible rivals. The supposed rivals are not gods at all. The worship of them 
is the worship of empty names. God is calling men back from delusion to fact when 
he is jealous of heathenish worship. 2. A necessity of riyhteoutnesi. Forsaking Jehovah 
for false gods is not merely leaving one deity for another, nor even only turning aside 
to vanity and a delusion. It is turning from holiness to sin. The worship of God 
involves purity of heart and life; idolatry means a lower moral life. For the sake of 
holiness God cannot endure the lower worship. It might be said that God could be 
worshipped imier various names as " Jehovah, Jove, or Lord." Bnt if the lower forms 
of worship involve false thoughts of God and evil practices in morals, they are degrad- 
ing and unendurable. 



148 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vai. 1—18, 



IL Ak idol provokes the jBAiiOTTST OF GoD. The idol tsl^es the place of God, 
sits on his throne, defiles his temple, usurps his Name and authority and worship. 
Anything that works in this way is an idol, and needs to he visited with the just 
indignation of God. Let us note some of these "images of jealousy." 1. Pleasure. 
If men set pleasure first, guiding their lives hy its gaudy ra.diance, pleasure presides 
over the altar of their souls. "Love not pleasure, love God," says Carlyle; for the 
•upreme love of the one excludes the supreme love of the other. 2. Money. This idol 
of gold is the modern representative of Nebuchadnezzar's statue on the plain of Shinar 
— a hard, helpless idol, which the man who lives for money enshrines in the temple of his 
soul. 3. Earthly love. God does not require us to ahandon human affection ; on the 
contrary, we cannot love God unless we love man, and we learn to love God hest 
through the exercise of human affections (1 John iv. 20). But when a human affection 
is supreme and will not yield in submission to tlie will of God, the object of it becomes 
an *• image of jealousy." 4. Self-will. We may think we serve God and yet we may 
refuse to obey him, only working according to our own will. This also is idolatry. 5. 
Fixed opinions. Instead of loving truth, we are tempted to love our own ideas ; wish- 
ing thera to be true, we are led to regard them as such, and so to shut our minds 
against the correcting voice of Divine revelation. All these images of jealousy are just 
so many embodiments of self, the monster idol of the soul and rival of God. To cast 
out these images we need the true Image of the invisible Qodi, Jesus Christ, to come 
and take possession of our hearts. 

Ver. 12. — Chambers of imagery. Old men who should have been the guides of 
the younger generation were found by the prophet to have their secret practices of 
idolatry in private chambers, where they kept idiils unknown to the world at large. Too 
careful for their reputation to share in the open idolatry of the mass of the people, these 
venerable hypocrites aggravated their guilt by cowardly deception. Safely ensconced 
in the seclusion of their chambers of imagery, they revelled in the orgies of a degrading 
idolatry, and then appeared in the streets as sedate citizens. The shameful sin of this 
double living may be practised in other forms with another kind of chamber of 
imagery. 

L EVEET MAN HAS A OHAMBEE OF IMAGERY IN HIS OWN HEART. Children and poets 

are possessed of the most powerful imagination; but even the dullest, most prosaic 
person is haunted with visionary presences, though of the most commonplace order. 
When we retire into ourselves, we unlock the door of our chamber of imagery and look 
at its ghostly scenes. There hang the portraits of the past, some blurred by the dust 
of years, others as clear as when they were first painted by the flash of a keen experi- 
ence; some distorted into painful, impossible ugliness, others rounded into equally 
impossible perfection. There, too, are vajiue shadows of the future. But the most 
important images are designs and wishes, favourite fancies and pet ideas. 1'hese we 
embrace as friends ; before some of them, perhaps, we prostrate ourselves in idolatrous 
worship. But happily we may also find there inspiring images of noble deeds, the 
ideals we would strive to copy in actual life. We may have left them too long in the 
dim chamber of imagery. We should brins them forth and clothe them with the flesh 
and blood of living deeds, while the bad images had better be crushed before they reach 
the doorway of utterance. 

U. There abb deeds done in the chamdbr of iMAasBT. Lust is there, and adultery, 
covetousness, theft, hatred, and murder. So long as a man restrains his utterance he is 
tempted to believe that it matters not what he imagines. No greater delusion can be 
possible ; for the true life is that which is lived within. While in his chamber of 
imagery, a man is his true self divested of the cloak of semblance which he wears when 
about in the world. What images does he there delight to gaze upon? The true 
character of the man will be determined by the answer to that question. Certainly 
•vil images may come there unsought and unloved as painful temptations, and it is the 
duty of one who loves holiness to turn aside from such. But the images delighted in 
reveal the true self. The wickedness there planned and gloated over in evil thought is 
tin — a deed of the soul. Ultimately it must come out in the life, for the imagination 
of the heart colours the external conduct. Shakespeare says— 



OH. vm. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZBKIBL. 149 

** Dangerous conceits are, in their natures, poisoni, 
Which, at the first, are scarce found to dietaite. 
But, with a little act upon the blood. 
Burn like the mines of sulphur." 

in. It 18 A DELUSION TO SUPPOSE THAT GJoD IB INDIFFERENT TO WHAT HAPPENS IN 

THE CHAMBER OF IMAGERY. The old men of Jerusalem comforted themselves with the 
notion that God did not see them, that he had forsaken the earth. This Ezekiel knew 
to be a monstrous delusion. 1. God holes into the chamber of imagery. There is a window 
in every soul, through which the eye of God gazes right down to the bottom of its most 
secret thoughts. He knows us better than we know ourselves. The cluak of hypocrisy 
is not as the thinnest veil between us and God. Now, this is of supreme interest, 
because, while it does not very much matter what our fellow-men may think about us, 
God's thought of us is all-important. 2. Ood will Jvdye us /or deeds done in the 
chamber of imagery. Knowing all, he will not judge only by what the world see^^. Sins 
of the heart will be noted by God, and will bring down upon us his Just wrath, even 
though the hands have been clean from iniquity. 3. The only effectual salvaiiun must 
he one that cleanses the chamber of imagery. " Create in me a clean heart, God," 
cries David, in the depth of bis penitence, knowing that the outward »ins he had 
committed have sprung from the evil of his imagination. Therefore nothing short of 
the new birth which Christ brings can save our souls. 

Ver. 15. — " Greater abominations." As Ezekiel is taken from one chamber of idolatry 
to another, in his visionary visit to the temple, he finds to his horror a continuous 
aggravation of the abominations. This is similar to the results of a survey of the 
woild's sin. 

I. Sin 18 FOUND in various degrees of abomination. The patristic statement that 
all sin is infinite, because it is an offence against the infinite God, is not found in 
Scripture, nor is it borne out by observation or experience. The Bible refers to varinns 
degrees of guilt ; e.g. John xix. 11. Peter's denial of Christ was a sin ; but Juiias's 
betrayal was a vastly greater sin. We are conscious of de<;rees of guilt in our ovvu 
lives. It looks as though the sink of iniquity must be a bottomless pit. There are 
even deeper, blacker, more frightful and damnable sins yet to be reached by an 
abandoned soul that plunges down an unchecked descent of iniquity. No one is so 
bad that he can say, " I can do nothinz worse than I have done." 

II. The variods degrees of abomination cannot be measured by external 
STANDARDS. They are not to be determined by any giadnated code of formal morality. 
What is a weakness in one man may be a crime in another. The father of a starving 
family who steals a loaf — like the hero of Victor Hugo's ' Les Misfirables' — is not to be 
judged as the respectable promoter of rotten investments, who grows rich on the ruin of 
thousands of helpless people. The miserable child of the London thief, whose training 
has been at a school of crime, cannot be justly put into comparison with the son of a 
happy, i)rosperous Christian home. There are hereditary tendencies to evil and peculiar 
circumstances of temptation which beset certain people more than others. The degree 
of guilt varies accordingly. We cannot weigh all these conditions. Hence the advice, 
" Judge not, that ye be not judged." 

III. All 8IN TENDS TO AN AGGRAVATION OF ITS ABOMINATION. As Ezekiel Went 

from one chamber to another, he came upon a continually descending series of scenes 
of wickedness. The worst were last. Sin is never at a standstill. It is a dark and 
turbid torrent that swells and blackens as it flows. The man who begins with a slight 
lapse from virtue is on the road to greater abominations. Herein is the danger, the 
fatal insidiousness of evil. If the sinner saw the whole course of his futiue from the 
first and at once — like Hogarth's pictures of the ' Hake's Progress ' — he would start back 
with horror. Yet while he lingers and toys with sin it is silently coiling about him 
with more and more direful entanglements. 

IV. The EXISTENCE of various degrees of ABOMINATION 18 A REASON FOR 8PEKDT 

REPENTANCE. 1. All sin is abominable. One sin may he a greater abomination than 
another, but the standard of measurement is not the depth below, but the height above. 
The question is — How far have we fallen ? not — How much further may we yet sink 
away frcan the light? A man's sin is not one whit the less because his brother's 



160 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. vin. 1-1& 



■im is greater in guilt. 2. The sooner we repent ike easier it is to~retwm. Sin hardens 
as it becomes more aggravated in evil. While the light of God is waning, the way of 
recovery is beconaing more obscure. " To-day is the accepted time." 3. It is possible 
for the greatest abomination to befm-givm. The obstacle is only on one side. Christ 

can snvp the worst of sinners. 

Ver. Itt. — Hvm-worship. When Bzekiel, in his visionary visit to the temple, came 
upon the last scene of horror, and beheld the 'greatest of all the abominations therein 
committed, he saw twenty-five men performing rites of worship before the rising sun. 

I. Sun-worship is most fascinating. This was the most common, and perhaps 
also the most primitive, heathen cult. It was very prominent in the ancient Egyptian 
religion— the rising, the midday, and the setting sun being honoured with separate 
names and rites ; it was the essential idea of the Canaauite Baal-worship, as well as ol 
th<j Babylonian religion ; and it lies at the heart of the Aryan mythology in Sanscrit, 
Greek, and Teutonic forms. If any material object should be selected for worship, it 
is natural that the earth's great source of light, power, and life should be the universal 
favourite. Our modern idolatries do not reach this material form, but they contain 
the same ideas. 1. The worship of light. This takes two forms. (1) Msthetidsm. 
Grace of form and tone are set up as supreme objects of admiration, to the neglect of 
moral goodness. (2) Science. This is put on a pinnacle as lord of all thought and life. 
Now, knowledge is good, and all truth, which is the subject of science, is in itself pure, 
and should be pursued by men. But the exclusive cult of science is idolatry, because it 
is placing knowledge above obedience. 2. The worship of power. The sun is th« great 
motive power of the universe. Latent sun-heat in coal drives our steam-engines. Direct 
sun-heat lifts the water from the sea, that afterwards descends in avalanches and moun- 
tain torrents. We do not prostrate ourselves before the sun, the source of all this force, 
but we do magnify the virtue of the power itself. Yet material resources are not the 
highest good. 3. The worship of life. The sun is the great fertilizing influence of 
natnre. The return of its warm rays awakens nature from the death of winter, and 
creates the new life of spring ; its great heat makes the tropics to teem with swift- 
growing vegetable and insect life. The most modern idolatry is the deification of the 
vital powers — the idea that, as all natural instinct is pure, the indulgence of naturalism 
is commendable. This is just the old Canaanite abomination. 4. The worship of the 
future. The sun-worshipper turned to the east and hailed the sunrise. There is some- 
thing fascinating and exhilarating in this anticipation of the morning. Christianity 
consecrates hope. But it is a mistake to believe in the future as in a fate of coming 
good. The future can only be good because God is in it, and blesses it. 

II. SuN-woRSHiP IS MOST ABOMINABLE. It includes many evil things. 1. Departure 
from Ood. The sun-worshippers stood with their backs turned towards the temple. 
Their attitude was most significant. All idolatry mast he practised with the back 
turned towards the truly Divine. We cannot serve the false and the true at one and 
the same time. 2. The degradation of Qod^s greatest works. The more beautiful and 
powerful and fruitful the sun is seen to be, the more shameful is it that men should 
degrade their thought of it into idolatry. When we abuse God's best gifts by idolizing 
them, we turn what should occasion our deepest gratitude and admiiation for Gtod's 
goodness into an occasion for departing from him. 3. The consecration of sin. Sun- 
worship began in adoration of the lord of day. But It descended into gross licentious- 
ness, through the selection of the fertilizing power of sun-heat as a special object of 
adoration. Thus sun-worship became the worship of lust. This will be the inevitable 
effect of naturalism regarded as a religion. The worship of nature-powers pure and 
simple involves the consecration of tlie lowest of those powers, so that what should he 
kept down as a slave claims to rule as a master, with obscene effrontery. 

Conclusion. The rescue from nature-worship — modern as well as ancient — is to be 
found in the revelation of One infinitely greater than nature. No wonder men who 
h»d no vision of the spiritual God selected the sun — so powerful in his southern 
splendour — as the greatest object of adoration. But we have " the Sun of Righteous- 
ness," before whose glory all physical brightness grows pale and fades away. 

Ver. 17. — Making light of sin, I. Sinners make light of snf. This is a common] j 



««. Tin. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPaBT EZEKlBlL. 151 

observed fact. Let us see how it is causod. I. As an aJtempt to excuse the tinner. 
This, of course, is the most obvious and palpable reason why iiuiuy peuple try t-i 
minimize their own sin. The prisoner pleads " Not guilty " simply to sav* himself. 
The same is done even before the private bar of a man's own conscience ; for we wish to 
excuse ourselves to ourselves. Tlius there may be no conscitius deception, no hypocrisy. 
We may really persuade ourselves that we are not so bad as we seem to be. The wish 
is father to the thought. 2. By the force of habit. We grow accustomed to the worst 
companions if we are much with them, as we scarculy notice the ugliness of what is 
constantly with us, though strangers would be struck with their first sight of it. So 
while we become familiar with our sins, their supreme and most dreadful wickedness 
ceases to affect us, as the fearful sight of mutilated bndies ceases to affect hospital 
surgeons. The horror dies out of the aspect of wickedness, and a look of familiarity 
takes its place. 3. Through the influence of examph. If a man stood alone in hu 
sin, be would be appalled at the lingular horror of it. But he sees it reflected in 
the lives of his neighbours, and, judging himself by t|)e average standard of society, 
instead of taking the Law of God for his measure, he passes an easy sentence. 4. /n (m 
deadening of consoience. This is the worst and the most dangerous effect of rin. The 
sense for perceiving its guilt is blunted. Until conscience is reawakened by the 
Spirit of God, no man truly appreciates his own guilt. 

II. It is iufossiblb fob God to make light or sin. 1. He sees it at it trtdy it. 
God is not deceived by our excuses. Hb sees into the true nature of our thought and 
conduct with an all-searching eye, and he is perfectly true and just to judge according 
to fact. 2. Ood measures it by the law of holiness. He knows our weakness, our 
ignorance, our temptation ; and he does not judge men as he would judge angels — of 
that we may be sure ; for " shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ? " But accord- 
ing as we have light he will estimate our conduct, measuring it against th.it li^lit, and 
not against the darkness of our neighbours. God cannot endure iniquity. lu his sight 
it is hideous and hateful and utterly deserving of condemnation. Let us remember 
that we shall not be judged by man's standards of conventionality, but by God's pure 
law of righteousness. 3. Tjf Qod forgives sin, he does not make light of it. Forgiveness 
is not excusing evil. It recognizes the whule black guilt of it. Jesus who brought free 
forgiveness denounced sin itself as no stern Hebrew prophet had ventured to denounce 
it. In pardoning the penitent he carefully note.) that her sins were " many " (Luke 
Tii. 47). The publican is commended for his humiliation in the confession uf sin (Luke 
xviii. 13). We can only judge of God's horror of sin by the darkness and agony of 
3ethseiLiane and Calvary. God forgives sin at the cost of his own Son. The great 
atonement of Christ was rendered necessary because God could not make light of sin, 
though he desired to save the sinner. We can be saved from our sin, not by making 
light of it, but when we fully confess its whole guilt and shame. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 4, 5. — The glory of Ood and the imwje of jealousy. In prophetic vision 
Ezekiel was transported from the place of exile to his country's metropolis, and to the 
temple which was the very centre of his people's religious observances. It may not be 
certain whether what in this vision he discerned actually took place, or whether the 
vision was representative and symbolical of what was occurring elsewhere in Judah ami 
even in Jerusalem. But what an extraordinary juxtaposition and contrast is that 
described in these verses I One observer in one spot is brought face to face both with 
the splendour of the Divine manifestation and with the horror of idolatrous rites! 

I. The gloet of the God op Isbabl. The prophet beheld an appearance of 
splendour, such as he had previously beheld in the plain, and had described in an 
earlier passage of his prophecies. 1. This appearance was emblematical of the Divine 
attributes ; alike of God's power to punish and to save, and of his moral excellences, 
justice and truth, mercy and love. 2. This anpearance was peculiarly suitable to the 
place where it was discerned : the temple of Jehovah was his dwelling-place, and the 
scene of his peculiar presence, who giveth not his glory to another. 3. This appear- 
ance was a reminder that for the Jewish people there was one, and only one, proper 
Object of adoration and worship. 



152 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vin. 1—18. 

1 i. The iDuLATi:uui> xmaoe. 1. This was doubtless a figure of one of the ialse gods 
vrorshipped by one of the nations in the neighbourhood of Palestine, by whom Judah 
had been corrupted and seduced. Which of the several idols was at that time worshipped 
by the Jews we are not told ; and, indeed, this does not signify. 2. Whatever this 
imaginary deity may have been, it is certain that the attributes assigned to it were 
opposed to those belonging to Jehovah. Cruelty and impurity were certainly qualities 
attributed to this false god. 3. Thus moral degradation was involved in the worship 
of this image; degradation all the more signal because the Jews forsook a God of 
righteousness and clemency, and fashioned or accepted an imaginary deity embodying 
their own worst faults and vices. 

III. 1'he indignation with which Jehovah beqabded Judah's fbefebenoe. The 
image was an " image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy." The reasons why 
the idol should be so designated, why such should be the way in which it was regarded, 
are obvious enough. 1. Jehovah had enjoined upon the posterity of Abraham 
abstinence from the idolatries from which the great forefather of the chosen people 
had been delivered. Monotheism was the very stamp and seal of their election. 2. 
The very lirst and second commandments of the first table of the moral Law prohibited 
idolatry. 3. The history of Israel had been one long rebuke of idolatry, and one long 
warning against falling into this seductive snare. 4. The ordinances and institution! 
of the nation were expressly designed to act as a check and dissuasive against the sin 
of the surrounding and heathen nations. 

Application. Apostasy from the service of the one living and true God is rendered 
inexcusable, and is worthy of severe condemnation, when, as in the case of Judah, and 
in our case, light is clear, privileges are many, and opportunities and inducements 
abound to be faithful and diligent in the practice of pure religion. — T. 

Ver. 10. — Base idolatry. Placed, as the children of Israel were, in a very central 
position among the nations, they were exposed to a great variety of temptations. 
Circumstances must sometimes have favoured the influence of one nation, sometimes 
of another. Commercial intercourse, political leagues, matrimooial alliances, all had 
a share in determining which nation should predominate in influencing the Jewish 
people. And it is certain that by such influences the people were led into idolatries of 
dili'erent kinds. Egypt, as the neighbour of Israel upon the south, naturally came again 
and again into contact with the people who had been by Divine power delivered from 
her hands. Probably some relics of Egyptian superstition lingered for generations 
among the Jews, and it seems certain that efibrts were made to introduce the deities 
and idolatrous worship of Egypt among the professed worshippers of Jehovah. This 
verse obviously refers to the practice of Egyptian idolatry in the capital, and in the 
very temple courts. 

I. The oharaoteb of this idolatry. 1. It was the worship of living creatures. 
2. And of the lowest forms of life. This we know to have been especially characteristic 
of the religion of ancient Egypt. 

II. The vileness and absueditt of this idolatby. 1. It was the elevation of 
the creature above the Creator. 2. It was the glorification of animal in preference to 
spiritual life. 3. It manifested itself in the most irrational and indefensible forms 
which so-called religion could possibly assume. 4. It lowered the worshippers to a 
moral level of degradation below which it was scarcely possible to sink. 

III. The guilt of the Jews in practising this idolatry. 1. They forsook th« 
pure and elevating woi ship of the living and true God, preferring the vile to the precious, 
the disgusting to the sublime. 2. 'I'hey acted in a manner contrary to all the lessons 
of their past history. 3. They rebelled against the authoritative admonitions of the 
Lord's faithful prophets. In all these respects the Hebrew people were far more 
blamable than the surrounding nations who had been trained in idolatrous practices, 
and had never declined from a purer and nobler faith and worship. — T, 

Ver. 12. — Atheism. In the chambers of the temple courts the prophet in bis vision 
beheld seventy elders, representing the people of Judah and Israel, engaged im 
idolatrous worship. The walls of the chambers were decorated with figures of th« 
animals to which homage w£is rendered. Those who by reason of character and 



OH. viii. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 153 



station should have been the leaders of the people in the offices of pure religion were 
engaged in waving the censers of the idolatrous worship, and the thick cloud of unholy 
incense filled the chambers. As the piophet gazed appalled at this awl'ul spectacle, the 
voice of the Lord addressed him: " Hast thou seen what they do? They say. The 
Lord seeth us not ; the Lord hath forsaken the earth." Here was the true explana- 
tion of the defection of the Jews — leaders and common people alike. It was atheism 
which led to idolatry. And atheism is far more generally at the root of all evils in 
society than many superficial observers are willing to allow. 

I. The elements of atheism. There are many who are not professedly and 
openly atheists, who are such in reality. They may not oast aside the Name of God, 
they may not openly repudiate the Law of God ; but in their hearts they believe not 
in him. There may be recognized on their part : 1. Disbelief in the Lord's omniscient 
observation of men. " They say. The Lord seeth us not." 2. Disbelief in the Lord's 
presence and activity. " They say, The Lord hath forsaken the earth." Whoever 
they may be who make these assertions, and whatever their standing among their 
fellow-men, they are practically and really atheistic. 

II. The opebation op atheism. It is impossible that such disbelief as that 
described should be without influence upon the moral nature and conduct. 1. Atheism 
removes the restraints from sin which belief in tlie Divine presence imposes. This 
is not the highest view to take of the question, but it is a just one; and many 
natures are largely influenced by the knowledge that an all-seeing God regards all 
their ways and thoughts. 2. Atheism removes the inspiration to goodness which 
belief in the Divine presence furnishes. The knowledge that a holy and omnipotent 
Father is ever with us, is ever ready to encourage and assist us in all our endeavours 
to realize our highest ideal, must needs be a factor of great importance in our spiritual 
life. Let this be withheld or contradicted, and how much that is best must be with- 
drawn along with it ! 

III. Tee fbuits of atheism. 1. Among these Jews at Jerusalem disbelief in 
Jehovah led to supei stition and idolatry — no unusual conjunction. 2. Very generally, 
atheism leads to self-indulgence and vice. 3. And it is destructive of all higher 
national life. Fidelity to God is (idelity to principle, fidelity to society, fidelity to the 
highest conception foimed of human life. Infidelity to God involves the opposite of 
all these virtues, and abandonment to the life of interest, of ease, of pleasure ; it gives 
power to every temptation to sin, to every evil tendency of society. Under its 
influence man sinks to the merely animal life, and to such mental activity as subserves 
that life. 

Application. We are sometimes told that in speculative atheism there is no great 
harm ; that without belief in God men may be good citizens, and may discharge 
honourably the several relationships of life. Without denying that, in certain 
instances, the influence of Christianity may fur a time abide after Christianity itself hai 
been abandoned, we liave yet to look at the proper and inevitable consequences of a 
general abandonment of belief in God. We shall find these ' so terrible, that we may 
well watcli and pray against the first loosenings of belief in the most fundamental and 
precious of all truths. — T. 

Ver. 14. — " Weeping /or Tammuz." If the usual interpretation of this passage it 
correct, then it is clear that there had been introduced from Northern Syria into 
Jerusalem a superstitious practice and cultus, which was altogether alien from the 
beliefs and the worship proper to the nation whom the Supreme had favoured with a 
clear and glorious revelation of his blessed character and his holy wdl. It is an 
illustration of the weakness and proneness to err characteristic of our humanity, that 
a nation so favoured as Judah should borrow from their neighbours religious rites and 
observances utterly inconsistent with their own religion, and of a kind fitted to degrade 
rather than to exalt the moral life. We may observe of this special superstition — 

I. That it suBSTiTnTED fiction fob tbuth. 

II. That it concenteated attention upon natube insteab of upok tbm 
AcT^OB of hatdbe. 

III. That rr bcbstitutbd an imaoinativb and fanciful fob a keal and 

liBSITIMATE CAUSE OF EMOTION. 



184 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. vin. 1— la 

IV. That it promoted viok instead of mobal purity. 

V. That it oonsequentlt deqraded the nation that buffered itself to bi 

aEDUOED BT IT. 

Application. No nation and no individual is superior to the necessity of watch- 
fulness against the contaminating influence of neighbours upon a lower moral platform. 
" Evil communications corrupt good manners." Instead of the good leavening tlie 
evil, and so purifying the mass, the contrary may happen, and the defiling influence ul 
error and impurity may spread. In this case there is every likelihood of the fulfilment 
of the proverb, " The companion of fools shall be destroyed." — ^T. 

Ver. 16. — Sun-worshippera in Jerusalem. Although the worship of Baal and other 
similar deities was no doubt a corruption due to the personification of the great orb of 
day, it does not seem that, in this passage, the prophet intends to denounce that form 
of idolatry. It appears that actual sun-worship, which we know to have been 
practised among the Persians, obtfdned in the time of Ezekiel at Jerusalem, though it 
is scarcely credible that it took place literally in the circumstances depicted in the 
context. 

I. The sun-worship itself. Of this it is enough to say that it is creatum- 
worship, and is therefore dishonouring to the Creator who kindled the sun in tht 
firmament, and who is himself the eternal, uncreated Light. 

II. The sun-wobshippers. 1. They included the priesthood ; for the five and twenty 
here mentioned were doubtless the heads of the twenty-four courses, with the higb 
priest presiding over them. 2. Their attitude was indicative of profanity and 
defection ; they are depicted as turning their backs towards the temple of Jehovah 
that they might face the sun as he rose in the east. 

IIL The effects of son- worship. 1. This superstition estranged the miQds of 
those who practised it from the God who is Light, and in whom is no darkness at ail ; 
it rendered them indifferent to the Divine Law, and inattentive to the Divine service 
and worship. 2. It was the means of filling the land with abominations and violence, 
and this was especially the case when conjoined with the worship of the Phoenician 
sun-god. 3. It thus became one of the many occasions for the arousing of the anger of 
Grod, and led to the retributions and chastenings which speedily came upon the ungrate- 
ful, unspiritual, and apostate people. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 16. — Oradual disclosure of human tin. The prophet notes the exact date 
of the vision, so that, if any doubt arose, the circumstance could be verified, so long as 
any one of these elders survived. These details of day and month may seem to man) 
readers needless and tedious ; yet, in an earlier day, they probably served an important 
purpose, and may be again useful in a future age. Even now they demonstrate with 
what diligent care the prophet preserved the records of Divine manifestations. Tht 
three hundred and ninet;y days during which Ezekiel was to be a living sio-n were now 
fulfilled. 

I. The oocaston. The occasion arose out of a visit made to Ezekiel by the elders 
of Israel. Genuine inquiry on the part of men is always pleasing to God. ll men ask 
alter truth from righteous motive, God is prepared to meet them. The response from 
heaven may not be in the mode men expect, yet .some response there will be. On 
this occasion, ton, Ood was honoured in the person of his messenger. It becomes us 
to use tho^e channels for information wliioli God has opened. If we are at our 
Sovereign's lootstool, we shall not have long to wait. 

II. God's obaoious manifestation. It was an act of grice that God should reveal 
himself to his prophet, so that through the prophet he might reveal himself to the 
elders. In every age God has chosen the most fitting agencies through which to 
manifest himself to men. 1. It was an exact repetition of a twmer appearance. 
This was to intimate that God's designs had in no respect changed. There were the 
same splendour.s of majesty — the unchangeable glory — of Jehovah ; there was the sam • 
appearance of radiant tire in the loins and feet, to indicate that he was about to march 
through the land in righteous indignation. " Verily, » tire goeth before him, and it 
shall be very tempestuous round about." " For he cometh to judge the earth," 2. A 
nUijhty energy was put forth. There was the form of a hand, by which the prophet 



OH. vin. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 156 

was lifttd up. From first to last we need Divine assistance. So foe' 1e is human 
nature, that at every step we need gracious succour, both to learn and to do God's 
will. We must be separated from earthly scenes — ^have elevation cf mind— if we 
would see things as God sees them. 3. Personal effort. There was jlace and scope 
for the prophet's exertion. Man must co-operate with God. " 1 behuld." Ezekiel 
must use his eyes. In that state of ecstasy to which he had been raised there is need 
for special activity. Human nature at present cannot long endure the ecstatic state. 
Golden opportunities such as these are brief. Therefore note well the precious lessons. 

III. The gradual disclosures or Israel's guilt. The glory of God was mani- 
fest in the temple. 1. In the clear light of Jehovah's presence we see the real 
character of sin. The eye of man needs the medium of light through which to 
discern objects; and a special revelation of God is required in which to discover 
the turpitude of sin. It was when God came near to Job that this exemplary 
man exclaimed, " I abhor myself." It was when Christ first revealed his glory to 
Peter that he put up the prayer, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, 
Lord." 2. AU forms ^ idolatry provoke Qod's jealous anger. We take this "image 
of jealousy " as an allegorical representation of the many-sided idolatry of IsraeL 
Whatever forms their idolatries assumed, they all had this in common — they usurped 
Jehovah's place; they supplanted his authority. In stupendous condescension, God 
speaks to us after the manner of a man. As the strongest passion which fallen man 
knows is jealousy, so God represents this as the picture of indignant sentiment in hie 
own breast. He sets high value on our human love. It is the most precious thing 
we can give him. Hence, we wound him in the tenderest part when we erect a rival 
in his place. This is a root-sin. 3. Sin becomes most heinous of all sin when 
committed in the temple. God's dwelling-place on earth is designed to be a fount, 
whence streams of blessing may flow to every province of our human life. To defile 
this fount is to send a stream of pollution into the domestic, commercial, and political 
life of the nation. If there be idolatry in the temple, there will be idolatry in the 
home; there will be disorder everywhere. The sanctuary will always be a source ol 
life or of death to the whole empire. 4. Qod's disclosures of our sin are gradual. 
This method has two advantages : (1) It gives us a clearer conception of the magnitude 
and the degrees of sin. (2) It serves to deepen impression, while it does not overwhelm 
us with despair. If we desire to know the truth respecting our sin, God's Spirit will 
lead us from point to point, so that we may have an ever-deepening sense of our 
iniquity. 

IV. The HEIN0U8NES8 OP Israel's oefenob. 1. Its secrecy. The prophet had to 
break through the wall in order to discover it. Men will often indulge secretly in sina 
which they are ashamed to commit openly. The censure of our fellow-men is often a 
useful deterrent. The opinion of others is a mirror, in which we see ourselves. Every 
man has his "chamber of imagery" within. Idolatry in the heart precedes the 
idolatry of temple-worship. Can we not find some image of evil painted on the walls 
of our imagination — some form of mammon, or pleasure, or self? Therefore "keep 
thy heart with all diligence." 2. The deceitfulness of sin. It had blinded men's eyes 
to the fact of God's presence — to the fact of certain discovery and certain retribution. 
A growing acquaintance with sin convinces us of its many wiles to deceive. Few men 
venture to sin until they forget God's omniscience ; and the habit of forgetfulness leads 
swiftly to atheism. 3. The sin was spread by most pernicious example. The men who 
ought to have been beacons and bulwarks against idolatry were pioneers in iniquity. 
Men holding high rank, whether in Church or in state, cannot sin as others do. Their 
influence is enormous, and it is inevitable that they lead others to heaven or to hell. 
Every station has its responsibilities. If, in Israel, the princes and elders had set a 
high example of pious obedience, in all Ukelihood the fortunes of the nation had been 
retrieved. If the helmsman be blind, there is small chance for the safety of the ship. 
4. This sin is seminal ; it soon produces a brood of other sins. Idolatry blossomed into 
sensual lust — into vice, disorder, and violence. The idolatiies of the heathen suited 
the popular taste, because they did not curb natural inclination ; gave a dangerous 
licence to every sensual and selfish passion. 2%«y who have driven from the heart the 
love of God are soon filled with every vile affectiun. They who have ceased to fear 
God soon cease to h»Te any regard for others' weaU Sin rapidly generates a swaim 



166 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. vm. 1— 18. 

aoxious vices. The womeu who wept for Tammuz at the door of the temple were, 
without doubt, living in shameless prostitution. To depart from Ood is to run into 
erery excess of iniquity. The more we examine the matter, the more flagrant and 
aggravated human sin appears. Superficial observers may talk of sin as a mere 
bagat«lle; but they who search out the matter conclude that language is too poor to 
describe the cursed thing. It is the heaviest calamity that can rest on a human being; 
worse than poverty, or pain, or ill-repute, or desertion, or death : •' He is in danger (^ 
tternal sin." — ^D. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Men co-assessors in Judgment taith God. In saving men from sin, 
God qualifies them for the highest ofSces la his kingdom. " They shall sit upon 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.' 

I. God gives us, m stages, hib view of human guilt. Without question, we 
should take very low and imperfect conceptions of sin, unless God revealed to us the 
facts in the moral department of existence. By such means, God condescends to train 
us for companionship with himself, and for high office in his realm. " Enow ye not 
that we shall judge angels?" 

II. God shows us furthee the manifold effects or human bin. 1. Its inex- 
cusahleness. It is not committed from want of knowledge. Those in Judsea who had 
the clearest access to knowledge respecting God yielded to idolatry. 2. Its effect upon 
others. All sin is contagious; and when exhibited in the lives of learned and official 
personages, it has peculiar fascination. The mystic force of influence diffuses it far and 
wide. 3. Its penetrative power. It touches and taints every part of man's nature — 
body, soul, and spirit. It defiles every department of human life and interest — agri- 
culture, commerce, literature, legislation, the household. 4. Its cumulative energy. It 
grows worse and worse, until every restraint is broken down, and all sense of shame is 
destroyed. Open defiance of God is the last phase of iniquity. 

III. GoD SUMMONS OUR JUDGMENT TO ABBESS THE GUILT. God appeals to hls prophet 
for his estimate of the case. " Hast thou seen this, son of man ? Is this a light 
thing?" Our judgment, our reason, our moral sensibility, our conscience, have been 
cunferred upon us for this selfsame purpose, viz. that we should condemn what is evil 
!ind approve what is good. Tinder certain circumstances it is our duty not to judge ; 
as, for instance, when all the facts of the case are not within our possession, or when 
sympathetic help is better than critical examination, or when our judging faculty is 
better exercised about ourselves than about others. Our good, and the world's advan- 
tage, must be our guide when to judge and when not to pass a judgment. 

IV. God debires to have our acquiescence in hib decisions. He puts great 
honour upon men in making them partners with him in the highest offices of the 
heavenly state. God is no lover of monopoly. As his creatures become fitted for 
eminent office and honour, be promotes them. To give them pleasure is to give 
himself pleasure. If any of his creatures become as wise and pure and good as he is, 
he will not repine. He calls us his sons and daughters ; and inasmuch as the relation- 
ship is real, he loves to have our companionship, ay, and our hearty approval of all 
that he does. When Christ shall sit as Judge, in glorious state, we are told that all 
the holy angeh shall sit with him. And if he will come to "be admired by his 
saints," he will desire to have admiration for his deeds as well as for his Person. 
" He shall he justified " by his people " as often as he judges." — D. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — 2%e vision of the image of jealousy. " And it came to pass In the 
sixth year, in the sixth nionth," etc. This and the following three chapters are one 
discourse, or the record of one vision. In this chapter we see how the prophet was 
transported in spirit to the temple at Jerusalem, and caused to behold the open and the 
secret idolatrous abominations of which the people of Israel were guilty. Several 
portions of these verses have already engaged our attention in other connections. 
Moreover, vers. 1 — 4 are merely introductory to the vision; but the following points 
may perhaps be considered by us with advantage. 

I. Thb eldbbb seeking counsel of THE FBOPHBT OF THE LoRD. " T sat in mine 
house, and the elders of Judah sat before me." It has been suggested that this was on 
the labbath day, and that the elders were accustomed to meetthaaca ihkt day to h«ar 



OH. Tin. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 157 

the Word of the Lord from Ezekiel, and to unite in the worship of the Lord their flod. 
But others are of opinion that the occasion was an extraordinary one, and that they 
were assembled to seek counsel or comfort from the prophet. Whatever the occasion 
might have been, there can be but little doubt that they were endeavouring to obtain 
■ome communication of the Divine will. Thus in the troubles of their captivity, when 
removed from their temple, and deprived of the regular ordinances of religion, these 
elders of Judah seem to have been more attentive to the prophet of Jehovah than they 
were when they had their religious privileges in full. When the vision had become 
rare, it was prized. It is our sin and loss that our blessings are often not justly and 
adequately valued until we have lost them wholly or in part. 

" What we have we prize not to the worth. 
Whiles we enjoy it ; but being lack'd and loat^ 
Why, then we rack the value ; then we find 
The virtue, that possession would not show iu ' 

Whiles it was ours." 

CShakespeaie.) 

Wise and blessed are they who duly prize their good and perfect gifts while In the 
possession and enjoyment of them. 

II. The Divine inspibation of the prophet op the Lobd. Ezekiel had been 
inspired previously. The Spirit of God had moved him mightily before; but now the 
hand of the Lord came again upon him. New services require new inspirations. 
Fresh duties demand for their worthy discharge fresh impartations of strength. Bach 
day we need the renewal of grace and strength from above. We discover in the piophet 
a triple effect of Divine iijspi ration. 1. Strengthening him. "The hand of the Lord 
God fell there upon me." (We have spoken of this in our remarks on ch. i. 3.) 
2. Exalting him. " And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of 
mine head; and the Spirit lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, and brought 
me in the visions of God to Jerusalem." While Ezekiel was sitting there amidst the 
elders of Judah, his spirit was exalted and carried away to Jerusalem. The inspiration 
of God raises the human spirit above its ordinary level, stimulates it into greater and 
nobler activities, and renders it more capable of receiving Divine impressions and com- 
munications. 3. Enlightening him. The Spirit enlightened the prophet by quicken- 
ing his spirit to perceive Divine visions, and by unfolding those visions unto him. (See 
our remarks on ch. i. 1, •' The heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.") 

III. The spiritual visions granted unto the prophet or the Lord. 1. A vition 
of the glory of the Lord Qod. " Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of 
fire : .from the appearance of his loins even downward, fire ; and from his loins even ' 
upward, as the appearance ... as the colour of amber. . . . Anii, behold, the glory of 
the God of Israel was there, according to the vision that I saw in the plain." Thus the 
prophet himself informs us that this vision of the glory of God corresponds with one 
which he saw before, and which we have already noticed (on ch. i. 26 — 28). 2. A 
vision of the dishonour done to the Lord Ood. The prophet was transported in spirit 
" to Jerusalem, to the door of the inner gate that looketh toward the north ; where was 
the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy. ... So I lifted up mine 
eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this 
image of jealousy in the entry." Many have thought that this was an image of Baal 
Lightfoot concluded that it was an image of Moloch. Others are of opinion that it was 
an image of Asherah or Astarte, which is mentioned in 2 Kings xxi. 7 ; ixiii. 4, 7, and 
incorrectly translated in the Authorized Version " grove." It has been suggested that 
it was an image of the Tammuz or Adonis mentioned in ver. 14, " and called ' the 
image that provoked to jealousy,' with special reference to the youthful and attractive 
beauty of the object it represented." The view of Fairbairn seems to us the most 
probable. " We are disposed to think," he says, " from the ideal character of the 
representation, that it should not be limited to any specific deity. The prophet, we are 
persuaded, purposely made the expression general, as it was not so much the particular 
idol placed on a level with Jehovah, as the idol-worship itself, which he meant to 
designate and condemn. So sunk and rooted were the people in the idolatroos feeling, 
that where Jehovah had an altar, there some idol-form must have its ' seat — » fixed 



168 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. rm. 1— 1& 

reiidence, to denote that it was no occasional thing its being found there, hnt a regular 
and stated arrangement. And whatever it might for the time be — whether it was 
Baal, or Moloch, or Astarte, that the image represented — as it was necessarily set up 
for a rival of Jehovah, to share with him in the worship to which he alone was 
entitled, it might justly be denominated ' the image of jealousy,' as it provoked that 
jealousy, and called for that visitation of wrath, against which the Lord had so solemnly 
warned his people in the second commandment." " The image of jealousy, which 
provoketh to jealousy," is an exjiression which looks back to Deut. xxsii. 16, 21 : 
'• They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they 
liim to anger." Thus Ezekiel beheld the Lord Jehovah dishonoured by his own 
people, and at the gate of his own altar. And being thus dishonoured, Jehovah 
abandons his temple. "He said unto me. Son of man, seest thou .what they do? 
even the great abomiaations that the house of Israel committeth here, that I should go 
far off from my sanctuary ? " When that sanctuary has been grossly polluted with 
idols he will no longer dwell there. And this is applicable to the Church of Jesus 
Christ. If a spirit of pride, worldliness, or selfishness become predominant in any 
Christian community, he departs far off from it. If any idol of creed, or ritual, or 
fashion, or popularity be establislied therein, he will go far away. And this is appli- 
cable also to the human heart. If we give the devotion of our hearts to another object 
or objects, he will leave us. He claims our supreme affection. He will not have any 
rival for our love. — W. J. 

Vers. 7 — 13. — The chambers of imagery ; or, secret sins. " And he brought me to 
the door of the court; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall," etc. In the case 
of " the image of jealousy " the idolatry of the Israelites was open ; in this case it is 
secret. In that the abominations were committed by the house of Israel ; in this by 
the elders of the house of IsraeL The paragraph suggests several observations on 
secret sins. 

L The most heinous sins are aENEBALLV COMMITTED IN SECRET. These chambers 
of imagery, in which the elders of the house of Israel did their wicked abominations, 
were concealed and difficult of access. The secrecy with which their vile sins were 
committed is graphically set forth in the text. " He brought me to the door of the 
court ; and when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. Then said he unto me, Son of 
man, dig now in the wall," etc' The idolatry practised in these chambers of imagery 
was the animal-worship of the Egyptians. The prophet beheld " every form of creep- 
ing things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed 
upon the wall." Such idolatry indicates deep spiritual degradation, and by its influence 
it increases that degradation. It is fitly characterized as " the vrickod abominations 
that they do." Hengstenberg well says, " Every thing created, however good it may 
be in itself, becomes an abomination as soon as it stands with man beside, or quite 
about, God." What a fall for the elders of Israel, from the elevating worship of the 
true and holy God to the debasing adoration of cattle and creeping things! And they 
must have felt the wrongness of this, or they would not have so carefully striven to 
conceal it. There are secret sins in the lives even of good men — sins of thought and 
feeling that are hidden from our fellow-men. Who could bear to have everything that 
transpires in his mind and heart exposed to the gaze of even his tenderest and beat 
human friend; or, indeed, to any one except the merciful and holy One? 

" Or what If Heaven for once its searching light 
Lent to some partial eye, dieolosing all 
The rude bad tliouglits, that in our bosom's night 
Wander at large, nor heed Love's gentle thrall? 

"Who would not shun the dreary uncouth place? 
As if, fond leaning where her infant slept, 
A mother's arm a serpent should embrace : 
So might we friendless live, and die unwept. 

■ An interesting description of these chambers, and the mode of access to them, ai 
illustrated bv Egyptian chambers of imagery, will be found in Kitto's "Daily Biblf 
Ulqstrations. 



OH. viu. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. 169 

" Then keep the Eoftesing veil in mercy drawn. 
Thou who canst love us, the' thou read us true ; 
As on the bosom of th' aerial lawn 
MeltB in dim haze each coarse ungentle hue." 

(Eeble.) 

But the lecret sins most analogous to those of the text are those which are practised 
wilfully. Could we read the chambers of imagery in human hearts, what pictures of 
■ins tolerated, and even indulged in some, we should see, while the lives present a fair 
exterior I Secret impurities, veiled dishonesties, concealed jealousies and animosities, 
and hidden idolatries, would appear before us in appalling shapes and colours, and 
perhaps in astounding numbers. 
II. The most heinous biks abe sometimes committed seobetlt bt those who 

ARE UNDEB THE 8TEONGE8T OBLIGATIONS TO ESCHEW THEM. " And there StOod before 

them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel," etc. (ver. 11). (On the 
" seventy men of the ancients," cf. Exod. xxiv. 1, 9 ; Numb. xL 16, 24, 25.) 1. The 
$eventy elders may he viewed as representing the whole people, and thus indicating the 
general corruption. In accordance with this view, the entire nation is represented as 
having fallen from its high and holy calling into this grovelling superstition. And 
with comparatively few exceptions the whole house of Israel had departed from the 
pure worship of the Lord Jehovah. 2. The seventy elders may be viewed as showing 
the corruption of those who should have been most incorruptible. They were the repre- 
sentatives and counsellors of the people, and as such they were morally bound by 
advice and example to have endeavoured to keep the people from idolatrous associa- 
tions, and to have maintained in its integrity the worship of the true God ; yet they 
fell themselves into abominable idolatries. More than once, persons standing highest 
in religious position have been amongst the lowest in their real character. Such was 
the case with the scribes and Pharisees during the time of our Lord's life upon earth 
(cf. Matt, xxiii. 13 — 33). Exalted religious position or oESce is no guarantee of exalted 
■piritual excellence. 

UL The pbaotiob of becbet sins sfbinos fbom pbactioal atheism. " For they 
■ay. The Lord seeth us not ; the Lord hath forsaken the earth." Here is a twofold 
denial. 1. Denial of the Divine observation of human life and conduct. " The Lord 
seeth us not." The attempt at concealment implies the fact that they ignored the 
all-seeing eye. The practice of sin generally involve* the overlooking or ignoring of 
the presence and observation of God. "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, 
beholding the evil and the good." Let this become a conviction, let it be realized as a 
solemn fact, and sin would become an impossibility, at any rate with most persons. 
2. Denial of the Divine interest in human life. " The Lord hath forsaken the earth." 
Their feeling seems to have been this : " God does not care for us ; he is indifferent to 
what we do, or what becomes of us." "As he does nothing for them, they must help 
themselves as well as they can." This practical atheism is the prolific parent of secret 
and other sins. If man realized the deep concern of God for his well-being, in that 
realization, he wonld have a most effectual restraint from sin. 

IV. The fact of the existence of secbet sins demands the eabnest consideba- 
TioN of the faithfui. sebvants of Gk>D. " He said imto me, Qo in, and behold the 
wicked abominations that they do here. . . . Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast 
thou seen what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the 
obambers of his imagery ? " Thus the prophet was summoned to consider the secret 
idolatries which were being practised by the elders of Israel. It is important that the 
faithful servants of God should consider the existence and practice of secret sins : 1. To 
oualify them for battling with such sins. The reformer must become acquainted with 
we fiill measure and force of the evils which he would abolish, if he would succeed in 
his mission. And the physician, if he would overcome disease, must know it in its 
inner workings as well as in its outer manifestations. So also is it with him who 
wonld wage war against sin. 2. To qualify them for estimating the righteousness <4 
CMPt treatment of sinners. To appreciate how just and true he is in all his dealings 
with men, it is necessary to consider the sins of mind and heart which are committed 
against him, as well as those of the tongue and hands. 

V. Tup MOST OABEFULLT CONCEALED SINS WILL ASSTTREDtT BE MADE MANIFEST. 



160 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. vm. 1— 1& 

Qod is perfectly acquainted with every one of them. Our secret sins are set in the 
light of nis countenance (cf. Ps. xc. 8). The revelation to the prophet of the wicked 
abominations practised in the dark in the chambers of imagery, is suggestive of the 
unveiling of all secret sins. 1. In the present life circumstances sometimes arise which 
occasion the revelation of hidden sins. Afflictions sometimes strip off the mask from 
the face of the hypocrite. Or the near approach of death leads to the acknowledgment 
of concealed vice or crime. 2. In the future life there will be an awful revelation of 
human character and conduct. " For God shall bring every work into judgment, with 
every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil." "Judge nothing before 
the time, until the Lord come, who will both bring to light the hiddeu things of dark- 
ness, and make manifest the counsels of the hearts." 

CONOLUSION. 1. "Create in me a clean heart, O God;" "Cleanse thou me from 
secret faults," 2. " Keep thy heart with all diligence ; for out of it are th« issues 
of life."— W. J. 

Vers. 14 — ^18. — Man's provocations cf Ood, and Oo^s punishment of man. "Then 
he brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord's house which was toward the 
north," etc. 

I. Man's pbovooations of God. In ver. 17 it is said, " They returned to provoke 
me to anger." The sins mentioned in this paragraph were not the only provocations of 
the Most High, as the words of the clause imply. Professor Cheyne translates, " pro- 
voke me to anger again and again." And Ewald, " exasperated me repeatedly." The 
various idolatries and other sins committed by the people were so many provocations 
of the Lord. But as to those mentioned in the text, notice : 1. The foul idolatry of 
the women. " He brought me to the door of the gate of the Lord's house which was 
toward the north ; and, behold, there sat women weeping for Tammuz." The meaning 
of Tammuz is not certain, but the conjecture which is by far the most probable is that 
it is the Hebrew and Syriac name for the heathen god Adonis, who, according to the 
fable, was the beautiful paramour of Venus. He was said to have been killed by a 
boar in the chase, and afterwards to have returned to life. The worship of Adoiiia 
took its rise at Byblos, in Phoenicia. " From Byblos it spread widely over the East, 
and was thence carried to Greece." It was probably introduced to the Jews from 
Syria. The festival of Adonis was celebrated in the fourth month (corresponding to 
portions of our June and July). This celebration " was of a twofold character : first, 
that of mourning, in which the death of Adonis was bewailed with extravagant sorrow ; 
and then, after a lew days, the mourning gave place to wild rejoicings for his restora- 
tion to life. This was a revival of nature-worship under another form — the death of 
Adonis symbolized the suspension of the productive powers of nature, which were in 
due time revived. Accordingly, the time of this festival was the summer solstice, when 
in the East nature seems to wither and die under the scorching heat of the sun, to 
burst forth again into life at the due season" ('Speaker's Commentary'). For seven 
days the women gave themselves up to this lamentation, chanting mournful songs to 
the accompaniment of pipes, cutting their breasts with knives, and either cutting off 
their hair as a sacrifice to the god, or presenting to him the more costly and shocking 
sacrifice of their chastity. Well does Fairbairn say, "This Phoenician abomination 
had becotne one of the festering sores of Judah's disease." 2. The idolatry of the men. 
" And he brought me into the inner court of the Lord's house, and, behold, at the door 
of the temple of the Lord," etc. (ver. 16). Most expositors follow Lightfoot in regard- 
ing these five and twenty men as the presidents of the twenty-four orders into which 
the priesthood was divided (1 Chron. xxiv.), with the high priest at their head; and 
thus they look upon them as representing the entire priesthood. This, however, is by 
no means certain. As a matter of fact, the priesthood as a whole had never given them- 
selves up to idolatry. Professor Cheyne says, " The number (twenty-five) is a round one, 
as inch. xi. 1. Had it been stated that the men were priests, we might have sup- 
posed that they were the heads of the twenty-four courses, together with the higli 
priest. But no ; they were ' elder's ' (ch. ix. 6), t'.e. laymen. The inner court was not 
closed to the laity till after the return from exile (see 1 Kings viii. 22, 64 ; ix. 25 ; 
2 Kings xi. 4 — 15)." But to whatever class these men belonged, they were offering 
provocation to God by worshipping the stm. TMs form of idolatry was of very ancient 



rai. Tin. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIKL. 161 

origin. Job declares his inuocenoe ol' it (Job xxxi. 26). It is distinctly prohibited in 
the Law given by Moses (Deut, xvii. 3). In its earliest form, among the Arabians, the 
worship was addressed directly to the heavenly bodies, without thie intervention of 
images. In times preceding those of the prophet this idolatry had been introduced 
into Jerusalem, and abolished by King Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 5, 11). But by some 
means it had been revived or reintroduced, and now in the days of Ezekiel was openly 
flourishing again. Moreover, their worsliip of the sun was aggravated by the posture 
in which it was practised, " With their backs toward the temple of the Lord, and 
their faces toward the east." The sanctuary of the Lord Q-od was behind them, as a 
thing they were renouncing, while they were looking to the new object of their hope 
and adoration rising in the east. A still further aggravation of their sin is mentioned : 
" And, lo, they put the branch to their nose." We are not certain as to the meaning 
of this expression. But the opinion of Hengstenberg seems to us the most probable : 
"The Persian sun-worship per, according to Strabo and others, held in his hand a 
bunch of shoots, called baisom, when praying to the sun, and applied it to the mouth 
when uttering prayer. This quite agrees with the rite here." And Professor Cheyne 
says of this rite, " It appears to be of Persian origin ; only this qualification must be 
made that, considered as a Persian practice, it has reference not to the worship of the 
sun, but to that of the sacred fire. In the A vesta we read of a bundle of branches 
called haresma (later writings call it tarsom), which occupied as important a place in 
Zornastrian worship as in the worship of these ' five and twenty men.' The twigs 
preferred for this sacred object were those of the date, the pomegranate, and the 
tamarisk, and the words of the Zoroastrian Scripture (Vendidad, xix. 64) are rendered 
aa follows by the latest translator : ' Let the faithful man cut off a twig of baresma, 
long as a ploughshare, thick as a barleycorn. The faithful one, holding it in his left 
hand, shall not leave off keeping his eyes upon it.' Thus it is not expressly stated by 
the Zoroastrian authorities (nor yet is it by Strabo) that the haresma was to be held 
to the mouth (or the nose). This, however, was the way of holding the veil called 
paitiddna, the object of which was to prevent the impurities of the breath from passing 
into the sacred fire. Professor Monier Williams inrorms me that this at least is still 
in use among the Parsee priests." By this heathenish and idolatrous practice the Lord 
Jehovah was insulted by his own people. 3. The social injustice and oppression. 
"They have filled the laud with violence." Unfaithfulness to God and cruelty to man 
were sins that went hand-in-hand amongst the people of Israel (of. ch. vii. 23 ; ix. 9). 
" State oppression and Church corruption go together," says Grreenhill ; " in the temple 
were pollutions, and in the land violence. The princes and judges, they wronged men ; 
the priests and prophets, they wronged God (Zeph. iii. 3, 4). . . . If there be violence 
in a land, there will be corruptions, pollutions, abominations in the sanctuary ; if there 
be superstition, idolatry in the Church-state, there will be oppression, injustice, and 
spoil in the civil-state : when the temple is a den of thieves, the land will be a den of 
oppressors and murderers (Jer. vii. 9—11)." Thus the people provoked the Lord to 
anger by their oft-repeated and much-aggravated sins and crimes. 

II. God's puhishmbnt of man. " Therefore will I also deal in fury : mine eye shall 
not spare," etc. (ver. 18). The nature of the punishment is not stated here ; but it 
has already been set forth at length by the prophet, and is still further indicated in 
the next two chapters. Two remarks concerning it are suggested by this verse. 1. It 
will be the expression of his righteous anger. " Therefore will I also deal in fury," 
The " therefore " indicates the close connection between the sin and the punishment. 
They are related as cause and effect (see our remarks on ch. vii. 4). 2. It ivUl be 
inflicted without any relenting. " Mine eye shall not spare, neither will I pity : and 
though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them," The 
former of these clauses we noticed on its occurrence in ch. vii. 4. And as to the loud 
cries of the wicked in their distress, they are generally the mere outburst of selfishness, 
without a particle of true penitence or prayer (cf. Prov. L 24 — 31). " When Nebu- 
chadnezzar came, besieged the city : when plague and famine increased, then they fell 
npon their knees and cried to God for help ; as malefactors, when the judge is ready to 
give sentence, cry out, and importune him to spare their lives. Such prayers are the 
Toice of the flesh, not of the spirit: forced, not free: faithless and unseasonable prayers, 
eoming too late, and therefore unacceptable. Let men therefore not defer seeking (^ 
ir,K»KTm. W 



162 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. ix. 1—11 



God till necessity puts them upon it" (Qreenhill). And let us seek him, not with the 
selfish cries of terror, but with penitent and believing hearts. "It is not the loud 
Toice, but the upright heart, that God will regard." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Ver. 1. — ^He oried, etc. The voice comes, 
as before, from the human form, seen as a 
theopbany, in the midst of the Divine glory. 
Cause them that have charge over the city. 
The noun is an abstract plural, commonly 
rendered " visitation " (Isa. x. 3 ; Jer. xi. 23, 
and elsewhere). Here, however, it clearly 
stands for persons (just as we use "the 
watch " for " the watchmen "), and is so 
used in Isa. Ix. 17 ; 2 Kings xi. 18 (comp. 
ch. xUv. 11). The persons addressed are 
called " men," but they are clearly thought 
of as superhuman ; like the angels who came 
to Sodom (Gen. xix. 1) ; like the angel with 
the drawn sword in 2 Sam. xxiv. 16; 1 
Chron. xxi. 16. His destroying weapon. 
The word clearly implies something dif- 
ferent from a sword, but corresponds in its 
vagueness to the Hebrew. In ver. 2 the 
Hebrew for " slaughter-weapon " implies an 
instrument for crashing into fragments, pro- 
bably an axe or mace. A cognate word in 
Jer. li. 20 is translated "battle-axe," and 
the LXX. gives that meaning here, as also 
does the margin of the Eevised Version. 

Ver. 2. — Behold, six men, etc. The man 
clothed with linen brings the number up to 
the sacred number seven, as in Zech. iv. 
10 ; Rev. i. 16, 20 ; xv. 6. He is over tliem 
rather than among them, and answers to the 
scribe who appears bo frequently in Assyrian 
sculptures, as the secretary who counts the 
prisoners that have been taken in battle. 
They come from the north, the region from 
which the vision of ch. i. i had come, in 
which, in the nearer vision of ch. viii. 4, the 
prophet had seen the same glorious presence. 
They appear, ».e., as issuing from the Divine 
presence to do their work of judgment. 
Possibly, as in Jer. i., there may be an allu- 
sive reference to the fact that the Chal- 
deans, as the actual instruments of their 
judgment, came from the same region. The 
gate in question was built by Jotham (2 
Kings XV. 35). The captain of the band is 
aiTayed in the " white linen " of the hosts of 
heaven and of the priests on earth (ttoS^ptjs 
in the LXX. ; comp. Lev. vi. 10 ; xvi. 4 ; ch. 
xliv. 17 ; Dan. x. 5 ; xii. 6). A writer's ink- 
horn. i?hrough all the changes of Eastern 
life this has been the outward sign of the 
scribe's office. Here it is obviously con- 
nected with the oft-recurring thought of 
the books of life and death in the chancery 
of heaven (Exod. zzxii. 32 ; Ps, Ixix. 28 ; 



cxxxix. 16 ; Isa. iv. 3; Dan. xii, 1 ; PhiL iv. 
3). It was to be the work of this scribe 
(ver. 4) to mark such as were for death to 
death, such as were for life to life. The 
LXX., misunderstanding the Hebrew, or 
following a different text, gives, not " a 
writer's ink-horn," but " a girdle of 
sapphire." With all the precision of one who 
knew every inch of the temple courts, the 
priest-prophet sees the visitants take their 
station beside the brazen altar, probably, as 
they came from the north, on the north side 
of it. 

Ver. 3. — ^Was gone up ; better, went up. 
The prophet saw the process as well as the 
result. The " glory of the Lord " which he 
had seen (ch. viii. 4) by the northern gate 
rose from its cherub-throne (we note the use 
of the singular to express the unity of the 
fourfold form), as if to direct the action of his 
ministers, to the threshold of the "house." 
This may be connected also with the thought 
that the normal abiding-place of the pre- 
sence of the Lord had been " between the 
cherubim" (Ps. Ixxx. 1) of the mercy-seat, 
but that thought seems in the present 
instance to be in the background, and I 
adopt the former interpretation as prefer- 
able. 

Ver. 4. — Set a mark upon the foreheads, 
etc. The command reminds us of that given 
to the destroying angel in Exod. xii. 13, 
and has its earlier and later analogues in 
the mark set upon Cain (Gen. iv. 15), and 
in the " sealing " of the servants of God in 
Rev. vii. 3. Here, as in the last example, 
the mark is set, not on the lintels of the door- 
posts, but upon the " foreheads " of the men. 
And the mark is the letter (a «, in old Hebrew, 
that of a cross + , and like the " mark " of 
mediseval and (in the case of the illiterate) 
of modern usage, seems to have been used 
as a signature, and is rightly so translated in 
the Revised Version of Job xxxi. 35. Jewish 
writers have accounted for its being thus 
used, either (1) from its being the last letter 
of the Hebrew alphabet, and thus denoting 
completeness, or (2) from its being the first 
letter of the word thorali (Law); or (3) 
from its standing in the same position in 
the Hebrew word for "thou shalt live." 
Christian writers (Origen, in loc. ; Tertul- 
lian, ' Adv. Marcion,' iii. 22) have not unna- 
turally seen in it a qnasi-prophetio reference 
to the sign of the cross as used by Chris- 
tians, and it is possible that the use ol 
that sign in baptism may have origin- 



OH. IX. 1—11.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL, 



163 



ated in this passage. That was to be the 
sign of the elect of God in the midst of a 
world lying in wickedness. Possibly in 
older as in later forms of idolatry (as e.g. 
in the cnltos of Mithras, Vishnu, Schiva), 
the Totaries of this or that deity may have 
been distinguished by some outward note of 
this kind ; but of this, though suggested by 
Currey, 1 do not find any evidence. It is 
dear, however, that there could be no an- 
ticipation of the Christian symbolism in the 
minds of Bzekiel or of his hearers. The 
" mark" was to be placed on all who were still 
faittiful to the worship of their fathers, though 
they could show their faithfulness only by 
lamentation of the national apostasy. Such, 
of coarse, were Jeremiah, and Earuch, and 
Ahikam, and Shaphan, and Gedaliah, and 
others, and such as these Ezekiel may have 
had present in his thoughts. Against all 
others (ver. 6) they were sent forth vrith 
nnsparing severity. 

Ver. 6. — Begin at my sanctuary, etc. It 
was fitting that the spot in which guilt had 
culminated should be the starting-point of 
punishment. There seems something like 
a reference to this command in 1 Pet. ir. 17. 
In each case judgment " begins at the house 
of God." So the dread work began with 
the ancient men, or elders, of the same class, 
t.e., if not the same persons, as those in 
ch. Tiii. 11. 

Ver. 7. — Defile the house, etc. What 
Ezekiel saw in vision was, we may well 
believe, fulfilled literally when the city was 
taken by the Chaldeans. The pollution of 
the temple by the bleeding corpses of the 
idolatrous worshippers was a fitting retribu- 
tion for the worship with which they had 
polluted it (oomp. ch. vi. 13). 

Ver. 8. — I fell upon my face, etc. The 
ministers of vengeance and the prophet were 
left in the courts of the temple alone. His 



human, national sympathies led him, as 
they led Moses (Numb. xi. 2 ; xiv. 19) and 
St. Paul (Rom. ix, 1 — 3) to undertake the 
work of intercession. With the words which 
liail been the key-note of Isaiah's prophecies, 
probably present to his thoughts (Isa. 
xxxvii. 32, et ah), he asks whether Jehovah 
will indeed destroy all that remnant of Israel 
(comp. oh. xi. 13) who might be as the germ 
of hope for the future. 

Ver. 9. — Then said he unto me. The 
answer holds out but little comfort. The 
iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah 
(we note the coupling of the names, though 
Judah only was the immediate subject of 
the vision, as if his prayer had gone up for 
the whole body of the twelve tribes) was 
immeasurably great. Not idolatry only, but 
its natural firuits, bloodshed and oppression, 
had eaten into the life of the nation (comp. 
ch. vii. 11, 12 ; viii. 17 ; xxii. 25). And 
these evils had their root in the practical 
atheism of the denials which had been 
already uttered in ch. viii. 12, and which 
are here reproduced. The unpitying aspect 
of God's judgments is, for the present, 
dominant, and the work must be thorough. 
One notes how the despair of the prophet 
leads him to forget those who were to have 
the mark upon their foreheads, who were 
indeed the true " remnant." Like Elijah, 
he does not know of any such (I Kings xix. 
10) ; like Jeremiah, he searches through the 
streets of Jerusalem, and cannot find one 
righteous man (Jer. v. 13. 

Ver. 11. — And, behold, etc. The speaker 
in the previous verses had been none other 
than the Presence which remained upon the 
cherubic form, while the seven ministers did 
their work. The captain of the seven now 
returns to report, as an officer to his king, 
that the work has been accomplished. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 2. — A writer's ink-horn. Here was a singular contrast. When Jerusalem was 
about to be given over to slaughter, six armed men went forth for the work of destruc- 
tion, their accoutrements and military bearing quite in harmony with the dread circum- 
stances of the day ; but accompanied by a most incongruous companion, a civilian, one 
of the city clerks, perhaps, with no better ammunition than an ink-horn. When, how- 
ever, the work of this man of ink is apparent, his function is seen to be of supreme 
importance in regard to the events of the day; for he it is who is to set a mark ov 
the foreheads of the penitent, which is to save them from the otherwise indiscriminate 
slaughter. 

I. The influence of the ink-horn. Writing was but slenderly used in those early 
days; yet even then the pen was knovm and used. Since that distant age how greatly 
has its power extended 1 It is now par excellence the tool and weapon of civilized society. 
Prom the ink-hom go forth influences that encircle the globe and endure to many 
generations. The vrriter at his desk uses his magic fluid as an elixir vita for ideas 
which would otherwise be still-born and be speedily buried in oblivion. By means of 
this potent agency he is able to give body and endurance to the fleeting fancies of the 



164 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. es. 1—11. 

hour. The greatest truths are thus preserved and transmitted. If there had heen no 
ink-horn, we should have had no Bible. Civilization has grown up on the food of 
literature. The sword destroys ; the pen creates. When the work of the warrior is 
lost in the wreck of ages, the work of the writer still endures. The victories of 
Nebuchadnezzar have left not a shadow behind them ; but the Psalms of David are more 
powerful to-day than when the sweet singer of Israel first chanted them to his 
shepherd's harp. 

II. The mission of the ink-hobn. This fearful power of writing may be put to 
hurtful or frivolous uses. It may disseminate poisonous ideas. Bad literature is worse 
than the plague. In private life the pen may record scandal that had better have been 
forgotten ; it may write spiteful words that will rankle in the mind of the leader who 
peruses them long years after the heedless writer has forgotten that he ever committed 
the folly of putting them to paper. The power of the pen is a warning to the humblest 
writer to beware of what he sets down. But there is a noble use of this power. The 
man with the ink-horn in Ezekiel's vision was to mark the penitent, and so to secure 
their being passed over in the great slaughter by the men of the sword. It is nobler to 
save than to destroy. The arts of peace are better than the science of war. Pure 
literature should be a saving and protecting influence. They who have the thoughts 
of God written on their minds and hearts may be said to be marked against the advent 
of the destroyer. All who have the gift or the vocation of writing are called to a 
career which should be one of help to their fellow-men. The literary man is tempted 
to be Indolent and selfish, to dream his life away without coming into contact with the 
misery of his fellow-men, and without doing much to alleviate that misery. Ezekiel's 
man of the ink-horn, however, is to leave his desk and walk through the streets. He 
is to use his ink to save his fellows. When a city is perishing it is no time to write 
idle sonnets. 

III. The BESPONSiBiiiiTT OP THE INK-HORN. The man with the ink-horn was required 
to give an account of his use of it (see ver. 11). This is a talent which the gieat 
Master expects to be used for his glory. Abuse of it is sin. Now, there are special 
temptations to such an abuse. 1. The love of fame. This leads to writing what will 
be admired rather than what is good and true. 2. 77ie greed of money. The gift of 
writing is prostituted to a shameful use when a man writes for pay contrary to hi» 
conscience and his convictions. 3. The sense of power. A writer is tempted to set 
down striking words, even if they should not be quite true, or though, perhaps, they 
should needlessly pain some fellow-man. Smartness is often cruel. Writing, like 
every other act of life, needs to be consecrated to Christ and executed for his glory. 

Ver. 4. — TTie mark upon the forehead. I. The penitent abe to havbs a mark 
UPON THEIE roEBHEADS. " The men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations " 
are to be marked on the forehead by the man with the ink-horn. God looks for con- 
fession of sin and repentance. He does not expect primitive innocence, because we 
have all lost that fair grace of Eden; but he desires to see our admission of guilt and 
our Borrow for sin. The penitent publican is accepted (Luke xviii. 13). The woman 
who washed Christ's feet with her tears is forgiven (Luke vii. 37 — 48). Such a condition 
involves certain experiences. 1. A recognition of the fact of guUt. We are often just 
blind to sin. It is one great step gained when we abandon excuses and admit the 
charges God has against us. 2. A sense of sorrow for sin. These men " sigh." It is 
worse to admit guilt and to pride ourselves in it, or regard it with indifference, making 
light of sin, than to be ignorant of its enormity. 3. A pulUc confession. These men 
" cry." They are known among their companions as penitents. Such are the men 
whom God marks. 

II. The penitent are to be saved by the maek on their foreheads. When 
the slayers go about with their swords they are to spare all who have the mark. The 
use of this ink-mark on the forehead is like the use of the blood smeared on the door- 
posts of the Hebrews on the night when the destroying angel went about to slay the 
firstborn of Egypt. God does not punish indiscriminately. In the midst of wrath 
he remembers mercy. There is a way of escape from Divine vengeance. When we 
repent of our sin he is ready to forgive and save. 1. The marJc is set hy a Divine 
command. The penitent do not mark themselves, nor do they mark one another. 



CH. EX. 1—11.] THE BOOK OP THE PltOPHET EZBKIEL. 165 

There may be wolves in sheep's clothing in Christ's flock. The seeming penitent may 
be a hypocrite ; but " the Lord knoweth them that are his." 2. The mwrh it con- 
spicuous. " On the forehead," not on some hidden part of the body. There can be no 
mistake about it. Men may be disowned by their brethren, but God will not forget 
his own. 

III. The mabk of the penitent is typical of the gbaob of Chbist. This whole 
scene is visionary. We may find in it illustrations of more than the people of the time 
guessed, or even the prophet himself dreamed. According to the best interpretation of 
the text, the mark seems to have been a cross. The penitent had the sign of the cross 
drawn in ink upon their foreheads. In Egypt the Hebrews sprinkled blood on their 
door-posts. Look at these two symbols — ^a cross ; sprinkled blood 1 Both are for the 
same object — to secure deliverance. Surely we have here, at least, most apt illustra- 
tions of the Christian redemption. No mere ink-mark of the cross, nor sacramental 
wine, can effect spiritual deliverance. But the cross and blood of Christ, i.e. the giving 
of his life for us and to us, secure our salvation. We must see to it, however, that 
this cross, this "mark of the Lord Jesus" (Gal. vi. 17), is on each one of us 
individually. 

Ver. 6. — Beginning at the sanctuary. The apostles, when entering on their missionary 
labours, were to " begin at Jerusalem " (Luke xxiv. 47). The destroying messengers 
were to begin their direful work at the sanctuary. 

L There is no pkotection in the sanotuabt. Some might flee to the holy shrine 
as to an asylum. This was done at heathen temples, and later at Christian churches, 
and no doubt in rude, violent ages, the pause of vengeance which such places afforded, 
like the use of the " cities of refiige " for the innocent manslayer, would then serve the 
purpose of justice. But this would be needless with God, because he is never hasty 
nor unjust, but slow to anger, and only taking just vengeance. Moreover, the asylum 
can never be a permanent protection for the guilty, and Ezekiel's Jews at the temple 
are guilty. 1. No holy place can secure us against God's wrath. We are not saved by 
attending church. The bad man who dies at church will go to the same fate that 
would have awaited him if he had dropped dead in his familiar haunts of debauchery. 
2. No holy office will secure «s without holy living. They who minister at the altar are 
not spared because of their sacred function. Priests share the doom of laity. Dante 
and Michael Angelo locate bishops in hell. The cardinal's hat appears in Fra Angelico's 
picture of the prison of lost souls. We shall not escape the punishment of our sins by 
putting on clerical vestments. 

II. The geeatest gdilt is found in the sanctuaet. No doubt the punishment 
was to begin there because the worst sin was practised in that place. The previous 
chapter gives an account of the abominations of the "chambers of imagery in the 
temple. Many things concur to make the sins of the sanctuary great. 1. They are 
sins committed against light. The sins of Christians are worse than the same deeds 
done by the heathen, because Christians know the evil of them. People brought up 
under religious influences have not the excuse which may be pleaded for the poor waifs 
and strays of the streets. 2. They are sins committed iy men who profess better things. 
Hypocrisy is thus added to the guilt of the offences themselves. 3. TTiey are stumbling- 
blocks to others. Where a good example is looked for, people see the shame of a 
hypocritical pretence. This is enough to destroy all faith in religion. 4. Uiey or* 
dishonowvng to Qod. The holy place is desecrated. Where God should be most 
honoured his Name is most outraged. 

m. The doom of the banotuabt is a wabnino to the wobld. The beautiful 
temple of Solomon was burnt ; Jerusalem itself was destroyed; the Jews were scattered. 
These things were done in part for our warning. They show that great guilt will surely 
bring great pimishment. They make it evident that no favouritism will prevent God 
from punishing the guilty. The members of a Christian Church will have no immunity 
on account of their membership, nor will pious phrases condone impious deeds. The 
besom of destruction will make a thorough search of the most secret refuges when God 
does begin the dreadful work. Let us flee from the sanctuary to the Savirur. 

Ver. 7. — The temple defiled. The Jews had a horror of death, and regarded a corps* 



166 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ix. 1—11. 

with disgust as an unclean thing, the presence of which would defile the most holy 
place, and the touch of which would render unclean any person who came in contact 
with it. Therefore a massacre in the temple would defile that sanctuary in the eyes of 
the nation hy filling it mth scenes of death, and strewing its courts with ahhorred dead 
hodies. The irony of such a conception lies in the fact that the aggravated ahomina- 
tions of idolatry and vice which brought down this fate on the doomed temple had not 
been regarded as any defilement. So it was when the Jews feared to enter Pilate's 
palace lest the consequent defilement should prevent them from eating the Passover, 
although the stain of murder on their consciences was not reckoned to be any impedi- 
ment (John xviii. 28). Thus men strain out the gnat and swallow the camel. 

I. Sin leads to an undue pbbfekbnob op the external to the internal. 
1. This is caused hy the deadening influence of sin. The once keen conscience is 
blunted, and the perception of real evil dulled, so that what should be regarded with 
loathing is tolerated with indifference. At the same time, the conventional standards 
by which questions of outward propriety are measured remain undiminished. The loss 
of the higher standards then gives these lower ones a fictitious supremacy. The fog 
which hides the eternal mountains of Divine righteousness magnifies the petty hillocks 
of human opinion. 2. This is illustrated in all phases of experience. Not only is more 
thought of external than of internal defilement in religion ; external things generally 
take the lead. The punishment of a sin is more considered than the evil of the sin 
itself. Shame is treated as worse than guilt. The word "character" comes to be 
transferred from interior disposition to public reputation. A. social stigma is dreaded, 
while undiscovered sin is harboured complacently. 

II. Eeal defilement is moral and nJTBENAL. It is those things which proceed 
out of a man that defile him (Matt. xv. 18), because they spring from the centre of all 
true evil, the heart of man. 1. The sanotuary of worship is only defiled by the corrupt 
conduct of the worshippers. Pompey could not really defile the sacred courts by 
trampling rudely over the holy ground. The true abomination of desolation was the 
sin of the Jews. A church is desecrated by worldliness and evil thoughts in the 
worshippers. 2. The temple of the lody is only defiled hy unholy conduct. It is a mere 
symbol of this defilement when contact with a corpse is thought to render the person 
unclean. Contact vsdth sinful occupations is the real defilement. When this temple of 
the Holy Ghost is turned into a depository of evil, its glory departs. It is not the 
dead flesh of a corpse, but living carnality that defiles. When this rottenness is cut 
out no external defilement can hurt, for then " to the pure all things are pure." 

III. The PUNISHMENT OP INTBKKAL BBPILEMENT IS OUTWARD SHAME. The JeWS are 

to have the temple defiled in this external manner as a punishment for the previous 
moral degradation of it. In the end sin blossoms into shame. The commission of sin 
may be hidden, but the punishment of it will be public. In God's great day the 
secrets of all hearts will be revealed. Then hypocrisy will cease, and the external will 
be a true index to the internal. The defiled soul will be seen in a foul body ; the 
corruption of heart will be punished by the degradation of all things that a man prizes. 
The only way of escape is by a previous confession of the soul-corruption, and the 
cleansing of the heart from its defilement through the grace of Christ (Ps. li. 7). 

Ver. 10. — The inexorahle God. We are so aconstomed to dwell upon the for- 
bearance, long-suffering, and merciful disposition of God, that the inexorable character 
of his righteousness is not suflBciently considered. There are conditions in which he 
cannot show mercy. 

I. God WILL NOT spare the impenitent. He pardons on condition of repentance. 
" If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins " (1 John L 9). 
But if we will not humble ourselves to admit our guilt, nor cease to court and favour 
the things that God hates, it is simply impossible that he should regard us with 
conplacency. 

n. God will not spare any pavoured persons. The perpetual fallacy of Israel 
lay in considering itself a privileged nation, sure of the favour of God in spite of its own 
unfaithfulness, instead of imderstanding that it stood under covenant relations with 
him which involved a loyal observance of certain conditions if the Divine blessings 
were to be received, Ohiistians are in danger of flattering themselves with a siniilar 



OH. IX. 1— ll.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 167 

delusion, God cast off his own people the Jews when they were faithless. God will 
cast off a faithless Church. Christians who break away from Christ wiU merit and will 
receive the " wrath of the Lamb." Those in highest positions in the Church will find 
no immunity. No excuses will be available for real guilt. 

III. God will not spare any sin. He means to destroy sin. If the siuner hold 
to it and identify his fate with it he must come under the destruction. If he cast it 
off as an alien, hateful, deadly thing — a viper that he has plucked from his bosom — 
God will destroy the sin. In the discipline of the Christian life God is always fighting 
against sin. He will not cease till he has killed the last of the vile brood of the 
serpent. Christ has come as the friend of the sinner, and therefore as the enemy of his 
sin. " He will throughly purge his floor," etc. (Matt. iii. 12), 

IV. God will not bpabe any needful chastisement. It hurts the kind parent 
to have to chastise his son. Yet it would be an unkindness and a selfishness to spare 
himself the pain of inflicting wholesome punishment. The surgeon has a steadier 
hand than the soldier. His knife is more inexorable than the sword of war. The 
very fact that it cuts to heal makes it the more strong and certain. " Whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth " (Heb. xii. 6). Therefore the chastisement which love inspires 
is the more certain to fall. 

V. God did not spahb his own Son. (Rom. viii. 32.) In the sacrifice of Christ 
God showed the firmness and strength of his love to us. A weak and soft love would 
not have gone to so great a cost. Even the tears of Gethsemane did not move the 
inexorable God, though, of course, this was really with the consent of Christ, who freely 
gave himself for us, and to whom therefore no wrong was done. 

Ver. 11. — The completed task. A man with an ink-horn had been sent round Jerusalem 
to set a cross on the foreheads of all penitent persons, and so to mark them for protec- 
tion against the terrible coming slaughter. This pleasant task had been performed, 
and the messenger now returned, saying, " I have done as thou hast commanded me." 
These words are a suitable motto for a completed task. 

I. The seevant op God is kbquibed to do as his Masteb couuands him. He 
is not only required to serve, he is also required to obey ; i.e. he is not merely to work 
for the benefit of his Master, he is to do what his Master wishes. Thus obedience is 
more than service ; and it is harder of performance. 1. He should have a single eye to 
his Master's will. Possibly this may be contrary to his own inclinations, and even 
opposed to what he imagines would be most serviceable towards the end in view. Men 
may criticize, advise, mock, threaten. The servant of God must be ready to reply 
with St. Peter, " Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more 
than unto God, judge ye," etc. (Acts iv, 19). The will of God — ^in the revelation of 
the Bible, the example of Christ, and a man's own conscience — ^is the one sole authority. 
With the enlightened liberty of Christianity this does not come as a blind law, but 
appealing to conviction. Yet still, when thus we know the right, there is an end of the 
matter. The servant of God is then like the famous Six Hundred. 2. He has only to 
accomplish his Master's will. The man with the ink-horn has simply to mark the 
penitent — not to rescue them, build a castle in which to hide them, fight on their 
behalf. The Christian soldier is to preach the gospel to every creature. The results 
he must leave with God. Moreover, each is just to do his own part, and not to distress 
himself because he cannot also do his neighbour's work. The terrible burden of the 
world would seem less if we realized our responsibility as lying just in obedience. 

n. The joy of the sbbvant of God is in accomplishino the task his Masteb 
lays upon him. • God does not put upon his servants harder work than they can per- 
form by his aid. Now we have to face our tasks, and perhaps they appear toilsome 
and formidable. It will be a most happy thing to be able to look back upon them as 
accomplished. Not, indeed, that any one perfectly fulfils the Master's eommands. 
Christ alone could cry, in the fullest sense of the words, " It is finished 1 " (John xix. 30), 
Yet St. Paul could say, " I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have 
kept the faith " (2 Tim. iv. 7). And Christ will welcome his true steward with the 
words, " Well done, good and faithful servant" (Matt. xxv. 23). 1. There is the Joy of 
accomplishment. The task of a Sisyphus is one of the tortures of Tartarus. The 
aimlessness of the walk of the treadmill gives the sting to the convict's punishment. 



168 THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. ix. 1— IL 

There is a joy in accomplishment. Each stage passed, each height climhed, each task 
done, hringa its own joy — a joy of which the indolent can have no conception. The 
true servant will say — 

" And I will ask for no reward. 
Except to serve thee still." 

2. l^ere is the joy of the Master's approval. Christ makes obedience the condition of 
his friendship (John xv. 14). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 4. — The mark of spiritual concern. The defection and idolatry already described 
in the previous chapter couW neither be disregarded nor unavenged. A nation that had 
enjoyed privileges so conspicuously great as Israel, and that had, in spite of all such 
privileges, apostatized from the Gud to whom they owed everything that distinguished 
them from the surrounding nations, had written its own sentence of condemnation. 
But the Divine retribution is never undiscriminating. The laws of national life are 
such that the righteous are often slain with the wicked ; but their calamity is not • 
sign of Divine displeasure. And above this earth, upon which anomalies are ever 
■witnessed — anomalies calling for both submission and faith — there is a region where 
perfect discrimination is ever exhibited. This passage teaches a precious lesson. The 
Judge of all the earth will do right ; he will separate the wheat from the chaff. " The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." They bear his own mark, the impress of his own 
seal. They shall be delivered in the judgment that shall overtake the disobedient and 
rebellious. The Divine Priest of salvation himself gives the direction, "Come not 
near any man upon whom is the mark ! " 

I. The PKBVAIiBKOE OF MOEAL ABOMINATIONB Df A COMMUNITI. The VarioUB 

idolatries that had been brought into Jerusalem had led the population of that city 
into error and sin. Even in the neighbourhood and the precincts of the temple itself 
the vrorship and the practices of the heathen prevailed unchecked. A holy God, and 
commandments righteous and pure, were forsaken for deities and for rites which were 
the expression of human degradation and corruption. Where is the community in 
which there is nothing parallel to the state of things at Jerusalem in the time of 
Ezekiel? Wealth, luxury, pleasure, a worldly standard of judgment and of life, are 
too often substituted for the lofty and exacting religion of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
With irreligioQ come vice and crime in varying forms. Abominations are wrought 
in every great city in Christendom at which angels may weep. 

II. The reteibutive judgment or God. The six men with the battle-axes, whom 
the prophet saw in his vision, were directed to execute a righteous sentence upon the 
inhabitants of the city ; they were without pity to slay the sinful and rebellious of 
every age and every class. There is something awful in the resolve of the Lord, as 
recorded by the prophet, " I will recompense their way upon their head." No one 
vfho has studied the history of the nations of the earth will question the action of a 
retributive Providence. In the facts which meet us there is indeed much that perplexes 
us; but we are not left in doubt as to the fate of the selfish, the worldly, the unjust, 
the cruel, the voluptuous, in a word, the idolatrous, those who forget and forsake God. 
However it may be hereafter, there is no room for questioning how it is in this world 
with those who rebel against God. 

III. The IKDirFEEHNOB with which PEBVAILINQ iniquity 18 TOO OENEBALLT 

EBGAEDED. Such indifference is sometimes justified by argument : as when men say 
that the world's sin is fated and inevitable, and that it is needless and useless to 
trouble ourselves concerning it. But generally this is merely a sign of selfishness and 
hardness of heart. Men shut their eyes and deafen their ears to the evidences of 
prevailing sin ; to recognize it would disagreeably disturb them in their pursuits, their 
pleasures, their dreams. 

IV. ThK 8UFFEEING AND DISTEES8 OCCASIONED TO THE TBUB PEOPLE OF GOD BT 

THE 8PB0TA0LK OF ABOUNDING INIQUITY. There are those, thank God, in every com- 
munity of professed Christians who are not unaffected by the abominations which are 



OH. II. 1—11.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 169 

doue. They mark their sense of pTsvailing sin by their protests and rebukes, by their 
confessions and prayers, by their practical efforts for the improYement of their fellow- 
men, and especially by their zeal in the proclamation of the gospel and in the further- 
ance of all means employed to bring before the minds of sinners the character, the 
ministry, the redeeming work of him who came " to seek and to save that which was 
lost." 

V. This bpikitual concern a. mark of God's bpeoial favour, and a sion of 
FUTUEE salvation. It was a common practice, and indeed still is, in the East, to set 
* mark upon the forehead of the deity worshipped, and upon the forehead of the woi- 
shipper. The practice is alluded to in other passages besides this in Ezel^iel. The 
priest and intercessor placed the sign upon those who sighed and cried because of the 
abominations ; and they were exempted from the general calamities and destruction. 
In this provision is a great spiritual truth. We should commit a mistake did we 
understand an outward and visible sign merely. This may be present or absent. It 
is the Lord's own prerogative to mark his own people, to recognize their earnest 
spiritual concern, to assure them of his own favour and approval as partaking the 
sentiments, if it may so be expressed with reverence, of his own nature, aud to secure 
them for the coming tribulation, to hide them as in the cleft of the rock, and to enrich 
them with the blessings of eternal salvation. There is no truer mark of the Divine 
Spirit than sorrow for prevalent sin, and solicitude for the cause of truth and right- 
eousness. — ^T. 

Ver. 6. — "Begin at the sanctnuwyl" The vision which Bzekiel saw, and which 
brought vividly before his mind the moral state of his country's metropolis, contained 
no feature more painful than the representation of the idolatry prevailing in the very 
precincts of the temple itself. He saw twenty-five men, apparently representing the 
priesthood, turning their backs towards the temple of the Lord, and their faces towards 
the east, and worshipping the rising sun. Upon these, as the most flagrant and 
inexcusable offenders, the righteous retribution first fell. Those most highly privileged 
are by that very fact most evidently responsible ; and unfaithfulness upon their part 
deserves and will receive sorer condemnation. 

I. Those specially employed in eblioious services are specially bound to 

WATCHFULNESS, SENSITIVENESS, AND ACTIVITY IN THE PRESENCE OP MORAL ABOMINA- 
TIONS. A profession of religion, much more occupation in the minstrations of religion, 
imposes a peculiar responsibility ; for religion is essentially in antagonism to error, to 
superstition, and to vice. Yet there have been periods in which ministers even of the 
true relifiion have been lax in their own conduct, and have connived at prevailing 
error, 'there is an obligation on the part of every one who, by reason of office, 
employment, and public position, is a representative of Christianity, to aim at the 
prevalence of Christian principles throughout the community. 
IL Those who, being professedly ministers of religion, ark yet negligent 

AND indifferent IN THE PRESENCE OP FLAGRANT SIN, ARE IN A SPECIAL MANNER 

OBJECTS OF Divine displeasure. It is not only in privilege and blessing that the 
sanctuary takes precedence. Unfaithfulness there is observed and reprehended as sin 
of the first magnitude. Eetribution begins at the sanctuary. How should they be 
clean who bear the vessels of the Lord! God is indeed forbearing towards the failings 
and infirmities of his true servants. But the insincere and hypocritical are the objects 
of Divine aversion; those of such character who occupy positions of prominence and 
influence are regarded as •busing their position and as forfeiting all claim to eon- 
fidence. 

III. The unfaithful in the sanctuary are the first to feel the nation's 
CHASTISEMENT. There is a well-known proverb, " Like priest, like people." A 
corrupt clergy encourages national degeneration. And when such degeneration issues 
in national calamity and destruction, it is but just that those who liave fostered evil 
principles should be the first to suffer. This has happened again and again in the 
world's history. Those who should have led the peo|ile aright, who should have 
enjoyed the people's confidence and esteem, have too often been the agents in their 
deterioration ; and when the time of trial has come, they have lost their iifluence, 
forfeited the position they abused, and paid for their unfaithfulnes-s with the ruin of 



170 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. [oh. ix. 1—11. 

their leputatioD, and even with the loss of their life. The destruction which has 
involved a nation has begun at the sanctuary. — T. 

Ver. 11. — True obedience. The very word "obedience" is to some minds offensive 
and repulsive. Association may connect it with tyranny, and then it suggests harshness 
and severity on the one side, and merely compulsory submission on the other. But to 
the right-minded no word is more welcome, for no moral quality is more honourable. 
The son obeys the wishes of his father; the soldier, the sailor, render immediate 
obedience to the word of command ; to the school-boy who is worthy of his advantages, 
his master's will is law; the ambassador lives to carry out the instructions of the court 
by which he is commissioned. In fact, all through human life, especially in civilized 
and Christian communities, command and obedience are universal principles, binding 
society together. In the text we have an example of obedience rendered by one of his 
servants to the most high God ; the profession of obedience here made is distinguished 
by remarkable simplicity and dignity. 

I. Belioious obedience is based upon personal relations. There is natural 
law, which, in a certain sense, we may be said to obey, but with no voluntary 
adoption or choice. Being, so far as the body is concerned, subject to physical law, we 
are to that extent obedient without the moral quality and virtue of obedience. But 
law in its proper sense is the imposition of the will of a superior upon that of an 
inferior. Law of this kind is not always just, is not always deserving of reverence. 
The despot commands, and his trembling subject may obey; the slave-driver 
commands, and the slave may from fear render unquestioning obedience. But, on the 
other hand, there are human relations which involve wise directions and willing 
compliance. And such are, in a sense, the copy of that beneficent relation which 
subsists between the Creator and his subject man. Mind comes into contact with 
mind. "/ have done as thou hast commanded me." The language brings the 
personalities into closest contact. The obedient is impelled, not by regard for his 
interests or by fears lest he suffer, but by the recognition of the personal right of God. 
It is always well, in the religious life, to look through the Law to the Lawgiver, 
through the decision to the Judge, through the fatherly word to the Father himself. 

II. Rbligiotjs obedibnoe iNvoiiVBS AUTHOEiTT AND SUBJECTION. Authority is 
not, as has sometimes been taught, an invention of human ingenuity for the promo- 
tion of human convenience. In its essence it is Divine. It is something quite 
different from power, and something far higher. In human natirre and in human 
society, authority is sometimes unaccompanied by power ; force even usurps its proper 
place. Human beings are fallible in wisdom and Imperfect in goodness ; and it often 
happens that the exercise of authority is unjust and hateful. But the authority of 
God is always exercised with wisdom and with justice. Obedience to man is always 
a qualified, whilst obedience to God is an absolute, duty. The Divine will is indeed 
binding, and for this reason — that the Divine judgment is always supremely excellent. 
In fact, every command of God is the utterance of the Infinite Season. There is moral 
authority in God's commands, which our judgment and conscience spontaneously 
acknowledge. 

III. Religious obedience is motived and inspired by grateful love. There 
is much obedience rendered hy man to man, merely upon compulsion, under the 
influence of fear. And there are those who, under similar motives, seek to serve God. 
Veneration for the Lawgiver, and admiration of commandments in themselves excellent 
and beautiful, constrain some men to devote themselves to a life of obedience. But the 
distinctively Christian obedience is that which is rendered from gratitude and affection 
to the Saviour. When his mission to earth is truly understood ; when it is perceived 
that it was pity which led him to undertake the work of redemption ; when not only 
his labours, but his suflerings and sacrifice, are pondered and appreciated ; — then love 
may well enkindle love, and those for whom Christ died may well ask what they shall 
render for all the benefits they receive from and through him. Who would not do 
anything to evince loyalty, affection, and gratitude, to a Friend so self-sacrificing, « 
Saviour so compassionate ? Our Lord Jesus himself relied upon these motives. He 
did indeed claim obedience as his right : " Why call ye me Master and Lord, and do 
not the things which I say ? " But he also asked obedience as a proof of response to 



CH.IX. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 171 

his friendship : •' Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you ; " " If ye lev* 
me, keep my commandments." 

" 'Tis love that makes our willing feet 
In swift obedience move." 

IV. BELiaiotrs obbdienob overcomes naturai. ebpugnanob to ant oouesb of 
ACTION PRESCRIBED BY DiviNB AUTHORITY. We have an illustration of this in tho 
context. The special vocation of the man with the ink-horn was to set a mark upon 
ihe foreheads of the men who sighed and cried for all the abominations that were 
done; yet he seems also to have had charge of the officers of the city to whom was 
entrusted the awful task of punishment and destruction. The work of deliverance was 
agreeable and grateful ; the work of chastisement and slaughter must have been painful 
and distressing. Yet in both directions the will of the ri<;htful Lord and King was 
done ; and the report was rendered of the fulfilment in all their completeness of the 
royal commands. It happens to us all now and again to be called to undertake some 
service from which we shrink, to which by our temperament and hahits we are 
naturally averse. But obedience has to he rendered, not only when the commands 
given harmonize with our predilections, but when they are sorely opposed to our 
natural or acquired tastes and inclinations. But rightful orders must be obeyed. Ab in 
the case of the Six Hundred — 

" Theirs not to reason why; 
Theirs not to make reply : 
Theirs but to do and die." 

So in the case of many a child of God, many a soldier of Christ, orders are known to 
be issued upon Divine authority which can only be oheyed at the risk of wealth, or 
reputation, or life. But such considerations have to be dismissed. Once satisfied that 
the commandments are Divine, the subject renders, if not a happy, yet a willing 
obedience. It is not to be expected that, in this imperfect state of being, obedience 
should always be enjoyment, though the aim of every Christian should be to say, with 
his Master, " I delight to do thy will, my God ! " 

V. EeLIGIOUS obedience YIELDS SATISFACTION TO THE CONSCIENCE. If pleasure 

does not always accompany and follow true service, approval will not Ml. Upon the 
grave of a great philanthropist may he read these lines — 

" He does well who does his l)est. 
Brothers I I have done my best : 
I- am weary : let me rest." 

There may be something of self-righteousness in these lines. Here is an epitaph, how- 
ever, which may be placed over any faithful servant of Christ— 

"Life's work well done ; 
Life's course well run ; 
Life's crown well won : 
Now comes rest." 

There is, however, no reflection upon a hfe of obedience to compare in grandeur and 
beauty with that recorded to have been uttered by our Lord himself, "I have 
finished the work which thou gavest rae to do." To have given up one's own wiU, to 
have accepted the will of Heaven, to have toiled and suffered as an obedient son and 
servant in God's cause, — this is the better part, which will endure the retrospect of 
life's closing hour. 

VI. EELIGIOaS OBEDIENCE SECURES ACCEPTANCE AND REWARD FROM THE SuPBEMB 

Ruler himself. If rebellion is, in the sight of God, man's one great error and sin, 
obedience is, in his sight, above all things acceptable. Every man who is saved is 
indeed saved by grace ; but all are judged by their works. The good pleasure of the 
King promotes to higher service as the reward of diligence and fidelity. And there 
can be no words so welcome at the last as these, " Well done, good and faithfiu 
servant ! "— T. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — 2%e hour of Jtidgment. As among men there are magistrates' sessions 
as well as the great assizes, so also God has seasons for the local administration of 



172 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET B2EKIBL. [oh. ix. 1—11. 

justice, as well as the final judgment. In fact, God is always upon his judicial seat, 
always meting out justice to the various orders of his creatures. If he ceased to judge, 
he would cease to rule. 

I. Mark the supbbmaoy of God's judicial voioe. The last chapter finished with 
the declaration, " Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, I will not hear 
them ; " this chapter begins with the statement, " Ee cried in mine ears with a loud 
voice." 1. The season for prayer was exhausted. Examination of Israel's case had 
terminated. The verdict had passed, and nothing now remained but execution. 
Prayer on the part of the condemned, at this point, would be merely a selfish thing. 
It would bring no good. It would be out of harmony with God's plans and with 
righteous law. 2. The voice of Ood subjugates and overpowers all other voices. It is a 
voice of creation : "He spake, and it was done." It is a voice of life: "Awake thou 
that sleepest ! " It is a voice of judicial destruction : " Depart, ye cursed, into outer 
darkness ! " The voice that Bzekiel heard was a loud voice. The prophet could not 
question its reality nor mistake its utterance. It overcame the prophet's unwilling- 
ness to hear judgment pronounced. It drowned all dissentient voices. Nothing was 
heard save this. " The voice of the Lord shaketh the mountains." 

II. God's eebvantb abe foitnd amono all orders of creatdbeb. This earth is 
not an isolated kingdom ; it is a province of God's great realm. The persons here 
summoned to appear for the execution of Jehovah's will are, without doubt, angels, 
though to the prophet's vision they seemed in form like men. As we read of angels 
who are appointed the guardians of little children, so we learn that certain angels are 
ordained guardians of cities and nations. To Daniel the angel spake of "Michael, 
yow prince" — "the great prince thatstandeth for the childrtn of thy people." The 
history of the Hebrew people is full of instances in which the angels of God were 
despatched either for the rescue or for the destruction of men. The Most High is 
unchangeable ; and inasmuch as a destroying angel had executed God's vengeance on 
the idolaters of Egypt, so now angels are employed to slay the idolaters in Israel. Yet 
there is singular economy in all God's arrangements. The number of these of&cers of 
justice was six, so that one might issue from each of the six gates of the city. The 
ministers of vengeance shall neither be too many nor too few. Eventually the Chaldean 
armies should be God's agents in the punishment of the Hebrews ; still, these would 
act under the generalship of the heavenly principalities and powers. 

m. The wobk of justice pboceeds side by side with that of mehoy. Along 
with the six officers appointed to destroy was one differently clad, whose work was to 
save. His clothing was the attire of peace — white linen — i.e. the dress of a trxte priest. 
Against six destroyers there was one protector, which denoted how few was the 
number of the faithful. They were to have a distinguishing mark in the most con- 
spicuous place — in their foreheads. The owner of the flock will take care to put his 
own sign-manual on his sheep. " The Lord kuoweth them that are his." In every 
time of trouble "he has hidden them in his pavilion — in the secret of his tabernacle 
will he hide them." Noah and his family in the ark ; Lot and his daughters in Zoar ; 
the early Christians sale in Fella when Jerusalem was destroyed ; — these are evidences 
of God's special care of his chosen. He accounts them his jewels, and in times of 
danger holds them iu the hollow of his hand. Not only had they not connived at the 
idolatry, but their souls were distressed on account of it. They had besought with 
tears their brethren to desist from the evil thing. Their holy zeal shall have a con- 
spicuous reward. 

IV. God's sbbvants have like dispositions with himself. Ck)d had described 
the emotions and purposes of his mind thus : " Mine eye shall not spare, neither will 
I have pity." And now he requires his officers to cherish the selfsame sentiments: 
"Let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity." To be a servant of God, and the 
executioner of his will, we must be like-minded with himself. Only such does God 
employ on work of high importance. Eye and heart must be as God's. Following the 
tendencies of natural temperament, some servants of God would be too lenient, some too 
harsh. In such matters we must loe sure that we are doing God's will, not indulging 
our own. Private spleen, and merely natural bias, must be completely repressed. 
Our feeling and temper and will must be chastened by almighty grace, in order that 
u'e may be the servants of God. His will must find a full response in our wllL 



OH. IX. 1—11.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 173 

V. Ketribution is equitable and complete. There is no miscarriage of justice in 
God's court, and in his retributions there is no excess. The equity of the destruction 
is seen in that it begins at the sanctuary. The ringleaders in rebellion shall be fore- 
most in the punishment. That sacred place is sacred no longer. God has withdrawn 
his presence;, therefore all privilege is extinguished. It had been a sanctuary for the 
oppressed, for the unfortunate, for the fugitive in war ; but it shall be no refuge for 
rebels defiant against God — no refuge for sin. Mere sentiment about the traditional 
sacredness of the place must yield to sterner virtues — must yield to practical and 
primitive righteousness. Better that every sanctuary of religion be defiled with blood- 
shed, than that they be nests of immorality, cesspools of vice ! If the reality ie gone, 
it is a common injury to maintain the appearance. And God's retributions will be 
complete. They will spare none. We may hesitate respecting the justice of destroy- 
ing "little children;" yet we can repose confidently on the bosom of the eternal 
Father, and say, " Will not the Judge of all the earth do right ? " To our limited view 
the administration of supreme justice may sometimes be veiled in " clouds and dark- 
ness ; " but we can afford to wait the fuller disclosures of the truth. " What we know 
not now, we shall know hereafter." — ^D. 

Vers. 8 — ^11. — Sitman intercession. In every age good men have felt an internal 
constraint to intercede for the guilty. Love to God always produces love to men, 

L iNTEROESSrON FOB THE GUILTY IS PRAISEWORTHY. Ezckicl felt that, thoUgh 

surrounded by the slain, his own life had been spared. A proper sense of Oid's com- 
passion to us awakens similar compassion for others. It is a noble sentiment, and God 
does not discourage it. It sheds a blessing in the breast of him who cherishes it. 
Abraham, Moses, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Paul, are notable examples of earnest intercessors 
for their fellows. 

II. Intercession fob the guilty should be made nf great humilitt. Ezekiel 
" fell upon his face." This was most seemly. For, on the surface of our appeal, it 
would seem as if an imperfect man were more possessed with pity than is God. Yet 
this can never be. The tiny rill can never rise higher than the fount. One beam of 
light can never outvie the sun. Kor can we suppose that any element of extenuation 
has been overlooked by the comprehensive mind of God. In fact, reflection at such 
time is quiescent ; the intercessor yields for the moment to the impulse of feeling. 
Nevertheless, intercession is proper and becoming ; for who can tell but that God has 
predetermined to grant delay or reprieve on condition that intercession be made? We 
must stoop if we would conquer. 

in. Intercession fob the guilty must always be subordinate to the intbbebts 
OP righteousness. The prophet evidently had due regard to the honour of God, while 
he sought a reprieve for men. To blot out the very nation which he had aforetime so 
protected and blessed, would (in the eyes of the heathen) have been a dishonour. But 
the approval of the good among angels and among men was more precious, deserved 
more consideration, than the opinipn of idolatrous nations. The well-being of the 
universe is intertwined with the maintenance of righteousness; and, at all costs, 
righteousness must be upheld. Already God had provided for the safety of the faithful 
few ; but to the eye of the prophet the few seemed as nothing. Yet, if we had larger 
faith, we should have less anxiety for the Church's weal. 

IV. Intercession, though apparently unsuccessful, brings some advantage. 
Though Abraham, in pleading for Sodom, was apparently unsuccessful, he was not 
really so. No piayer is fruitless. God was not displeased with Bzekiel's intercession. 
He condescended to reason with him. He showed him yet more clearly the magnitude 
of Israel's sin. He, showed him how that, if he did not destroy evil men, the evil men 
in Israel would slay the pious : " The land is full of blood." He impressed on the 
prophet's heart yet more deeply the sanctity of law and equity. The severest punish- 
ment was simply "recompense" — their proper wages. By such intercession the 
prophet is the better equipped for his future work. — ^D. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Divine discrimination in the execution of fudgm«nt. " He ciied also 
in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to 
draw near," etc. In the preceding chapter the various forms of idolatry which were 



174 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ix. 1— 1L 

practised in Jerusalem, and by which the Lord Jehovah was provoked, were set forth ; 
and now Ezekiel beholds in vision the treatment which Gkid was about to deal out to 
the people by reason of their provocations. We observe — 

I. That the agents op Q-od'8 judgments abe ever ready to execute his oom- 
HANDS. " He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have 
charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his 
hand," etc. (vers. 1, 2). Instead of " Cause them that have charge over the city to 
draw near," Hengstenberg translates, " The visitations of the city draw near ; " and 
Schroder, "Near are the visitations of the city." These six must be angels, heavenly 
watchers over the city ; or, perhaps, as Bunsen says, " the punishing and destroying 
angels," who are now to execute the Divine retribution. They are spoken of as men, 
because they appeared in human form, in which form angels appeared unto Abraham 
(Gen. xviii. 2). That they were angels is evident also from the fact that they formed 
the retinue of the " man in their midst, clothed in linen," who is " no other than the 
angel of the Lord, and whom we never see accompanied with any other retinue than 
that of the lower angels ; compare for example Zech. i. 11, etc., and Josh. t. 14, where 
the angel of the Lord designates himself as prince of the host of the Lord" 
(Hengstenberg). Many have been the conjectures as to the significance of the number 
of these angels. The true explanation seems to be that, with the angel of the Lord, 
they made the sacred number — seven (cf. Zech. iii. 9 ; Eev. v. 6). They were the 
executioners of the judgments of God upon the guilty inhabitants of the favoured 
city. And they were to execute it under the direction of " the man clothed in linen." 
For we have to regard him " not alone as appointed to the work of delivering the pious 
— not as standing in opposition to the six ministers of righteousness. The protection 
of the pious is his privilege ; but the work of vengeance also stands under his controL 
The six are to be regarded as absolutely subordinate to him, executing the work of 
destruction only by his order and under his authority " (ibid.). After the execution of 
the judgment in this chapter, he said, " I have done as thou hast commanded me " 
(ver. 11). And in ch. x. 2, 7, he is expressly represented as the agent of the Most 
High in the burning of the city. Now, these angelic beings may be said to have been 
the agents, and the Chaldeans the instruments, in the work of slaughter. Soon as they 
were required for that work they were promptly at hand. And soon as they received 
their commands " they went forth, and slew in the city." Many are the agents and 
instruments which God employs ; and when he summons them, they quickly respond 
to his call. When he commanded, the flood of waters overwhelmed the old world ; 
and the flood of fire consumed the cities of the plain; and the earth yawned and 
engulfed the rebels against Moses and Aaron. In his judgments upon Egypt, frogs 
and flies, locusts and hail, were his ready instruments (cf. Ps. Ixviii. 43 — 51 ; cxlviii. 8). 
II. In the execution op his judgments God discriminates between the two 
great divisions op moral ohabaoter. "And he called to the man clothed with linen, 
which had the writer's ink-horn by his side ; and the Lord said unto him," etc. (vers. 
4 — 6). Thus in this judgment certain persons were to be spared, while the rest were 
cut off; and provision was made for sparing them. How were they to be divided? 
Upon what principle was the awful separation to be made? 1. The discrimination is 
in moral character. There are those who represent the great division of men as a 
matter of Divine choice, altogether irrespective of human character or conduct. They 
say that men are elect or non-elect and reprobate solely because of the determinations 
of the Divine will. Certainly it is not so in this case. In the Divine estimation the 
essential division of men is not material, social, or intellectual, but moral. Mark the 
character here indicated of the men who are to be preserved : " The men that sigh and 
cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst" of the city. (1) Men who 
deeply grieved because of sin. They " sighed for all the abominations," etc. They did 
not participate in them, or regard them as trivial, or treat them with indifference ; but 
were burdened by them, and mourned over them. Thus have holy men in all ages 
been afflicted by sin (cf. 2 Pet. ii. 7, 8; Ps. cxix. 53, 136, 158 ; cxxxix. 21 , Jer. ix. 1 ; 
Ezra ix. 3). And thus our blessed Lord was deeply moved by the wickedness and woe 
of men (cf. Luke xiii. 34 ; xix. 41 — 44). (2) Men who gave expression to their grief 
because of sin. " That cry " — or groan — " for all the abominations," etc. Their sorrow 
found audible utterance. It was not concealed, but manifest. Their cries and groanij 



CH.IX. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 175 



indicated the oppresBion of their souls. " It argues strength of grace," says Greenhill, 
" to mourn for others' sins. Censuring and reproaching of others for their sins argues 
strength of corruption ; and mourning for them argues strength of grace, a sound 
spiritual constitution. Such a one was in Christ ; he prayed because of the hardness of 
others' hearts (Mark iii. 5)." Such are the characters who were to be spared in the 
great slaughter. 2. The discrimination is made in infinite loisdom. " And he called 
to the man clothed with linen, which had the writer's ink-horn by his side," etc. (vers. 
3, 4). Some think that the ink-horn was to be used for registering the names in the 
book of life, and making the mark upon the forehead. And as to the character of the 
mark, many contend that it was in the form of a cross. But the entire proceeding 
appears to he symbolical. We know that it took place in vision ; and this marking 
upon the forehead was not to be an actual external thiog, but it was a figurative setting 
forth of the truth that in the general slaughter certain persons would be safe, they would 
be guarded by the omniscient and omnipotent providence of God. Now, this discrimi- 
nation was infallible. The man with the ink-horn is no other than he who " knew all 
men, and needed not that any one should testify of man ; for he himself knew what was 
in man." His knowledge is infinite, both in its minuteness and in its comprehensive- 
ness. And in the final judgment, which is committed unto him, there will be no 
mistake. To him every man's character will be manifest as if written upon his fore- 
head ; and he will read it with unerring accuracy. 3. The discrimination leads to most 
momentous issues. " And to the others he said in mine hearing. Go ye after him through 
the city, and smite," etc. (vers. 5, 6). Tliey who had the mark upon their foreheads 
were exempted from the awful judgments, while they who had it not were subject 
unto them. The signed ones were perfectly secure ; the unsigned were ruthlessly 
slaughtered. But were the godly actually preserved in the siege and capture of the 
city ? We know that Jeremiah, Bbed-melech, and Baruch were (Jer. xxxiz. 16 — 18 ; 
xlv. 6). But looking at the question more broadly — Are the true and good exempted 
from the judgments which befall the wicked? In some instances they have been. 
Noah was saved when the ungodly world was drowned ; Lot was rescued from the 
doomed cities of the plain ; the Israelites escaped the plagues which fell upon the 
Egyptians ; and ere the destruction of Jerusalem by the Eomans the Christians had 
escaped to the little town of Pella, in Peraea. But, to quote the words of Dr. Payson, 
" it will perhaps be said that many of the most bold and faithful servants of God and 
opposers of vice have suffered even unto blood, striving against sin. We grant it, but 
still it is true that the mark of God was upon them. It appeared in those Divine con- 
solations which raised them far above suffering and the fear of death, and enabled them 
to rejoice and glory in tribulation. Did not Stephen exhibit this mark, when his 
murderers saw his face as it had been the face of an angel ? Did not Paul and Silas 
display it, when at midnight their joy broke forth, in the hearing of their fellow- 
prisoners, in rapturous ascriptions of praise ? Did not some of the martyrs display it, 
when they exclaimed in the flames, ' We feel no more pain than if reposing on a bed of 
roses ' ? " So far as the outward event is concerned, the righteous and the wicked have 
often been swept away in one common calamity ; but wide has been the difference of 
their inward experiences in such calamities. Nothing befalls the godly but what they 
shall be sustained under, and it shall be overruled for their good. In the gracious 
providence of God " all things work together for good to them that love " him. " Who 
is he that will harm you if ye be zealous of that which is good ? " It is eternally true 
that "righteousness tendeth to life ; and he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own 
death." In the last great assize the wicked " shall go away into eternal punishment ; 
iiut the righteous into eternal life." 

in. That the judgmbktb op God fall first trPON those who have peeveetbd 
THE richest privileges. "Slay utterly . . . and begin at my sanctuary. Then 
they began at the ancient men which were before the house." The ancient men, or 
elders, are those mentioned in ch. viii. 16 as standing " with their faces toward the 
east," worshipping the sun. They had practised their idolatry nearest to the sanctuary 
of the Most High ; and they were the first to be slain. As ancient men, elders, they 
occupied a position of honour and privilege, and should have used their influence to keep 
the people faithful to the Lord their God ; but they had set an example of idolatry, and 
they were to be made the first example of judgment, "Begin at my sanctuary" — the 



176 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ix. 1—11 

place where the highest privileges had. beea neglected or perverted, where priests had 
proved treaoheroua to their trust, and where God was dishonoured. " To stand near the 
house of God is a blessed and also a safe position ; but it is also the most dangerous 
position, if it is hypocrisy. Certainly in this case religion is no lightning-conductor, 
but what the tree is in the gtorni ; those who are under it are sure to be struck dead " 
(Schroder). 

Conclusion. 1. Let those who are eminent in position and privileges endeavour to 
be eminent also in principle and piety. 2. Let every one ask himself — Am I of the 
character of those who were spared in this stern judgment ? — ^W. J. 

Vers. 8 — 10. — The intercession of the prophet and the answer of the Lord. "And it 
came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left," etc. This intercession 
helps us to understand why the Lord showed to Ezekiel the secret abominations of the 
people, and called upon him to consider them (ch. viiL 7—12). In dealing with that 
vision, we suggested that he was called upon to consider it in order that he might be 
qualified to estimate correctly the righteousness of God's treatment of the wicked. To 
know the extent and enormity of their sins was necessary to enable him to acquiesce 
in the Divine judgments with which they were about to be visited. That necessity is 
made manifest by the fact that, now that the prophet beholds the execution of those 
judgments, he cries to God to abate their severity, and has to be reminded again of the 
many and heinous sins of the house of Israel and Jndah. Consider — 

I. The affecting inteecession of the prophet. (Ver. 8.) In vision the work of 
slaughter in the temple is finished, and the angels of judgment have gone forth to slay 
in the city, leaving Ezekiel alone "in the court of the priests of the temple; " then he 
" fell upon his face, and cried, and said. Ah Lord God I wilt thou destroy all the residue 
of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem ? " This intercession : 1. Arot* 
from deep feeling. " I fell upon my face, and cried." Falling upon the face in prayer 
is indicative of great humiliation and grief, as may be seen from several examples (ot 
Numb. xiv. 5 ; xvi. 4, 22 ; xx. 6 ; Josh. vii. 6). And our Lord, when his " soul was 
exceeding'sorrowful, even unto death, . . . fell on his face, and prayed." So the soul of 
Ezekiel was intensely stirred as he beheld in vision the terrible slaughter of the sinful 
people. It may be a prophet's stern task to denounce the awful judgments of the Most 
High; but he will be deeply moved because of those judgments. The miseries of even 
the most guilty sinners will affect his heart with grief; and this feeling will lead him to 
intercede with God on behalf of the sinful and suflFering people. Deep feeling prompts 
to earnest prayer. 2,. Presented an earnest a^eal. "Ah, Lord God! wilt thou destroy 
all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? " But had it 
not been shown unto Ezekiel that certain persons were to have a mark set upon their 
foreheads, and were to be spared in the general slaughter ? " That his question is not 
hindered by his having heard of the pious being spared shows either his fear in this 
respect, that in Jerusalem there will be nothing at all to be spared, or that the sparing 
in comparison with the destruction does not at all come into consideration" (Schroder). 
Almost every word in this appeal is weighty. " Ah, Lord Jehovah 1 wilt thm destroy 
all the residue of Israel?" Thou who didst enter into covenant with them, and didst 
gay, " My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. 
Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure 
for ever, and his throne as the sun before me ; " wilt thou fail in thy promises, ana 
break thy covenant ? " Wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel ? " Thou didst say, 
" If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments ; if they break my 
statutes, and keep not my commandments ; then will I visit their transgression with 
the rod, and their iniquity with stripes ; nevertheless my loving-kindness will I not 
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail ; " and wilt thou now destroy 
them? Will it not suffice for thee to visit them with the sharp rod and with the 
searching stripes of thy chastisement ? " Wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel t " 
They have slain all that were in and about the temple, and have gone forth to slay in 
the city, and thou didst say unto me, " Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may har* 
some that shall escape the sword" (ch. vi. 8); and wilt thou make an utter end, leaving 
uo remnant, but slaying all ? Thus earnestly and powerfully does the prophet appeM 
to the Lord on behalf of he doomed Deople. 



ni. X.1— 22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



177 



n. The condescendino answer of God to the prophet. (Vera. 9, 10.) The Lord 
graciously resiouds to the intercession of his servant; and in this response we have : 
1. A declaration of the great wickedness of the people. (Ver. 9.) (1) Here are some 
forms of their wickedness. " The land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness ; " 
or, as in the margin, " wresting of judgment." Cruelty and injustice abounded. They 
had " filled the land with violence " (oh. viii. 17). (2) Here is the root of their wicked- 
ness : " They say, The Lord hath forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not." (We have 
noticed these words in oh. viii. 12.) They were practically atheistic, denying the Divine 
interest in and observation of human life. "The source of all transgression," says 
Michaelis," is the denial of the providence of God." 2. A declaration of his determination 
to fully execute his judgments. "And as for me also, mine eye shall rot spare, neither 
will I have pity." (See our notes on these words in ch. vii. 4.) 3. A declaration of the 
retrOmtory character of his judgments. "I will recompense their way upon their head." 
This relation of judgment and sin is move fully stated in ch. vii. 3, 4 (see our notes there). 
The Prophet Obadiah also declares this truth : " As thou hist done, it shall bo don« 
unto thee : thy reward shall return upon thine own head." 

CoNCLtTsioN. The answer of the Lord to the intercession of the prophet sheds 
encouraging light upon his treatment of our prayers to him. We learn that we havs 
liberty of approach to him. We may talk with him of his judgments ; and he wUl not 
resent it as if it were presumptuous on our part. We may rather rest assured that he 
will graciously respond to our appeals. He will reply even to our " wild and wandering 
eries " to him. But he will not always grant oui requests either for ourselves or for 
oUienk He loves us too much -and too wisely so to do> — ^W. J. 



BXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEE X 



Tern. I, 2. — ^Then I looked, etc There 
follows on the work of judgment anotlier 
theophany, like that of ch. i. 15 — 28. In the 
" expanse," or firmament, like the " terrible 
crystal," there is seen as before the likeness 
of a sapphire throne (see oh. i. 26, note). The 
form of the man who is the manifestation 
of Jehovah is implied, though not named. 
It is he who speaks to the captain of the six 
ministers of vengeance, himself the seventh, 
end bids him go in beneath the "whirling 
wheels" that are beneath the cherub (col- 
lective singular, as in ch. ix. 3), and fill his 
hands with coals of fire (ch. i 13), and 
scatter them over the city, as the symbol 
of its doom. We are reminded of Isaiah's 
vision (Isa. vi. 6) ; but there the work of the 
fire was to purify, here simply to destroy. 

Vers 3, 4. — Now the cheruhini stood, etc. 
The position of the cherubim is defined, 
with a vivid distinctness of detail, which 
once more reminds us of Dante. They had 
been standing on the right, i.e. the southern 
side of the sanctuary. What follows is 
probably a reproduction of the change of 
positions described in ch. ix. 3, and the 
verbs should be taken, therefore, as pluper- 
fects. The cloud of glory, as m 1 Kings viii 
10, 11 and Isa. vi. 1, 2, the Shechinah, that 
was the token of the Divine presence, filled 
the court, but the glory itself had moved 
to the threshold at the first stage of its 
departure. 

EZEKIBIt, 



Vers. 5, 9. — ^And the sotmd of the ehera- 
bim. The use of God Almighty {El Shad- 
dai ; oomp. Exod. vi. 3), the name of God as 
ruling over nature, while Jehovah ex- 
pressed his covenant relationship to Israel, 
is, it may be noted, characteristic of the 
early stage of the religion of Israel (Gen. 
xvii. 1 ; xxviii. 3 ; xliii. 14 ; xlviii. 3). 
Shaddai alone appears eighty-one times in 
the Book of Job. Ps. xxix. explains the 
voice of El Shaddai (though there it is " the 
voice of Jehovah ") as meaning the roar of 
the thunder. The hands of the " Jiving 
creatures," now recognized as cherubim, 
had been mentioned in ch. i. 8, and it is 
one (if those hands that gives the Are into 
the hands of the linen-vested minister of 
wrath. The elemental forces of nature, of 
which the cherubim are, partly at least, the 
symbols, are working out the purposes of 
Jehovah. The two words translated wheels 
are diiferent in the Hebrew. The first is 
singular and collective (galgal, the " whirl- 
ing thing," used of the wheel of a war- 
chariot, ch. xxiii. 24 ; Isa. v. 28), and might 
well be translated "chariot" here. The 
second, that used in ch. i. 15, 16, also in 
the singular, is applied to the single wheel 
of the four by which the angel-minlsters 
stood. 

Veis. 8, 9. — The description of the 
theophany that follows, though essentially 
identical with that in oh. i., is not a literal 
transcript of it. The prophet struggles, as 
before, to relate what he has actually seen 



178 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [on. m. 1—22. 



in the visions of God. The fact is stated 
as explaining the mention of the " hand " in 
Ter. 7. That, as in ch. L 8, was one of their 
members (see notes on ch. i. 15 — 17). All 
that had seemed most startling and awful to 
him on the banks of Chebar is now seen 
again — ^the four living creatures, now named 
cherubim,the wheel by each, the unswerving 
motion of the wheels in their onward course. 

Ver. 11.— Whither the head, etc. The 
word has been taken, as in Job xxix. 25, for 
the "chief" or "principal" wheel, that 
which for the time determined the course of 
tlie otiiers. With all the complex structure 
of the cherubic chariot, all was simple 
in its action. The spirit of the living 
creatures was in the wheels, and that gave 
unity (ch. i. 20). 

Ver. 12.— And their whole body. Here 
there is distinctly a new feature. In ch. i. 
18 the " rings " of the wheels were " full of 
eyes." Here the eyes are everywhere. It 
is not hard to interpret this part of the 
vision. The prophet receives a new im- 
pression of the all-seeing eye of Jehovah. 
Everywhere, as he stands face to face with 
the forces of nature, he can say, must say, 
within himself, "Thou God seest me" 
(Gen. xvi. 13). There is an eye that looks 
upon him where he least expects it. The 
same thought appears in the stone with 
seven eyes in Zeoh. iii. 9. St. John repro- 
duces it in the same form as Ezekiel, with 
the exception of the wheels, which form no 
part of his vision, in Rev. iv. 6. 

Ver. 13. — As for the wheels, etc. ; better, 
with the Revised Version, they were called in 
my liearing, the whirling wheels; or better 
still, to keep the collective force of the 
singular galgal, the chariot. He recognized 
that as the right name of the whole myste- 
rious and complex form. It was nothing less 
than the chariot-throne of the King of the 
universe. There is no sufficient reason for 
talking the noun, with the Authorized 
Version, as a vocative. 

Ver. 14. — The first face was the face ef ,a 
cherub, etc; better, with the Revised 
Version, of the cherub. This takes the place 
of " the face of an ox " in ch. i. 10, and it is 
first in order instead of being, as there, the 
thiid. It is as though, in this second 
vision, he recognizes that this was emphati- 
cally the cherubic form. Possibly the article 
indicates that this was the form that had 



given the "coals of fire" in ver. 7. Each 
form, we must remember, had the four faces, 
but the prophet names the face which each 
presented to him as he gazed. 

VeiB. 15 — 17. — As he gazes, the recognition 
is complete. What he sees in the courts of 
the temple is identical with the living 
creature by the river of Chebar. It moves 
as that moved, wheels and wings and 
cherubim, all as by one harmonious 
impulse. 

Ver. 18. — Then the glory of the lord, etc. 
The chariot-throne was, as it were, ready for 
its kingly Eider. Tlie " glory "-cloud, or 
Shechinah, takes its place over them, and 
the departure begins. From that hour the 
temple was, in Ezekiel's thoughts, to be, 
till the time of restoration contemplated in 
ch. xl. — xlviii., what Shiloh had been, a God- 
deserted place. We are reminded of the voice 
which Josephus tells us was heard before 
the final destruction of the second temple, 
exclaiming, " Let us depart hence," as the 
priests were making ready for the Pente- 
costal feast <' Bell. Jud.,' vi. 5. 3). 

Ver. 19. — The departure has the east 
gate of the Lord's house for its starting- 
point. By that gate, in tlie later vision of 
the restored temple, the glory of the Lord 
was to return (ch. xliii. 4). For " every one " 
read " it," sc. the galgal, or complex structure 
of the chariot. The Hebrew verb is in the 
singular, but, as the italics show, there is no 
word answering to " every one." 

Ver. 20. — Once more the prophet asserts, 
with fresh emphasis, the identity of the two 
visions which it had been given him to see. 
Now, as it were, he understands why the first 
vision was seen aa coming from the north. 
He does not tell ua whether the journey of 
which he saw the beginning was to end. 
For the present there was a halt, as we learn 
from eh. xi. 23, " over the midst of the city." 
Even when the vision ended, it had not 
gone further than the Mount of Olives. We 
may conjecture, however, that he thought of 
its goal as that more sacred region of the 
heavens in which it had at first manifested 
itself (see note on ch. i. 4). It was, at any 
rate, no longer in the temple. The banks 
of Chebar or any other place might become, 
as Bethel had been tn Jiicob (Gen. ixviii. 
17), as " the house of Gud " and " the gate 
of heaven." 



HOMILETIOa 

Ver. 1. — The throne of God. The Greek conception of God was intellectual ; the 
Hebrew, moral. To the Hellenic thought he was the Supreme Mind ; to the Jewish he 
was the Supreme Will and Authority. The one conceived him as the Architect of the 
universe, displaying his iatelligMice in a vast design ; the other, as the Sovereign Ruler 



OH. X. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 179 

of all things. Thus the Hebrew symbol of the Divine is a gloiy above a heavenly throne, 
and with the Jew the most significant Divine thing is the throne. Each thought is 
true, and our later Christian theology combines them both. But there is an awful 
sublimity in the Old Testament religion springing from the moral and governmental view 
of God, and to miss this is to sink into naturalism. The modern tendency is in some 
respects diverting attention from the Hebrew Throne to the Greek Mind. We need to 
revive the Old Testament element of the thought of God. Perhaps greater regard to 
this will help us to face some of the peculiar difficulties of our own day. 

I. The throne of God is stjprbmb. The throne seen in Bzekiel's vision was " in 
the firmament that was above the head of the cherubim." The most exalted and 
glorious beings lie at the foot of that awful throne. 1. Qod rules. He is will as well 
as thought. He does not merely know ; he acts. 2. Ood rules in the present. Mea 
rebel agninst the authority of God. Nevertheless, it stUl exists. It is not only that 
we shall appear before a future judgment-bar of God. Already we live under his con- 
stant reign. 3. Ood^t rule is supreme. Death, sin, Satan, are all beneath God, and 
ultimately they will be conquered and crushed, that he may be all in all Even Christ, 
who sits at the right hand of God, is " subject to him " (1 Cor. xv. 27, 28). 

II. The theonb op God i8 righteous and therbfoee aLOBious. 1. It is righteous. 
The justice of God's rule is not treated in the Old Testament as a source of terror, but, 
on the contiary, it is always praised and rejoiced in. The old cruel earthly tyrannies 
were felt to be so horribly unjust, that men turned with a sense of relief to the justice 
of the Supreme King. God is the Personal " Power that makes for righteousness." 
The end of his government is the highest goodness. 2. It is there/ore glorious. The 
old glory of mere brute force with the triumph of cruelty is a low and vulgar folly by 
the side of this Divine glory of righteousness. Here is the greatest glory of God — not 
his omniscience nor his omnipotence, not the irresistible might and overwhelming 
majesty of his throne, but its righteousness. It is not a blood-stained glory of the 
earthly conqueror, but the sapphire beauty of perfect purity, truth, justice, and 
benevolence. 

III. The throne of God is a centre op Divine revelation. The Greek 
method of seeking for God is by the way of intellect. The Great Mind is looked for in 
his plans. The Architect of the universe is to be found by using the "argument from 
design." But latterly this Aristotelian method has been confused in the minds of 
gome — though, doubtless, only temporarily and by misunderstanding — through the 
spread of the doctrine of evolution. Meanwhile our own age seems to need to return 
to the Hebrew method. Our best teachers point us in this direction. God is not 
chiefly the Infinite Intellect. He is the Will and the Power of right. We feel him in 
all force. But we discern him best in our own consciences. The unanswerable voice 
within that whispers, " Thou shalt " or " Thou shalt not," is an utterance from the 
throne of God, and it bears witness to the existence, and more than the existence, the 
authority, of our supreme Lord and King. 

Ver. 2. — " Coals of fire," The coals of fire which Ezekiel saw between the cherubim 
were to be poured forth in destruction upon the doomed city of Jerusalem. But there 
are various uses of Divine fire. Let us notice some of them. 

I. Coals of fibe for destruction. This dreadful destiny of Divine fire must be 
considered first, as it was the one intended by the prophet. " Our God is a consuming 
Fire." There is not only punishment, there is destruction in the operation of fire. It 
hurts, but it also consumes; and its primary work is destruction. " The wages of sin 
is death." God does not only chastise with the rod ; he destroys with his fire. The 
earlier chastisement is to save from the later destruction. We may be thankful for the 
sharp lash if it drives us from the burning fire. 

II. Coals of fire for purification. Fire does not only destroy ; it lefines. 
Eefuse is burnt by it ; silver is purified. God sends fiery trials to cleanse our souls by 
burning out the evil, and leaving the better nature freer and purged. Perhaps the fire 
which would be for destruction if we remained impenitent may be converted into a 
refiner's furnace when we learn its burning lesson, and humble ourselves in tke very 
flames of wrath. So let us use the fiery trials of life. 

III. Coals of fibb fob consecbation. The whole offering of Jewish sacrifice was 



180 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. x. 1—22, 

bnmt upon the altar. There is • eonsuming zeal of God which wholly takes possession 
of his consecrated servant, and bums through him, so that he is no longer a slave of 
the earth, but is lifted up as on Elijah's chariot. Still living in this world, indeed, for 
the service of God, he feels that the old Adam has been killed, the evil of his nature 
has been burnt out of him, self has been slain, and now he belongs wholly to God. Alas! 
so perfect a consecration is not attained by any of us. But Christ's baptism in fire leads 
us up to it. It is a supreme mistake to suppose that our Lord calls us only to ease and 
rest. He calls to the pilgrimage, the battle, the cross, perhaps to the furnace. Even 
when life outside is smooth, the consecration of will and passion means a fiery ordeal. 

IV. Coals of fieb fob inspiration. The engine is driven by coals of fire. Our 
physical energy is dependent on the burning up of the tissue of our bodies. The heat 
of enthusiasm is the inspiration and source of energy for mental and moral enterprises. 
Love is a great fire of burning coals, and when it becomes bright and warm, the soul grows 
strong for sacrifice and service. We may have false fires, indeed, fires of earthly passion 
that scorch and wither our better nature. No earth-bom fire will kindle the devotion 
of the soul. For this live coals from off God's altar are needed. The fire from between 
the cherubim kindles our fire. The great love of Christ coming like coals of fire can 
give MS warmth of love and devotion, and inspire us for the Christian life. 

Ver. 4. — 2%e moving glory. It is difficult to follow the enraptured prophet through 
all the mystic mazes of his vision, and catch the meaning of the many gorgeous symbols 
that he discovers on every hand. But now and again certain points stand out with 
an individual significance even when their relation to the whole shifting panorama may 
strike us as somewhat obscure. Here we may take some hints from the moving 
of the Divine glory. This radiance moved from over the cherub, and stood over the 
threshold of the house. 

I. God's globt has come from heaven to earth. Ezekiel saw the radiance pass 
from the cherub to the threshold of the house. 1. The glory has visited earth. It is 
not confined to celestial altitudes. Earth is not yet a godless hell. God, who talked 
with Adam before the Fall, also talked with Moses after the Fall. There is a Divine 
halo about every good life. Little children come "trailing clouds of glory," and " of such 
is the kingdom of heaven." But this glory is most present in Christ. Thus the 
beloved disciple said, "We beheld his glory, the glory as of the Only Begotten of the 
Father " (John i. 14). 2. The glory has reached common life. There were cherubim 
in the holy of holies at the temple, and there the Shechinah was said to dwell. But 
now Ezekiel sees the glory pass to the threshold of the house. It moves from the 
high priest's sanctuary to the way of the common people, and seems to look forth from 
the doorway with cheering radiance and a benediction towards the great world outside. 
This has certainly happened in the free preaching of the gospel of Chri.«t, and the equal 
privileges of all Christians. The Shechinah passed from the temple at Jerusalem to the 
Carpenter's workshop at Nazareth ; and ever since it has dwelt among the familiar 
haunts of men, consecrating daily toil, making simple lives beautiful with the light of 
God. 

IT. God's glory is in movement. The fiery pillar of the wilderness moved from place 
to place. When by the Red Sea, it stood behind the camp and between this and the 
pursuing army of Egypt. In travel, it went on before the host. The presence of God 
is not always equally manifest at the same place. There are God-haunted realms, and 
there are apparently God-deserted regions. Physically, God is equally present every- 
where. But morally, the conduct of men does not admit of an equal revelation of the 
Divine. 1. TTie ghry may depart from its old seat. It left the temple, and it deserted 
the Jews. Poor down-trodden Palestine is now only to be called a " Holy Land " for the 
sake of its memories and associations. North Africa and Asia Minor, once the brightest 
centres of the Christian Church, have been left dark and deserted. This is not owing to 
God's changing. His glory is not like the waning moon, or the setting sun, or the flicker- 
ing lamp. But as men forsake him, " Ichabod I " must be uttered over their most sacred 
spots. 2. Ths glory may visit new scenes. It has shone over the martyrs of Madagascar 
and Uganda, and the native missionaries of the South Seas; it is beginning to dawn 
in the great dark continent, and among the teeming millions of India and China. 
There is no dark soul over which it will not shine, if only pardon is penitently sought. 



OH. X. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET BZEKIEL. 181 



Ver. 8. — " The form of a wmCt hand." Those strange composite creatnreB, the 
cherubim of Ezekiel's vision, have been described earlier as of human aspect (ch. i. 6), 
and in particular as having " the hands of a man " (ch. i. 8). This appearance of the 
hand is again referred to in the verse before us, so that we are led to think not 
merely of a general resemblance to human features, but of some special importance in 
the particular member thus emphatically and repeatedly named. 

I. The hand is made pob woek. So wonderful a mechanism is there in it, that a 
whole Bridgewater Treatise was devoted to an examination of its teleological significance. 
No machine of most delicate workmanship approaches the construction of the human 
hand. In familiar transactions of business " hand-made " goods are preferred to the 
" machine-made." Now, the natural form of the hand shows that it is designed for 
work. It may be clenched into the fist for fighting, but this is not its natural condition, 
and all the finer qualities of fingers and thumb are here wasted. A clublike end to the 
arm would be better than a flat palm and supple fingers, if the primary purpose of the 
hand were pugilism. Nature declares that we are not made to fight ; we are made to 
work. 

II. Handiwork is Divine aud holy. There are hands in heaven. By a figure of 
speech, God is said to have hands (e.g. Ps. viii. 6). The cherubim have hands. The 
strange thing is that these wondrous beings have both wings and hands, combining the 
flight of a bird with the work of a man. This is the ideal state — to be able to soar 
aloft in heavenly regions, and yet to have faculty for practical tasks. Too often winged 
souls lack working hands. They who soar, dream ; they who work, plod. The perfect 
pattern of life represented by the cherubim is that of wings and hands — power of 
flight and skill in work, poetry and practice, devotion and service, contemplation 
and activity, aspiration and application. Seen in heaven, the hands are holy. The 
shrivelled, paralyzed hand of the fakir is a token of fanatical folly. There is no dis- 
grace in the horny hand of toil. Work is Divine ; for God works (John v. 17). Work 
is heavenly. There will be service in heaven. There is no paradise for the indolent. 

III. The hand needs to be eedeembd. Sometimes it is brutalized into a weapon 
of hatred. Frequently it is soiled by deeds of eviL The swift, silent hand of the 
thief is a degraded hand. Every sin stains the hand that performs the wicked action. 
If the human hand expressed the character of the work it is sometimes put to, it would 
be twisted, knotty, foul, sore, rotten. The hand wants redemption — a redemption which 
follows that of the head. For the poor hand is but the servant of the head, that 
shames it with evil orders. When Christ saves a soul, he brings " the redemption of 
the body." The hand is then made holy — only to work what is good, only to write 
what is true, ready to stoop to uplift the fallen, to grasp with friendly pressure the 
hand of a poor distressed brother, to point to the way of heavenly perfection. 

Ver. 18. — Olory departed. In ver. 4 Ezekiel says that the glory visited the 
threshold of the house. Now he describes its departure and return to the cherubim. 

I. The globy op new Divine revelations has dbpabtbd. The glory that visited 
the threshold of the temple brought a special symbolical revelation, and when that 
revelation had been made the glory retreated and left the scene in its normal earthly 
condition. Revelation has come in epochs separated by periods of assimilation, when 
the newly revealed truth has been left to work among man like leaven. God gave 
the Law "once for all from Sinai. The gospel was brought into the world by Christ and 
his apostles, and left there to spread — not left without the aid of God's Spirit and that 
inward revelation by which an old truth becomes new in each fresh heart that receives 
it, but still given as a completed thing in respect to its facts and substance. We have 
no more prophets like Isaiah nor apostles like St. Paul. But we do not need them, for 
Christ has given us the perfect truth for all time. Yet we cannot but feel that there 
was a wonder and a beauty in those old days when the glory of the growing revelation 
was flashing out upon an astonished world. 

II. The glory of highest baptueb will depart. There are times when heaven 
is opened and we see the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of 
man. Then we would fain build our tabernacles and retain the rare delight. But it 
is not to be. These angel-visits are few and far between. Jacob wakes from his 
dnam to the chill loneliness of the desolate hills of BetheL The disciples who have 



182 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. x. 1—22. 

witnessed the Transfiguration must descend from Hermon to the troubles of the plain, 
and exchange the society of Moses and Elijah for that of a raving lunatic. It is rare 
for the soul to be in a condition to enjoy the greatest bliss. But it is not necessary 
that this condition should remain ; indeed, it is better to be in quieter moods for the 
homely tasks of life. Therefore we must still tread this lower earth, though we may 
have some fine glimpses of the lieavenly splendour. The spray that is Bung off from 
the great ocean of celestial bliss may occasionally reach us in drops of gold. Yet our 
vocation is to walk by faith. Meanwhile the departure of this glory does not mean 
the departure of God ; he is with us in the dullest days. Nor does it mean our fall and 
shame; it may be best for the faithful servant to work in quiet without the full 
revelation of the Divine presence. We need ceaseless grace ; we can wait for eternal glory. 
III. The glory op the Christian life mat depart. There is a glory which 
should be on us and abiding with us. All Christians are " called to be saints." Few 
of us may behold the celestial splendour, but all of us should wear the aureole of 
purity. When we have washed our robes and made them white in the blood of the 
Lamb, the new glory' of pardon and cleansing should abide. But, alas 1 even this glory 
too soon departs ; the cleansed garments are again dragged through the mire, and the 
Christian, though renewed by Christ, dares not regard himself as a " saint." When he 
falls into a great sin the glory has indeed departed. If the fresh fervour of youth 
fades, and a commonplace character is all that remains, must it not be said that the 
glcvy has departed, though the/aiY/i ^.tiA. fidelity may remain? 

Ver. 22. — Heavenly changelessness. There is great resemblance between ch. i. and 
ch. X. Ezekiel is transported in spirit from the banks of the Babylonian river Chebar 
to the temple at Jerusalem. Yet the cherubim which he sees in the one place are 
exactly the same as those he has seen in the other. This fact of identity in great 
diversity of circumstances strikes the prophet as remarkable, and he chronicles it with 
emphasis. Earthly scenes change ; heavenly facts remain. 

I. The range of heavenly changelessness. 1. In various times. Divine grace 
is always essentially the same. On the very threshold of history Abraham is justified 
by faith; to-day faith is the one ground of the soul's becoming right with Grod. The 
Fsalms of David express the inmost essence of religion for modern Christians. The 
gospel of the first century is the gospel for the nineteenth century. The Christ of 
history is the Christ of the future. If we can see the old familiar countenances of the 
essential Divine facts that cheered and warned and guided our fathers, we have just the 
vision that we need to-day — though, indeed, the old truths are to have fresh applications, 
and though, perhaps, we may have to remove the veils with which the errors of the 
past have sometimes obscured them. 2. In various places. The cherubim of Chebar 
were the cherubim of Jerusalem. The Christ of Nazareth is the Christ for London. 
The religion that dawned among the hills of Galilee spreads like a day over the whole 
earth, and shows itself as suitable for England as for the East, and as suitable for China 
and Africa and New Guinea as for Europe and America. 3. Under various circumstances. 
The quiet river-bank was very different from noisy Jerusalem. Yet the same wondrous 
cherubim looked down upon both scenes, as the same stars of heaven gaze upon the 
city slums and the country villages, on the blood-stained battle-field and the peaceful 
meadow. The same God is over all. The gospel of Christ is the same for all — rich 
and poor, learned and ignorant, young and old. 

II. The causes op heavenly changelessness. 1. Inherent truth, Our better 
changes come largely from the correction of mistakes. We are always having to 
unlearn our errors, to slough the old skin. But truth abides. In heaven all is true. 
God's Word is true. Therefore while "all flesh is grass . . . and the grass withers . . . 
the Word of the Lord abideth for ever " (1 Pet. i. 24, 25). 2. Absolute perfection. 
Eevelation came by stages of growth and development and through human channels. 
Hence its changes and the putting away of the old form of it in the Law for the new 
form of it in the gospel. But when we see through these earthly manifestations the 
really Divine behind them, we come upon absolute perfection, which is changeless. 3. 
Stable constancy. God is not fickle. His representative agents, symbolized by the 
cherubim, must be constant too. God will keep to his word. Therefore we may biiild 
Ufoa his promise as on a granite rock. We change ; he abideth faithful. 



CH. X. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, 183 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The throne of Deity. The prophet, ia this chapter, malceg use of all the 
wealth of earthly and human imagery to enhance his readers' conception of the glory 
of the Eternal. The throne here pictured is the throne of G-od, and the metaphor is 
employed in order to gather around the Deity all associations which may htlp to raise 
the thoughts in reverence, confidence, and adoration towards the King of the universe. 
At the same time, every figure drawn from earth, from man, must needs come short 
of the great reality ; for the finite can do no more than merely suggest the Infinite. 

I. God is the supreme King by undebivbd bight. Earthly monarchs reign by 
right of conquest, or election, or inheritance. They come to reign, they begin to 
reign. In these respects there is contrast between the sovereigns who bear sway 
among men and the King of kings and Lord of lords ; for he is Alpha and Omega, the 
Beginning and the End. To examine, to question, to vindicate his right is an absurdity, 
an impossibility ; it is the condition and foundation of all rights, and is iudcmoniitrable 
and self-evident. 

II. God is supreme in the possession and exercise op kingly power. Earthly 
sovereigns differ one from another in the military and naval forces they command, in 
the weight they bring to the councils of nations, in the respect and fear with which 
they are regarded. But there is no measure by which power such as emperors wield 
can be compared with Omnipotence. There is One, and there can be only One, who is 
almighty, who wields all the resources of the universe, and of whom it may be said 
that all the manifestations of his might are " but the whisperings of his power." 

III. God -is supreme in the universality of his dominion. Vast as are the 
realms of the greatest of earthly potentates, these are but a speck, a mote, wi en placed 
beside the kingdom of the Creator. For this both transcends all and includes all the 
kingdoms of the earth : " His kingdom ruleth over all." 

IV. God is supreme in the righteousness which is ohabaotbristio op his 
SWAT. The true glory of a prince does not lie so much in the extent of his dominions 
as in the justice of his rule and administration. All human righteousness is a mere 
reflection of the righteousness of the great King of heaven and earth. " A sceptre of 
righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom." A throne is sometimes thought of in 
association with the arbitrary and despotic exercise of power ; all such associations 
must be dismissed when we come to think and speak of the Occupant of the throne of 
heaven. There may be that in his government which perplexes and baffles us ; but 
nothing is so certain to our minds as his unswerving rectitude, his inflexible justice. 
Our highest powers of veneration are inadequate to conceive and to adore his moral 
attributes. Our proper attitude ia to fall down before him and acknowledge the 
insufficiency of our purest homage. 

V. God is supreme in his claim upon all his intelligent obbation for honour 
and glory. It is sometimes represented by utilitarian thinkers that men's faculties 
are misused and their time wasted in the attempt to " glorify God." But the view 
of human nature is indeed both superficial and radically false which admits of such an 
objection to the practice of devotion. The worship which consists only of words and 
gestures is indeed an unprofitable superstition. But the worship which is spiritual is 
both acceptable to God and profitable and elevating to man. It is well to conceive of 
God as a King as well as a Father. Many human relationships must concur in order 
to present to our minds the claims of God upon our nature. To Christians the throna 
of Christ is the throne of God. " Thou art the King of glory, Christ 1 "— T. 

Ver. 4. — The Irightness of the Divine glory. The Shechinah-cloud in the holiest 
place was the visible representation and symbol of the presence of the Eternal in the 
place set apart for special communion between God and man. Appealing primnrily to 
the sense of sight, it did in reality appeal to the intelligence and the conscience of the 
people. It was the same luminous cloud which Bzekiel beheld in his vision, and in 
which he recognized the manifestation of the Divine presence and interest. 

I. The true glory of the Lord consists in his moral attributes. The 
Tews ever required a sign. But whilst the multitude may have rested in the sign, the 



IM THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. X. 1—22. 



enlightened and epiritual passed from the sign to the thing signified. True glory Is 
not in material splendour, however dazzling, but in that excellence which is perfected 
in God, the Source of all goodness. Whilst the less reflecting may he more impressed 
with the omnipotence and omnipresence of God, which must indeed excite the reverent 
admiration of all to whom he makes himself known, such as are morally cultivated 
and susceptible will find the highest and purest glory in the Divine wisdom, righteous- 
ness, holiness, and love. 

II. This gloky ib peouliablt impeessivk whbbb theeb is spibituai. etrscEPTi- 
BiLiTT. As the man is affected by many things which are neither felt nor noticed by 
the brute, so the spiritually living and earnest are impressed and iufluenced by the 
contemplation of the Divine character and attributes. These may have no interest for 
the worldly and the selfish ; but they are felt to he great, sacred, and precious realities 
by all natures that are brought by spiritual teaching into sympathy with God. " They 
are spiritually discerned." There is a capacity within us which is only developed and 
satisfied when brought into contact with the purity and the grace of him who is ft 
Spirit, and who will be worshipped in spirit and in truth. 

III. The vision of this beightnbbs is a motive and stimulus to euuan obedienob 
AND PBAISE. The hosts of heaven gaze upon the Divine glory, and by the vision are 
prompted to unceasing adoration. It is the same with the enlightened and Bpiritual 
among the sons of men. As the daybreak and the sunrise call forth the glad song of 
the lark as it soars aloft, so the rising of " the brightness of the Lord's glory" upon 
a soul summons it to the glad exercise of exulting adoration. Nor does tins form the 
only response. Man's active nature renders the service which is due to him who is 
recognized as the Source of all good, of all blessing. Obedience is acted praise, as praise 
is uttered obedience. 

IV. To the Cheistian the Lobd Jesus is the biohest Revelation op the Divine 
GLOBY. The evangelist tells us that he and his fellow-disciples beheld Christ's glory, 
" the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." And the 
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews describes the Son of God as " the Emanation from 
th« Divine glory." They who look into Christ's face behold the moral attributes of 
Deity in all their resplendent brightness. " They look unto him, and are lightened, and 
their faces are not ashamed." — T. 

Ver. 5. — " The voice of the Almighty." The human voice deserves to be studied and 
admired as a most effective and delicate and exquisitely beautiful provision for the 
expression of thought and feeling. It is so etheresJ, so semi-spiritual, that there seems 
scarcely any anthropomorphism in attributing it to the Creator himself. The sounds 
of nature may indeed be designated the voice of God. But the characteristics of the 
human utterance seem most justly attributable to him who comprehends in perfection 
within himself all those thoughts and emotions which are distinctive of the spiritual 
nature. 

L The expebsston oasts light upon the natube of God. The voice is, among all 
the inhabitants of this earth, man's prerogative alone. And for this reason — man alone 
has reason, and therefore he alone has speech. There are noises and sounds, and even 
musical sounds, in nature ; but to man alone belongs the voice, the organ of articulate 
speech and intelligible language. When voice is attributed to the Almighty God, it is 
implied that he is himself in perfection that Reason which he communicates to his 
creature man. Our intellect and thought are derived from his, and are akin to his ; our 
reason is " the candle of the Lord " within. 

II. The bxpeession oasts light upon the intbboouese between God and mah. 
The purpose of the voice is that man may communicate with his fellow-man by means 
of articulate language, and by means of all those varied and delicate shades of intonation 
by which we convey our sentiments, and indicate satisfaction and disapproval, confidence 
and distrust, tenderness and severity, inquiry and command. Now, where we meet in 
Scripture with the phrase, " the voice of God Almighty when he speaketh," we are led 
to think of the purpose for which he utters his voice. It is evidently to communicate 
with man — mind with mind — that we may be acquainted with his thoughts, his 
wishes, his sentiments with regard to us, if we may use language so human. The 
whde of nature may be regarded as uttering the Divine thought, though, as the psalmist 



OH. X. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEU 185 

tells MM, "there is no speech nor language, and their voice cannot be heard." But his 
articulate speech comes through the medium of human minds — the minds of prophets 
and apostles, and (above all) the mind of Christ Jesus. The Word speaks with the 
Divine voice; in him alone that voice reaches us with all the faultless tones, and with 
the perfect revelation which we need in order that we may realize and rejoice in the 
pre sence of the Divine Father of spirits, the Divine Saviour and Helper. 

III. This expression oasts light upon the duty and privilege of mas. 1. It is 
ours to listen with grateful joy to the voice of God. " The friend of the bridegroom 
rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice." Christ speaks, and his utterances 
are welcome to every believing and sympathetic nature ; they are as the sound of a 
voice long expected and wished for, as it now falls upon the listening and eager ear. 
The sinner may well dread the voice which can speak to him as with the thunder of 
threatened vengeance. But the Christian recognizes the tones of love and the accents 
of gentleness. 2. It is ours to listen to the voice of God with believing submission and 
obedience. God's voice is always with authority. Because he reveals himself as our 
Father, he does not cease to command. " Ye have not heard his voice at any time," 
was the stern reproach addressed by Jesus to the unspiritual Jews. The exhortation 
comes to us all, " To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts." — T. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — The machinery of Ood's providence. A man must be embodied 
ignorance who should suppose that all the activities of God's government come within 
the range of his vision. Our knowledge is not the measure of existence. 

" There are more things in heaven and earth 
Than are dreamt of in oui philosophy." 

What we know is an infinitesimal fraction of what we do not know. Hence every 
revelation of God's administrative rule should be welcomed with eager delight. 

I. God's essential majesty is inconoeivable. The difEculty for man to compre- 
hend the nature and government of God lies, not on the part of God, but on the part of 
man. His spiritual nature is so environed with bars of flesh that he cannot discern 
spiritual realities. Truth finds its way into his mind mainly by the use of sensuous 
images. The difficulty is aggravated by long habits of neglect and self-indulgence. 
Under these circumstances, the marvel is that he knows as much about the world as 
he does. We can form no definite conception of the Infinite or of the Eternal ; yet it 
appears to our reason that God must be infinite in capacity and eternal in duration. 
Possibly, God is above the conception of the oldest archangel. Possibly, God cannot 
reveal the whole extent of his nature to any created being. Certain it is that the wing 
of human imagination soon tires in its attempt to soar to the height of the Godhead. 
All the machinery of his rule is in harmony with himself — majestic, ethereal, sublime I 
How shall man measure himself with God ? Surely he is but a mote in the sunbeam, 
incomparably minute, yet to God incomparably precious I 

II. God's peesence, without a cloud, is to man insupportable. On every occasion 
on which God has condescended to reveal himself to men there has been the attendant 
circumstance of a cloud. " God is light ; " but to human sensibilities the full blaze of 
light is insufferable. When God appeared to Moses among the solitudes of Horeb, 
" the glory of the Lord appeared in a cloud." The presence of God among the Hebrews 
In the desert was symbolized by the pillar of cloud. At the moment when the first 
Jewish temple was consecrated to the service of Jehovah, a mysterious " cloud filled the 
house of the Lord." God was known to abide in the holy of holies, iu the cloud that 
covered the mercy-seat. When Moses and Elijah descended to commune with Jesus on 
the Mount of Transfiguration, " a cloud overshadowed them," and the voice of the 
Father " was heard out of the cloud." At the close of our Lord's earthly mission he 
ascended from earth to heaven from the heights near Bethany, " and a cloud received 
him out of the apostles' sight." So too the prophecies which announce the next 
appearance of our Lord indicate the surroimdings of a cloud : " Behold 1 he cometh with 
clouds;" "Ye shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven." Clouds 
distribute and attenuate the fierce light of the sun, and enhance the splendours of the 
scene. They are a manifestation of the component parts of light. They reveal its 
beauty and its power. So God attempers the brightness of hia evseatial glorj to suit 
the necessities of men. 



186 THE BOOK OP THE PEOrHET EZEKIEL. [ch. x. 1— 22. 

III. God's administration of justtcb is an blabobatb and complex system. 
Human agency is intimately allied with the dynamic forces of nature on the one side, 
and with the active powers of angels on the other. The wheels (with the numerical 
symbol, four), impressive from their magnitude and their rotatory speed, indicate the 
mighty forces of nature. Even in these wheels the prophet discovers eyes, which are 
the symbol of intelligence. The cherubic beings are represented as combining the 
strength of the ox, the courage of the lion, the swiftness of the eagle, and the intelligence 
of man. Beneath their wings there is seen, ever and anon, a human hand — the index 
of human agency and action. Besting on this complex system of cherubic life is seen 
the cerulean throne of God, bright as a sapphire stone. In the destruction of Jerusalem 
the Chaldean armies did not act alone. Nebuchadnezzar, probably, was not conscious 
that any power, other than his own will, was instigating him to the war. Nevertheless, 
he was an instrument of justice in the hand of God. There is much service done for 
God which is not intended. Said God respecting Cyrus, " I girdeil thee, though thou hast 
not known me." Human kings and warriors are only parts of a complex system. 
Human will has a very limited circle in which to play; yet it has its place. 

IV. In this complex system the Mediator FOLriLs an important part. (Ver. 2.) 
" The man clothed with linen " clearly represents the great High Priest — ^the Divine 
Mediator. He who brings mercy to men is also the Minister of judgment. He who 
proclaims " the acceptable year of the Lord " announces also " the day of vengeancd of 
our God." God will "judge the world by that Man whom he hath ordained." If the 
great Shepherd will preserve his flock, he must destroy the wolves. Justice and mercy 
go hand-in-hand. As we see here the ministrations of angels, along with God's Son, in 
the work of destruction ; so in later days we see, in fact, the alliance of angels with 
Christ in the work of men's salvation. Nor should we fail to overlook the promptitude 
with which the Son fulfilled his Father's word, " Go in between the wheels, . . . and fill 
thine hand with coals of fire, . . . and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my 
sight." Is not this a practical commentary upon Messiah's words, " I do always the 
things that please him"? So with all God's servants, " They go straight forward." 

V. God enters upon the work of destruction slowly and reluctantly. We 
read in the fourth verse that the glory of the Lord withdrew from the inner court of 
the temple, and stood over the threshold of the house. Again, we read in the eighteenth 
verse that " the glory of the Lord departed from ofif the threshold of the house, and stood 
over the cherubim. And the cherubim lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the 
earth in my sight." Again, in the next chapter the record runs, "And the glory of the 
Lord went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the 
east side of the city." With slow and successive steps God departed from the sanctuary 
which he had chosen for his residence. All this prefigured the " leaving the house 
desolate," and the ascension from the Mount of Olives," by our Lord. So has it always 
been. The axe is laid at the root of the tree — a delay of judgment — that the tree may 
yet become fruitful. Infinite patience belongs to God. He " is slow to anger, while 
plenteous in mercy." A great truth is embodied in the old adage — 

" The mill of God grinds slowly. 
But it grinds exceeding small." 

VI. We discover in this vision the harmony op Scripture. Between this 
unveiling of God's purposes respecting Israel, and his purposes towards the world 
revealed in the Apocalypse of John, there are instructive resemblances. The cherubic 
forms again appear. Angels have special charge over the forces of nature — winds and 
fire and earthquake. So far as human vision reaches, kings and armies act by their 
own free-will, and to accomplish their own ambitions ; but when we are lifted up to 
God's pedestal, and are shown_ the progress of events from that high standpoint, we see 
that a series of Divine agents is employed — men fulfilling their part in subordination to 
angelic ministers. In God's great army we have generals and captains and lieutenants, 
as well as the rank-and-file. In the government of the universe, men fill a humble 
though an honourable place; and consequent on their diligence and fidelity now will be 
their promotion to higher office by-and-by. " Be thou ruler over five cities I " "Be thou 
1 nler over ten cities I " '* I appoint unto you kingdoms, as my Father hath appointed 
lua"— D. 



OH.X. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 187 

Vers. 1, 2, 6, 7. — 2%e vision of Judgment hy fire. "Then I looked, and, behold, in 
the firmament that was above the head of the cherubim," etc. The vision recorded 
in this chapter is substantially a repetition of that which is described in the first 
chapter, as the prophet himself intimates (vers. 20, 22). The only differences of any 
importance are that the prophet was not in the same place when he received this vision 
as when he received its counterpart, and that the symbolical actions in this have not 
occurred before. We shall not again notice those features of the manifestation which 
we considered in our treatment of the first chapter, but shall confine our attention to 
the symbolical actions, and at present to the scattering of coals of fire over the city. 
The work of judgment begun in the last chapter is continued in this one. The 
destroying angels have (in vision) gone forth slaying the guilty people ; the dead 
bodies were lying in the temple courts and the city streets ; and now the command is 
given to finish the work of judgment by scattering coals of fire over the city, and so 
destroying it. Three chief points call for attention. 

I. The Authob or this judgment. " He spake unto the man clothed with linen, 
and said, Go in between the wheels," etc. The Speaker is the enthroned One: " God 
the Father sitting on the throne, to the Son, to whom he has given full power to execute 
judgment " (John v. 27). Notice : 1. 2%e Tnajesty of his state. (Ver. 1.) It is not 
said that any manifestation or appearance of God was given in this vision. But 
Ezekiel beheld the appearance of the exalted throne over the cherubim, a throne as of 
pure and brilliant sapphire like the clear and deep vault of heaven. " The heaven-like 
colour of the throne indicates," says Hengstenberg, " the infinite eminence of God's 
dominion over the earth, with its impotence, sin, and unrighteousness." The repre- 
sentation is intended to shadow forth the glory of God. How glorious he is I The 
glory of heavenly things far surpasses the highest glory of earth, and the glory of God 
transcends the highest of heaven. He is " glorious in holiness ; " " the glorious Lord ; " 
" the King of glory ; " " the God of glory ; " " the Father of glory ; " and his kingdom is 
glorious in majesty. 2. The sovereignty of his authority. God is supreme over the 
forces of nature, symbolized by the wheels ; over every form of life, symbolized by the 
cherubim, or " living creatures " (ch. i.) ; over the six destroying angels (ch. ix.) ; and 
in a sense over " the man clothed with linen," who is the Agent of the Father (of. John 
xiv. 31 ; XV. 10 ; xviL 18). He commands the scattering of fire over the city. The 
Chaldeans could not have laid waste Jerusalem but for his permission. " His kingdom 
ruleth over all." " Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee ; the remainder of wrath 
shalt thou restrain." 

n. The great Agent op this judgment. " And he spake unto the man clothed 
with linen, and said. Go in between the wheels," etc. The man clothed in linen, who 
was to scatter the coals of fire over the city, was, as we have seen, the angel of Jehovah, 
otherwise called the angel of the covenant. Notice: 1. Tlie diverse functions ascribed 
to him. In the preceding chapter he was summoned to the preservation of the pious ; 
in this he is sent forth to complete the work of destruction because of sin. This is 
suggestive of his two comings into our world. He came as a Saviour, to bring for^ve- 
ness to sinners, and deliverance from sin, and comfort for mourners, and strength for 
the weak, and hope for the despairing, and to scatter wide the blessings of Divine grace. 
But he will come again as a Judge in dreadful majesty. " The Lord Jesus shall be 
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on 
them that know not God," etc. But a more correct and complete analogy to these 
diverse functions ascribed to him in this vision is in the fact that in his future coming 
he will both perfect the salvation of his people, and deliver over to punishment those 
who have rejected him. That coming will be either the cause of ineffable rapture and 
adoration (Rev. vii. 9 — 17), or of unutterable terror and anguish to every man (Rev. 
vi. 15 — 17). 2. The prompt obedience rendered by him. "And it came to pass, thaf 
when he had commanded the man clothed with linen, saying. Take fire firom between 
the wheels, fi-om between the cherubim ; then he went in," etc. (vers. 6, 7). His delight 
was in doing the will of his Father. " Jesus saith, My meat is to do the will of him 
that sent me, and to finish his work." And at the close of his mission upon earth, 
he said with infinite satisfaction, " Father, ... I have glorified thee on the earth ; I 
have finished the work which thou gavest me to do." He complied with his Father's 
will at all times, in all things, and with his whole heart. How perfect is the example 



188 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. x. 1—22. 

which h« sets us in this respect I Let us imitate him, endeaTouring to obey the holy 
will even as he did. 

III. The means of this judgmbnt. " Fill, thine hand with coals of fire, . . . and 
scatter them over the city." The fire denoted was elemental fire ; for it was taken 
from between the wheels, and the wheels symbolize the forces of nature ; and it was to 
be used in burning the city. In this use of fire we have an illustration of : 1. .4 most 
useful servant lecoming a most terrible foe. The Most High, if he pleases, can turn our 
greatest comforts into our direst curses ; and he may do so if we misuse thera. " They 
had abused fire," says Greenhill, " to maintain their gluttony, for fulness of bread was 
one of their sins ; they burned incense to idols, and abused the altar fire, which had 
been the greatest refreshing to their souls ; . . . and now even this fire kindled upon 
them." And as a matter of fact, fire was used in destroying the temple and other places 
in Jerusiilem. Josephus tells how Nebuzaradan, by command of the King of Babylon, 
having despoiled the temple of its precious and sacred treasures, set fire to it. " When 
he had carried these off, he set fire to the temple in the fifth month, the first day of 
the month, in the eleventh year of the reign of Zedekiah, and in the eighteenth year 
of Nebuchadnezzar ; he also burnt the palace and overthrew the city " (' Ant.,' i. 
viii. 6). 2. The divers uses of fire as represented in Holy Scripture. It is there used to 
set forth both cleansing and avenging powers. It is the symbol of the purification of 
the human heart and life from sin (Isa. vi. 6, 7 ; Mai. iii. 2, 3). It is also the symbol 
of the punishment of the incorrigibly corrupt (Matt. xxv. 41). " Our God is a con- 
Bim:iing Fire ; " and we must each be brought consciously near unto him, either to be 
cleansed from our sin, or, failing in this, to bear the just judgment thereof; for the 
Divine fire is essentially antagonistic to sin. 

Conclusion. 1. Let us eschew every form of sin. 2. Let us seek the application iff 
the pwrifying fire of the Divine love to our hearts. — ^W. J. 

Vers. 4, 18, 19 ; and ch. xi. 22, 23. — The mthdrawal of the presence of Oodfrom a 
guilty people. " Then the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub, and stood over 
the threshold of the house," etc. These verses, which are all essentially related to one 
subject, suggest the following observations. 

I. That God never withdbawb his gbaoious pebsbnce from a person ob a nation 
UNTIL thet have QUITE FORSAKEN HIM. The chosen people had despised his laws ; 
they had turned aside from his worship for the most debasing idolatries ; they had 
filled the land with their violence ; they had denied his observation of their lives, and 
his interest therein ; and they had persecuted his prophets who called them to repent- 
ance. They had abandoned him provokingly and persistently ; and now he is about 
to take from them his gracious presence. That presence he never withdraws from any 
individual or from any community until he has been rejected — driven away, as it were, 
by heinous and continued sin. In proof of this we may refer to the following and other 
portions of the sacred Scriptures : 1 Sam. xv. 23, 26 ; xxviii. 15 — 18 ; 1 Chron. xxviii. 
9; 2 Chron. xv. 2 ; Ps. Ixxviii. 56—64; Jer. vii. 8—16. 

n. That God withdraws his gracious presence from a person ob a nation vert 
OBADUALLr. We have an intimation of his leaving the temple in ch. ix. 3, where the 
glory of God departs from the holy of holies to the threshold of the house, by which is 
meant, says Schroder, " the outermost point, where the exit was from the court of the 
people into the city." In ver. 4 the prophet beholds the same movement repeated. 
Then in vers. 18 and 19 the Lord's complete abandonment of the temple is symbolically 
exhibited. And in ch. xi. 22, 23 the symbol of the gracious presence departs from the 
citj', and makes a temporary sojourn on the Mount of Olives before forsaking the land. 
Thus step by step the symbol of the glory of the Lord goes away from them. It is as 
though he forsook them with great reluctance. By his servant Hosea he expresses the 
same truth : " How shall I give thee up, Bphraim ? how shall I deUver thee, Israel ? " 
etc. (Hob. xi. 8). It seemed, too, as though he would be entreated by them not to 
depart from their midst, and moved away so gradually in order that they might so 
entreat him. And if God withdraws himself, or withholds his gracious influences from 
any one, he does bo, as it were, with measured steps and slow. Men are not left to 
themselves and their own devices hastily. God waits long to be gracious unto man. 
He does not depart from any one until he has received great and protracted provocation. 
He is " the God of patience; " and " he delighteth in mercy." 



eH. XT. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. 



189 



III. That when God withdraws his aEAcious peesenck tbou a pebson ob nation 
THET ARE BEREFT OF HIS PROTECTION. Shortly after Ezekiel had seen the glory of Gfod 
pass away from the holy of holies to the threshold of the house (oh. ix. 3), the destroy- 
ing angels began their work of slaughter in the temple. And before the complete 
destruction of the city, the glory of God departed from it to the Mount of OUves. 
When the Lord had quite withdrawn his gracious presence they were at the mercy of 
their enemies, and troubles came upon them fast and furiously. •* When the sun is in 
apogee" says Greenhill, " gone from us, we have short days and long nights, little 
light but much darkness ; and when God departs, you have much night, and little day 
left, your comforts fade suddenly, and miseries come upon you swiftly." What a 
tragical example of this we have in the case of King Saul 1 When God had departed 
from him, and answered him no more, neither by prophets nor by dreams, he was sore 
distressed, and the terrible end was close at hand (1 Sam. xxviii. 15 — 20; xxxi.). 
" This is to be forsaken indeed, when God prepares to forsake us. Lo ! thea more than 
ever darkness comes over aU the powers of man's spirit and over his life, and even 
trusted, loved countenances of friends go into shadow. Good thoughts grow ever 
fewer, impulses to prayer ever more rare ; admonitions of consdence cease ; the holy 
of holies in the man becomes empty down to the four walls and the usual pious 
furniture " (SchrSder). 

Conclusion. " Take heed, brethren, lest haply there shall be in any one of you an 
evil heart of unbelief in falling away from the living God : but exhort one another day 
by day, so long as it is called To-day ; lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitM- 
ness of sin." And let us pray, " Cast me not away from thy presence ; and take not 
thy Holy Spirit from me."— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTBK XL 



Ver. 1. — ^moreover the Spirit lifted me np, 
etc. It is noticeable that the position to 
which Ezekiel was thus transported in his 
vision from his place in the inner court 
(ch. viii. 14), was identical with that which 
he had jnst seen occupied by the olierub- 
chariot before its departure (ch. x. 19). 
What he is about to see will throw light on 
the significance of their departure. The gate 
is probably, here as tliere, that of the court 
of the temple. Five and twenty men. The 
number at first reminds us of the worshippers 
of the sun, in ch. viii. 16 i but that, as we 
saw, was probably a company of priests. On 
the other hand, the two who are named are 
styled princes of the people, which suggests 
a lay rather than a priestly status, and 
they are seen in a different locality. Con- 
jectures as to the significance of the number 
vary. (1) Two from each tribe of Israel, with 
the king at their head. (2) Two from each 
of the twelve divisions of the army, each 
containing twenty-foui thousand men (1 
Chron. xivii 1 — 15). (3) Eepresentatives of 
twelve regions of the city — a kind of muni- 
oi pal council, with their president. Possibly, 
after all, the number was used more or less 
vaguely — a "round" number, as we say 
(Smend). It is probably safe, however, to 
think of them as representing the lay ele- 
ment of authority. Nothing is known 
further as to the persons named. Jaazaniah 



is distinguished by Ms parentage from hii 
namesake of ch. viii. 11 and Jer. xxxv. 3. 
Both were probably familiar to those for 
whom Ezekiel wrote, as leaders of the party 
that was " always devising mischief," in 
opposition, «.e., to Jeremiah and the true 
prophets. Possibly the meanings of the 
names Jaazaniah (equivalent to " God heark- 
ens ") the son of Aznr (equivalent to " The 
Helper"), Pelatiah (equivalent to "God 
rescues") the son of Benaiah (equivalent 
to "God builds "X are chosen as with a 
grim irony. The name of Azur meets iia 
in Jer. xxviii. 1 as that of the father of the 
false prophet Hai^aniah. The death of 
Pelatiah was probably an hiotorical event 
to which the prophet pointed as a warning 
to those who, either at Jerusalem or among 
the exiles, were speaking as he spoke. 

Ver. 3. — It is not near, etc. The words 
take their place among the popular, half- 
proverbial sayings of which we have other 
examples in oh. viii. 12 ; ix. 9 ; and xviii. 2. 
As in most proverbs of this kind, the thought 
is condensed to the very verge of obscurity, 
and the words have received very different 
interpretations. (1) That suggested by the 
Authorized Version. " It (the judgment of 
which the true prophets spoke) is not near. 
Let ns build houses, not, as Jeremiah bids 
(xxxix. 5), in the land of exile, but here in 
Jerusalem, where we shall remain in safety. 
Are we threatened with the imagery of the 
' seething pot ' (Jer. i. 13) ? Let us remember 



190 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. si. 1—25. 



that tW caldron protects the meat in it from 
the fire. The walls of the city will protect 
UB from the army of the Chaldeans." The 
temper which clothed itself in this language 
was that of the self-confident boastful 
security of Jer. xxviii. 3 ; and the death 
of Hananiah, the son of Azur, in that his- 
tory presents a parallel to that of Pelatiah 
in this. (2) Grammatically, however, the 
rendering of the Eevised Version is prefer- 
able : The time is not near for huilcUng 
hornet ; probably, as before, witli a reference 
to Jeremiah's advice. " We," they seem to 
say, " are not come to that point yet. We 
will trust, as in (1), in our interpretation of 
the caldron." (3) On the whole, I incline, 
while adopting the Eevised Version render- 
ing, to interpret the words, as Smend takes 
them, as the defiant utterance of despair: 
"It is no time for building houses, here or 
elsewhere. We are doomed. We are 
destined (I borrow the nearest analogue of 
modern proverbial speech) 'to stew in our 
own juice.' Well, let us meet it as we best 
may." I find what suggests this view (1) 
in the improbability that the thought of 
the caldron could ever have been received 
as a message of safety (comp. ch. xxiv. 3, 
6) ; and (2) in the despairing tone of most of 
the sayings that Ezekiel records (xviii. 2 ; 
xxxvii. 11). Probably there were, as in other 
like crises in the history of nations (say, e.g., 
in those of the Franco-German War) rapid 
alternations between the two moods of boast- 
ful security and defiant despair — the galgen- 
humor, the courage of the gallows, as Smend 
calls it; and the same words might be 
uttered now in this temper, and now in that. 
In either case, there was the root-element 
of the absence of repentance and submission. 

Vers. 4, 5. — The prophet still, we must 
remember, in his vision, is bidden to do his 
work as a true prophet, and to rebuke the 
defiant speech which he had heard. As in 
ch. ii. 2, the Spirit of Jehovah comes upon 
him, and throws him into the prophetic 
ecstasy. It is noticeable that here, as in 
oh. ii. 3, his message is not to Judah only, 
but to the whole house of Israel as repre- 
sented by those to whom he spoke. I know 
the things. This, as ever, was one of the 
notes of a true prophet, that he shared, as 
was needed for his work, in the knowledge 
of him from whom no secrets are hid (John 
ii. 24, 25; Matt. ix. 4; 1 Cor. xiv. 25). 
Thoughts, as well as words, were laid bare 
before him, as they were to his Lord (Heb. 
iv. 12). 

Ver. 7.— They are the flesh, etc. The 

Srophet is led to retort their derisive or 
efiant words. Not they, but the carcases 
of their victims, were as the '' flesh " in the 
'■ caldron." For themselves, there was 
uuother fate in reserve. Neither to be pro« 



tected by the caldron nor to meet tbeir 
doom in it, but to be brought out of it. 
Death, by famine, sword, or pestilence (ch. 
V. 12), might be the doom of some, but for 
others, perhaps specially for those whom 
the prophet addresses, there would be 
captivity first, and death from the sword 
which tber feared, afterwards. 

Ver. 9.— The strangers are, of course, the 
Chaldean invaders, and the prediction finds 
its fulfilment in the massacre of the 
princes of Judah at Riblah (Jer. lii. 9, 10), 
which was in Hamath, the northern border 
of Israel (1 Kings viii. 65; 2 Kings xiv. 
25). Then they should see that their defiant 
speech as to the " caldron " and " the fiesh " 
would be of no avail. Thus they should 
know that the prophet had spoken in the 
name of Jehovah, and that their punishment 
by the heathen was the righteous retribution 
for their having walked in the ways of the 
heathen. 

Ver. 13. — Pelatiah the son of Benaiah. 
We must remember that this was part of the 
vision, but it may be assumed, in the nature 
of the case, that it represented what then 
or afterwards was a fact in history. Had 
Pelatiah died suddenly during a council 
meeting ? Compare the death of Hananiah 
in Jer. xxviii. 17. As it was, even in the 
vision, the death so startled and horrified the 
prophet, that he burst out again into a 
prayer like that of ch. ix. 8. Was the 
" residue," the " remnant " of Israel, repre- 
sented by one of the chief counsellors of the 
city, to be thus out off? 

Ver. 14. — The answer to that question 
conies as by a new inspiration from the word 
of the Lord. 

Ver. 15. — The men of thy kindred, etc. 
The full force of tlie phrase can hardly be 
understood without remembering that the 
word for "kindred" implies the function 
and office of a goel, the redeemer and 
avenger of those among his relations who 
had suffered wrong (Lev. xxv. 25, 48 ; 
Numb. V. 8), and the point of the revelation 
is that Ezekiel is to find those who have 
this claim on him, his true " brethren," not 
only or chiefly in his natural relations in 
the priesthood, but in the companions of his 
exile (the LXX., following a different read- 
ing, gives, "the men of the Captivity"), 
and the whole house of Israel, who were 
in a like position, who were condemned by 
those who had been left in Jerusalem. As 
in Jeremiah's vision (xxiv. 1), they were 
the " good figs ; " those in the city, the vile 
and worthless. They wore the remnant,- 
the residue, for whom there was a hope of 
better things. They were despised as far 
off from the Lord. They were really nearer 
to his presence than those who worshipped 
in the temple firom which Jehovah had 



OH. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. 



191 



departed. Ewald and Smend take the words 
as indicative : " Ye are far," etc. 

Ver. 16. — Yet vrill I be nnto them as a 
little Ganctnary; better, with the Revised 
Version, o little while, as marking that the 
state described was transient and provisional. 
For a time, Ezekiel and the exiles were to 
find the presence of Jehovah manifested as 
in the vision of Chebar (oh. i. 4—28), or felt 
spiritually, and this would make the spot 
where they found themselves as fully a holy 
place as the temple had been. There also they 
would have a " house of God." But this was 
not to be their permanent lot. There was 
to be a restoration to " the land of Israel " 
(ver. 17; oh. zxxvil. 21), to the visible 
sanctuary, to a second temple no longer dese- 
crated by the pollutions that had defiled the 
first. As with all such prophecies, the words 
had " springing and germinant accomplish- 
ments." In ch. xl. — xlviii. we have Bzekiel's 
ideal vision of their fulfilment. A literal but 
incomplete fulfilment is formed in the work 
of restoration achieved by Zerubbabel, Ezra, 
and Nehemiah, and the hopes then cherished 
by Haggai and Zeohariah. A more com- 
plete but less literal fulfilment appears in 
the Church of Christ as the true Israel of 
God (Gal. vi. 16), and in the Jerusalem which 
is above (Gal. iv. 26). In the fact that in 
the seer's vision of that heavenly city there 
is no temple, but the presence of " the Lord 
God Almighty and the Lamb" (Rev. xxi. 
22), we find the crowning development of 
Ezekiel's thought. Intermediate expansions 
are found (1) in the gradual substitution of 
the synagogue for the temple in the religious 
life of Israel; (2) in our Lord's words to 
the woman of Samaria (John iv. 21 — 24); 
and (3) in his promise that where two or 
three are gatliered together in his Kame, 
there he would be in the midst of them 
(Matt, xviii. 20). The thought that it is 
the presence of Jehovah that makes the 
■anc^ary, not the sanctuary that secures 
the presence, Ezekiel may have learnt from 
the fate of Shiloh (Ps. Ixxviii. 60). 

Ver. 17. — I will give you the land of Israel 
The marginal references in the Authorized 
Version show how entirely Ezekiel was 
following in the footsteps of his master 
Jeremiah, as he had done in those of Isaiah, 
in their prophecies of restoration. Here also 
the law of " springing and germinant accom- 
plishments " finds its application. Ezekiel 
(xlvii. 13 — xlviii. 35) has his ideal of a new 
geographical Israel, as of a new local temple, 
a land from which idolatrous shrines and 
high places have disappeared. St. Paul 
(Bom. ix. — xi.) clings to the thought of a 
restoration of the literal Israel, even while 
he strips it of Ezekiel's geographical limita- 
tions. 

Ver. 19.— I will give them one heart. 



The LXX ., following a d ififerentreading,give» 
"another heart" (as in 1 Sam. x. 9); but the 
Hebrew, represented by the Authorized and 
Revised Versions, is, without any doubt, right. 
As in the symbolic action of the joining of 
the two sticks in ch. xxxvii. 15 — 22, so here, 
the hope of the prophet, like that of Isaiah 
and Jeremiah (xxxii. 37 — 39), looked forward 
to the unity of the restored people. Judah 
should no longer vex Bphraim, nor Ephraim 
Judah (Isa. xi. 13). The long-standing line 
of cleavage should disappear. Oneness of 
purpose and of action would characterize 
the new Israel of God. So, in our Lord's 
prayer for his Church, there is the prayer 
that " they may be one " — made perfect in 
one (John xvii. 21—23). Left to itself, 
Israel tended, as all human commiuiities 
have tended, to an ever-subdividing indi- 
vidualism, fruitful in sects ami parties and 
schisms. Even the highest of those aspira- 
tions has remained as yet without any 
adequate fulfilment. The ideal unity of 
the Christian Church is as far distant as that 
of the Church of Israel. It remains for ui 
to welcome any approximate fulfilments as 
pledges and earnests of the future unity of 
the true Israel of God in the heavenly 
Jerusalem. In the prophet's thoughts that 
unity was to be brought about by the Divine 
gift of a " new Spirit," loyal, obedient, un- 
selfish. We note how distinctly, whether 
consciously or unconsciously, Ezekiel repro- 
duces the thought, almost the very words, of 
Jer. xxxi. 31 — 33 ; xxxii. 37 — 39 ; how his 
wordsare in their turn reproduced in Eev.xxi. 
3 — 5. The eternal hope asserts itself again 
and again in spite of all partial failures and 
disappointments. I will take the stony heart 
out of their flesh. The thought is, as we 
have seen, identical with that of Jer. xxxi 
81 — 33, but the form in this instance is 
eminently characteristic of Ezekiel, and 
meets us again in ch. xxxvi. 26. The " stony 
heart " is that which is " hardened" (ch. iii. 7) 
against all impressions of repentance, to 
all natural or spiritual aspirations of the 
good. So Zech. vii. 12 speaks of those who 
had made their hearts "harder than an 
adamant stone." So we may remember, by 
way of illustration, that Burns says of the 
sin of impurity that "it hardens a' within," 
that " it petrifies the feeling." Ezekiel had 
seen enough of that stoniness in others, 
perhaps had, at times, felt it in himself. 

Ver. 20. — ^That they may walk in my 
statutes, etc. Out of the new spirit there 
was to grow the new life— a life of righteous- 
ness and obedience, as in worship, so also in 
the acts of man's daily life and his deal* 
ings with I lis neighbours. So, and not other- 
wise, could the actual relation of Jehovah 
correspond to the ideal, as it had been 
declared of old (Exod. vL 7; Lev. xzvi. 12 ; 



192 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. XL 1—28. 



1 Sam. xii. 22; 2 Sam. vii. 23). This, for 
Ezekiel, was the crowning bleBsedness of 
all, as it had been that of earlier and con- 
temporary prophets (Hos. li. 23; Jer. xxiv. 
7). To that thought he returns again and 
again, as to the anchor oi his hope (ch. xir. 
11 ; xxvii. 14 ; xxxvi. 28 ; xxxvii. 23, 27). 

Ver. 21. — But as for them, etc. We note 
the peculiar phraseology. The heart of the 
people walks not simply after their detestable 
things, but after the heart of those things. 
There is, as it were, a central unity in the 
evU to which they unite themselves, just as 
the heart of man turns to the heart of 
(rod when the two are in their ideal relation 
to each other. For those who did this, 
whetlier in Jerusalem or among the exiles, 
there was the prospect of a righteous retri- 
bution. The words close the message which 
Ezekiel heard in the courts of the temple 
iu his visions, but which he was to deliver 
Cver. 25) to them of the Captivit/. 



"Vers. 22, 23. — Another stage of the depar- 
ture of the Divine glory closes the vision. 
It had rested over the middle of the city. 
It now halts over the mountain on the east 
side of the city, t.«. on the Mount of Olives 
(2 Sam. XV. 30; Zech. xiv. 4). Currey 
mentions, but without a reference, a Jewish 
tradition that the Shechinah, or gloiy-cloud, 
remained there for three years, camng the 
people to repentance. What is here recorded 
may have suggested the thought of Zech. 
xiv. 4. We may remember that it was from 
this spot that Christ " beheld the city, and 
wept over it " (Luke xix. 41) ; that from it 
He, the true Shechinah, ascended into 
heaven. Here, perhaps, the dominant 
thought was that it remained for a time to 
direct the work of judgment. And so the 
vision was over, and the prophet was borne 
back in vision to Chaldea, and made known 
to the exiles of Tel-Abib the wonderful and 
terrible things that he had seen. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 3. — Tha false eonfidence vf unbelief. Jeremiah told the captirea to aettle in 
the land of exile and build houses there, because the Captivity was to last for genera- 
tions (Jer. xxix. 5). But the frivolous people have rejected that wise counsel, and they 
declare that such provision for exile is not necessary. " It is not time to build these 
houses the prophet spoke of," they say ; " we will stay in the city, like the flesh in the 
cauldron." 

I. Impenitbnob debates talsb confidbnoe. This is to be expected, just as we see, 
on the other hand, that a deep sense of guilt brings with it a fear of judgment to come. 
When we feel and own our sin, we must admit that we deserve punishment, and we 
must see that the ground of assurance is cut from beneath our feet. What right have 
we to believe that God will shield us from harm, while we are bidding defiance to his 
Law ? But while a soul is impenitent the ill desert and threatening doom are not 
perceived. It does not own that it should be punished. It defends itself and shelters 
itself behind innumerable excuses. Moreover, the moral sense is now blunt, and the 
faculty of spiritual insight blind. The messenger of God, too, is regarded as an enemy, 
and therefore little attention is given to his word. Thus arises a meretricious faith, the 
opposite of true faith, the confidence of unbelief. 

II. False confidence postpones and minimizes the prospect of calamity. 1. li 
postpones. Possibly the evil day may lie in the future. This much is tacitly admitted. 
But it is so far away that we need not give any consideration to it. While the prophet 
declares that it is at the door, the reckless unbeliever relegates it to a region of dim 
futurity beyond the horizon of practical considerations. 2. It minimizes. Even if it 
is admitted that the dreadful day is near, the evil of it is made little of. " There is no 
need to build houses," these " Jerusalem sinners" exclaim. The storm may come soon, 
but it will quickly pass. Thus men make the least of the prospect of future punish- 
ment. False confidence first postpones the consideration of it, and then softens its 
terrors. To the impenitent sinner hell is first a far-off possibility ; then, though it is a 
nearer future, it is not thought to be so unendurable as the preachers declare. 

HI. There is great danger in false oonfidenob. The Jews were simply deceiving 
themselves. Their very language should have revealed their folly to them. They 
described the city as a cauldron in which they were as the flesh. Their only application 
of this metaphor was to represent themselves as well inside the city, and therefore as 
not needing to build other houses. But the prophet did not have to go far afield to 
find another very obvious application of the lame metaphor. The cauldron is to be set 
on a fire, and the flesh is only placed in it to be seethed. The cauldron, therefor^ 



m. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 193 

aymlmlizes a very dreadful fate (jet. 7). The danger b not tbe lesi because we close 
our eyes to it. Meanwhile a false confidence hinders the impenitent from fleeing from 
the impending calamity and seeking a place of refiige. Light TiewB of sin and judgment 
to come lull the careless into a fatal sleep. 

Yer. 6. — OocFs knowledge of man's &ought. I. TBI fact. We know a few men ; 
God knows all. None are so obscure, or remote, or secretive as to hide from him. We 
know the exterior life; God knows the life within— every thought, and wish, and 
dream, and fancy. We know in part and with many obscurities, having to piece 
together scattered hints, and possibly falling into great blunders in our estimation of our 
neighbours. God knows completely and without possibility of error, searching into the 
deep secrets of the heart, not setting down aught in malice, but also not blinded to sad 
truths by the partiality of an imperfect love. 1. Ood knows our ideas. He sees when 
we are in error, observes the crooked course of our ill-trained thinking, and notes tbe 
narrowness of our notions. He also knows the true thought which is not understood by 
our fellow-men. 2. He knovis our desires. If he does not grant them, it is not because 
he is ignorant of them. Before a prayer is out of our lips the wish of it has reached the 
mind of God. When we cannot find words to express the longing of our souls, those 
vague, dumb desires are exactly measured and fully comprehended by God. God 
knows our evil desires, the wicked wishes that have not yet found vent in wicked 
deeds. 3. Se knows our sorrows. Though the heart only knoweth its own bitterness 
among men, the sympathetic knowledge of God has gauged it to the bottom. No one 
can say, " My grief is quite beyond comprehension." No one can he utterly misimder- 
Btood. Misjudged by man, the martyr is known to God. 4. Ood knows our sin. There 
is no secret place where a deed of wrong can be done without the eye of Crod seeing it. 
Abel is murdered in the field, but still his blood cries to God for vengeance. 

II. Its oonseqxiekces. 1. Hypocrisy is a mistake. It only hides our shame from the 
less important spectators, while the all-seeing eye of God regards it as an addition to 
the guilt which lurks beneath. 2. Postponement of punishment is no guarantee for 
escape. The criminal who is not caught red-handed hopes that he will now elude the 
vigilance of the ministers of justice, and the longer he remains undetected the more 
confident does he grow in the assurance that he will never be caught, until long years 
of immunity almost beget a feeling of innocence. But if God knows all, there is no 
escape from his anger behind the obscuring growth of years. 3. Ood's long-suffering 
is manifest. The heathen might say, " My God does not strike me, because he has not 
discovered my offence." Bat when the omniscience of God is admitted, his forbearance 
is seen to be a wonder of patience and love. He knows all, and yet he is still ready to 
pardon, still waiting to be gracious, nay, even still heaping upon his sinful children 
many favours I 4. There is hope of salvation. If our escape lay only in our concealment 
of guilt, there would always be a danger of ruin through discovery. The criminal who 
has no better hope than this is standing on thin ice. But now we see that God knows 
the worst of us, and yet offers pardon and reconciliation through the gift of his Son, we 
have the greatest encouragement to accept his grace. Moreover, since he knows our 
troubles, hopes, fears, aspirations, and difficulties, he can send the exact help we need. 

Ver. 16. — The sanctuary of the exile. The Jews of Jerusalem boasted themselves in 
their temple, but with a false confidence, for that splendid edifice was to be razed. 
On the other hand, the poor exiles of Babylon looked upon their state of separation frum 
Jerusalem as involving a loss of the privileges of the sanctuary. Daniel prayed with 
his window open towards Jerusalem, as though God were still to be sought in the sacred 
city (Dan. vi. 10). But Ezekiel gives the captives the assurance that God will be their 
Sanctuary during the short time of exile in the distant land of their captivity. 

I. GoD 18 THE BEST SANCTUAET. No Solomon Can arise by the banks of the Chebar 
to build a new temple. The splendour of Lebanon and the skill of Hiram, together with 
the wealth and devotion of the Jewish nation at the height of its glory, produced a 
wonder of the world, which a feeble band of heart-broken captives could never dream 
of equalling. Yet the sorrow-stricken remnant of [lious Ifrael were to have something 
better than gilded walls and cedar pillars. They were to have God as their Sanctuary. 
1. Ood vouchsafes his presence to his people. He does not only give a house of worship ; 

EZEKIEU 



184 THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. XL 1—25. 

he comes himielf. 2. Ood's presence sanctifies. It is a sanctuary .^ The place where 
Moses stood before the bui ning bush was " holy ground," for God was there (Exod. iii. 
5). Chaldea was far from the " Holy Land ; " yet if God were there he would make 
light in the centre of heathen darkness. Wherever God visits us he makes a sanctuary. 
The workshop is a holy place when God is in it. 3. Qod's presence saves. The temple 
was regarded with a false confidence and a foolish superstition as a charmed asylum, 
but the event proved the delusiveness of such an assumption. When God is with us 
anywhere, however, we are safe j for he is " a Sun and a Shield." 

II. This sanctuaet is to bb found in exile. 1. In exUefrom the native land. 
The colonist far removed from the home and Church of his fathers, may find God in the 
busli or on tiie prairie. Though no " place of worship" may be within his reach, he 
need not feel banished from gracious influences. If his heart turn to God, God will be 
with him as his Sanctuary. 2. In exUefrom, the old delights. When trouble comes, a 
man is, as it were, driven from the land flowing with milk and honey out into a waste 
howling wilderness. But One is with him, and the God who met the poor fugitive 
Jacob will make a Bethel in the desert of trouble. 3. In exile from heaven. We seek 
another country. Here we are pilgrims and strangers ; our citizenship is in heaven. 
Kevertheless, God is with us here and now to train and guard and cheer us with the 
sanctuary of his presence. 4. For a short season. God would be the Sanctuary in 
exile " for a little time," not because he would soon desert the banished, but because 
he would bring them home again. If God is with us in trouble, he will bring us out 
of trouble. He is with us here for a season, that he may lead us to be with him in 
heaven for ever, Christ came into exile from heaven to be with us here on earth that 
he might bring us back to God. He " tabernacled with us," was our Sanctuary in 
exile during his earthly ministry. Now he has gone to prepare a place for us in the 
eternal home. 

Ver, 17. — Restoration and reunion. L The Ditinb pebsenoe seoubes FurnBi 
SALTATION. The promise that God will be with his children in exile " as a Sanctuary " 
(ver. 16) is immediately followed by the assurance that he will bring them back to 
their land. It is not for nothing, then, that the poor exiles have the Sanctuary that is 
better than Solomon's splendid temple — GoJ's very presence. If God is with us, the 
future is ours. God is not only a Stay and a Comfort to-day, he holds the key of 
to-morrow. Therefore God only needs to be a Sanctuary for " a little while." Our light 
afBiction "endureth but for a moment." The presence of God should make the 
hardship of the moment doubly endurable, first because of its own immediate help, and 
secondly on account of the cheering prospects it opens out. The light of such a future 
should throw back rays of comfort into the darkest experience. 

II. The future salvation is to be a great restoration. God will bring the 
exiles home again. This implies two things. 1. Deliverance from evil. The Jews 
were scattered aniong heathen peoples whose alien temper and domineering spirit were 
sources of trouble; e.g. Daniel, and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Sin plunges us 
into hurtful conditions. For wholesome discipline God's true people may be thrown 
into circumstances of persecution and peril. But this will not be for ever. If the Son 
of God is with the three in the furnace, he will deliver them from it. 2. Restoration 
to the old home. The exiles are to return to Canxan. Souls exiled from the kingdom 
of heaven by sin will, when pardoned and renewed (see rer. 19), be restored to the 
privileges which were the birthright of all — for all have been children, and " of such is 
the kingdom of heaven." Further, those who have been thus far restored may well feel 
the need of a more perfect recovery to the home of God, since this earth is not heaven, 
and here the people of God are " pilgrims and strangers " seeking " another country, 
that is, a heavenly." God's perfect restoration includes the bringing of his children 
home to heaven. 

III. Tm« GREAT kestobatiox inoluses pekfbot reunion. The nation was 
scattered j the promise is that it shall be reunited. Sin divides ; redemption unites. 
All evil has a disintegrating influence on national and family life. Its root is selfish- 
ness, and selfishness implies severance. But love is the source of the better life, and love 
is the closest bond of union. 1. National reunion. So with the Jew. A nation will be 
safe against internal strife when Christian principles are followed. 2. The reunion vf 



CH. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 195 

mankind. War is a vast and hideous fruit of selfish sinful passions and narrow hard- 
heartedness. Christianity, if triumpliant, would kill war by uniting the nations in 
brotherhood, thus biingiug "peace on earth." 3. The reunion of individitdl$. In restora- 
tion to God we learn patience, sympathy, and charity in regard to our fellow-men. 4. The 
reunion t/ families. This begins on earth in pure home love. But it will be completed 
in the great restoration of families when all can meet in the home beyond the grave. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The heart of flesh. Two mistakes are commonly made by well-meaning 
social reformers. Too much faith is placed in external improvement, and too much 
power is credited to man. It is not perceived that the greatest evil is in the heart, and 
that the only cure can be found in the help of God. But both of these deeper truths 
•re recognized in the passage before us. 

I. The natubb of the obsat oHAHaE. Ver. 17 had promised an external restora- 
tion ; now we have the assurance of an internal transformation. It is the heart that is 
to be changed. The very centre of the being must be renewed. For this David prayed 
(Ps. li. 10). The need of it was pointed out to Nicodemus by Christ (John iii. 3). Note 
the characteristics of the new heart. 1. Unity, "One heart." The internal discord 
will cease. A man with divided affections is like a two-hearted monster. But doubtless 
the unity here referred to is social. Sin having brought quarrels among men, the new 
state will be one of harmony. 2. Life, The old heart was of stone, and therefore dead. 
The new heart is of flesh, and living. Sin deadens the soul. The death of sin is the 
resurrection of the better nature. 3. Susceptibility. The stony heart cannot feel. This 
is the dangerous result of sin. The conscience is seared. The guilt of sin and its 
danger are not felt. The appeals of Divine grace are unheeded. Tears are wasted on a 
marble statue. Bain and sunshine cannot fertilize a granite rock. But the new heart 
is tender. As when Moses strikes the rock the streams flow, so when God's Word 
reaches the stony heart with the power of his Spirit a new feeling is awakened. 4. 
Naturalness. The new heart is of flesh, not of some rare ethereal substance. The 
Christian is not to have the heart of an angel, but just a man's true natural heart. The 
Christian is the true man. Christianity is in harmony with nature. Inhumanity is 
unnatural. The lack of natural afiiections is a sign of unspirituality. Cold saiutliness 
is not an effect of Qt)d's grace, but a product of man's perversity. God puts a heart of 
flesh in the flesh. Thus there is harmony, and all is natural. 

II. The socroe of the obeat ohanoe. God promises to effect this wonderful trans- 
formation. Only he can do it. We can change our clothes, our habitation, our outward 
manners, but not our hearts. The depth of the change renders it too much for man. 
So does the previous condition of those on whom it has to be wrought. As the heart is 
of stone, it is too cold to feel its need, and too dead to strive after a better condition. In 
this hardness and indifference the hapless condition of the sinner is completed. Even 
the penitent cannot create in himself a clean heart. But left to himself, man is not 
likely to become penitent. Kow, God promises to do what man can never accomplish 
for himself. He will take away the old evil — ^remove the heart of stone. He will give 
a new nature — the heart of flesh. He will also inspire power into this new nature by 
putting " a new spirit " in his children. This is done by the gift of his Holy Spirit. 

III. Thk besuIiTS of the obeat ohanoe. This change takes place in the heart ; it 
is inward, and therefore secret. But its consequences cannot be hidden, for out of the 
heart are " the issues of life." No one can have the heart of flesh and behave like a 
being of stone — cold, nnsympathetic, inactive. Two consequences are noticed. 1. 
Ohedience. The heart of flesh is given that God's people may walk in his statutes and 
keep his ordinances and do them. We cannot truly obey God till we love him. When 
the heart is right with God the most natural result is that the conduct should be right 
also. Yet, be it observed, this is not to be regarded as a merely necessary result of 
God's action within ut, for ver. 20 describes a purpose rather than a certain result. God 
gives a heart of flesh " that " his people " may walk," etc. It is still left with them to 
exert themselves in the way of obedience. 2. Adoption, " Thy seed shall be my 
people, and I will be their God." God owns his renewed people as his children ; they 
own him as th«r Father. The right heart is at one with Qoi. 

Ter. 26. — Preaching to the eapiivu. I. The pbeaohbb mubt itabs raoM a bxt» 



196 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZERIBL. [ch. xi. 1—25. 

LATioK HADE TO HIUSELF. The prophets were seers. The apostles were eye-vntDesMs 
of the life, death, and resurrection of Christ. No preacher can go forth with God's 
Word unless he has first received that Word. For it is not his business to gather congre- 
gations merely to hear his " guesses at truth," nor is he called to set before men his 
most profound speculations, if those speculations are only wrought out of his own ideas. 
He is a messenger — therefore he must bear a message ; a herald — therefore he must 
have a gospel to proclaim. Where shall the modern preacher find his Divine word ? Ue 
cannot pretend to be an Ezekiel at liome among the cherubim, to whom the inmost 
wheels of the Divine mysteries seemed to be revealed. Nevertheless, he has his revela- 
tions : 1. In the Bible. Of all men the preacher is called to be a diligent student of 
this rich storehouse of revelation. The modern preacher does not see Ezekiel's cherubim, 
but he can read the New Testament, of which Ezekiel knew nothing ; and the <;ospel 
story of Jesus of Nazareth is a greater revelation than the visions of an Old Testament 
prophet. 2. In experience. Every preacher must have his own vision of Scripture 
truth. We can only speak what we have seen and heard. The truth must be inter- 
preted by experience. 

II. Thb private revelation of tbuth is given fob fublio DECiiARATiON. Ezekiel 
mio;ht have thought himself a rarely privileged soul, and have considered his visions as 
choice mysteries to be kept secret, and nut to be wasted on unsympathetic ears, like 
pearls ca^st before swine, if he had not nnderstnod his duty as a prophet of Israel too well 
to make such a mistake. Freely he had received, freely he must give. All who know 
God's truth are under sacred obligatious to do what in them lies to declare that truth. 
It is not possible for every one to be a preacher by word of mouth. Still, in some way 
missionary enterprise should follow the reception of Divine truth. We who have the 
gospel are bound to give it to those to whom it is yet an undreamed secret. 1. This 
declaration is to be unreserved. Ezekiel spoke all the things. Some were obscure ; 
some might cause offence ; some might be abused. Yet he was not at liberty to hold 
back anything. The preacher must not shun to " declare the whole counsel of God." 
2. This declaration is /or all. It was given to Ezekiel's neighbours, the captives, 
without distinction. As there are no esoteric truths in God's revelation, so there is no 
spiritual aristocracy of the initiated. The only limit is our capacity to receive. " He 
that hath ears to hear, let him hear." 

III. The declaration of Divine truth is espeoiallt needed by those who abb 
IN TROUBliE. Ezekiel "spake unto them of the Captivity." 1. It is a peculiarly 
Christian duty to bring the consolation of God to the trovbled. This is suited to the 
sorrowful. Lighter thoughts may amuse in hours of ease. But when darkness gathers 
about the soul, nothing short of the deep verities of God will satisfy. Those verities 
may not be always pleasant. Much that Ezekiel saw filled him with distress. Still 
God's truth is all wholesome and healinc;, and his last words are his best, as Ezekiel's 
hearers must have found when the prophet concluded with the wonderful promise of the 
" heart of flesh " (ver. 19). 2. The gospel is peculiarly appropriate for those who are 
spiritually captives, i.e. in bondage to (1) superstition, (2) duubt, (3) fear, or (4) sin. 
Christ came to proclaim liberty to such captives (Luke iv. 16). 



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHOBa 

_Ver. 2. — Evil counsellors. Ezekiel was a true patriot; and it was according'y to 
him matter of great distress that his countrymen were misled by ungodly and self-seek- 
ing counsellors and princes. "If gold rust, what shall iron do?" If those occupying 
posi tions of authority and eminence are unfaithful, what can be expected of the m uli itude. 
who go as they are led? By whatever name they are called, and to whatever gilts or 
acquirements they owe their inQuence, there will always, in every state and in every 
Church, be men who lead, who guide the thoughts and control and inspire the actions 
of their fellows and inferiors. It was the prophet's sorrow to see posts of power at 
Jerusalem occupied by those who led the citizens astray and encouraged them in their 
rebellion against God. His experience and reflections lead us to think of great men whs 
are at the same time counsellors of evil in the community. 



CH. XL 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 197 

I. The C0DN8ELL0EB OF A NATION OWE THEIB POSITION AND INFLUKNCE TO GIFTS AND 
ACQUIREMENTS FOB WHICH THET ARE INDEBTED TO DiVINB PaOVIDENOB. 

II. Such position and influence are necessarily accompanied by oratb 

RESPONSIBILITY. 

III. The counsellors of a nation abuse their trust when they seek to direct 
PUBLIC policy bo as to secure personal and private ends. That this is often dona 
no student of political philosophy and history, no observer of contemporary politics in 
any nation, can doubt. Men profess zeal for the public good, and upon such profession 
are exalted, by the favour of a prince or of the public, to positions of eminence and 
power. No sooner are they securely in office than they make use of their newly acquired 
power to gain some eilds dear to their own interests, passions, or prejudices. Some by 
oppression or peculation amass great wealth ; some find means to revenge themselves upon 
their enemies and rivals ; some seek to get into their own hands the reins of supreme 
power ; some regard office as the opportunity for advancing their family or their friends 
to posts of consideration and emolument. In public such persons speak of patriotism, 
of popular rights, of disinterested devotion to the public good. But in reality they are 
always scheming to secure some advantage to themselves. So much is this the case in 
certain communities that among them the "politician" is loathed and despised by all 
men of integrity and honour. 

IV. Evil counsellors are actuated by base motives. Politicians are sometimes 
in the pay of their country's enemies ; they are sometimes the instruments of a despot 
who seeks to rob the people of their rights, and to establish a tyranny ; they are some- 
times indiffeient to their fellow-countrymen's sufferings, if only they themselves may 
profit by their nation's fall. Self is their rule, their impulse, their one consideration. 
What they do they do not as unto the Lord, but unto men. 

V. Evil counsellors lead a community into error and ruin. The multitude 
ever follows the guidance of the few. The uninstructed and ill-informed are at the 
mercy of their superiors. Old Testament history abounds with instances of misleading 
by unprincipled rulers. It is mentioned to the condemnation of one and another of the 
kings that they "caused Israel to sin." And what was true of the "chosen nation" is 
true of every people ; at some epoch or other the pride, the vanity, the ambition, the 
meanness, or the selfish sloth of those in authority has led the nations into some course 
of infatuated folly, and the people have suffered for the offences of their leaders. 

VI. Ebtribution will surely overtake such as by wicked counsel lead the 
PEOPLE ASTRAY. The time must come when the secret purposes of wicked rulers will b« 
brought to light and exposed. Some are hurled by the indignation of the people from 
the lofty position to which they have been allowed to climb. Some retain their position 
whilst they live, but their memory is accursed. But of all we are assured upon the 
highest authority that they shall be brought into judgment, and that their deeds shall 
uot be unpunished. — T. 

Ver. 3. — Judgment deferred. The evil counsellors of Jerusalem did their worst to 
counteract the effect of the message which the Lord's prophets were commissioned to 
communicate. Thus it came to pass that the inhabitants of the city were encouraged 
to neglect the obvious duties of repentance and supplication; and, when the time of 
judgment came, were found unprepared. The means by which the devisers of mischief 
brought about this result are described in this passage. They induced the citizens to 
believe that, if the threatened judgment were ever to come, it would not be yet, not 
probably in their time ; and encouraged the citizens to build houses, and to live as if 
no catastrophe were about to befall them. If the ruin of Jerusalem were appointed, at 
all events that ruin was "not near." 

I. The way in which sinners treat the threats of God's authorized 
MINISTERS. 1. It is often the bounden duty of faithful messengers of God to foretell 
the approach of chastisement and judgment. A painful duty it always is ; and it is 
to be feared that on this accoxmt many shrink from discharging it. Even the tender 
and gracious Jesus now and again denounced the sins of the self-righteous and hypo- 
critical, and warned such that condemnation awaited them. No one can carry out the 
office of a minister of righteousness who does not remind the unbelieving and impeni- 
tent that " the wages of sin is death." 2. It is observable that such admonitions are 



198 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. [ch. xr. 1— 25. 

often treated with neglect and contempt. It has been that from the time of Noah, 
whose warnings were unheeded and ridiculed by his contemporaries. The admonitions 
of Christ himself in some instances only embittered the hostility of those whom he 
reproached. Every servant of God has had occasion to exclaim, " Who hath believed 
our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?" 

II. Thb ebrob which sinnebs commit in so TBEATiNO God's hessaoe. 1. Mfiny 
ttho hear the warnings and threats addressed to them give no credit to what thi y 
1 ear, and do not expect the predictions to be fulfilled. They have more confidence in 
tlieir own judgment and in their own good fortune than in the Word of the Lord. 
They do not wish to believe, and they will not believe. 2. Many who do not abso- 
lutely disbelieve and reject the message, nevertheless persuade themselves that its 
fulSlmeat will be indefinitely deferred, and indeed is altogether uncertain. Such 
seems to have been the case with the evil counsellors, whose guidance was accepted in 
Jerusalem. Their answer to every prediction of calamity was this : " It is not near ! " 
It is with the same excuse that the Word of God is so constantly encountered in our 
own days ; and there are those who may not make this excuse in words, who yet 
cherish it in their hearts and act upon it in their conduct. " Because sentence against 
an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully 
set in them to do evil," 

m. The folly and wickedness of such tbeatment of God's messaob. What 
shall be said of the attitude of those whose one reply is this: "It is not near"? 
1. They must be reminded that time, after all, is of comparatively little importance. 
The main question for us is this — Is God angry with the wicked? Is his wrath 
to be revealed against the ungodly? If it is so, then how can we attach great impor- 
tance to the question — Will this be made manifest this year or next year; now or at 
some future time ? 2. They must be reminded that the judgment foretold may 
be actually nearer than is supposed or believed. It was so in the case of Jerusalem in 
the time of Ezekiel. It has often been so. Men have been eating and drinking, 
marrying and giving in marriage, when sudden destruction has come upon them. 3. 
They must be reminded that, near or far, the judgment of the Supreme Buler is 
inevitable. " Who may abide the day of his coming ? and who shall stand when he 
appeareth?"— T. 

Ver. 5. — Divine omniscience. Among the many elements of that superiority 
which is distinctive of monotheism over polytheism must be noted the perfect know- 
ledge which the one God possesses of all the creatures whom he has made. Men who 
believe in the " gods many " of the heathen have not, and cannot have, that con- 
stant sense of the Divine omniscience which must exercise so signal an influence for 
good over the worshipper of the Supreme. 

I. The beasonableness of this doctrinb. We attribute to the Deity infinite per- 
fection ; and this is not consistent with the limitation of his knowledge. It is absurd 
to suppose that he who has made the mind of man has lost the power of recognizing 
the thoughts and intents of the heart which he fashioned by his power and wisdom. 
There is no part of his universe in which God is not present. Much more evidence is 
it that the Father of the spirits of all flesh is in possession of every secret of the 
intellectual and spiritual nature of man. 

II. The foboetfulnesb OF this doctbine. It is evident that the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and especially the false teachers and evil counsellors in the city, lost sight 
of this great truth. God was not in all their thoughts. It may not have occurred to 
them, as they pursued their selfish plans and lived their irreligious life, that every 
purpose and hope was known to the Divine Lord and Judge. " All things are naked 
and opened to the eyes of him with whom we have to do." 

III. The tbbbob whioh this dootbihe should have fob evil-doebs who abb 
BEuiKDED OF IT. God kuows the wicked things that come into men's minds and 
are encouraged to abide there — the injustice, the covetousness, the falsehood, the 
impurity, the cruelty, the hatred, the malevolence, which are distinctive of those who 
depart from God. Such qualities, even before they find expression in word and act, 
are repugnant to the nature of the just and holy God. And he is not simply an 
observer; he is a Judge. He disapproves and condemns thoughts, sentiments, and 



OH. XL 1—25.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 199 

purpoBes which are in opposition to his own laws, to his own character. He has 
revealed his intention to bring men into judgment for all their conduct, and for every 
secret thing, good or bad. I'rom this reckouiog with the Judge of all there is no 
escape. The prospect may well strike the impenitent sinner with dismay. 

IV, The dissuasive power which this doctbine should exercise ovee those 

WHO AEE HESITATINQ WHETHER OB NOT TO YIELD TO TEMPTATION. In Order tO resist 

temptation to sin, it is not enough to guard our actions, to order aright our circum- 
stances and associations. It is in the mind that the real battle must be fought. And 
upon this battle-field, what auxiliary is so potent and effectual as the remembrance of 
the Lord's omniscience ? He is with us to assist us in the regulation of our thoughts 
and desires ; for he knows alike the force of temptation, and the sincerity of our 
endeavour to check and to overcome it. 

V. The welcome given by God's people to this doctbine. The same truth 
is a joy 'and consolation to the Christian, which the ungodly man finds an occasion 
of distress and dread. Why is this? It is because God has in Christ made himself 
known to his heart as his Friend and Father. Thus openness and confidence and holy 
intimacy prevail between the Christian and his God. The faithful servant of God 
knows his infirmities and his faults, and he is grateful to be assured that these are 
known to his Father in heaven, who will deal leniently and compassionately with 
them, and will assist him in overcoming them. God knows the aspirations and 
endeavours of his own children, is interested in every effort to attain to a fuller know- 
ledge of himself, and a more constant and practical subjection to his will. In 
Ps. czxKix. the feelings of the good man, conscious of the Divine omniscience, find a 
full and most poetical and fervent expression. There is nothing which such a man 
would wish to hide from such a Friend. — T. 

Ver. 13. — Eemonstrance and intercession. It is remarkable that whilst Ezekiel w»s 
commissioned to censure and to denounce the political action of the evil counsellors of 
Jerusalem, he took no pleasure in the awful practical expression which the righteous 
Judge saw fit to give to this censure and denunciation. It was the prophet's business 
to expose the wicked policy of Pelatiah; but this man's death was to Kzekiel a severe 
shock and sorrow, calling forth from his sympathetic and patriotic heart the words in 
which he deprecated with all reverence and submission the displeasure of the Lord. 

I. The occasion of ebmonbtbance and inteecession. In this passage the occa- 
sion was twofold. 1. The pressure of present afSiction, in the death of one of the 
leaders and riilers in the metropolis, 2. The apprehension of future calamity and 
disaster such as the present affliction foreboded. What had happened to one would, 
in all likelihood, happen to others. Similarly, every well-wisher to his country and 
his Church is, in times of trial, driven to the throne of grace for merciful forbearance 
and interposition. 

n. The presentation op remonstrance and intercession. 1. There is an iden- 
tification on the part of the suppliant of himself with liis people. After all, whatever 
might be the errors of any class of his countrymen, Ezekiel was a Hebrew, and he 
CDuld not but suffer in the sufferings of his country; its misfortunes could not but 
afSict him ; its ruin could not but humiliate and distress him. 2. There is an 
implicit admission of the justice of the Divine action ; the prophet does not complain 
of what had been wrought by the hand of Divine and judicial authority. No affliction 
was undeserved. 3. There is supplication that ills apparently impending may be 
averted. As Abraham pleaded for Sodom, so Ezekiel pleaded for Jerusalem. There 
is but a remnant : of that remnant shall a full end be made ? As if he added, in the 
language of the patriarch, " That be far from thee, Lord 1 " 

Application. The Christian cannot fail to be reminded, by this passage, of the 
intercessory office of Christ. We have an Advocate with the Father, appointed and 
accepted by that Father's love. Here is our refuge and our hope in the time of 
calamity and under the fear of judgment. Our High Priest is a powerful and success- 
ful Intercessor. Our sins have deserved that " a full end " should be made of humanity. 
But through Christ mercy is extended, clemency exercised, and salv&tion assured to 
' hose who place thenlselveB under the patronage and protection of the great Mediator 
iii.l Advocate. — ^T. 



200 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oH.xi.1— 25, 

Yen. 16, 17. — Ewile and reitoration. There is a, change in the tone of the pro- 
phet. A full end shall not he made of the remnant. The mistropoUg shall fall, the 
king shall he led captive. The enemy shall prevail. But the ohlldran of the Captivity 
shall not be forgotten ; they shall experience the protection and fellowship of their 
covenant God ; and they shall be bruugbt back to the land of Israel, when Divine 
purposes are fulfilled, and when the time is ripe. 

I. God a SANCTnABY for a season in a foreion land. This must have been 
a precious and encouraging assurance to the captives in their banishment. They 
loved Jerusalem, and they loved the temple. Far from the scene of their national 
privileges, they were yet not forsaken by the God of their fathers. 1. Every holy 
place has its true meaning and value from the residence in it of the Eternal. It is not 
the costly material of which a sanctuary is built, the labour and art with which it is 
decorated, the robed priesthoods who minister, or the lavish offerings and sacrifices 
that are presented ; it is not these things that make a temple. It is the presence of 
God himself to receive and bless the worshippers, that endears the building to the 
enlightened and pious. 2. God may manifest his presence and favour in places where 
no sacred edifices exist. So Jacob understood, when he awoke from his slumber and 
his dream, and exclaimed, " Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it notl " 

" Where'er they seek thee, thou art fonnd. 
And every place is hallowed ground." 

Those upon the stormy deep, those in the primeval forests, those in the waterless 
deserts, those in the caverns of the earth, have met with God in the exercises of devo- 
tion. And he was a Sanctuary to his banished ones in their captivity in the East, as 
near to them as he was to those still permitted to resort to the courts of the temple at 
Jerusalem. " The tabernacle of God is with men." 3. Thus God's spiritual presence 
may be realized and enjoyed even in a world of sin. Earth is in a sense the scene of 
exile and of banishment. But for all that, God will be to his people a Sanctuary in 
the place and during the period of their captivity. His Church is his temple, and 
from it he never departs. 

II. God the Restores of his banished ones. 1. The dispersion and banishment 
are appointed for a time and for a purpose. There were reasons why the sons of 
Abrahaib should be exiled from the land promised to their progenitor, the father of the 
faithful. It was apparent to the wisdom of God that only thus could they be pre- 
served and delivered from the temptations, especially to idolatry, to which they had 
so_ often yielded. The discipline was severe, but it was effectual. The period of 
exile was not prolonged vindictively. 2. The restoration is as providential as the 
Captivity. The language of the text is very emphatic upon this point : " I will even 
gather you from the people," etc. " He deviseth means whereby his banished ones 
may return." It was this prospect which sustained and cheered the Hebrew people 
amidst disasters at home and exile abroad. The land of their fathers was their land ; 
and in due time they were to enter and possess it. 3. The restoration of the Israelites 
prefigured the final salvation of all God's people. Their exile shall not last for ever. 
There is a better country, even a heavenly, a Jerusalem above; yonder is the promised 
Inheritance, and the eternal abode of the blessed gathered from every land. — ^T. 

Ver. 19. — Spiritual trantfarmation. This promise is one of the most precious to be 
found in the Old Testament Scripture. Relating as it evidently does in this passage 
to the nation of Israel as a whole, it has generally been taken by Christians as having 
applicability to all who yield themselves to God, to be dealt witih by his renewing and 
transforming grace. 

I. The nature that needs transformation. This is characterized by hardnest. 
It is " the stony heart " which Divine grace undertakes to soften and renew. The 
hard or stony heart is that which is insensible to spiritual realities, upon which 
neither Law nor gospel makes any impression, which resists every appeal whether of 
righteousness or of mercy. 

II. The power that effects the transformation. The powerlessness of all 
human agency and endeavour is apparent. Man's influence can do much ; but here is 
the most difficult of all problems to be solved ; here is the necessity for something 
more than reformation — for actual renewal. Hence God, the Almighty, undertakei 



OH. n, 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. • 201 

the work himself. He spe^iks here with authority, as the Being who needs no coun- 
sellor, no helper, who has iofinite resources at his disposal, who exercises his own 
prerogative. It is not here explicitly stated what are the means he employs ; but we 
know that they are means in harmony with the moral nature of man, that his appeal 
to us is an appeal of truth and lore. In the Christian dispensation, the agent of 
transformation is the Holy Spirit given at Pentecost, and perpetually abiding in the 
Church, and the instrumentality employed is the gospel of our Saviour Jesus Christ, 
appropriated by the faith of the believing hearer of the Word. 

III. The BPFE0T8 AND EVIDENCES OF THIS TBAN8F0BMATI0N. 1. NewnCSS of Spirit 

supersedes the old disposition to disobey and rebel. Every reader of the New Testa- 
ment knows what stress is laid upon the new covenant, the new birth, the new life, 
newness of the spirit, etc. In fact, this verse from Ezekiel is peculiarly in harmony 
with the Christian dispensation and all that belongs to it. 2. Unity of heart is one 
form of newness; for it comes to supersede the division and opposition which prevail 
where God's authority is rejected and where God's Word is despised. It is our Lord's 
prayer concerning the members of his Church, that they " all may be one " — one in 
him and in the Father, and so one each with the other. 3. Sensitiveness is what is 
intended by the heart of flesh. The nature which God by bis grace renews is a nature 
which responds to the love of God by gratitude, faith, and consecration. A heart 
delighting in what pleases God, dreading what offends him ; a heart loving all whom 
, God loves, and inspiring a life of scrupulous and hearty obedience ; — such is the new 
heart, the heart of flesh, which is the best gift of God to his children. 

"A heart resigned, submissive, meek, 
My dear Bedeemer's throne ; 
Where only Christ is heard to speak. 
Where Jesus reigns alone." 

T. 

Ver. 20. — Mutual potsession. This language is of frequent occurrence in Scripture, 
and applies to the relation between Jehovah and his chosen and covenant people Israel. 
It is ideal, for, as a matter of fact, the descendants of Abraham and of Jacob were 
constantly in rebellion against God, and alienated from him by their wicked works. 
Yet it was actually true of an election within the nation. And it remains for ever 
applicable, in strict and literal truth, to all those who receive Divine grace, acknowledge 
Divine authority, and rejoice in Divine communion. 

I. The obedient are claimed and owned by God as his people. "They shall be 
my people," says the Eternal. They are his : 1. To possess. They are his property, 
and they bear upon them his mark. 2. To control. They are his servants, yielding 
themselves to him, and their powers as instruments in his service. 3. To love. God 
loves his own people, as a father loves his own children, as a husband loves his own 
wife. 4. To bless. The Lord is mindful of his own. There is nothing that is for 
their good which he withholds from them. 

II. God 18 claimed and owned by the obedient as theie God. On this account : 
1. They reverence him. Let others offer their adoration where they will, the Lord, 
say they, is our God, and him only will we serve. 2. They trust him. His ways may 
sometimes be dark, and his counsels perplexing ; but he is theirs, and therefore they will 
not withdraw their confidence from him. 3. They glorify him with all their powers. 
To them there is no limit to their Lord's claims and authority ; he has but to say. Go, 
and they go ; Come, and they come ; Do this, and it is done. 4. They hope in his 
promises. He has given them his word that they shall be brought to everlasting 
salvation ; and the assurance, coming from their own covenant God, inspires them with 
a brii^ht and consolatory hope. " This God is our God for ever and ever ; . . . our Guide, 
even unto death." — T. 

Ver. 25. — The prophetic office. In these few and simple words we have a declaration 
of the ofiBce and function of the inspired prophet, and in a certain sense of every true 
religions teacher whom God commissions to be the vehicle and conscious agent in com- 
municating his truth, counsels, admonitions, and encouragements to men. 

L Keobption. The prophet and every religious teaoiier must come mediately or 



202 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xi. 1—25. 

immediately into spiritual communication with the Divine Mind. 1. The Source from 
which the communication proceeda is none other thswi God himself. 2. The matter 
which is received is what is commonly called revelation ; the thoughts and commands 
and purposes of the Supreme are made known to a human spirit. 3. The vision, the 
hearing, of the prophetic soul are made ready by Divine grace to appreciate the 
communication. 

II. Impabtatiok. 1. Thus the prophet, the religious teacher, is a mediator, capable, 
on the one side, of fellowship with God, and on the other of correspondence and com- 
munion with his fellow-men. 2. There are special qualifications, by reason of which 
be can fulfil the commission received ; he should be a man of quick intelligence, ol 
tender sympathy, of dauntless courage, of manifest authority. 3. Yet his chief 
credentials are simple and moral — truthfulness, conscientiousness, and simplicity of 
nature and habit. — ^T. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The summary punishment of official guilt. As a rule, God is extremely 
patient towards human rebellion. He reproves and remonstrates and warns long 
before the executioner appears. Yet sometimes he departs from this course, by a sum- 
mary act of vengeance. The penalty that follows some crimes is swift and sudden. 
The Chaldean nobles who laid an impious snare for Daniel were soon overtaken with 
judgment. When Herod accepted the profane fiattery of his courtiers, he was soou 
consumed with inward disease. Ananias and Sapphira had scarcely completed their 
falsehood when the sword of the executioner fell upon them. At times God starts out 
of his secret place, and suddenly vindicates his outraged majesty. 

I. Mark the flaobanct of bin in pbiests and peoflb. In all probability these 
twenty-five men were the heads, or princes, over the twenty-four courses of the priests, 
while Jaazaniah and Felatiah may have held a yet higher rank in the temple. It may 
be that Pelatiah was high priest or ruler of the temple. Certain it is that they were 
" princes of the people." 1. Their position was one of vast influence. Their opinions 
would be accepted as the opinions of the people. Their example would be widely imi- 
tated. To a large extent, tliey would influence the life and conduct of the population. As 
they had the privilege of access to God, and possessed the means of knowing his will, the 
people would, as a matter of course, look to them for guidance. Profanity or infidelity 
among the chief priests would speedily infect the Hebrew flock. Hence, for others' sakes, 
it behoved them to be prudent, devout, and circumspect. 2. 2%ey had turned Divine 
warning into ridicule. This seems the only satisfactory way of explaining their boast, 
" We dwell securely." " This city is the cauldron, and we are the flesh." Jeremiah, 
who still dwelt in Jerusalem, had seen, in a vision from God, " a seething pot, and its 
mouth was towards the north." The heads of the priestly order had parodied this, 
had treated it as an image of self-security, instead of as an omen of danger. As if they 
had said, " Be it so I This city, with its bastions and gates, impregnable as brass or 
iron, is a cauldron, and as the flesh is safe in the cauldrons, equally so are we!" They 
laughed at every intimation of danger. In the teeth of a hundred warnings, in the 
teeth of a score of defeats and overthrows, they persisted in a conviction of safety, 
liike fools of other nations, they " made a mock at sin." 8. This sensehes hardihood 
led to aggravated crim£. One sin soon breeds a thousand others. They, who had the 
administration of justice, abused their office, and ruled with a sword of terror. Either 
by excessive lenity, in not repressing crime ; or else by excessive tyranny, human life 
was held cheaply in the city. Death was a common occurrence, and excited no horror. 
Civic strifes abounded. The number of the slain increased, and these princes were 
responsible for the foul deed. They were the persons who "had filled the streets with 
the slain." The stains of human blood were upon their skirts. 4. The exact measure eif 
their sin was known. Not an item in their evil deeds was unknown nor unregistered. 
They had tried to conceal their misdeeds, had endeavoured to minimize their offences, 
were attempting to persuade themselves that Jehovah did not trouble about such matters. 
But imagine their surprise and confusion when every iota of offence, ay, and every 
secret evil thought, was fully laid out in the bill of attainder. T^e amount and degree 
of each man's guilt is allotted with scrupulous exactness. 

II. Observe the pbophbt's commission. Ezekiel was employed by God to convey 
the last remonstrance to these princes. 1. Elevation ^ mind U needed to JU men fm 



OH. II. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. 203 

rqA-oving sin. *' The Spirit lifted me up." We live, for the most part, on Buch a low 
Jsvel of spiritual feeling, that we must be "lifted up" in order to see the real wicked- 
ness of sin, in order successfully to remoustrate with sinners. Nothing can really 
" lift us up" to a nobler life but the power of the Holy Ghost. 2. Knowledge is given 
to men for use. No sooner was it revealed to the prophet who were the ringleaders in 
the nation's sin, than at once the Spirit said to him, " Prophesy against them, O son of 
man." Here is work for man which the cherubim cannot do. It is the prerogative of 
man that he can gain access to the understanding, the judgment, the reason, the 
feeling, of his fellow-man. Therefore God uses men to convey his messages of grace 
and admonition to guilty men. All the knowledge of Divine things which we have 
is given us for the advantage of all. " No man liveth unto himself," 3. Divine 
command and Divine strength are given at one and the same time. When the voice 
said to Ezekiel, " Speak!" " the Spirit of the Lord fell upon him." Duty and ability 
always go together. God has never given to man a command which he was unable to 
obey. When God said to Moses, " Go forward 1 " God knew that the sea would divide 
at the fitting time. When Jesus said to the man with a withered hand, " Stretch it 
forth I " he knew that along with the effort would be imparted new strength. Some 
duties may appear formidable to a man who forgets the promised co-operation of Divine 
grace. But whenever a spirit of faith possesses a man, be can say, like Paul, " I can do 
all things through Christ who strengthens me." In a very terse prayer did an ancient 
Father in the Church express this truth, " Give : and then command what thou wilt." 
4. The plainest reproof is the greatest kindness to men. Every accusation of God is 
laid by the prophet before these guilty men. It is a false friendship that conceals any 
part of the truth from our fellows, especially from relatives and kindred. Smooth 
words are not always the coin of affection. We read of one " whose words were softer 
than oil, yet were they drawn swords." Very wisely did David say, " Let the righteous 
reprove me ; it shall be a kindness." It needs an abundance of wisdom, and a deep 
well-spring of love, to speak the whole truth to an erring friend, if we would win him 
back to paths of virtue and piety. The centrifugal force of duty is often greater than 
the centripetal force of kindness. Had Eli been more firm and faithful with his sons, 
he might have saved the ark of God— ay, the whole nation — ^from disaster. We must 
" speak the whole truth in love." 

III. See the attendant bnebgt of God. "It came to pass when I prophe- 
sied, that Pelatiah died." 1. Mow Joolish is carnal security I Walls that seem 
made of brass or granite are weaker than paste-board, unless they have God behind 
them. Foundations built by men are built on nothingness. Belshazzar conceived 
himself secure because the enormous walls of Babylon were about him ; yet " in the 
selfsame night was Belshazzar slain." God's weapons of offence can penetrate easily 
all the poor defences of men. 2. Man's opportunity is hrief. It is an act of mercy 
that God allows any opportunity for escape. Such favour is seldom ever shown by an 
earthly king. Yet sin so blinds men that they imagine the reprieve will last for ever. 
It does not accord with God's wise and gracious plans to announce when the reprieve 
shall absolutely close. Often it closes when least expected. The day of salvation is the 
passing moment — the fleeting now. 3. The retribution of Qod is sometimes tummary. 
Men often persuade themselves that some change of circumstance, some lengthened 
illness, will precede the final stroke. They lean upon a broken reed, an empty 
shadow. " God seeth not as man seeth." He had seen that Pelatiah had reached a 
climax of sin, had received this special messenger with haughty scorn, was hardening 
his heart under this new reproof of Ezekiel. Hence to lengthen out his day of grace 
was waste of mercy, was to encourage others in sin. Therefore it was better that the 
scene of trial should suddenly close. The Lord smote him that he died. " He, that 
beinc often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without 
remedy." 

IV. Mark the benevolent solicitude of God's sebvant. The sudden death of 
Pelatiah corroborated the truth of Ezekiel's message, and vindicated his claim to be 
Jehovah's servant; nevertheless, in this Ezekiel rejoiced not. He was more concerned 
for his Master's glory than for his own, more anxious about Israel's well-being than his 
own advantage. He could consent to be set aside, 'exiled, slain, so long as Israel's 
power and fame could be restored. Such generosity of nature is the best qualification 



204 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xi. 1-25. 

for a true servant of Qod. They who are most like God are the most fitted to do GJod's 
work. Moseg and Paul were eminent examples of this self-disinterestedness ; best oi 
•11, Jesus the Son of God.— D. 

Vers. 14 — 21. — Privilege: apparent or real. Every good thing is liable to abuse, 
and even religion is in danger of degenerating into pernicious superstition. Tbs 
outward forms often remain — even swell into exaggeration — after the inner reality baa 
departed. So the Hebrews in olden time deemed themselves secure against evil, 
because they had still among them the visible temple of Jehovah. They were callous 
to the fact that the only value of the temple arose from its Divine Occupant. As well 
might one cling to a beautiful corpse when the indwelling spirit had fled. 

I. External fbivileqb is only an afpabent good. It is a channel which may 
convey either good or evil, fresh water or foul. It is like a rampart, which is very 
useful in time of battle, if only it be filled with brave soldiers ; if left untenanted, it 
becomes of use to the enemy. The existence of the temple in Jerusalem became a 
snare to the Jews ; it made them haughty, self-confident, boastful. In an earlier day 
the Jewish army deemed itself impregnable on the battle-field, because the ark of God 
was with them. So ni>w the inhabitants of Jerusalem were over-confident of security, 
because the temple of God was there. Towards their brethren in exile they cherished 
an unlovely temper, a repulsive front. They imagined that because thei/ had been 
left in the city, while others had been banished, they were the favourites of God, and 
that those removed to Babylon were removed from the favour and wing of Jehovah. 
Again and again had this remnant in Jerusalem been assured that they also would be 
removed from the city, and would die in the border of Israel ; but they persistently 
refused to believe such distasteful warnings. Their contiuuance in the sacred city 
was an injury to their character. They were fostering the worst forms of self-cono-it 
and self-righteousness and self-exclusiveness. They wanted to shut themselves in, 
and to shut their less-favoured brethren out. So they eaid, " Get you far firom the 
Lord : unto us is this land given in possession." 

II. The loss of external privilege is not nboebsabilt the loss of God's 
presence. When men desert us, God often comes all the nearer on that account. As 
God had endeavoured to teach the Jews (though with little success) that his personal 
jresonce was their only security, so now he assures the dispersed of Israel that, if they 
desired his presence, he would be to them still a " Sanctuary." All that he had been 
to them aroretime in Jerusalem he could be to them in Babylon. After all, their case 
need not he so deplorable. Better to be in Chaldea along with Glod, than in Jerusalem 
without him. They had supposed that God had identified himself with that gorgeous 
ten^ple in Jerusalem — that he was there in a sense in which he could not be elsewhere. 
This error must be unlearnt. Having God with us, we may have all real good. 

III. Severest disaster is often the cradle of blessino. Already it began to 
appear that the defeat and captivity of Israel were needful, yea, were working good in 
the banished ones. Already the exiles had lost faith in idols, and were ashamed of 
their past folly. Already they found that if they returned in spirit and prayer to the 
true God, he would still be their substantial Friend. The faith and courage of Daniel 
and other young men in Babylon indicate the improvement in religious life which 
was budding. The presence of Bzekiel as a teacher among them was an omen for 
good. We have seen how (ch. viii.) the elders of Judah had sought his presence, and 
this, doubtless, that they might hear some word from the Lord. The sights of 
idolatry in that idolatrous land had probably sickened their minds and filled them with 
disgust. Now they sorrowed over lost privileges and lost opportunities. By the side 
of Chebar they " hung their harps in the willows," and wept. The sunshine of pro- 
sperity had spoilt their simple faith and loyalty ; but in the shades of adversity they 
began to learn wholesome lessons. Here their character shall be re-created, their piety 
shall be revitalized. Earthly misfortune is heavenly discipline. 

IV. The highest good is internal. Far better to have a fortune loithin than a 
fortune outside us. This wealth is durable, abiding, inalienable. No amount of money 
can purchase honesty, or courage, or tender sensibility, or heart-purity. 1. Segenera- 
Hon is promisvi. " I will put a new spirit within you." The stony heart shall be 
changed iito a, heart of flesh. Men are often too blind to appreciate the best possessionej 



CH. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 20S 

but when our judgment is enlightened, we perceive that this is the richest hoon God 
can give or man receive. This is an inner fountain of blessing — " a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life." 2. There foUowt a spirit of filial loyoUty. Possess- 
ing this new nature, God's Law will become a delight. The sentiment of David is 
reproduced in them: '* Oh, how I love thy Law 1 " Better still ; they learn to say, like 
Jesus, "I delight to do thy will, God!" The path of obedience now becomes a 
fascination — a flowery mead or a fragrant grove. As the stars of heaven observe their 
proper orbits, so the new-born man spontaneously runs in the statutes of God. Obedi- 
ence is no longer irksome; it is as natural as breathing, as natural as fruit-bearing. 
3. Covenant relationship. " They shall be my people, and I will be their God." This 
covenant secures for the chosen ones the inalienable favour and protection of Gud. 
God obtains, by mutual treaty, a new proprietorship in these people ; they, on their 
part, obtain a proprietorship in God. They have a claim yielded to them by Divine 
condescension — a claim upon God they did not possess before. 4. National unity. " I 
will give them one heart." Division had been one source of weakness in the former 
time. Civic rivalry had been the forerunner of national disaster. Now a better 
feeling shall prevail. " Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Ephraim shall not envy Judah." 
Union of the tribes shall be strength. 5. On this shall follow demolition of idolatry. 
" They shall take away all the detestable things." The more we know God — his 
Fatherhood, love, and mercy — ^the more we see the folly and vanity of idols. The 
baubles that pleased a child are despised when we become men. Our growing love to 
God will make us intolerant of every rival. As the burnt child dreads the fire, so the 
restored Hebrews abhorred idols. The man who has a clean heart desires also a clean 
home. Real reformation begins within — at the centre, and works outward. 

V. God's government deals with the individual man. Such is the series of 
precious donations God engaged to bestow upon his afflicted people in exile ; yet their 
repentance and submission was the pivot on which all good depended. If one here and 
there still clung to the old idolatry, that one should be excluded from all share in the 
nation's regeneration. His sin shall bear its proper fruit. The new covenant was to 
be personal a^ well as national ; for God will not overlook the individtuil in the crowd. 
" Each one shall give account of himself unto God." The one amons the guests 
destitute of the wedding garment was in a moment espied by the King. Not a solitary 
culprit shall escape the scrutiny of God's eye, nor the operation of God's Law. As the 
light of day penetrates every chink and comer of our globe, so the light of God's 
righteousness will disclose every sin of man. — D. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — 2%« presumptuous security of sinners exhibited and condemned. 
" Moreover the Spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the Lord's 
house," etc. 

1. The pebscmptttous and false SECtniiTT op binnebs exhibited. (Vers. 1 — 3.) 
The twenty-five men here mentioned are not the same as those mentioned in ch. viii. 
16 ; for already they have been slain in vision. In both places the number is a round 
one. And in this place it is clear that they were leaders of the people ; for they gave 
counsel unto them, and two princes of the people were in the midst of them. Theii" 
conduct shows tons: 1. Sinners boastinr/ their security in defiance of the declarations 
of the Lord hy his prophets. Some of the exiles in Babylon had looked forward to a 
speedy return to their own land. Jeremiah the prophet sent to them a letter to cori-ect 
this error, saying, "Build ye houses, and dwell in them ;" and assuring them that not 
until they had accomplished seventy years of exile would they be permitted to return 
to the land of their fathers (Jer. xxix. 1 — 14). In the same letter he threatened those 
that were left at Jerusalem with " the sword, the famine, and tlie pestilence." And 
these five and twenty men, in mockery of the words of the prophet, said, " It is not 
near to build houses." They encouraged themselves and others in the opinion that, 
however it might be with the captives in Babylon, they were safe enough in Jerusalem, 
and need not trouble themselves about building houses. Moreover, Jeremiah had seen 
in vision a seething pot, or cauldron, with its face toward the north, which symbolized the 
coming of the kingiioms of the north against Jerusalem and against the cities of Judah, 
and taking them (Jer. i. 13 — 16). And in derision of this prophecy these twenty-five 
men said, " Thit is the cauldron, and we are the flush." As the flesh within the caiildroD 



209 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xl 1-25. 



is safe from the surrounding fire, so they regarded themselves as safe within their city 
walls, whatever forces may rage outside them. They deemed their position a secure 
one, and would trust to their city walls and defensive arrangements, rather than heed 
the words of the Prophets Jeremiah and Ezekiel. In most ages there have been 
presumptuous and profane scoifers at the threatenings of Divine judgments (cf. 2 Pet. 
iii. 3, 4). And in our own age there are many who persist in sin, notwithstanding the 
warnings addressed to them in the sacred Scriptures. And if their own conscience also 
remonstrates with and warns them, they make light of its admoniiions. They seem 
to think that they can sin on with impunity, that somehow they will escape the 
natural consequences of their trangressions (cf. Jer. v. 12). 2. Sinners in influential 
positions forming wicked plans and proffering wicked counsel, and so misleading others. 
" These are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in ihis city." They 
entered into political intrigues, and formed plans of resistance against the enemy in 
direct opposition to the will of God expressed by Jeremiah (xxi. 8 — 10 ; xxvii. 8 — 18 ; 
xxxviii. 17 — 23). By following this course, these five and twenty men had brought 
calamity and slaughter upon many whom they had misled (ver. 6). Sin, mischievous 
in any one, is especially mischievous in those who, by reason of their position and 
influence, lead others astray. When leaders in society by evil and perilous examples, 
or politicians or statesmen by unwise or unrighteous speeches or measures, or authors 
by injurious books, mislead or corrupt others, it is unspeakably pernicious. Great is 
the responsibility attached to great influence, and great is the guilt when that influence 
is exerted for evil.' 

II. The peesumptcods and fame SEcmtiTT of sinners condemned. (Vers. 
4 — 13.) Notice: 1. ITie Divine knowledge of their evil designs. "Thus saith the 
Lord ; Thus have ye said, house of Israel : for I know the things that come into your 
mind, eyery one of them ; " or, as Hengstenberg translates, " And that which riseth up 
in your mind I know." To the Omniscient all their thoughts and purposes were 
fully known (cf. Deut. xxxi. 21 ; Ps. cxxxix. 1 — 6 ; John ii. 24, 25 ; Acts i. 24 ; and 
see a homily on this verse which appears below). 2. The disastrous consequences of 
their evil designs. < " Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the 
streets thereof with the slain." At this time bloodshed and murder were terribly 
prevalent in Jernsalem, and were amongst the chief crimes mentioned by Ezekiel as 
calling for the Divine judgment upon the city and its guilty inhabitants (cf. ch. viii. 
17 ; ix. 9). And in addition, " the slain" includes those who would be killed " by the 
Chaldeans, already slain from the standpoint taken up in the discourse of God." And 
they are said to be the slain of " the men that devise mischief," because their deaths 
were a consequence of their evil counsels. Who can guage the miseries that arise in 
every age from the evil counsels of incompetent, unprincipled, or wicked leaders of 
men? 3. The fatal issue of their evil designs. (Vers. 8 — 13.) Here are several points 
which call for brief notice. (1) The utter failure of their boasted security in the city. 
" I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, 
and will execute jndaiments among you." (2) Their slaughter in the execution of the 
just judgment of God. " Ye have feared the sword ; and I will bring a sword upon 
you, saith the Lord God. ... Ye shall fall by the sword ; I will judge you in the 
border of Israel." And this pro|iheoy was fulfilled with remarkable fidelity. After 
they had taken Jerusalem, the Chaldean army made prisoners of many of the chief 
men; they also captured King Zedekiah as he was endeavouring to escape by flight; 
and they carried them " to Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, to Riblah in the land of 
Hamatli," on the northern border of Israel ; and there the King of Babylon slew the 
princes and nobles of Judah, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in 
chains, to carry him to Babylon (2 Kings xxv. 18 — 21 ; Jer. xxxix. 4 — 7 ; Iii. 8 — 11). 
(3) Their recognition of Jehovah as the true and supreme God when it was too late. 
" And ye shall know that I am the Lord " (we have noticed these words in ch. vi. 7, 
10). "It is lamentable," says Hengstenberg, " if we must fcain the knowledge of God 
by our own destruction, if he in whom we live, and move, and are, is first recognized by 
the strokes which break our own head. The knowledge has here, moreover, no moral 
import. It is a mere passive knowledge, forced upon the ungodly, unconnected with 
repentance." (4) The awful earnest of the fulfilment of the words of the prophet. 
" And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died." In 



OH. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 207 

vision Ezekiel beheld the death of Pelatiah; and it Beems to us that he died, in fact 
when this prophecy was made Icnown unto him. " This incident, whose awful character 
is attested to us by the impression upon Ezekiel, symbolizes prophetically the certainty 
in actual fact of the judgment of death on the others also (cf. Jer. xxviii. 17)" 
(Schroder), And so the issue of their presumptuous security and wicked counsel was 
to be their violent and ignominious death. We have in this an illustration of the issue 
of persistent wickedness. " The soul that sinneth, it shall die." " The wages of sin is 
death." " Sin, when it is full grown, bringoth forth death." 

III. The soitROW of a godlt man in view of God's judoments upon the wicked. 
" Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said. Ah, Lord God ! 
wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel ? " To Ezekiel the death of Pelatiah 
was an awful pledge of the death of all the others against whom he had prophesied ; 
and it so deeply affected his spirit as to cause him to cry out thus to God (we have 
noticed these words on ch. ix. 8). " Sudden or great judgments do put the saints and 
servants of God upon humble, earnest, and argumentative prayer. Humble, ' Then fell 
I down upon my face;' earnest, 'and cried with a loud voice;' argumentative, 'Ah, 
Lord God I wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel ? ' " (Greenhill). 

Conclusion. Learn : 1. The peril of presumption in any course which is opposed to 
the will of Ood. 2. The great worth to a people of wise and upright leaders. — W. J. 

Ver. 5. — Go^s knowledge of our thoughts, " I know the things that come into your 
mind, every one of them." Hengstenberg translates, " And that which riseth up in 
your mind I know." The fact thus stated is — 

I. Most reasonable. 1. From the nature of Ood. Grant that God is infinite, and 
the statement of our text must be true. Nothing can be so great as to overmatch his 
comprehension ; nothing so small as to escape his notice. Our Lord declared the Divine 
interest in the smallest and lowliest things (Matt. vi. 26 — 30 ; x. 29, 30). It is 
unphilosophical to think that even the smallest thing is in any way unknown to him. 
It is limiting his knowledge. 2. From the nature of the human mind. (1) It is the 
most wonderful creation of God. Man can reflect, reason, anticipate, imagine. " Gud 
created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him." We have reason, 
conscience, affection, adoration. The greatness of the human mind appears very clearly 
when we consider its achievements. Mention some of them. Its capacity and 
impulse for progress also indicate its greatness. " It never rests, it has never attained, 
it is never perfect. Its law is progress. A point which yesterday was invisible is its 
goal to-day, and will be its starting-post to-morrow." (2) It is the sphere of the most 
wonderful operations. We see much of God in his operations in matter; e.g. power, 
wisdom, constancy. We see more of him in his operations in mind ; e.g. more marvellous 
power, profounder wisdom, richer goodness. In the government of mind the righteous- 
ness, truth, and love of God are manifested. We see most of God in his dealings with 
sinful, disordered minds. The sin of man occasioned the most glorious display of the 
Divine mind and will. We see the wisdom and love of God in his method of reconciling, 
saving, lost men as they were never manifested before. I do not wonder, then, that 
God knows everything that arises in our mind, for our mind is his most wonderful 
crccition, and his most wonderful creation disorganized, ruined ; and he is engaged in 
saving it. How deep must be his interest in it! 

II. Most wonderful. Not because of anything in God as a difSculty or hindrance 
to this vast and minute knowledge ; but : 1. Because of the intellectual quality of " the 
things that come into our mind." How insignificant, trifling, vain, many of them are I 
How few really great thoughts ever rise in our mind ! We know how trying it is to be 
compelled to listen to the trivial talk of an ill-furnished mind ; to hear all the paltry 
details of matters in which we have no interest or concern. Tet God knows all our 
petty, trifling, vain thoughts. Not one of them escapes him. How wonderful ! 2. 
Because of the moral quality of " the things that come into our mind" Not only are 
many of our thoughts insignificant and trifling, many are also mean, corrupt, and sinful. 
It is painful to become acquainted with the ungenerous or base thoughts and feelings of 
another's mind and heart. We shrink with loathing from the contemplation of the - 
malicious or cruel designs of any one. In our own selves there is much that we would 
not that any one should gaze upon, or any mind know, lo deeply are we ashamed of it. 



208 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xi. 1—26, 

Yet God knows eyery dark thought and guilty memory; we can hide nothing from 
him. He regards all sinful thoughts and feelings with unutterahle hatred ; yet he 
knows them every one. But while hating our sin with unappeasaUe hatred, he loves 
us with unspeakable love. He looks at our thoughts and weighs them, hecause they 
are ours, and he would save us from the vain and sinful ones, and inspire and strengthen 
within us the wise and good ones. His love for us is as great as his knowledge of us, 
and leads him to interest himself in all that concerns us. 

III. Most admonitokt. 1. No thoughts are unimportant. Since the Lord takes 
knowledge of, and is so deeply interested in, all that arises in our mind, nothing there 
can be trivial. You think that your foolish or vain thoughts are of no importance; 
that they are not like words or actions which affect others ; that thoughts influence no 
one so long as they remain unexpressed. But your thoughts give tone and colour to 
your mind and character. To a great extent they arise out of your character, and they 
react upon your character according to your treatment of them. If you foster the 
impure thought, it will make you more impure ; if you entertain the trivial thought, 
it will increase your triviality. Your mind is God's temple. Should you not take 
heed how you treat it? 2. All our thoughts should he such as he approves. They 
should be: (1) True. He exhorts us to "buy the truth, and sell it not;" to "prove 
all things; hcild fast that which is good." He is himself the " God of truth." Jesus 
Christ is "the Truth." We should cultivate the true in thought in every department 
of knowledge and of life. Endeavour to think only those thoughts which accord 
with the reality of things. Be true. (2) Pure. Shun with loathing the unchaste 
desire or impure feeling. You cannot prevent the low or foul suggestion ; but you are 
free tc welcome such suggestion, or to shrink from it with repugnance. Welcome it, 
and it will coirupt you. Resist it, and it cannot contaminate you. If you would 
bu free from impure thoughts, you will gain your end most swiftly and surely by 
cultivating pure and beautiful ones. If your thoughts be true and pure, God will 
smile approval, etc. Be pure. (3) Earnest. Let not your true and holy thoughts 
he dreamy, visionary, impractical. We are in a world of toil and trial, sin and sorrow, 
sickness and death, a world that cries for help; and God demands earnest thought 
with a view to noble life and work. 

Conclusion. 1. Sere is warning to the wicked. God knows all your life and 
thought. You cannot hide anything from him (cf. Job xxxiv. 21, 22 ; Ps. cxxxiz. 
1 — 6 ; Heb. iv. 13). And he who knows us will also judge us. " Cleanse thou me 
from secret faults." " The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin." 2. Here 
is eneouragement to the good. God knows your thoughts, devices, purposes, motives. 
He never misunderstands you. If, like Joh, you are misjudged by man, you may say 
with him, " But he knoweth the way that I take." Therefore be encouraged.— W. J. 

Vers. 14 — 20. — A suffering people scorned hy man and comforted hy Ood. " Again 
the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, thy brethren," etc. 

I. A SUFFERING PEOPLE 8C0KNED Bt THBIE BRETHREN WHO THOUGHT THEMSELVES 

BECUBE. (Ver. 15.) A considerable number of the fellow-countrymen of Ezekiel 
were, like him, suffering the privations and sorrows of exile; and the people that 
still remained in Jerusalem, instead of pitying the exiles, despised and insulted them. 
They spake of them : 1. As rejected of God. " Unto whom the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem have said, Get you far from the Lord ; " or, " Be ye far from Jehovah." These 
proud dwellers in Jerusalem thought that the presence of the Lord Jehovah was 
confined to the temple in that city, that the captives in Babylon were cut off from his 
presence, and rejected by him. They judged from outward appearances, and concluded 
that, because they were still in their own land and in the sacred city, while their 
brethren were in exile, they were the favoured people of God, and their brethren were 
cast off by him. And they came to this conclusion not sorrowfully because of the 
privations of their brethren, but with Pharisaic self-complacency and cruel disdain. 
2. As having no portion in the land of Israel. The inhabitants of Jerusalem assumed 
that they who had gone into captivity had forfeited their estntes, and that those estates 
should become the property of those who remained in the country. They said, " Unto 
us is this land given in possession." That which they Unjustly denied to their exiled 
brethren they claimed for themselves. They arrogated to themselves an exclusive 



OH. XI. 1—25.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 209 

position as a people near unto the Lord, and exclnrire possesrion of the land which he 
had given unto the whole of the Israelites. By thair spirit and conduct these inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem remind us of some in our own age who " profess and call themselves 
Christians," and who claim that only in their community can salvation be found, that 
only as administered amongst them are the sacramejats valid, and that the Church of 
which they are members is the only true one. They could heartily join with the self- 
righteous people of Jerusalem in saying, " The temple of the Lord, the temple of the 
Lord, the temple of the Lord, are these." Bnt not they who think themselves holiest 
and nearest to God, or who have the greatest reputation for religion amongst men, are 
most highly esteemed by him, but rather " the poor iu spirit," the " lowly in heart," 
" The high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy, dwells with 
him that is of a contrite and humble spirit." It was not the proud Pharisee, but the 
penitent publican, that " went down to his house justified : ... for every one that 
exalteth himself shall be humbled ; but he that humbleth himself shall be exalted." 

II. A ^UFFEBINO PEOPLE VINDIOATED AND COHFOBTED BT THE LOBD GoD. (Vers. 

16 — ^20.) The despised captives are vindicated and consoled by several gracious and 
encouraging assurances, which we will briefly notice. 1. ITuit they were the true people 
of Ood. " Son of man, thy bretliren, thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and all 
the house of Israel wholly." The Prophet Jeremiah had already declared that the 
Israelites who were in exile were better in the sight of God than those who remained 
in Jerusalem (Jer. xxiv.). And now Ezekiel is told that his true brethren, brethren in 
spirit as well as according to the flesh, are to be found, not in Jerusalem, but among the 
exiles by the river Chebar. To them, as Hengstenberg points out, the future of the 
kingdom of God belonged, while " those who remained in Jerusalem, notwithstanding 
their high pretensions, were doomed to destruction." " All the bouse of Israel wholly, 
as contrasted with " the inhabitants of Jerusalem," is to be understood as a general 
statement, since there was in Jerusalem a godly remnant (ch. ix. 4 — 6), and amongst 
the exiles there were some who were not faithful to the Lord Jehovah (ch. xiv. 1 — 5). 
But, in the main, the true Israel was to be looked for, not in Jerusalem, but among the 
exiles in Babylon. How different in this respect was the Divine estimate from that of 
the Pharisaic dwellers in the sacred city I And may it not be in our day that to him 
who " seeth not as man seeth," not they who boast their privileges and piety, but the 
despised and lowly, are the genuine Israel of Qoi 1 2. That they should find in the 
Lord Ood ample compensation for their lost privileges. " Therefore say. Thus saith 
the Lord Ood ; Although I have cast them far off among the heathen, and although I 
have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little Sanctuary in 
the countries where they shall come." It is more correct to translate, " I will be to them 
a Sanctuaty for a little " time or season, referring to the comparatively short period of 
their captivity. Though they were far removed from their " holy and beautiful house," 
yet they should have communion with God ; for he himself would be present with 
them, and the realization of his presence transforms any place into a hallowed templet. 
The people of Israel were too prone to regard the presence of Ck>d as confined to the 
temple at Jerusalem, or at most to the Holy Land. Under this impression, the Prophet 
" Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord." The Lord God, 
in assuring them that he would be to them as a sanctuary during their exile, corrects 
this error, and gives the germ of the precious truth that the devout and humble spirit 
may offer acceptable worship and hold blessed communion with him anywhere. And 
in this assurance we have an anticipation of the inspiring declaration of our Lord, 
** The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in 
spirit and in truth," ete. (John iv. 23, 24). In the presence of Ch>d with them as a 
Banctuaiy the exiles would find compensation for their enforced absence from their 
homes and from the temple and its ordinances. We have here a tost of godly 
character. When the heart is truly and thoroughly right with God it finds compen- 
sation ia him for every privation and loss. The assurance that we hare him for our 
Portion will sustain and satisfy us in time of sorest need, and enaU* na t* ling — 

"Jesus, to whom I fly. 

Doth all my wishes fill. 
What though created stieaina an diy, 
I have the Fountain still. 

IZXKISIk F 



210 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. xi. 1—25, 

Stripped of mine earthly flriends, 
I find them all in One ; 
And peace and J07 that never ends, 
And hearen in Ohrist begun." 

(0. Wesley.) 

8. That they ihoM he restored to their country and privileges by the Lord God. 
" Therefore say. Thus saith the Lord Grod ; I will even gather you from the people, and 
assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the 
land of Israel." The inhabitants of Jerusalem said, " Unto us is this land given in 

S)8sossion ; " but in answer thereto the Lord says to the exiles, " I will give you the 
nd of Israel." And the promise was fulfilled when " the Lord stirred up the spirit of 
Cyrus Eing of Persia " to proclaim permission to them to return to their own land and 
to rebuild the temple of the Lord Jehovah — a permission of which more than forty 
thousand availed themselves. "It is well for us," says Matthew Henry, "that men's 
severe censures cannot cut us off from God's gracious promises. There are many that 
will be found to have a place in the holy land whom uncharitable men, by their mono- 
polies of it to themselves, have secluded from it." 4. That they should receive from the 
Lord the highest spiritmd favours. (Yers. 18 — 20.) Here is the assurance unto them 
of four spiritual blessings. (1) Unity of heart towards God. " I will give them one 
heart, and I will put a new spirit within you." Their heart had long been divided 
between the true God and idols, but it should be fixed upon him. By means of the 
discipline of the Captivity, their hearts were united to fear his Name. Such, in fact, 
has been the case ; for since their return from Babylon they have not bowed down to 
idols. (2) Tenderness of heart towards God. " And I will take the stony heart out of 
their flesh, and give them an heart of flesh." By resisting his will and Word and by 
persisting in sin they bad hardened their hearts ; and he promised to give them a heart 
" soft and susceptible of the impressions of Bivine grace. The promise is essentially 
Messianic, although a beginning of its fulfilment is already to be recognized in the 

eiriod immediately after the return from the exile" (Hengstenberg). Resistance of 
ivine influence and rebellion against Divine commands still harden human hearts. 
"Take heed . . , lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin." St. 
Paul speaks of some who have so hardened their heart as to be " past feeling " (Eph. 
iv. 18, 19). It is only God by his grace that can change the stone to flesh, and make 
the hard heart tender in penitence and piety. (3) Conformity of conduct to the will of 
Qod. This follows as a consequence of the change of heart. The renewed heart leads 
to a reformed life. Their reformation had two chief aspects — the renunciation of their 
sins, particularly the complete severance of themselves from idolatry (ver. 18), and 
their positive compliance with the holy will of God. This was the end aimed at in 
putting the new spirit within them ; " That they may walk in my statutes, and keep 
mine ordinances." The piety of the heart must and will be seen in the practice of the 
life. If the fountain be purified, the stream wilt be pure. (4) Confirmation in the most 
exalted and blessed relationship. " And they shall be my people, and I will be their 
God." This follows in natural order what has gone before. By the renewal of their 
hearts he restores them to himself as his chosen people ; and by the obedience of their 
lives to him they testify that he is their God. This relationship is the richest of all 
blessings; it comprises all needful good, and crowns every other blessing. If "the 
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall want nothing." "If God be for us, who can be against 
us ? " " Whom have I in heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth that 1 desire 
beside thee. My flesh and my heart faileth : but God is the Strength of my heart, 
and my Portion for ever."— W, J. 

Ver. 16. — Ood the Sanctuary of his people. " Tet will I be to them aa • little 
Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come." Instead of " as a little Sanctuary," 
it is better to translate, "a Sanctuary for a little." The assurance given in the text 
seents strange at first. The Lord Jehovah will be a Sanctuary to his people. He is the 
grand Object of worship: how, then, can he be the place of worship? The exiles in 
Babylon were far removed from all the joyous privileges of public worship ; from their 
temple, with all its precious and sacred associations, they had been ruthlessly sundered. 
They had long fors^en God, and at length they became a prey to their enemies. And 



OH, XL 1—25.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 211 

in this idolatrous country, while the inhabitants of Jerusalem were dividing them, and 
boasting their own security, Jehovah promises the captives that he himself will be to 
them a Sanctuary, and in himself he would compensate them for the loss of their 
religious privileges. All those blessings which they had been accustomed to associate 
with the sanctuary he would bestow upon them. 

I, The banotuaby was a flaoe of befuob and safett. Through eentures men 
bad been accustomed to take refuge in sanctuaries from the enemies or persecutors by 
whom they were pursued, and there every life was held to be inviolably secure. The 
most implacable foe was compelled to recognize the security afforded by the holy place 
(cf^ 1 Kings i. 50 — 53). So Jehovah promises to Israel to be to them a sacred and 
inviolate asylum from all dangers in the land of their captivity (cf. Isa. viii. 14 ; xzzii. 
2 ; Ps. is. 9 ; xlvi. 1, 7, 11). The Lord was a Sanctuary for his scattered people — a 
Sanctuary from the storm of persecution, from the oppressions of their conquerors, and 
from the rage of their enemies. He still sustains this relation to his people. He is 
•till "a Befuge for us." How blessed that in a life so stormy as man's often i^ God is 
a Sanctuary unto him I Let us hide ourselves in him. 

n. The sakotuabt was a place of comuunion with God. There God manifested 
himself to his people, and made communications of his will to them (cf. Exod. xxv. 22 ; 
Numb. vii. 89). So that the promise to be a Sanctuary unto his people was a promise 
of communion with himself; that, though they were driven from the temple of their 
fatherland, yet in their exile God would still commune with them. This assurance 
involves more than we sometimes recognize. If we commune with God we must 
receive his thoughte, "How precious are thy thoughts unto me, God I" etc. 
Communion with God involves the realization of his graciotis presence. In fellowship 
there is always friendliness. " Henceforth I call you not servants," etc. (John xv. 15). 
How inspiring and blessed it is to feel the friendly presence of God with us ! We may 
always have this sanctuary of communion with the Highest. In all the rush and roar 
and turmoil of a busy and troubled life we may realize the safety and comfort of the 
sanctuary of the Divine presence. We may have a Gerizim or a Zion which none can 
behold but God and the angels. We may have a holy of holies in our poor hearts, 
which we may carry with us into the Babylon of the world's business and strife. 
III. Let us take hold of the principle involved in the text, which we take to be 

THAT THE LOSS OF EVEN THE MOST PEECIOUS POSSESSIONS IS HADE UP TO US BY GoD OUT 
OF THE FULNESS WHICH DWBLLKTH IN HIM, IP HE IS OUB PoBTION. The promise of the 

text involved as much to the exiles in Babylon. If the Lord is our Portion, he will 
afford us blessed compensations for any privations we may be called to sustain. Let 
OS take illustrations of this. There are times when some of the people of God are 
subjected to loss of property; their natural comforts are much diminished; many of 
the enjoyments of life, which they bad regarded as essential to their happiness and 
almost to their life, are taken away; and they have painful misgivings as to how they 
■hall bear these privations in the future. We dread to meet the shock of reduced 
position and straitened circumstances. But when the shock comes, we find full 
compensation in God. His grace susfaina us. His peace grows within us. His com- 
forts delight our sonL He is " the Strength of our heart, and our Portion for ever." 
We are enabled to say, with St. Paul, " I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, there- 
with to be content," etc. (Phil. iv. 11—13). The Divine compensations are also given 
in painful hereavemints. In your home there was a beautiful and beloved child j you 
held that child as a most precious gift of God ; your very worship of God became more 
impassioned and devout as you thought of that living and dear revelation of his good- 
ness to you. Your child was to you " a little sanctuary ; " through his beloved life you 
drew nearer to God. Yet God took your child away from you ; and oh, the anguish 
of your desolate heartl Perhaps you were in danger of thinking more of the child than 
of God, of loving the gift more than the Giver, of prizing the sanctuary more than the 
God of the sanctuary. And so God took away the child whom you almost idolized. 
At first you were sorely afficted, but God said, " I will be to thee a Sanctuary," and 
gradually the troubled heart became still, and was calmed and comforted. And now 
by his own loTe God makes up to you for your great loss. And in coming years, when 
you imagine yon will lack the tender filial ministries you had anticipated from your 
child, he will more than supply the deficiencies by the arrangemeuts of his own infinit* 



212 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. [oh. xt 1—26. 

tenderness and care. God also compensatea his people for the loss of rdigious privileges. 
In his providence he sometimes removes us by sickness from the services of the 
sanctuary, and we have a season of weary waiting for bis restoring hand. We 
anticipate with sadness the Lord's day, when bis people will be worshipping in the 
courts of bis house, and we suffering through the lonely hours at home. Bat the day 
arrives, and with it a joyous disappointment. God himself becomes to us a Sanctuary. 
He compensates us for the loss of psalmody by inspiring diviner music in our heart, for 
the loss of "common worship " by giving us deeper spiritual communion with himself 
and with all holy souli, and for the loss of sacred ministrations by the immediate and 
blessed ministry of his Holy Spirit to our spirit. And so the day we dreaded was 
rich in present blessing, and bright with gleams of the glory that awaits us in the 
future. Or in his providence God removes us to a district where we are separated from 
the influence of a generous and godly friend, or from the ministry of a valued teacher 
or pastor. Our regret is very keen, our misgivings as to our future progress are serious, 
and perhaps our dissatisfaction with providential arrangements is in danger of becoming 
great. But in this also the Lord becomes to us a Sanctuary. To our increased need he 
gives more of his infinite fulness. And we find that by blessing us with another teacher 
or pastor, or by means of the devout and earnest study of his holy Word, or by the 
ministry of good literature, or by the immediate action of his Holy Spirit upon our 
spirit, he compensates us for all our losses. Herein is one of the great blessednesses 
of the portion of the godly. As our need grows, God reveals unto us his own infinite 
BufBciency more and more fully, and out of that sufficiency he giveth more grace. The 
more loud and fierce the storm, the more closely does he enfold us in bis inviolate 
protection. The more numerous and urgent our requirements, the more abundant and 
prompt are his supplies. Make him your Portion, and infinite resources are yours (cf. 
Ps. Ixxxiv. 11 ; Lam. iiL 24 ; Matt, vi 33 ; 1 Tim. iv. 8).— W. J. 

Ver. 19. — A united heart the gift qf Ood. " I will give them one heart." The exiles 
in Babylon, to whom the text was addressed, had long wandered from God into idolatry. 
Their heart had not been fixed or united. The promise was fulfilled in their case in 
this sense — that since their return from captivity they have never lapsed into idolatry. 

L This fbouibe is apflioable to the Chbistian Church. Oneness of interest 
and heart in the welfare of a Church on the part of its members is essential to its 
prosperity. 1. Oneness of heart in brotherly unity is necessary. " Behold, how good 
and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity I " etc. (Ps. cxxxiii.). To 
secure this we must exercise mutual forbearance and charity, and cultivate an afiectionate 
regard for each other. 2. Oneness of desire/or the prosperity of the work qf Ood is 
necessary. There is reason to fear that this desire is not very deep on the part of some 
Church-members, who very often grumble at what others are doing, and do nothing 
themselves. If we have this desire, we shall take it to God in prayer. We shall "keep 
not silence, and give him no rest," etc. (Isa. IxiL 6, 7). If we have this desire, it wiU 
lead us to personal efforts to attain its fulfilment. To retain this unity of desire we 
must be prepared to waive personal opinions as to minor methods, keeping the eye 
steadily fixed upon the grand objects which we are aiming at. Mutual concessions are 
necessary to abiding unity. In seeking unity in the Church let us trust the promise of 
the text, and use appropriate means to secure it. 

II. The text is applicable to diffbbent classes of personal character. 
Examples of hearts divided and purposes unsettled are to be found in every province 
of life— in business, in mental culture, in religion. Yet everywhere the thing is evil 
Division is weakness. " The rolling stone gathers no moss." •' A double-minded man 
is unstable in all his ways." One-heartedness is essential to progress in anything. 
The men who have attained marked success in any pursuit have followed it steadily 
and persistently. Concentration is power. "Unity is strength" everywhere and in 
everything. Let us specify certain characters to whom the text is applicable. L Ta 
the insincere. There are persons who are not true, whose thoughts and words do not 
agree, whose appearance and reality are not harmonious. Our text is a promise for 
them if they will receive it. The man of renewed heart is honest, true. The mere 
form of godliness, or profession of discipleship to Christ, will avail us nothing. UnleM 
we have the life and poirer of Christ, the name of Christian will be worse than worthless 



0H.xn. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 



213 



to as. The genmne Christian is sincere and upright. 2. To those who are endeavowing 
to " terve Ood and mammon," It is impossible to be at once devoted to woridly ends 
and to God. A woridly spirit is incompatible with real religion. The spirit of the 
world is opposed to the spirit of Clirist. One or other must be supreme in us. We 
cannot yield ourselves to the pursuit of the pleasures, honours, or richei of this world, 
and to the service of the Lord Jesus at the same time. It is imposdble to combine the 
two things. God promises to give us one heart — a heart undivided and thoroughly 
fixed upon himselt Are we willing to receive the blessing, and to receive it now ? 3. 
To those who " halt between two opinions" Many are wavering and undecided as to 
personal religion. They have not resolved to try to combine the service of " God and 
mammon ; " but they have not elected whom they will serve. They have often been 
religiously impressed, but never decided. They have often felt the supreme importance 
of religioD, but have not yielded to its claims. They are wavering and undecided. 
They feel without wisely acting. They have religious emotion, but not religious 
resolution. They procrastinate the great choice till " a more convenient season." They 
will not take the decisive step. They are not one-hearted. Now, they may obtain 
a united heart from God. The hesitation which is so injurious and perilous to them 
would be banished if they would accept God's promise in the test, and decide by liis 
help to serve him. He would " give them one heart," and sufficient strength to perform 
their resolution. And then they could sing, with David, " My heart is fixed, God, 
my heart is fixed : I will sing and give praise." Thus the text promises to us unity 
and thoroughness of heart. Our own weakness we know ; and how prone to unsteadi- 
ness, change, and division our hearts are. But " God is greater than our heart," and 
he proffers to us the unity and stability which we need. In the strength of his promise 
let us pray, " Unite my heart to fear thy Name," and let ua consecrate ourselves 
unreservedly unto him. — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER Xn 



. Ver. 1. — The word of the lord, etc. Thia 
formula, so familiar in Isaiah and Jeremiah, 
appears for the first time in Ezekie), but 
occurs repeatedly afterwards, especially in 
this chapter (vers. 8, 17, 21, 26, and again ch. 
xiii. I ; xiv. 2, el al.'). The teaching by " the 
visions of God" ceases, and that of direct 
message or symbolio acts is resumed. In 
each case the point aimed at was'the same. 
The people who heard the one or saw the 
other were to be taught how utterly ground- 
less was the hope that Jerusalem could hold 
out against its enemies. The interval be- 
tween the two was probably a short one, 
and the new teaching, we may conjecture, 
had its starting-point in the prophecies of a 
speedy deliverance which were current both 
at Jerusalem and among the exiles at 
Babylon. 

Ver. 2. — ■Which have eyes to see, etc. We 
note the words in their relation both to like 
utterances in the past (Isa. vi. 9 ; xlii. 20), 
and by Ezekiel's contemporary (Jer. v. 21), 
and in the future by our Lord (Matt. xiii. 13), 
by St. John (John xii. 40), and lastly by 
St. Paul (Acts xxvUi. 27). The thought 
and phrase were naturally as ever-recurring 
as the fact. 

Vers. 8 — 7. — Prepare thee stuff for remov- 



ing, etc ; better, eqatpment for a Jommey, 
with the implied thought that it is the 
journey of one going into exile. " Bag and 
baggage," all the household goods which 
an exile could take with him (Exod. xii. 11, 
84 may supply an illustration), were to be 
brought out in broad daylight and piled up 
opposite his door. Then in the twilight 
(Bevised Version, tn (he dark, and so in 
vers. 7, 12) he was to go forth, not by the 
door of his house, but by breaking through 
the wall (with such walls as those of ch. 
xiii. 11 the process would not be difficult), 
as a man might do who was escaping secretly 
from a city through the gates of which he 
dared not pass (ver. 5), and was to start 
with his travelling chattels uponhisshoulder. 
Lastly (ver. 6), as the strangest feature of 
all, he was to go forth with his faoe covered, 
as one who wished to avoid recognition, as 
one also who could not see one step of the 
way before him. This, it is intimat^ would 
startle even the most careless, and in this 
way he would become, as he had been before 
in like symbolio acts (ch. iv., v.), as Isaiah 
(xx. 2) and Jeremiah (xxviL 2) had been 
before him, a sign unto the honse of Israel. 
Vers. 8, 9. — The commands were obeyed, 
and the prophet waited for the next inspira- 
tion, the next word of the Lord. It would 
seem as if be had himself done what he 



2U 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIBL. [oh, xil 1— 28. 



was told to do without knowing what it 
meant. It was not till night had passed to 
morning that, he was ahle to answer the 
qncBtion which the exiles asked him. What 
doestthont At last the answer came. 

Vera. 10, 11. — This burden concemeth the 
prince in Jerusalem; litemlly, the prince 
if ihi$ burden in Jerusalem. The word 
" burden," in the sense of " prophecy," so 
common in Isaiah and Jeremiah and other 
prophets, as Hosea (viii. 10) and Nahum 
(i. 1), is used by Ezekiel here only. Possibly 
ho on the whole avoided it, as having 
fallen into discredit through its constant use 
by the false prophets (Jer. xxiii. S3 — 38), 
and preferred the formula of " the word of 
Jehovah." As interpreted by Jer. xxziz. 
4 and 2 Kings xxv, 4, the "prince" ia 
Zedekiah. Possibly Ezekiel avoided the 
title " king," as seeing in him one who was 
a ruler de facto, but not a king de jure. 
The facts related in Jor. xxxix. 4 exactly 
correspond with the symbolic act. Zede- 
kiah and his men of war escape from the 
city by night, " by the way of the king's 
giirden, by the gate between the two walls," 
probably enough with faces covered, ai 
David's M'as in his flight (2 Sam. xv. 30), 
to avoid detection, or as a sign of mourning, 
and through some freshly made exit from 
the palace. The further significance of the 
covered face is found in the fact that Zede- 
kiah was blinded at Kiblah by Nebuchad- 
nezzar's orders, and from that time could 
not see the ground on whiqh he trod. Those 
wh" see in every Old Testament prediction 
nothing but a prophecy ex eventu infer from 
this tiiat this section of Ezekiel was written 
after the destruction of Jerusalem. I do 
not take that view, and place it in close con- 
nection with the preceding chapters. We 
note in ver. 11 the peculiar phrase, " I am 
your sign." Ezekiel, in what he does in the 
presence of the exiles, is figuring that which, 
before long, will came to pass in Jerusalem, 
They were to go forth into captivity as he 
had gone. For they shall remove, the 
Bevised Version gives, they ihaU go into 
exile. 

Ver. 12. — For that he see not, read, with 
the Revised Version, because he shall not see. 
Ver. 13. — My net also will I spread, etc. 
Compare the same image in Lam. i. 13. 
The prediction of ver. 12 is reiterated with 
emphasis. Zedekiah shall be in Babylon, 
yet shall not see. Josephus ('Ant.,' z. 
vii. 2 ; viii: 2) relates that Ezekiel sent thia 
prophecy to Jerusalem, and that ?edeklah, 
finding an apparent discrepancy in the 
words that he should not see Babylon, and 
those of Jeremiah Cxxxii. 4 ; xxxiv. 8), 
hardened himself in his unbelief. There ia 
BO reason, however, for supposing that 
Josephns bad access to any other records 



than the books of the two prophets, and his 
narrative looks rather like an imagined 
history of what might have been. 

Vers. 14, 15.— And I vill soatter. The 
capture of the king would naturally be 
followed by the dispersion of his adherents, 
some of whom would fall by the sword, 
while a few (Hebrew, men of number, Le, 
easily counted) would escape to some neigh- 
bounng country, where they might hope to 
find a refuge. There they would have to 
tell their tale of shame, and to let the 
heathen know that Jehovah was tbos 
punishing their abominations (comp, ch. 
ziv. 22, 23). The prophecy ends with the 
familiar formula, They shall knew that I 
am the Iiord. 

Ver. 17. — The opening words. The wert 
of the Lord came to me, imply an interval 
of passivity and silence. One conscious 
burst of inspiration came to an end, and was 
followed, after a time, by another, 

Ver. 18. — Eat thy bread with qnaUng, 
eto. No special stress is to be laid on the 
fact that only bread and water are named. 
The prophet is not dwelling now on the 
scarcity of food in the besieged city, as he 
had done in ch. iv. 9 — 17, but on the fear 
and terror which should haunt the lives of 
the besieged. Here again we can scarcely 
doubt that, as in ver. 11, Ezekiel was a 
sign to those among whom he lived. Out- 
wardly and visibly he was seen after his 
strange fiitting, cowering in a comer, as one 
hunted down and dreading pursuit, with 
every look and gesture of extoemest tenor. 
This was to be the portion of those who 
escaped and whose life was "given them (br 
a prey," The strange act was to be ez- 
plained to "the people of the land," is. the 
exiles among whom Ezekiel lived. The 
short prediction ends with the usual foi^ 
mula. There is another interval, and then 
another inspiration, 

Ver. 22.— What is that proverb, etc? 
The words indicate how the previous mes- 
sages had been received. Like the men of 
Jerusalem, the exiles could not believe that 
the judgment was so near. They said, in 
words that had become proverbial: (1) 
The days are prolonged. "Month after month 
pttsses " (it is obvious that they had so passed 
since Ezekiel began his work), "and yet the 
end comes not." Such throughout the 
world's history has been the cry of those of 
little, or of no, laith (Amos vi, 8 ; Isa. v. 19 ; 
Jer, xvii. 15 ; Matt. xxiv. 48 ; 2 Pet. iii. 4). 
(2) Every vision faileth. " The prophet ia a 
dreamer of dreams. We have heard of many 
such visions, yet still all things continue as 
they were." 

Ver. 23. — The prophet meets the onnent 
proverb with a counter-proverb of his own : 
" The days are not far off, but have ' 



«3H. xn. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



215 



near." Compare the language of the Baptist 
(Matt. iii. 2), of our Lord (Matt. iv. 17), of 
St. Paul (Rom. xiii. 11). For the true 
prophet there is always a near fulfilment, 
though there may be also an ultimate and 
more complete reality of which that is the 
pledge and earnest. The " vision" shall 
not fail ; every word (so in the Hebrew) shall 
become a reality. 

Ver. 24.— Flattering divination. The 
word is the same as the " smooth things" of 
Isa. XXX. 10, the "flattering lips" of Fs. zit 
2, 8. LXX., iicwT ev6fi fyoi rci irphs X'^P'"' 
Vulgate, amhigua. The " divinations " (the 
Hebrew word is found only here and in 
ch. xiii. 7, though cognate words are found 
elsewhere) are so described, not without a 
touch of scorn in the use of a word which 
is not applied to tlie utterance of the true 
prophets, because they promised a speedy 
deliverance, even within "two full years" 
(Jer. xxviiL 3). 

Ver. 25.— The thought of ver. 23 is re- 
iterated with emphasis. The rebeUlous 
house, whether at Tel-Abib or in Jerusalem 
(probably the word ia used with special 



reference to the former), should see the word 
of Jehovah fulfilled in their own days. One 
notes how the prophet dwells on the word 
prolonged, as though that had specially 
stirred his indignation. So again — 

Vers. 26, 27. — The words imply another in- 
terval of silence, meditation, and then a fresh 
utterance to the same effect as before. In 
this case (ver. 27) we trace a slight modifi- 
cation in the language of the gainsayers. 
They recognize Ezekiel both as a seer and 
a prophet. They do not say that hia 
vision " faileth." They content themselves 
with throwing the fulfilment into the dis- 
tant future. Their thought is that of the 
proverb which has been ascribed to more 
than one king or statesman, Aprit moi U 
deluge. To these his answer is nearly in 
the same terms as before. Still harping 
on the offensive word, he tells them thai 
nothing that he has spoken shall be " pro- 
longed." The destruction of the temple 
and the holy city, the departure of the 
Divine Presence from the sanctuary, these 
were already within measurable disttmee 



HOMILETICa. 

Ter. 2. — Blind eyes and deaf ears. I, All men havb oboans f*ic PEBOEirnia 
SPlBiTnAL TBUTH. These blind Jews have eyes and the deaf have ears. Neither class 
is deformed or mutilated in respect of their organs of sense. Here is the paradox, the 
surprising situation. It is men with eyes and ears who are blind and deaf. It is no 
wonder that the lower animals should live without man's religion in a life of brutish 
appetite. But it is surprising that beings endowed with higher faculties should degrade 
themselves to such a life. That this is the case with the most hardened and ignorant 
may be proved by the experience of life. 1. The most brutalized sinner was once a 
child. Then he had the child's wondering, open-eyed vision of truth. 2. The most 
degraded have been restored. Then the faculty of spiritual perception has been 
reawakened. This proves that it was only dormant, not absent. 3. Even in » con- 
dition of indifference a degraded, deadened soul may be aroused. The bow drawn at 
a venture may send an arrow into a joint of the armour of worldly thought and find 
the natural sensitiveness beneath. 

II. Some men have lost thk power of peroeivino spibitual tbuth. Their 
eyes are blind and their ears deaf. This does not mean merely that they have not the 
gifts Joel referred to (Joel ii. 28). It means that they do not perceive the truth which 
is declared to them by the messengers of God. 1. The words spoken are not heeded. 
They are mere sound. Immediately they are spoken in the ear a rush of unsympathetic 
thoughts sweeps them away. It is like sowing by the wayside. _ The Beed is trampled 
underfoot. 2. If the words are attended to, the personal significance of them is not 
grasped. They are mere ideas unrealized. They are not felt to have any relation to 
life. Thus a biblical scholar may be blind to the truth of God. 

III. This state of spiritual blindness and deafness is caused bt sin. The 
people are " a rebellious house," and therefore they cannot pprceive the Divine message. 
We have come upon one of the worst consequences of sin. It deadens the soul against 
its own guilt and against the messages from God to the sinner. This is very different 
from intellectual dulness. The will of God is so revealed that " the wayfaring man, 
though a fool, may not err therein." Indeed, mere intellectual acumen does very 
little in helping us to perceive spiritual and moral truth. God has hidden from the 
** wise and prudent " what he has revealed to " babes and sucklings." The preaching 



216 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xn. 1— 2a 

of the cross of Gbiist is foolishness to many of the world's wise men (1 Cor, i. 18, 19), 
because they have not spiritual sympathy with it (1 Cor. ii. 14). Note the blinding 
and deafening which are sometimes ascribed to God (e^. Isa. tL 9, 10) — ^because it is 
the abuse of God's action that leads to such a condition, and because it is a condition 
of Divine judgment — are here brought back to man's guilt. 

IV. God does not neqleot the blikd and deaf. Their state is one of guilt— for 
they brought it on themselves — and also one of danger. But they are not left alone in it. 
Ezekiel is to proceed to more simple and striking action, in order to extort attention 
from the indifferent. We must shake the sleeper when his house is on fire. We want 
more rousing preaching. God has pity on the blind and deaf, and it is according to 
his mercy that every effort should be made to reach them. Christ gives new sight and 
hearing (Luke iv. 18). 

Yer. 11. — TtacMng by examph. The Jews had neglected the words of Ezekiel ; the 
prophet is now to attempt to rouse them by a fresh method, by an illustrative action. 
They would not attend when he told them that the trouble was coming ; he is now to 
perform before their eyes an action illustrative of that trouble. The inhabitants of 
Jerusalem refused to admit that they will be sent into captivity, and it would seem that 
their friends in captivity were in sympathy with them in this respect, and could com- 
municate with them. So Ezekiel packs up his goods and removes bis house, as a sign 
of the approaching removal of the Jews into captivity. This is the most effectiva 
method of teaching. 

L Why teaohino sr example is effeottve. 1. It it ludd. Deeds at« more 
visible than words. Men ot various languages can understand the same fitcts. The 
bold outlines of an event are more readily grasped than the floating sounds of speech. 
2. Jt is impressive. We are struck by what we see with our own eyes far more than 
by what is reported to us by others. The greatest deeds recorded in history do not 
produce so much impression on us as the much smaller things with which we have had 
personal contact ; but those historic deeds are far more interesting than abstract ptdlo- 
sophical principles. 3. It is suggestive. Deeds are more eloquent than words. They 
are many-sided, and every facet is capable of reflecting some truth. Thus the same 
illustration may convey various aspects of truth to different persons. 4. It is enduring. 
The memory of events remains when that of words has faded. Nothing dies so rapidly 
as the influence of an orator. Facts live for ever, while words of preaching vanish 
almost as soon as they are spoken. 

II. What teaohino bt example is most effective. 1. 2%at which is human. 
We may take illtistrations from nature, and read " sermons in stones, books in the 
running brooks, and good in everything ; " but human life is more full of instruction- 
more lucid, impressive, suggestive, and enduring in its lessons. Hence the inestimable 
value of honest biography. 2. T/iat which is personal to the teacher. It is good to be 
able to point to great examples in history. But when the preacher himself does some 
striking deed, his influence is far greater. Ezekiel was himself to remove in illustration 
of the Captivity. We can teach best by our lives. 3. 2%o< which involves sdf-saorifice. 
Ezekiel's action was one of trouble and vexation. If our message costs us little, it may 
be lightly esteemed. Nothing is so impressive as the evidence of pain and cost in the 
effort to enlighten others. Self-denial is the most eloquent of persuasive influences. 
He who thus puts himself to trouble proves his sincerity, and impresses his neighbours 
with his own earnestness, and with the corresponding weightiness of his message. 

Note : All this may be most perfectly illustrated from the gospel of Christ. Here we are 
taught by the/ac<( of the life, death, and resuirection of Christ. Those facts are seen 
in the personal history of our great Teacher, and pre-eminently in his sacrifice of himself 
to the truth and for the benefit of the world. 

Yer. 13. — Ood^s net. I. God spbeads a net. 1. Ood wiU not leave guilty men 
free. They have a time of liberty, but there will be a limit to this. Though they 
have a long tether, some day its end will be reached. Freedom is given to allow scope 
for choice. If the power of choice is abused, the freedom will be withdrawn. 2. Qod 
em^aioys means/or restraining the liberty of bad men. He does not lay hold of them with 
his hand; he uses a net. In the present instance the net was Nebuchadnezzar. Thai 



OH.xn. 1— 28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 217 

heathen monarch did not know that he was a mere instrament In the hand of Gh)d ; 
yet did God so completely hold him in this respect that he called the man " my servant 
Nebuchadnezzar " (Jer. xx v. 9). Thus God overrules the movements of kings. 3. Thes* 
meant may not he perceived hy the unhappy victims. The net is a snare, and " in vain 
is a snare spread in the sight of any bird." We must not suppose that God really 
deceives his children. The Jews had been warned. But their eyes were blind and 
their ears deaf (ver. 2). The danger is not the less because men do not perceive it> 
Just when a man boasts of his greatest triumph the meshes of a Divine judgment may 
be drawing together about his doomed life. 

II. God ensnares in his net whomsoever he will. 1. He design! the net for 
particular persons. In the verse before ns it is spread for one man. There is no 
element of chance in the judgments of Heaven. God considers the case of each soul, 
and acts accordingly. 2. All the men eavght in Ood's net are sinners. He has no 
terrors for the good. He is not like the tempter, who ensnares men into evil. Every 
man who is caught in God's net of judgment has been first ensnared in the devil's net 
of sin. 3. ITie greatest are not heyond the reach of this net. In the present instance 
the net is spread expressly to catch no less a person than Zedekiab, the King of 
Jerusalem. Massive battlements and the serried ranks of a mighty army cannot keep 
off the invisible entanglement of the net of judgment. 

III. These is no eabthlt heans of escapinq fboh God's net. Its threads may 
be fine as gossamer, but they are strong as steel. Zedekiah was to be taken in the 
snare, and brought to Babylon in so helpless a state that he would not even see the 
place, for, as the event proved, his eyes were to be put out. The king fled by night 
from Jerusalem, but was caught by the Chaldeans near Jericho. As " the stars in 
their courses fought against Sisera," the course of armies and nations turned against 
the guilty Jews and their wicked king. There is no hope for the impenitent. 

IV. Chbist has spread a new net or salvation. He told his apostles that they 
should be fishers of men (Matt. iv. 19), and he compared the kingdom of heaven to a 
drag-net (Matt. xiii. 47). The only way of escaping from the awful net of judgment 
is to permit one's self to be taken in the saving net of the gospel, 

Ver. 18. — Fear. Ezekiel, in conformity with his new, desperate method of rousing 
the heedless Jews, is now to dramatize Fear in his own person and action, as a sign 
of the terror that will seize upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the days of its 
overthrow. 

I. Feab arises from evil causes. The sound and innocent soul in healthy cir- 
cumstances should not know fear. Observe some of the causes of fear. 1. Ignorance, 
" Fear always springs from ignorance," says Emerson. There is a sense of the mysterious 
and uncertain about it. When we perceive an approaching calamity, we may shrink 
from it and feel the keenest distress ; but the peculiar agony of fear lies in the darkness 
of futurity. This, of course, implies nothing morally defective, for we are necessarily 
limited. Childish fears naturally haunt cliildish ignorance. But though not morally 
wrong, except in the careless and wilful, ignorance is an evil circumstance to be con- 
quered. 2. Weakness. There is a weakness of nerve which belongs to one's bodily 
condition, and so some are constitutionally timorous. But the worst fear springs from 
cowardice, i.e. from a culpable laxity of moral fibre. 3. Ouilt. Fear followed the Fall. 
" The wicked flee when no man pursueth." We know that we deserve ill ; therefore 
we cannot be surprised if we are to receive it. This is an intellectual conception ; but 
the moral effect of sin is stronger. The man who is conscious of his sin feels ashamed, 
smitten with helplessness ; and the heavens gather up black thunder-clouds over his 

head. 

II. Fear is hurtful. 1. It is one of the most painful elements of punishment. 
The murderer sufiers infinitely more agony in the condemned cell than he can ever feel 
on the gallows. " There is but one thing of which I am afraid," says Montaigne, " and 
that is fear." 2. Fear is a cause of disaster. " The direst foe of courage," says George 
Macdonald, " is the fear itself, not the object of it ; and the man who can overcome his 
own terror is a hero and more." We are paralyzed by fear. As in dreams the limbs 
are heavy, like lead, when a terror is approaching, so in waking life we find that the 
terror which threatens fascinates us into helplessness. 3. Worse than all this, fear is 



218 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKlEL, (00. xa. 1—28 

morally degrading. " Fear is cruel and mean," aaya EmerBon. It is a selfish passion, 
and it lowers our whole tone and character. 

III. Fear hat be oonquebed bt rAiTH. Constitutional bravery will exclude the 
possibility of fear. " Fear 1 " exclaimed the hero Nelson, when only a boy, to his grand- 
mother, who had asked if he had not met fear when he had lost his way, "what is it 
like? I have never seen it." Such incapacity for fear is a splendid natural endow- 
ment, but it has not the moral character of victory over fear in those who are capable 
of its pangs. The true antidote to fear is faith. We cannot know everything, and so 
dispel the ignorance out of which fear springs; nor can we create in ourselves the 
strength of a hero by a sheer act of will ; nor can we deny or repudiate our guilt. But 
we may trust God's protection in the darkness, lean upon his strength in the hour of 
need, and rely upon his pardon when we repent of sin and turn to the grace of Christ. 
So the feeblest can say, " When I am weak, then am I strong ; " " I will go in the strength 
of the Lord God." Moreover, the work of faith will be completed by love, for " perfect 
love casteth out fear." 

Vers. 22, 23. — A worthless proverb. Ezekiel quotes a proTerb with which the Jews 
are comforting themselves, and tells them that it cannot be relied on. 

I. A PBOVEBB IS READILY ACCEPTED. 1. Its optjiess of txprttsion attrocU IM, We 
are taken by neatness of phrase. A lie may be ably expressed, and a great fallacy may 
strike us as particularly well put. Thus the form disguises the substance. 2. It$ wide 
use throws us off our guard. We regard it as an embodiment of " the wisdom of the 
many." What "everybody" says is taken for granted as true. Passing freely in 
conversational commerce, the question of a familiar proverb's soundness is scarcely 
raised. 3. Its antiquity makes it venerable. Proverbs are supposed to contain " the 
wisdom of the ancients." 

II. A PROVERB HAT BE FALSE. 1. Apttiess of expressum is no guarantee tf frcitt. 
This is only a matter of form. Surely Descartes made a mistake in asserting that 
seeing a thought clearly was equivalent to an assurance of the truth of it. Lucidity of 
expression may cover falsity of idea. 2. The mass of men may be in error. The voice 
of the people is by no means always the voice of Glod. When one common prejudice 
seizes many minds, they are all likely to be deluded into a common error. 8. The 
venerdbleness of a proverb does not guarantee its truth. It is forgotten that, as Bacon 
tells us, we are the ancients, and those who lived in the early days belong to the child- 
hood of the race. Other things being equal, the latest saying should be the truest. 
Certainly no premium is to be set on the knowledge of antiquity. 

III. A PROVERB MAT BE MISAPPLIED. This was the case with the Jews to whom 
Ezekiel referred. They quoted a proverb revealing a startling insight into one 
remarkable feature of Hebrew prophecy which until lately had been almost lost right 
of. The prophet sees the future as though it were present, and he describes it in such 
a way as to suggest to many that it is nearer than it proves to be. There is little 
perspective in prophecy. Its horizon often appears to move before us as its predictians 
are translated into facts of history. But this is not always the case, nor does the post- 
[tonement of fulfilment mean its never coming. In the present case the proverb of 
postponement was misapplied, for fulfilment was close at hand. Here is the danger of 
general phrases. True in one set of circumstonces, they may be utterly false in another 
a|>plication. 

IV. A PROVERB BHonLD BE TESTED. We should treat our proverbs as uncertun 
coins, and ring them before using them. Then we shall find that not a few are of as 
base metal as Hanoverian sovereigns. There is a sort of proverbial orthodoxy con- 
structed out of set theological phrases which has no other stamp upon it than that of 
preachers' usage. Loyalty to truth compels us to submit this religious coinage to the 
t«st of Scripture, conscience, and experience. The most dangerous proverbial expressions 
are those that flatter ourselves. With the Jews the favourite proverb was one that 
postponed the prospect of the evil day and threw doubt on the Divine message. Cynical 
unbelief is full of self-assurance. But it is not safe to trust to it simply because it may 
be clever or prevalent. Every idea that denies the Divine word is sure to prove delusive. 

Ver. 24. — The end of delusions. The Jews had been deluding themselves with a 



OH. XII. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 219 



false proverl)— or at all eTents, with a proverb falsely applied (see Ter. 22). Ezekiel 
tells them that such errors and those of flattering divinatioa will both cease. There if 
to be an end to error. 

I. Delusions win a temporary triumph. The false prophet has his day of success. 
Flattering errors easily win their way into popularity. The history of thought is largely 
made up of the story of errors — their genesis, growth, prevalence, triumph, and 
decay. This fact should guard us against accepting any motive just because it happens 
to be triumphant. There are fashions in philosophy and theology. But truth is 
eternal and abiding, and it is therefore simply foolish to accept the ideas which chance 
to be in vogue at our own time without further inquiry. 

II. Thb triumph of delusions is fruitless. Error is always barren of any solid 
results. It is darkness, death, negation. Even when at the acme of prosperity it is 
but as a bubble ; it has no substance in it. There came a time when the vain vision 
and the flattering divination of the Jews were to be put to the test in the siege of 
Jerusalem. At this moment of trial they were found to be utterly useless. This is the 
fatal defect of a false idea. We may cherish it for long until we need to use it. But 
directly we put it into practice it crumbles away. 

III. Trouble expo^^es delusions. So long as Jerusalem prospered the vain visioni 
continued, and the flattering divination was practised without intermission. It was 
the touch of real trouble that broke the bubble. Many a comfortable soul, is living in 
a fool's paradise ol direful error without fear or pain until some real adversity comes. 
Then the utter delusiveness of the admired notions is suddenly revealed with appalling 
amazement. If we are able to hold to fatal notions till the end of life, we shall find at 
last that they are but rotten planks, which will break up when we try to float on them 
over the chill waters of death. 

lY. The exposure of delusions is a blessino. Katurally enough, it first strikes 
the helpless dupes with dismay as a pure calamity. Why should they not be permitted 
to dream their lives away on a bed of roses although the volcano should be slumberiog 
beneath ? Because even apart from consequences truth is supremely desirable, and 
error is an evil thing. We ought to be thankful for a painful process which leads us 
out of darkness into light. But it is not necessary for us to wait for the alarming 
awakening. The revelation of God in Christ and the truths of inspiration are with 
US to spare us the terrible method of deliverance from error, and to lead us out of 
darkness into the light of Christ. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Ver. 3. — Hope mingled with fear. If we bear in mind that this language wm 
employed by the Lord in directing Ezekiel how to deal with the house of Israel, we 
shall see what light it casts upon human liberty and responsibility. The prophet was 
to make use of certain symbolical means with the view of wakening his countrymen to 
a sense of their danger, and of inducing them to repent and to turn unto the Lord. 
Kow, believing in the Divine omniscience and foreknowledge, we cannot but be 
assured that the Eternal foresaw what would be the result of the appeal which was to 
be made. Yet he spoke to the prophet as if that result was uncertain. " It may be 
tliey will consider, though they be a rebellious house." Ezekiel did not and could not 
know what would be the issue of this ministry with which he was entrusted; and he 
was to do his work in a perfectly natural and human way, to act as believing in the 
liberty of those to whom he was sent, and as leaving the responsibility entirely with 
them. He experienced in his mind a conflict of emotions; hope was mingled with 
fear. 

L A natural expectation founded upon experience. Ezekiel knew that he was 
sent to "a rebellious house," to "a stiff-necked people;" he could not possibly be 
blind to the character and disposition of those whom he knew so well Every herald 
and messenger of God is sometimes sent to the unbelieving, the bard-hearted, the 
apparently unimpressible. Such characters have often been brought into contact with 
the Divine Word, and have as often spurned it. Judging by experience only, how can 
any servant of God go to such, taking with him a new message, or the old messi^ with 



220 THE BOOK OF THE FBOFHET EZEEIEL. [oh. zn. I—mS. 

new arguments and perguasions to enforce it, without something of discouragement, some- 
thing of foreboding ? It is not possible. Habits are confirmed as days and years pass 
on; the hard heart is likely to grow harder instead of softer. Only the hammer can 
break, only the fire can melt it. 

II. A ooNTBABT HOPB BPBiNaiNa FBOH BBNEVOLENOB. Divine kindness addresses 
the rebellious and impenitent yet once again. " It may be they will consider." If 
this view it possible to God, surely it is possible to God's human messenger. He knows, 
perhaps, that his own ignorance has been instructed, his own obduracy has been melted; 
and he hopes that in this the experience of others may resemble his own. If men will 
but consider, consideration may lead to repentance. And why should they not 
consider ? Is not the message from God a message that deserves serious and patient 
attention? The good will which the Lord's servant has towards his fellow-men forbids 
him to despair of their salvation, to abandon labour on their behalf. 

m. The APFonrcED means havino been used bt God's uebsenqer, the besfon- 

BIBIUTT MUST BK LEFT WITH THOSE ADDRESSED IN God's NAHB. The herald of Qod 

delivers his message, presents the offers and the requirements of Divine authority ; he 
does this with mingled fear and hope ; and he can do no more. The record has uways 
been a record resembling that of Paul's ministry at Some : " Some believed, and some 
believed not." The minister of Christ preaches the gospel, whether men will hear or 
forbear. He delivers his souL He cannot command results. He can simply repeat 
the admonition of his Master, "Take heed how ye hearl" And it is well that he 
should not discbarge his ministry in a spirit of dejection and despondency. He must 
indeed fece the possibility that those whose welfare he seeks may refuse to consider; 
they are free agents, and the competing voices of the world are powerful, attractive. 
Yet he should not forget that they may consider; and if they will only yield so far, he 
may reasonably hope that consideration may lead to repentance and to lUis eternal.— T. 

Ver. 18, — Trembling anticipatiotu. Frequently was the ministry of Ezekiel a 
ministry of symbolism as well as of language. Very pictorial and effective must some 
of the prescribed actions of the prophet have appeared to those who witnessed them. 
On the occasion referred to in this passage he ate his bread and drank his water with 
trembling, carefulness, and astonishment. Now, in ordinary cases, the daily meals are 
partaken by good men with cheerfulness and gratitude. The change from Ezekiel's 
nsual demeanour to that evident upon this occasion must certainly have awakened on 
the part of his companions not a little curiosity and inquiry. There was a typical 
signification in it, which he himself was ready to explain. There are times when 
anticipation of evil is justified, when its absence is unreasonable. The terrors, privations, 
and sufferings of the approaching siege of Jerusalem were pictured beforehand by the 
figurative, symbolical action of the prophet. 

I. The occasion of these TBEMBLiira fobebodikos. It was the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem and the land of Israel who were about to suffer. And their sufferings were 
the just reward of their unfaithfulness and rebelliousness. Threats and warnings had 
not been spared. The prophet at least believed that these threats were not empty and 
vain, that the day was approaching when they should be fulfilled. The siegs of the 
rebellious city was at baud. 

II. The symfatbbtio ceabacter of these trehblikg FOBEBODiNas. Like a true 
minister of God, Ezekiel thought and felt less for himself than for his people. He had 
personally no special reason for alarm. So far as his own safety was concerned, there 
was no reason why he should cherish anticipations of eviL But in his own mind he 
identified himself with Jerusalem, with Israel. He could not separate and isolate 
himself from those to whom he was bound by ties of kindred and of common indebted- 
ness to the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob. If his people suffered, he would 
suffer with them. Even if they showed a sinful indifference to their state and prospects, 
he would cherish a just sensitiveness. If disaster were approaching, he would not be 
content to secure his own safety and to regard their fate with heartless unconcern. 

III. Tbb intkktiom or these tbembling fobbbodihob. Ezekiel was no mere 
prophet of evil. He did not conceive himself to have accomplished his mission in 
predicting the coming evil, and then abandoning the people to the consequences of 
their sin. He warned them in the hope that they would profit by his warning, turn 



en. xn. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. 221 

from their evil ways, and seek that national disaster might be averted, or, at all erents, 
in the hope that individuals might repent and flea from the wrath to come. His 
mission was one of benevolence. 

IV. The justification fob these tbemblino tobebodinos. The siege which Ezekiel 
foretold came to pass ; the people, in the famine which ensued, ate their bread with 
carefulness, and drank their water with astonishment; the cities were laid waste, and 
the land became a desolation. All the predictions of the Lord's prophet were verified. 
The false security of the people was proved to be false and baseless ; their hope of 
immunity from judgment was frustrated. The righteous judgment of God was vindi- 
cated, and that in a most awful manner. 

V. The ultimate issue of these tbehblins roEEBODinas. The fear of the prophet, 
the calamity and terror which overtook the people, had a moral, a religious end, which 
in large measure was secured. The authority of the Ood of Israel was asserted. The 
vanity of rebellion against him was demonstrated. The attention of all concerned was 
directed to the principles of true religion as the foundation alike of national and of 
individual well-being. " Ye shall know that I am the Lord." — T. 

Vers. 22 — 28. — The Kumum proverh and the Divine. National proverbs embody 
national thinking, national sentiments, national habits. They sometimes convey 
counsels of wisdom. But they are sometimes superficial and all but valueless. As in 
the case here recorded, such frivolous and misleading sayings need to be replaced and 
substituted by the dictates of inspiration, of infallible wisdom, and undying truth. 

L A specious peoveeb of human wisdom. 1. Its import. This was twofold — it 
asserted the postponement indefinitely of righteous judgment, and the failure of 
authorized prophecy. No doubt retribution was deferred ; but this, which was a sign 
of Divine forbearance, was interpreted as a proof that judgment there was none, on 
earth or in heaven. No doubt the warnings were uttered long before the calamity 
overtook the people; and, in consequence, the threatened, ^he unbelievers, instead of 
using the opportunity to repent and reform, abused it to their own condemnation. 
2. Its plausibility. It is described as a " flattering divination ; " for it was intended to 
fall in with and to encourage the carelessness, the impenitence, and the unspirituality 
of men. 3. Its iUunveness. The opponents of the inspired prophet had but a " vain 
vision " to boast of. Time unmasks idl false, deceitful appearances ; in a short time it 
was seen that the proverbial wisdom of the impenitent was utterly baseless, was 
indeed nothing but folly. 

IL A VBBAOious DEOLABATION OF DiviNE COUNSELS. 1. The provcrb dishonouring 
to God is exposed and refuted. "I will make this proverb to cease." Events should 
make its currency impossible. There is a destructive power in truth — ^it shatters 
illusions to pieces. Great swelling words of vanity collapse when they encounter the 
simple but authoritative utterances of Divine truth. 2. The truthfulness of the Lord's 
prophets is established. Every word is fulfilled. Most unlikely events come to pass 
m accordance with prophetic utterance. God speaks, and the pride of the haughty is 
humbled, and things that are not vanquish things that are. The faithful admonitions 
of the Lord's servants are proved to be just and wise. 3. A new proverb is created by 
the action of Divine providence. " There shall none of my words be deferred any 
more." The time came, and came speedily, when this could not be questioned. And 
what happened in the days of Ezekiel has happened wherever God has spoken. For 
us it is chiefly of practical concern to notice that he who came from God and went to 
God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, uttered forth the Divine mind and will 
with a unique completeness ; and that though heaven and earth shall pass away, his 
words shall not pass away. — ^T. 

Yerg. 1 ^16. — The dramatic form of prophecy. It is of the first moment that men 

should h«Te right and adequate impressions of the truth. A man's life is properly 
moulded through his intelligence. His intelligence moulds his tastes, feeds his emotions, 
inspires his purposes, directs his life. Clear convictions of truth and duty possess 

unspeakable value. «vv. *j»xt. 

I. Mobal 0BTUSBHE88 TB MEN 18 A OBiEF TO GoD. Byss Mve Ijcen Conferral for the 
sole' reason that men may see ; and ears, that they may hear. Tet men often misuse and 



229 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. xn. 1— 2& 

neglect them. By indulgence in viciouB likings they wilfully blind the inner eye and 
make deaf the inner e«r. "None are so blind as those who will not see." "If the eye 
be evil, the whole body is full of darkness." If the sole channel of truth be choked, 
the man is the victim of falsehood. This is a grief to God, and he adopts a thousand 
methods to illumine the dark understanding. He sometimes blinds the eye of sense 
that the eye of the mind may open. He finds his way into the heart of men through 
some other avenue hitherto untried; for he who made man will find some method of 
access to his soul. 

II. A NOVEL KORM OP PBOPHEOY — A DBAUA IN ACTUAL LIFE. Instruction, as a 
iiile, is addres.sed to the ear ; but for the deaf and for infants it is often addressed to the 
eye. So, in olden times, God often gave to men an object-lesson. We have the 
narrative of such an event in the fourth chapter, where Ezekiel was required to lie on 
one side of his body during three hundred and ninety days. When Zedekiah the 
prophet was summoned to the court of Ahab, to give counsel respecting the projected 
war, Zedekiah entered the king's presence furuijhed with horns of iron. The appear- 
ance of these was to add impressiveness to the prophet's words. So when Paul was 
journeying for the last time to Jerusalem, Agabus, a prophet, came to him at Caesarea, 
and, taking Paul's girdle, bound liis own hands and feet, then added, "So shall the 
Jews bind the man that owneth this girdle." This appeal to the eye by living actiun 
strengthens conviction in the minds of spectators of the truth and impurtance of the 
message. By every possible method God accommodated himself to the necessities of 
the people for whom he still designed kindness. 

III. Mediatorial seeviob by man foe men. The labour of a true prophet is no 
sinecure. It is the hardest of toil. He must have no care for himself in his solicitude 
for others. To be a true prophet he must be like-minded with God. The self-foiget ful, 
self-sacrificing love of Gud must flow in his veins. He must be compleiely devoted to 
the good of those to whom lie is senL No labour must be accounted arduous, no pain 
severe, in order to success in his undertaking. Now Ezekiel is required to array 
himself in an emigrant's attire ; provide himself with the usual bagga ;e for foreign 
travel; take his staff in his hand ; carry his equipment on his shoulder; leave his home 
in the sight of men, yet with face veiled; and dig a hole through the city wall, to 
secure exit from the city. To do all this in the town of Tel-Abib would excite public 
attention, surprise, and wonder. The people would consider the prophet mad. Yet 
ihii was the very end God had in view, viz. to arrest attention and to produce reflection. 
This strange action would indicate the strength of Ezekiel's faith, and strong faith 
•wakens faith in others. He was willing, like Paul, " to become all things, so that by 
•ny means he might save some." 

IV. Inquiby leads to oleabeb eetelation of truth. The knowledge which • 
man gets in response to inquiry is more appreciated and more pondered than that which 
is given unasked. A great triumph is gained over the sluggishness of our nature 
when a spirit of inquiry is stirred within. If a man desires knowledge, it is an omen 
for good ; it is the dawn of blessing. Clearer and fuller informatiun can come through 
the gateway of the ear than through the gateway of the eye. The people to whom 
Ezekiel addressed himself were those of the Ca|itivity at Tel-Abib. They were foster- 
ine a false hope (aided by vain counsels sent from brethren in Jerusalem) that their 
captivity would be very brief, and that new political combinations would result in 
speedy restoralinn to Palestine. Thus their minds would be disturbed ; their simple 
trust was diverted from God, and tliey were losing the spiritual benefit which the exile 
was intended to bring. Inquiry after the truth would lead the way to mental tran- 
quillity and submission. The clear fulfilment of prophecy would strengthen faith in God. 

V. Folly of all effort to evade God. In the fourteenth verse we read, "I will 
scatter toward every wind all that are about to help him, and all his bands." This 
announcement would embrace the Egyptian host which came to help Zedekiah, as well 
as his own people. To resist Jehovah is to resist the granite rock. A single word from 
God ought to suffice in order to obtain our readiest obedience. Patriotism is an excel- 
lent virtue in its dace, but very often it is only a poor admixture of vanity and 
selfish ambition. Fious trust and pious obedience are far superior. To be wise wa 
must always be on the side of God. God's will is supreme, and, in the and, is irre- 
sistible. Oneness with that will is life and peace. 



OH. xn. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET BZEKIEL. 223 

VL To ENOW God — this is the final issue. It !■ instructive to observe how that 
thia is the frequent refrain : " They shall know that I am the Lord." This was a lesson 
which the Hebrews would not learn in days of prosperity ; therefore they were led into 
the deep shades of adversity to acquire it. The discipline, though severe, was success- 
ful. Experience is an excellent school, though a costly one. It cured them of their 
foolish belief in idols, and wrought in them the conviction that the unseen Jehovah 
alone was Qod. Yet in many persons this knowledge was only intellectual. It did 
not command their affection, nor draw after it spontaneous service. The knowledge 
of OkA which becomes to us Ovation, is an experimental knowledge. It is knowledge 
of God as our God — our reconciled Father. We know him with personal intimacy. 
We admit him to the inmost chamber of our hearts. He becomes Emmanuel, i.e. God 
with us — God in us. We grow up into his likeness. We imitate his qualities. We 
field to him will and heart and li/e.~-D. 

Vers. 21 — 28. — The snare ofvmhdief. Faith has the power to make the distant 
near. It obliterates distance of time and space. Bnt unbelief reverses the effect. It 
looks in at the wrong end of the telescope, and reduces realities to a mere speck. 
Unbelief corrupts all blessing; it makes sour the very cream of God's kindness, 
" Because judgment is not speedily executed," incorrigible rebellion makes a mock of 
retribution. 

I. Thb announoeuent of distant jttdomgnt is obeat kindness. The ancient 
Greeks had an adage : " The gods have feet of wool." But this does not describe the 
character of the living God. Instead of overtaking men hastily, " he is slow to 
anger." He does not willingly afflict. " The axe is often laid at the root of the tree,' 
and that for a long spell ; and if repentance and fruitfulness appear, the sentence ia 
gladly revoked. The turn and purpose of our God are not destruction, but restoration. 
If it is within the range of possibility to awake the slumbering conscience, and save 
the man, God will do it. To announce beforehand ordained judgments is kindness 
infinite. 

II. Deferbed judombnt often leads to misplaced confidence. The best 
blessings, when corrupted, become our direst curses. Neither the bitter experience of 
■in, though long-continued, nor the royal clemeucy of God, produces any beneficial effect 
on some men. They seem deaf to every appeal of prudence, insensible to every over- 
ture of kindness. All tender feeling appears to have vanished; they have reached 
already a state of hopeless reprobation. If the severity of justice for a moment should 
relax, they put it down to cowardice, or weakness, or irresolution. They say, " Wo 
■hall have peace, though we walk after the imagination of cur own hearts." " Give a 
loose rein to lust," say they ; " God doth not regard us." 

nL Unbelief puts fab off the dat of beckoning. Its shallow line of reasoning 
is this : " No punishment has fallen upon us as yet. To-day will be as yesterday, 
and to-morrow as to-day. Probably," say they, " punishment will not come at all ; 
or, if It should, it is so far away that for all practical purposes we may disregard 
it." There is a strong force of inertia in every man's nature. What haa been, he 
thinks, will continue to be. "Where is the promise of his coming?" The wish 
becomes father to the thought, that punishment is dubious, problematic — a mere ghost 
of probability. All the evidence of Divine rule and Divine interposition unbelief " 
rejects as hypothetical craze. What cannot he seen and handled and touched unlielief 
despises as unreaL 

IV. The houb of doom at length suddenly stbikes. To men it often seems a 
■ndden event ; not so to God. He has seen the elements preparing stage by stage, and 
** suddenness" forms no part of his experience. So it has been with all the great 
calamities that have overtaken men. In the period of Noah's deluge, men saw no 
prognostication of coming danger. "They bought, they sold, they married, they were 
given in marriage, until the very day that Noah entered into the ark." On the day of 
Sodom's doom, the sun rose over the eastern hills with his usual splendour and tran- 
quillity ■ yet before noon the smoke of the devastation rose and smothered in silence 
Ae cries of its dying population. " So shall the coming of the Son of man be." When 
profligate men least expect it the storm shall break upon their heads. Whensoever 
tk« long-suffering kindness of God is made an occasion of fresh licence, he quite 



224 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [ch. xn. 1— 28. 

sure that retribution ii not far away. " In such an hour ai ye think not, the Son of 

man cometh." — D. 

Vers. 1 — 16. — A parabolic appeal to a rebtlUou* people. " The word of the Lord 
also came unto me, saying, Son of man, thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious 
house," etc. " Now begin the amplifications," says Hengstenberg, " the marginal 
note3, so to speak, on the great text in ch. viil. — zi., which extend to ch. ziz., and these 
terminate in a song, corresponding to the song in the first group in ch. vii. The 
approaching catastrophe of Jerusalem forms the central point throughout. The 
pi'0i>het is inexhaustible in the announcement of this, as the false patriotism was inex- 
haustible in its announcements of salvation." We are not certain whether this parable 
of Ezekiel's removing was really acted by him or only visional. But we incline to the 
opinion that it was internal and visional, for the following reasons : 1. This communi- 
cation (vers. 1 — 16) refers chiefly to the king and the people in Jerusalem, while the 
prophet dwelt at Tel-Abib. So that so far as the people principally interested in it are 
concerned, it would be as impressive to them if it took place in the region of the 
prophet's soul as if it were outwardly enacted in a country far away from them. 
2. The prophet is represented as dwelling in the midst of the people to whom this 
communication chiefly applies, and as doing these things in their sight ; but seeing 
that he actually dwelt at Tel-Abib on the Chebar, we think that his dwelling and acting 
spoken of in this chapter must have been visional. 3. If it had been an actual and 
external' occurrence it would not, at least in one respect, have well answered the end 
designed. That end was to set forth the truth that the king and the people in Jeru- 
salem should be carried into captivity. But inasmuch as Ezekiel was already in exile, 
if he actually went forth thus from his Babylonian residence, the action would more 
fitly symbolize the return of the exiles to their own land than the carrying of others 
into exile. Such a return many of the exiles were hoping for and expecting speedily; 
and the prophet was not likely to be told to do anything that would encourage the 
vain expectation. Jeremiah had already written to tbem, exhorting them to build 
houses and settle peacefully in the land of their captivity, because they should not 
return to their own land until seventy years of exile were accomplished. For these 
reasons we incline to the opinion that the doings of vers. 3 — 7 were not external and 
actual, but internal and visional; but, as we have said above, we are not certain of this. 
Of this we feel assured, that, if they were visional, they were impressed upon the mind 
of Ezekiel with all the vividness of actual transactions. But, happily, this question 
does not affect the permanent and universal teachings of the incident. Kotice— 

L The deplobable hobal condition of bebellious sinnebs. " Son of man, then 
dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house," etc'. 1. A condition of tad mortU oMnte- 
ntss. " Which have eyes to see, and see not ; they have ears to hear, and hear not " 
(cf. Deut. xxix. 4 ; Isa. vi. 9, 10). The will of God was made known unto them, and 
they had the mental and moral faculties which are necessary for its apprehension, yet 
they did not apprehend it ; they misapprehended or disregarded it. " When men see, 
hear, and do not profit by their seeing or hearing, then they neither see nor hear in 
Scripture sense." In this respect how great is the moral insensibility, not only of the 
openly profane, but of many who attend the public means of grace ! They unite in 
forms of public worship without any spiritual improvement ; they hear the ministry of 
redemptive truth without any saving impression. They "have eyes to see, and see 
not ; they have ears to bear, and hear not." 2. Moral ohtuseness arising from per- 
sistent wickedness. " For they are a rebellious house." Their moral insensibility was a 
consequence of their habitual sin. " The cause is all from themselves ; the darkness 
of the understanding is owing to the stubbornness of the will." The practice of sin 
blunts the spiritual susceptibilities, tends to destroy the capacity for receiving religious 
impressions or perceiving spiritual truth; and when fully developed it ends in moral 
sensibility, and makes a man " past feeling." 

II. The fatienob and pebbibtenoe of the Divine effobtb fob the oonvebsion of 
THE wicked. " Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing," eta 
(ver. 3). Many means had been tried to lead them to repentance, but without a satis- 
factory result. Still, God does not yet abandon them, but directs that other means 
shall bo tried, saying, "It may be they will consider, though they be a rebellious 



"h. XII. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 2V!o 

house." The truth must " be set before their eyes," says Hengstenberg, "in rough, 
palpable, overpowering reality, if it is to find entrance to their minds, and succeed in 
emancipating them from those dreams of the future which are preventing their repent- 
ance. . . . The greater the weakness of their eyes, the more conspicuous must be the 
exhibition of the truth." God is unwilling to abandon the wicked to their sin and 
doom. He has long patience with them, sends to them messenger after messenger, and 
employs means after means, both various and oft-repeated, in order to lead them to 
turn from sin to himself. In illustration and confirmation of this, see ch. xzxiii. 11 ; 
Jer. xliv. 4 ; Hos. xi. 8, 9 ; Neh. ix. 26 — 31 ; Matt. xxi. 33—44. And in the incident 
before us, he not only addresses to them this stirring parable to arrest their attention 
and awaken their consideration, but he also instructs the prophet to make known to 
them the interpretation of it, that even the most infUfferent and the most insensible 
might be made acquainted with the truths communicated. 

III. The exteaordinart Divine appeal to the inconsiderate and ebbblliocjs 
PEOPLE. This parable (vers. 8 — 7) was the Lord's appeal to the insensible and 
rebellious people. It does not require any exposition from us, as the inspired interpre- 
tation is here given (vers. 8 — 16), and this also is interpreted by its remarkable fulfil- 
ment in history. But we may mark the several stages of the mournful history here 
predicted, the fulfilment of which is recorded in 2 Kings xxv. ; Jer. xxxix. 1 — 10 ; 
lii. 1 — 30. 1. Here it a picture of the king and people of Jerusalem going into cap- 
tivity. (Vers. 8, 4, 10, 11.) " The stuff for removing," or " baggage of the emigrant " 
(vers. 3, 4), "is the equipment made by one who enters on a journey never to return." 
And " as they that go forth into captivity," or " like the removals of the emigrant " 
(ver. 4), signifies, according to Hengstenberg, "in the costume and with the manner of 
emigrants; 'with a hag on the shoulder and a staff in the hand;' 'sad and with 
drooping head.' " Thus Ezekiel was to typify the departure of prince and people into 
exile. 2. Here is a picture of going into captivity by sorrowful and stealthy flight. 
(Vers. 5 — 7, 12.) He is to go forth in the twilight so as to elude the vigilance of the 
enemies, and with his face covered so as not to see the beloved land which he is leaving. 
And all the accounts of the flight agree that it was made in fright and furtively under 
cover of night. 3. Here is a veiled announcement of the king's deprivation of sight 
and an explicit declaration of his destination as an exile. (Ver. 13.) According to 
Josephus ('Ant.,' x. vii. 2), Ezekiel sent an account of this prophecy to Jerusalem to 
strengthen the influence of Jeremiah with the king, who was personally consider- 
ably disposed to heed the counsel of that prophet. But the king compared the 
announcements of the two prophets, and finding that while Jeremiah said he should 
be carried in bonds to Babylon, Ezekiel said be should not see it, he disbelieved both 
of them. And yet the event showed that both of them were true. The king was 
carried as a prisoner to Babylon, but he did not see it, for Nebuchadnezzar had put 
out his eyes at Biblah in the land of Hamath. 4. Here is a declaration that the king 
should be left without defence 'yr helper. " I will scatter toward every wind all tliat are 
about him to help him, and <tll his bands " (ver. 14). And the sacred historian tells 
us that when the army of the Chaldeans overtook the fleeing king " in the plains of 
Jericho, all his army were scattered from him." 6. Here is the intention expressed to 
spare a small remnant for the acknowledgment of the supremacy of Jehovah and the 
confession of their sins. (Vers. 15, 16.) Only "a few men," or "men of number," 
should be left, i.e. so few that they might be easily counted ; and they should be spared 
in order that they might acknowledge the many aggravated and persistent sins of the 
people, which had led to these stern judgments, and so vindicate the justir« of God in 
the infliction of them. And by these judgments they would become convinced that 
Jehovah is the living and the true God. " They shall know that I am the Lord." 
These words, which " recur as a refrain " in these prophecies, we have already considered 
(in ch. vj. 7, 10). 

Conclusion. Learn : 1. The peril of disregarding the Word of the Lord. Such 
conduct, persisted in, leads to spiritual blindness and deafness. 2. The obligation of the 
good to put forth persistent efforts for the conversion of the wicked. 3. The importance 
of employing various means for the conversion of the wicked. — W. J. 

Vers. 17 — 20. — Deprivations caused by sin. " Moreover the word of the Lord came 

EZEKIEL. 



228 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [cH. xn. 1—28 

to me, saying, Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking," etc. This paragraph was 
addressed to Ezekiel's fellow-exiles. " Say unto the people of the land ; " t.e. of Chaldea. 
The design was to discourage the false expectations of the captives, who were looking 
forward to an early season of prosperity for their native land, in which they hoped to 
share. To this end the prophet shows to them that, in respect to their fellow-country- 
men in Jerusalem, there would be a cutting off of the physical comforts of life, great 
anxiety and distress of mind, and sad devastation of both cities and country, and all 
these things because of the sins of the people, or " for the violence of all who dwell in 
it." Several things call for attention. 

I. Sin dbpbiving sinners of the physical comfoetb or life. " Son of man, eat 
thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness; 
and say unto the people of the land. Thus saith the Lord God of the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel [or, 'in the land of Israel']; They shall eat 
their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonishment." These words 
puiut to the cutting off of the comforts of life, and the possession of the mere neces- 
saries thereof. But not always does sin produce consequences such as this. Sin and 
secular prosperity have often gone hand-in-hand (cf. Gen. xiii. 10, 13; Ps. IxxiiL 
3 — 12 ; Luke xii. 16 — 20 ; xvi. 19 — 26). But in these cases the prosperity was 
precedent to the Divine judgment or to the full development of sin. When that 
development had taken place, and that judgment was being exercised, there was a 
striking reversal of circumstances in each case. In the siege of Jerusalem, to which 
our text points, physical comforts and luxuries disappeared, and long before its close 
men deemed themselves fortunate if they could secure bread and water. And in our 
age the wicked may prosper in the world and increase in riches ; but in the time of 
retribution, whenever it arrives, sin will be found injurious to all the true interests of 
man. Sin often strips the sinner of physical comforts, and even of the bare neces- 
saries of life. Drunkenness, gluttony, indolence, wastefulness, bring many a person 
and many a family to abject poverty and want (cf. Prov. vL 9 — 11 ; xix. 15 ; xxiii. 21 ; 
xxiv. 30—34). 

II. Sin depriving sinners op peace and sbrbnitt of spirit. " Son of mvi, eat 
thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulness. 
. • . They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their water with astonish- 
ment," They would eat even the necessaries of life, not in peace and comfort, but in 
anxiety and alarm. Their distress may have arisen from fear lest their scanty supplies 
of food should fail them, and so they Ate " their bread with carefulness." And to this 
was joined terror of their enemies who surrounded them, causing them to take of the 
sustenance of life " with quaking, trembling, and astonishment." It is of the nature 
of sin, when it is developed, to destroy peace and calmness of mind, and to produce 
terror and distress. "The wicked are like the troubled sea," etc. (Isa. Ivii. 20, 21). 
Without doubt we may often find the wicked in their sad career untroubled either by 
guilt or fear ; but for every one the time of awakening comes, and with it security 
departs and terror arrives. "When the pleasure has been tasted and is gone," says 
Mr. Froude, " and nothing is left of the crime but the ruin which it has wrought, then 
the furies take their seats upon the midnight pillow." " The wicked flee when no man 
pursueth." " The sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them ; and they shall flee as fleeing 
from a sword ; and they shall fall when none pursueth." 

III. Sin desolating the land in which it was committed. " That her land may 
be desolate from all that is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell 
therein. And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be 
desolate." Instead of " Thut her land may be desolate from all that is therem," the 
margin reads, " from the fulness thereof." The meaning seems to be that the land 
would be " stripped of all its inhabitants and of all its wealth." The land of Israel was 
once fair and fertile — " a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths 
that spring out of valleys and hills," etc. (Deut. viii. 7 — 9). In the time of Solomon 
the Tyrians received large quantities of corn and wine and oil from this fruitful land 
(1 Rings V. 11 ; 2 Chron. ii. 10). But what is its condition now? And what has 
been its condition for ages past ? " He turneth a fruitful land into barrenness, for the 
wickedness of them that dwell therein." " The plain of Jordan, well-watered every- 
where, and as the garden of the Lord " (Gun. xiii. 10) is not the only example of 



3H. XII. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 227 

fertility, being changed into barrenness because of the sins of the people. Other lands 
have had a similar fate, but by a different process. There are sins by which lands are 
still laid waste. Indolence, effeminacy, self-indulgence, delight in war, and social 
oppression, in every age produce impoverishment and desolation in any country where 
they prevail. 

IV. Divine jttbgment beoausb of sin leading sinners to know that Jehovah is 
THE ONE LIVING AND TRUE GoD. "And ve shall know that I am the Lord" (see our 
notes on these words in ch. vi. 7, 10 ; xi. 10). — W. J. 

Vers. 21 — 28. — Tlie word of the Lord discredited and vindicated. "And the word 
of the Lord came unto me, saying. Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in 
the land of Israel ? " etc. 

I. The word of the Lord discredited. 1. It was discredited in various degrees. 
(1) By some it was entirely disbelieved. " Son of man, what is that proverb that ye 
have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth ? " 
The reference in this proverb is to the predictions of the Divine judgments against 
Jerusalem and its inhabitants, which had been made by Jeremiah long ago. And the 
proverb is a jeering expression, indicating the opinion that these predictions had totally 
failed. These sceptics argued within themselves and amongst themselves, that because 
the fulfilment of the threatened judgment was delayed, the threatening itself was 
untrue. " The experience of God's forbearance had destroyed their apprehension of his 
truthfulness." Ttiis sinful misinterpretation of the Divine dealings is not confined to 
that generation or to that people. We discover the same presumptuous unbelief in 
Ps. 1. 21, " Ttiese things hast thou done ; and I kept silence," etc, ; in Eccles. viii. 11, 
" Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily," etc. ; and in 2 Pet. 
iii. 3, 4, " There shall come in the last days scoffers," etc. What an abuse is this of 
the patience of the Lord God I What a base perversion of his forbearance and grace 
(cf. Bom. iu 4 — 11 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9) I (2) By others the word of the Lord was dis- 
credited by indefinitely postponing its fulfilment. " Son of man, behold, the house of 
Israel say, The vision that he seeth is for many days, and he prophesieth of the times 
that are far off." These persons argued that, because the fulfilment of the threatenings 
of Jeremiah had been delayed so long, that fulfilment was yet far off. They concluded 
that the prophetic visions would not be realized in their time, and therefore they need 
not be troubled by them. 2. It was discredited in open expression. " Behold, the 
house of Israel say. The vision that he seeth is for many days," etc. (ver. 27). In the 
case of those who entirely discredited the word of the Lord by the prophet, the terms 
in which they expressed their disbelief had become proverbial. " What is that proverb 
that ye have in the land of Israel ? " etc. (ver. 22). This aantiment, common among 
the people, " had been expressed in a pointed sentence, . . . and straightway became 
[jopular as a watchword, which was taken up on every occasion against the true 
prophet." Their disbelief of the message of the Lord by his prophet, and their derision 
of that prophet, were not veiled, but openly paraded by the people. As Greenhill says, 
" This wicked speech was become a proverb ; it passed through the mouths of all sorts, 
young, old, great, small, learned, ignorant; it was in the city and country, a proverb in 
the land of Israel." Disbelief had grown daring and defiant. 3. This discredit was 
plausibly encouraged. False prophets, by means of vain visions and flattering divi- 
nations, had fostered disbelief of the stern announcements of Jeremiah, the true prophet 
of Jehovali (ver. 24). These men had propiiesied smooth things to the credulous 
house of Israel — credulous, that is, of such announcements as harmonized with their 
inclinations. So Ahab believed the smooth-speaking false prophets to his own death, 
while he hated and imprisoned the faithful Micaiah, the prophet of the Lord Jehovah 
(1 Kings xxii.). And the false prophets of Jereuiiah's age encouraged the presumptuous 
security of the people until that security was shattered by disaster and ruin. 

II. The word of the Lord vindicated by himself. 1. By its contin»*d procla- 
mation. The people of Jerusalem probably thought by their, disbelief and adrision to 
put to silence the word of the Lord by Jeremiah his prophet. But God still speaks 
by him, and by Ezekiel also. " Tell them therefore, Thus saith the Lord God," etc. 
(ver. 23). " I am the Lord : I will speak," etc. (ver. 25). " Therefore say unto them, 
Thus saith the Lord God," etc. (vor. 28). la this way God speaks again and again to 



228 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xin. 1— 23, 



this unbelieving and rebellious people. He will not leave himself without faithful 
witnesses, who will speak his word even to the most sceptical and stubborn of men 
(cf. ch. ii. 3 — 7 ; iii. 4 — 11). 2. By Us full and speedy fulfilment. The Lord here 
declares that : (1) His word should be fulfilled speedily. " Say unto them, The days 
are at hand, and the effect of every vision. ... I will speak, and the word that I 
shall speak shall come to pass ; it shall be no more prolonged : for in your days, 
rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the Lord God. . . , 
There shall none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have 
•poken shall be done, saith the Lord God." And, as Hengstenberg says, "the 
announcement of the prophet has passed into fulfilment in a terrible manner. Scarcely 
five years elapsed when Jerusalem with its temple lay in ruins ; and those who had 
filled their belly with the east wind of their proud hopes of the future were either lost 
or envied the dead." (2) His word should be fulfilled completely. " The days are at 
hand, and the effect of every vision." The full "contents of every prediction" would 
be brought to pass. The unbelieving and rebellious people probably thought that even 
if things came to the worst, they could not be so bad as in the prophetic representations, 
that Jeremiah had exaggerated the troubles that were coming upon the nation. But 
"the word of every vision" was at hand. No partial fulfilment was about to take 
place. Every word of prophetic prediction was to be realized. 3. By putting to silence 
the false prophets who had discredited it. " There shall no more be any vain vision nor 
flattering divinatiun within the house of Israel." The events that were drawing so 
near would confound these prophesiers of smooth things. The complete fulfilment of 
the visions of the true prophet would effectually stop the mouths of the false ones. 

Conclusion. Our subject presents to us : 1. An assurance of the certainty of the 
fulfilment of the Word of the Lord. (C£ Numb, xxiii. 19 ; Ps, Ixxxiz. 34 ; Matt. v. 18 ; 
ixiv. 35; Luke xvi. 17; 1 Pet. i. 23 — 25.) 2. Warning against unbelief of the Word 
of the Lord, and against the false security arising therefrom. The punishment 
denounced against sin will certainly be inflicted unless the sinner turn from his evil 
way. 3. Encouragement to trust the Word of the Lord. Its promises are true and 
reliable. The hopes which it inspires are not delusive. " For how many soever be the 
promises of God, in him is the Yea : wherefore also through him is the Amen, unto the 
glory of God through us." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER xm. 



Ver. 1. — Another interval follows, and 
then a fresh and fuller burst of inspiration, 
manifestly in close connection with ch. xii. 
21 — 28, and to be read in combination 
with Jer. xxiii., which, as Jeremiah was in 
communication with the exiles (Jer. xxix. 
1), Ezekiel may probably have seen. There 
were false prophets and prophetesses among 
the exiles as well as in Jerusalem, and an 
utterance is now found for his long-pent-up 
indignation. 

Vers. 2, 3. — Son of man, prophesy, etc. 
The sin of the men whom Ezekiel denounced 
was that they prophesied ont of their own 
hearts (Jer. xiv. 14; xxiii. 16, 26), and 
followed their own spirit instead of the 
Spirit of Jehovah. All was human and of 
the earth. Not a single fact in the future, 
not a single eternal law governing both the 
future and the past, was brought to light 
by it. To one who was conscious that he 
had a meapage which he had not devised 
himself, anil which he had not been taught 



by men (Gal. i. 12) j that he had no selfish 
by-end.s in what he said and did; that he 
was risking peace, reputation, life itself, for 
the truth revealed to him, — nothing could 
be more repulsive than this claim to have 
seen a vision of Jehovah, by men who had in 
reality seen nothing. For foolish prophets, 
read, with the stronger Hebrew, the prophets, 
the f vols, the words deriving their force from 
a kind of paronomasia of alliteration. The 
nal'iim are also the n'balim. 

Ver. 4. — Like the foxes in the deserts, etc. 
The points of comparison are manifold. 
The fox is cunning (Luke xiii. 32, where 
tlie tt-rra is applied to Herod Antipas). It 
spoils the vine and its fruits (Song of Sol. 
ii. 15); it burrows among ruins (Neh. iv. 3; 
Laju. V. 18). So the false prophets were 
crtifty, laid waste the vineyard of the Lord 
of hosts (Isa. V. 7), made their profit out 
of the ruin of Israel, and made that ruin 
worse. The ' Boineke Fuchs,' in satirizing 
the monks and priests of the sixteenth cen- 
tury under the same comparison, presentf 
a curious, though probably unconscious, 



CH. XIII. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 



229 



analogue. In Maft. vii. 15 and Acts xx. 
29 wolves appear as the types of the false 
prophet. 

Ver. 5. — The verse contains two distinct 
images. There were breaches in the walls 
of Jerusalem, literally and spiritually, and 
the false prophets had not been as " repairers 
of the breach" (Isa. Iviii. 12; Ps. ovi. 23). 
The hedge of the vineyard of Israel had 
been broken through (Isa. v. 5), and they 
had done nothing to restore it (ch. xxii. 30). 
The day of battle, the day of the Lord, had 
come, and they were betraying the people 
instead of helping. 

Ver. 6.— The lord saith. The verb is that 
specially used for the utterance of propheis, 
and the deceivers used it without the autho- 
rity of a true mission. For they have made 
others (or, men) to hope, etc., as in the Au- 
thorized Version and Revised Version, reail, 
with the margin of Bevisid Version, they 
hope to confirm their word, taking the verb 
as in Ps. cxix. 43, 49; Job vi. 11, et al.). 
So the Vulgate, pereeveraverunt confirmare. 
Through deceiving others, they came to 
deceive themselves, and were really expect- 
ing a fulfilment. 

Ver. 9. — Mine hand shall be, etc. After 
Ezekiel's manner, the thought of ver. 6 is 
repeated in an altered form in vers. 7, 8. 
What had been a statement appears as a 
question to which there could be but one 
answer. The prophet, as it were, cross- 
examines his rivals. Could they deny the 
charge? Was not every word of it true? 
Then, after the statement of the sin of the 
false prophets, comes the proclamation of 
the punishment. The hand of Jehovah 
would be upon them for evil and not for 
good. In the assembly of my people. The 
Hebrew word indicates not a large popular 
gathering, but a secret council of those who 
deliberate together to carry out their plans 
(Ps. Ixxxix. 7; cxi. 1; Jer. vi. 11). The 
prophets who had acted together, and been 
looked up to by the people as forming such 
a council, should lose that position of au- 
thority. The words that follow point to a 
yet lower degi-adatiou. They should be in 
the strictest sense of the word excommuni- 
cated. The city of Jerusalem, perhaps every 
city of Judah, had its register of citizens. 
In such a reg:ister were inscribed also the 
names of proselytes of other races (Ps. IxxxviL 
6), and so men came to think of a like 
register as kept by the King of kings, 
containing the names of those who were 
heiis of the "life" of the true Israel (Exod. 
xxxii. 32; Isa. iv. 3; Dan. xiL 1). In 
neither of those registers, the earthly and 
the heavenly (but stress is probably laid 
upon the former), shall the false prophets 
find a place. Ezra ii. 62 gives an example 
of the use made of such registen on the 



return Crom the Captivity. One notes the 
contrast between the "my people" which 
recognizes Israel as still the heritage of 
Jehovah, and the "thy people" used in 
ch. iii. 11 of the rebellious house of the 
Captivity. For the false prophets there 
should be no return to the land of Israel 
such as that which the prophet anticipated 
for the faitliful and the penitent (oh. xxivii. 
21 ; comp. Isa. Ivii. 13). Here there is no 
specific mention of the name being struck 
out. The prophet contemplates a new 
register, in which their names will never 
even have appeared. 

Ver. 10. — Peace, when there was no peaoe. 
This, as in Micah iii. 5; Jer. vi. 14; xxiii. 
17 ; Zech. x. 2, was the root-evil of the fiilse 
prophet's work. He lulled men into a false 
security, and so narcotized their consciences. 
One built up a wall. The imagery starts 
from the picture of a ruined city already 
implied in vers. 4 and 5, and expands into 
a parable in which we note a parallelism 
(1) to Isaiah's picture of dishonest and un- 
safe building (xxx. 13); (2) to our Lord's 
parable at the end of the sermon on the 
mount (Matt. vil. 24, 25 ; Luke vi. 47—49). 
With an incisive sarcasm, Ezekiel describes 
what we should call the " scamp-work " of 
their spiritual building. They profess to 
be " repairers of the breach " (Isa. Ivili. 12) 
in the walls of the spiritual Zion, and this 
is how they set about it. One built up a 
wall. This may point to a false prophet, 
but the " one " (Hebrew, " he ") is probably 
indefinite, like the French on, equivalent to 
"some one." Some scheme is devised, an 
Egyptian alliance or the like, to which the 
people look for safety. It is, as in the margin 
of the Authorized Version, a " slight wall," 
such as was used for partition walls inside 
houses. They make it do duty as an out- 
side wall (Mr in ver. 12). It has no sure 
"footings," and materials and workmanship 
are alike defective. The false prophets 
would smear it over with untempered mortar 
(the Hebrew word is found only here and 
in ch. xxii. 28, and is probably an example 
of Ezekiel's acquaintance with the technical 
vocabulary of his time) — with a stucco or 
plaster, which is hardly better than white- 
wash (compare the " whitened " or plastered 
wall or sepulchre of Matt, xxiii. 27; Luke 
xi. 44 ; Acts xxiii. 3), used to hide its defects 
and give it a semblance of solidity. They 
come, that is, with smooth words and pro- 
mises of peace. 

Ver. 11. — In words which would almost 
seem to have been in our Lord's thoughts 
in Matt. vii. 25, we have the pictore of an 
Eastern storm, torrents of rain passing into 
hail (LXX., \lSoi verpipo^oi), accompanied 
by a tornado of irresistible violenoe (oom- 
paie like pictures in Exod. is. 22; Josh. 



230 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xni. 1— 23. 



X. 11; Isa. XXX. 80; xxviii. 2, 17). And 
wheu the disaster comes men will turn to 
those who professed to be master-builders 
and repairers of the breach, with derision, 
and ask, " Where ia the daubing wherewith 
ye have daubed?" And then men shall 
see that through all this it is Jehovah's 
hand that has been working. It is he wlio 
"rends" the wall; he who "brings it down 
to tlie ground;" he who "accomplishes his 
wrath" (vers. 13—15). That shall be the 
end of the false " visions of peace." 

Ver. 17. — Set thy face against the daugh- 
ters of thy people. Here we note that the for- 
mula, " thy people," of ch. iil. 11 reappears. 
The section which follows (vers. 17 — 23) 
throws an interesting side-light on the 
position of women in the religious life of 
Israel. For good as for evil, their influence 
was stronger there than in most other na- 
tions. Miriam had led the way (Exod. xv. 
21), and had been followed by Deborah 
(Judg. T. 4). Huldah had been almost as 
prominent in Josiah's reformation as HU- 
kiah the high priest (2 Kings xxii. 14—20 ; 
2 Chron. xxxiv. 22). It was but natural 
that there should be women on the other 
side also, guiding their own sex ; and it is 
probable that Bzekiel had in his thoughts 
some special leaders who headed the women 
of Jerusalem in their opposition to Jere- 
miah, as afterwards at Futhros (Jer. xliv. 
15). So, later on, we have the prophetess 
Noadiah heading the opposition to Nelie- 
miah (Neh. vi. 14) ; and in the New Testa- 
ment, on the one hand, Anna (Luke ii. 36) 
and the daughters of Philip (Acts xxi. 9), 
and on the other, the ill-regulated prophet- 
esses of Corinth (1 Cor. xi. 5) and the 
woman Jezebel, who called herself a pro- 
phetess (Bev. ii. 20). 

Ver. 18. — Woe to the women who sew 
pillows, etc. Ezekiel's minute description, 
though it is from a different standpoint, 
reminds us of that in Isa. iii. 18 — 26. In 
both cases (here are the difiiculties insepar- 
able from tlie fact that he had seen what 
he describes, and that we have not; and 
that lie uses words which were familiar 
enough then, but are now found nowhere 
else, so that (as in the cuse of the ^ova-la of 
1 Cor, xi. 10) we have to guess their mean- 
ing. The picture which he draws of a false 
prophetess is obviously taken from the lile, 
and the dress, we can scarcely doubt, was one 
that belouged to her calling. The word for 
" sew" meets us in Gen. iii. 7 ; Job x^-i. 15 ; 
Kccles. iii. 7; and the English is an adequate 
rendering. For the word rendered "pillows," 
the LXX. gives ■irpoaKe<j)6\aia, the Vulgate 
pulvilU (equivalent to "cushions"). The 
word here obviously denotes an article of 
dress, something fastened to the arms. For 
anu-holai, read Join<< o/ Hw tvx) hands, which 



may mean either knuckles, wrists, or (as in 
tlie Kevised Version) elbows. Possibly these 
may have been, like the phylacteries of Matt, 
xxiii. 5, cases containing charms or incan- 
tations, and used as amulets. Sometliing 
analogous to, if not identical with, these orna- 
ments, is found in the "seeress wreaths," and 
"divining garments" of Cassandra (.^seh., 
•Agamemnon,' 1237—1242), and io the 
"garlands" or "fillets" of the Pythian 
priestess in .ffisch., ' Eumen.,' 39. By some 
writers (Havernick) the word has been taken, 
as, perhaps, in the Authorized Version, for 
"pillows" in the larger sense, either lite- 
rally as used in wanton luxury, like the 
" tapestry " of Prov. vii. 16, or figuratively, 
like the "wall" of the preceding section, 
for counsels that lulled the conscience into 
the slumber of a false security. Strangely 
enough, the Hebrew noun rendered "arm- 
holes" has the pronominal suffix "mjarms," 
or "mj/ hands." Keil accepts this rendering, 
and explains it as meaning that the prophet- 
esses sought to " bind the arms," i.e. to re- 
strain the power of Jehovah. On the whole, 
it is safer to follow Ewald and Hitzig, as 
I have done above. Make kerchiefs npon 
the head of every stature. The word for 
"kerchiefs" is again unique, but is, per- 
haps, a variant of the word in Isa. iii. 22, 
and rendered "wimples" in the Autho- 
rized Version. There is a fair consensus of 
interpretations that it means, as "kerchief" 
means, some covering for the head, » veil 
that hangs down over it, like the Spanish 
mantilla. Its use is, perhaps, explained 
by the words that follow, which suggest 
that the veils were not worn by the prophet- 
esses themselves, but by those who came to 
consult them. The former had, as it were, 
a whole wardrobe of such veils adapted to 
persons of various heights, so that in all 
cases it shrouded their whole form. We 
may, perhaps, read between the lines the 
thought that their utterances, like their 
veils, were adapted to suit every age and 
every taste. Analogous usages preseut 
themselves in the tallith of later Judaism, 
and the veil worn by the Roman augurs. 
Ezekiel paints, we may believe, what he 
had seen. And in tliose veils he bad seen 
a net rast over the victims of the false 
prophetesses, a snare from which they 
could not escape. Will ye hunt, etc. ? The 
question (that form is preferable to the 
affirmative of the margin of the Bevised 
Version) is one of burning indiguation. 
Omitting the words, "that come" (which 
have nothing in the Hebrew correspondiog 
to them), the second clause will run, "Will 
ye make your own souls live?" and the 
question is explained by what follows. The 
prophetesses were living upon the credulity 
of the victims over whom they cost their neti 



eft. iiiL 1—^3.] Mb book op TSB PEOPflllT EZEKIEL. 



2^1 



Ver. 19. — Will ye pollute me, etc. ? rather, 
with the Revised Version, ye have profaned, 
the interrogative form not being continued 
in the Hebrew. The prophet dwells -with 
scorn on the miserable pay for wliioh the 
prophetesses were guilty of so great a sin. 
Not for rewards of divination, like those of 
Balaam (Numb. xxii. 7), but for gifts like 
those bestowed on the harlot or the beggar 
(1 Sam. ii. 36 ; Hos. iii. 2)— for handfuls of 
barley and pieces of bread — they plied their 
wretched trade. For examples of the lower 
gifts in kind (offered to prophets, compare 
those of Saul (1 Sam. ix. 8), of Jeroboam's 
wife (1 Kings xiv. 3), the false prophets in 
Micah iii. S. And they did this in direct 
opposition to the will of Jehovah. They 
" Blew," i.e. drew on to destruction, the souls 
that were meant for life. They " saved the 
souls alive," t.«. their own, which were 
worthy of death." That was the oatcome 
of their "lying" divinations. 

Ver. 20 — To make them fly, etc. ; rather, 
with the Revised Version and Ewald, as 
if they were hirdt, carrying out the thought 



that the amulets on the arms of the prophet- 
esses, and the veil cast over the heads of 
the votaries, were like the snare of the fowler. 
So the threat that follows, that the amulets 
should be torn off and the veil rent, is 
practically equivalent to the promise that 
the victims should be " delivered out of the 
snare of the fowler" (Ps. xol 3; cxxiv. 7). 
They should no longer be in the power of 
those who traded on their credulity. They 
too shall know that he who speaks is in- 
deed Jehovah. 

Ver. 22. — Because with lies, etc. What 
specially stirred Ezekiel's indignation was 
that the false prophetesses saddened the 
hearts of the righteous (of those who looked 
to him aud Jeremiah for guidance) with 
prophecies of evU, and deluded the evil- 
doer by false hopes, go that he should 
not turn from his evil way and live. For 
by promising him life, read, with the LXX., 
Vulgate, and Luther, and the Revised Ver 
sion, that he ehould live, as he would do, if 
he turned from his wickedness (ch. iU. 21 ; 
xviii. 9, 17). 



HOMILETIGS. 

Ver. 2. — Prophesying against the prophets. I. Thet who teach others need 
THEMSELVES TO BE TAUGHT. No man Is a perfect fountain of original knowledge. The 
teacher must not only be a scholar in his early days, he must be a learner all through 
his life. Moreover, in regard to his own experience he needs light and help. He is 
not merely a voice for other souls. He too has a soul which may be in darkness, even 
while he is striving to illumine his hearers. There is great danger in the profes- 
sionalism of the pulpit. It comes to be taken for granted too readily that familiarity 
in handling the words of eternal life presupposes a healthy possession of that life. 
Preachers hear but few sermons. We want missionaries to the pulpit of our land, that 
the lea'lers of the people's religion may be led by the truth of God. 

II. They who teach othbks mat be whollt wrong themselves. The professional 
prophets of Israel were many of them false prophets. They were not simply blind 
and in error. They made lying pretences to an inspiration which they did not possess, 
and they flattered people with vain visions which they had themselves cunningly 
devised. Their's was guilt of deepest dye. The teacher may fall into error uninten- 
tionally, for he is a fallible man ; and then his mistake will not be culpable. But 
deception and moral failure are fatal sins. Surely every one who stands in the respon- 
sible position of a leader of others has a double motive for searching his own soul to 
see that he is not a false prophet. ^ , , v 

III. They who teach othebs will bb called to account by IJod. trod has been 
watching the false prophets, and now Ezekiel is sent with a special message to them. 
What then, is the advantage of prostituting the high mission of a servant of God for 
the sake of 'popular favour? The flatteries of a deluded multitude will not save the 
deceiver when he is called to account by his great Master. Nay, those flatteries will 
turn to curses when the victims of his base deception have their eyes open to the snare 
which he has laid for them. Of all pursuits, that of preaching simply for popularity is 
the most dangerous and degrading. 

IV They who teach others only their own ideas in the name or God abb the 
1I08TFAL8B TEACHERS. The prophets of Jerusalem did not only flatter the people with 
popular teaching, they carried that teaching out of their own hearts, and then ascrilied 
it to God Now, the prophet was an inspired man, or he was nothing. His sole busi- 
ness vas to declare the Divinf message— " Thus salth the Lord." But in speaking 



232 THE BOOK OP THE PKOPllKT EZEKIEL. [ch. xiii. 1—23. 

only out of his own heart he knew that he had no such message. Yet by professing 
to be a prophet he claimed to he giving it. Here was his great sin. He was forging 
the name of God for his own inventions (see ver. 6). Similar is the sm of the preacher 
in a Christian pulpit who uses that vantage-groutid to expound his own private ideas 
to the neglect of, or even in opposition to, the teachings of the Bible, and yet on the 
authority of the Christian ministry. This is treason against Christ. 

Ver. 4. — Foxes. Ezekiel here likens the false prophets to foxes in waste places. 
This cutting comparison shows the daring of the true prophet, the extremity of the 
evil of false prophecy, and the crying need of exposure of this evil. There is a limit 
to the reserve of politeness when truth is dislionoured and God insulted by those whom 
a culpable charity still flatters with terms of friendliness. Christ called Herod a fox 
(Luke xiii. 32). Still, it needs the grace of Christ or the inspiration of an Ezekiel to 
be sure that one's use of such a title ior a fellow-man is not misapplied. Consider in 
what respects false teachers may be compared to foxes. 

I. Poxes ake wild animals. The comparison is with creatures untamed and 
practically untamable. Now, to all appearance the false prophets were very different, were 
the very opposite in manners and demeanour. They were the trained sophists of an 
ancient civiUzation, court preachers well skilled in the use of oily phrases, masters of 
polite diction. To call such men foxes would seem to be an extravagant insult. 
Nevertheless, beneath the gracious exterior there was the heart of the untamed animaL 
These teachers were not submissive to the guidance of the Spirit of God. All who 
refuse that guidance are wandering in the wilderness of life. They are not the sheep 
of God's flock, but like the foxes that range at large outside the fold. 

II. Poxes ake destructive animals. Among the Hebrews they were not cele- 
brated for the cunning for which they were famous in Greek fables, but for their 
wasting mischief. False teachers are compared to these ravenous beasts. The wilful 
teachers of error are like the wreckers who hang out false lights to draw ships to the 
rocks. The destruction is twofold. 1. By driving from the true pastures. Thus the 
flock is starved in the wilderness. Error draws men off from the wholesome food of 
truth. 2. By direct vnjv/ry. The foxes tear and devour the lambs of the flock. Error 
has deadly fangs in spite of its gracious aspect. 

III. Poxes haunt boinous places. Ezekiel imagines the foxes among ruins. False 
teaching flourishes when the Church has fallen into decay. A low moral tone prepares 
the way for error. If the soul were in a vigorous condition, the deceitfulness of an 
unworthy teacher would be speedily detected. It is only spiritual degeneracy that can 
give an opportunity for the religious charlatan. 

IV. Foxes boam about in the dare. They are creatures of the night. Deceitful 
teaxshers prey upon the ignorant and superstitious. Like the wild animals that only 
creep out under shelter of night, they prowl about in the shadows of dark times. 
They dread the day. Therefore the remedy is to be found in the spread of hght. We 
cannot conquer error by directly refuting it so well as by fortifying people against it 
With a clear, strong teaching of truth. The foxes of error are on the look out *br their 
\ ictims. Let the shepherds of light be to the fore in keeping the pure trutn of tte New 
Testament well in the minds and hearts of the people. 

Ver. 10. — False pecux. " Peace ; and there was no peace." 

I. Men cbave peace. A city is alarmed at the prospect of an attack. W^ar stands 
with famine and plague as one of the three great scourges of man, and it is the 
greatest of the three. There is a worse war than that of man with his follow — the 
war of sin against the soul, the war of the soul against God. This spiritual war wounds, 
slays, devastates, terrorizes. It is true that many who wage it never confess its hurt- 
fulness, and even profess a joy in their condition. But when men retire into the silence 
of their own souls they must feel that the unrest within, which perhaps they do not 
yet ascribe to their sinful alienation from God, is a source of utter weariness, perhaps 
even of loul-agony. Cowper exclaims — 

" Oh for a lodge in some vast wildemesa. 
Some boundless contiguity of shade. 
Where rumour of oppression and deceit, 



CH. xiii. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, 233 



Of unsuccessful or successful war, 
Might never reach me more 1 " 

II. There are false promises of peace. Bzekiel's contemporary prophets pro- 
mised peace, though Jerusalem was threatened with destruction by the true prophets 
of God. l._ The peace of unbelief. The threatenings of judgment are discredited. 
Future punishment is regarded as an invention of the priests to keep their dupes in 
subjection. 2. The peace of self-satisfaction. The true prophets denounced sin ; but 
the false prophets flattered with smooth words. There is a teaching which minimizes 
sin and guilt, and so lulls the alarmed conscience to sleep. 3. The peace of presump- 
tion. The false teachers taught their hearers to presume on the favour of God, and to 
assume that God would never suffer Jerusalem to be destroyed. So men now abuse the 
revelation of God's love by assuming that he will never smite in anger. 

III. Words of peace will not create peace. The prophets might say " peace ; " 
but there would be no more peace for all their reiteration of the pleasant message. 
Smooth doctrines do not make smooth facts. We may enjoy a rosy theology with no 
shadows in its ideas; but if there are shadows in life, they will not be softened theeby. 
The future is not shaped by our notions of what it should be ; neither is real peace 
given in the present by mere words of peace. The need is deeper than that which any 
assuring language can satisfy. The unrest of the soul calls for an active, powerful 
pacifying. Till that is experienced the soul will be restless still. 

IV. CiiKisT ALONE BRINGS TKUB PEACE. There is a peace of God, but it is not to 
be got through flattering words and pleasant assurances. Perhaps storms and trouble 
will precede it. At least there must be the break-up of the false peace in the revolu- 
tion of complete repentance. Then Christ will not only spea7c peace; he comes to 
make peace (Bph. ii. 15). His peace is brought about by his victory over sin, which 
is the one fundamental cause of war between the soul and God, and of unrest in the 
soul itself. Christ reconciles us to God by his cross, and brings our souls into harmony 
with the will of God. This is the only sure and solid peace. 

Vers. 11 — 16. — " Untempered mortor." The teaching of the false prophets of peace 
is here compared to a wall built of untempered mortar, which is overthrown in a 
tempest. 

I. A FALSE HOPE 18 LIKE A WALL BUILT WITH UNTEMPERED MOKTAB. 1. It offers 

protection. The wall is built, and it endures long enough to invite the threatened 
people to take shelter behind it. It stands between them and the enemy. So a false 
hope is planted between men and their danger, like a city wall, and it encourages 
them to despise the danger. 2. It presents a fair appearance. The wall may be well 
designed with towers, and bastions, and battlements, and all the latest improvements in 
plans of fortifications. It has a certain mortar holding the stones to^^ether, which 
may appear to be of the very best quality. So false hopes charm with an appearance 
of solidity. 3. It contains solid materials. It is not a mere mound of earth. There 
are good hewn stones in the structure. Hence its deceptive appearance. A lie that is 
half a truth is the most deadly lie. We may have certain solid truths of the Christian 
religion. Yet if these are not united by personal faith they hang loosely together, 
and will not save us. 4. It lacks an essential element. The mortar is rotten. Then 
all the rest goes for nothing. " One thing thou lackest " (Mark x. 21). Yet that 
one thing may be so vital that the absence of it may lead to utter failure. Our system 
of religion, like the teaching of the false prophets, may have every commendable element, 
beauty, symmetry, fulness, etc., except one — truth. Then, alas ! there is nothing to 
hold it together, and the whole is no better than a heap of rubbish. 

II. The tempest or teial will shattbp. a false hope. When we see people who 
are comfortably ensconced in a neat little system of religious conceptions, though we 
know that that system is only held together by the friable mortar of fancy, not by th« 
Portland cement of truth, at fiist it might seem cruel to unsettle them. But it should 
be remembered that they are certain to be unsettled at length, and the only questions 
are as to when and how this will take place. If the rotten wall is not pulled down, 
some day it will be thrown down. 1. The tempest of trial will come. God sends his 
bMlstorm, his hurricane. It cama to Jerusalem in Nebuchadnezzar's invaaion. It 



234 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xni. 1— 23. 

visits every soul at some time, for "man is born to trouble," etc. If our bark is 
ouly made for fair weather, it is doomeH to shipwreck, because tlie storm will break at 
last on every life. If it does not come during our earthly course, it will visit ns at the 
close. Death will then come as a howling tempest. 2. The false hope mil then crumble 
aivay. Hail and hurricane dash down the feeble, pretentious wall. Trouble overthrows 
false hopes. We may be content to live in the dreamland of illusion during the drowsy 
summer days of prosperity. But trouble compels us to be real. Then we are forced to 
ask ourselves in solemn earnestness, "What is truth?" Then the refuge of lies 
tumbles into a hopeless ruin. 3. 'ITie builder of the false hope will suffer in its over- 
throw. "Ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof." False teachers will suffer with 
the overthrow of their teacliinais. They who take refuge in falsehood will be buried in 
the ruin of their delusions. The greatet the hope, the more fearful will be its fall, and 
the more dreadfully will they be bruised and crushed who take up their abode in it. 
4. The false hope is overthrown that we may turn to the triie Hope, " Christ our Hope." 

Vers. 17 — ^20. — Effeminate rdigion. If Ezekiel is not to be read with prosaic literal- 
ne.ss as referring to the women of Jerusalem, but is to be umlerstood to describe, in 
scornful metaphor, the false prophets as daughters of Jerusalem sewing pillows, he has 
here given us a picture of effeminate religion. 

I. The BELiaioN which ignores stern facts is effeminate. 1. Hiere ii a nohle 
sphere for woman in religion. The women of the Bible give us many a fine example 
of exalted piety. From Deborah, " the mother in Israel," to the Marys of the gospel 
story, women have appeared on the sacred page as inspiring examples. The Bible 
elevates the position of woman, and teaches us to treat her with reverence. 2. There 
is something feminine in the highest character of men. We see it in Jeremiah and St. 
John. Christ combines in his own Person the perfection of a woman's character with 
the perfection of a man's. 3. Nevertheless, there is an effeminacy of religion. " Effemi- 
nate," says Hengstenberg, " is all accommodation theology." The present inclination 
to shun the stern facts of revelation, and confine attention to what is pleasing, runs in 
the direction of effeminacy. If we adapt our religion to the inclinations of people, instead 
of declaring the whole counsel of God, whether men will hear or whether they will 
forbear, we betray a sad lack of virile strength. 

II. Effeminate religion aims only at base and comfort. These "daughters 
of Jerusalem," the effeminate prophets, spent their time in sewing pillows when they 
should have been forging swords or building solid walls ; for they were only whispering 
soft words of hollow consolation when they should have been renouncing sin and pre- 
paring to face calamity. 1. There are pillows for evil consciences. Men desire to escape 
from the stabs of conscience. They would lay the restless conscience at ease. An 
effeminate religion helps to do this by lulling the alarmed sense of guilt and danger. 

2. There are pillows for indolence. When called to action effeminate souls prefer ease 
and comfort. We meet with consoling promises in Scripture, but not for such. It is 
the mistake of many that they convert the religion which should be a stimulant into 
an opiate. 

III. Effeminate eeligion must be denounced and opposed. 1. It is cruel. The 
prophets of Jerusalem were fattening themselves at the expense of their neighbours, 
and preserving their own lives by destroying the lives of other people (ver. 18). 2. It 
is mercenary. God is " polluted" for " handfuls of barley and pieces of bread." This 
" preaching to the times " in meek submission to the Zeitgeist is a profitable thing for 
the pi'pular preacher, but it means unfaithfulness to the Master when pleasant words 
only are spoken, and hard truths are hidden in order to bring " grist to the mill." 

3. It is fatal. God says, "Behold, I am against your pillows." The present age has 
a horror of pain. But sin is worse than pain, and rough dealing which saves from sin 
is better than pillows of ease for impenitent souls. They who trust to artificial comfort 
now will be awakened by the terrible arm of judgment. The pillows are supposed to 
be made for God's arms, so that he may act softly. But no Boftened doctrine will 
destroy the stem facts of judgment. 

Ver. 22. — Misplaced sorrow. We have here set before us the twordd mischief of 
the false preaching of peace. The ligliteous are made needlessly sad, and the wicked 



cu. XXII. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 286 

are spared the sorrows which they need to drive them from their evil ways, and are 
thus confirmed in their wickedness. 

I. False ideas in eelioion bbino needless sorrow to good peoplb. One par- 
ticular aspect of this mischief is here brought before us — that of the triumph of sin and 
the prospect of its immunity, together with the persecution of men who resist it. Such 
was the condition of things at Jerusalem under the influence of the popular prophets 
in the days of Jeremiah ; and a similar state appears to have prevailed when Ezekiel 
was writing. But we may see other aspects of the same mischief. 1. Doubt as to Diuim 
justice. If sin is to be unrestrained, goodness may fail. It lonks then as though the 
world were left to drift without control. 2. Doubt as to the Fatherly care of God, 
This is an opposite mistake in appearance, and yet the two lie near together. They 
hoth come from losing the perception of God's active presence. In the second case, 
however, good people may trouble themselves by dwelling exclusively on the stem 
teatures of judgment, through a reaction against the iaxity of popular notions. 3. Mi&- 
application of the doctrine of election. Good people have feared they might not be 
among the elect. A false fatalism has hung like a pall over their hopes. They have 
not seen the freedom of grace, the perfect love of God for every soul, the open door for 
return. 4. A horror of the unpardonable sin. Yet they who fear they have com- 
mitted this sin prove by their very distress that they have not, because that distress 
shows that they are not dead to spiritual things. 

II. False ideas in religion keep away needful sorrow from bad people. 
Sorrow for sin is a wholesome experience, and nothing can be more dangerous than to 
be able to do evil without experiencing any feeling of compunction. The flattering 
theology which would encourage such a condition is the most deadly enemy to its 
dupes, and while it professes kindness to the sinners whom it lulls to sleep as they 
float down the rapids of increasing wickedness, it is really murdering their souls by 
rendering them deaf to the thunders of the cataract. Let us note some of the delusions 
which lead to this fatal result : 1. Disbelief in judgment to come. Soothed by such a 
notion, reckless men imagine that they can sin witli impunity. It would be better for 
them if they were pained by visions of judgment. No doubt the extravagant, coarse 
pictures of a medieval hell have led to a revolt against the idea of future punishment. 
Yet whatever may be the nature of that punishment, justice requires some terrible 
retribution for terrible sin. 2. The belief that Ood is only mild. His love is infinite. 
But therefore it must include wrath against sin. Soft-hearted benevolence is not 
perfect love. 3. Light views of sin. The evil being slightly regarded, its punishment 
is not expected to be great. Moreover, apart from slavish fears of future suffering;, sin 
itself should be sorrowed over as a hateful thing. But while it is painted in flattering 
hues it will not be followed by wholesome compunction. 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORa 

Yera. 1 ^9. Pretended prophets. There is no institution in itself so good but it may 

be corrupted and turned to evil purposes. Prophecy was given to the Hebrew people 
as a token of Jehovah's interest in them and care for them. The intention was to 
afford national guidance and consolation, to give to religion an intellectual character, 
and to counteract any tendency to formalism which a misunderstanding of the sacerdotal 
and sacrificial system would naturally encourage. Prophecy was especially adapted to 
those Israelites who were far from Jerusalem, the scene of sacrifices and of festivals ; 
and the children of the Cajitivity were, in an espicial manner, indebted to the prophets 
for the counsel, the inspiiation, the encouragement, which they needed in their banish- 
ment from the land of their fathers. Amongst these exiles in the East there arose self- 
seekin", ambitious, hypocritical, and pretentious men, who assumed the prophetic 
ofiice "ministered to the prejudices of their fellow-countrymen, and often led them 
astray by their erroneous advice. Against such men Ezekiel was commissioned to 
raise his protest, in language of severe denunciation and warning. 

I. The peofession and claims of the false pkophets. The men here exposed 
were not prophets of any heathen deity, ministers of any idolatrous religion. They 
claimed to be servants of Jehovah, and to speak in his name to their fellow-country- 



236 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiii. 1—23. 

men. They prefaced their statements and their advice with such language as Ezekel 
here quotes : " Hear ye the word of the Lord ; " " The Lord saith." Doubtless there 
were those who were conciliated and attracted by such ciaims, but who would have 
resented any summons addressed to them in the name of a heathen deity. 

n. The practical conteadiotion of their pbofbssion and claims. In terms 
figurative, yet impressive and conclusive, Ezekiel exhibits the hoUowness of the 
pretences advanced by these lying leaders of the people. They are " like foxes in the 
waste places " — cunning, crafty creatures, who make their dwelling in the ruins and 
the wreck of a deserted city. So the prophets who profess to guide the people really 
prey upon them, and are most at home in the destruction and desolation which they 
have helped to effect. They have not taken their place in the breach, they have not 
helped in the defence of the city, they have not stood in the van of the battle, when 
the enemy has made an assault. Here is the practical test, which reveals the worth- 
lessness of all professions of patriotism, of all claims to leadership. 

III. The seal ikspibation of the false prophets. The secret is disclosed; the 
explanation of the illusion is given. The false prophets prophesy out of their own 
hearts ; they follow their own spirit ; they have seen nothing ; the Lord hath not sent 
them; theirs is a lying divination; they have spoken vanity, and seen lies. In a 
word, professing to derive their commission and their message from the Eternal, the 
All- wise, they simply utter what commends itself to their own opinion, what serves 
their own interest, what agrees with their own sinful prejudices. This accounts for the 
unwisdom and worthlessness of their advice. They who follow them may expect to 
be misled. 

IV. The condemnation of the false prophets. " Woe unto the foolish prophets, 
saith the Lord God ; " " I am against you." This condemnation is apparent from 
several facts. 1. Their predictions are falsified, and their counsels brought to nought. 
2. They mislead the people to destruction. 3. They bring confusion upon themselves. 
This sentence is pronounced in language very plain and very smiting. The hypo- 
critical pretenders to a Divine commission are excluded from the register of the house 
of Israel, and are denied entrance into the land of Israel. All their plotting and lies 
are not only unmasked ; they issue in confusion and destruction to themselves. — ^T. 

Vers. 10 — 16. — The vanity of flattering counsel. It has often been observed regarding 
the recorded discourses of the Lord Jesus, that his severest denunciations were directed 
against the hypocritical professors of religion, especially such as misled their fellow- 
men into error and sin. The same may be said of Ezekiel; his language, when 
exposing the hollow pretensions of the false and foolish prophets, who hy their advice 
were leading the people into destruction, becomes almost invective. The particular 
offence of which these hypocrites were guilty was this — they encouraged the people, in 
opposition to the declarations of Jehovah by his prophets, to believe that the nation 
stood in no special danger ; they professed to " see visions of peace " for Jerusalem ; 
and they by this means hindered the people from repentance and reformation, in which 
alone lay the possibility of salvation. In Ezekiel's view these false prophets pretended 
to build up the edifice of national stability and prosperity upon unsound foundations 
and with untempered mortar; all defects were smeared with plaster and concealed from 
an ordinary observer. The prophet, however, foretold the approach of torrents of rain 
and hailstones, by which the worthlessness of this pretentious work should be revealed, 
and the work should be utterly destroyed. 

I. An insecure koundation and structure. Spiritual work is often compared to 
the labour of a builder. The wise and laithful teacher and counsellor lays a sound 
foundation, builds with strong and approved material, carries out a wise plan with 
patience and efficiency, and brings his work to a prosperous issue when the topstone is 
laid with rejoicing. Par otherwise is it with the worldly and crafty, who build for their 
own selfish purposes, who are careless as to the basis upon which they rear the edifice, 
as to the substance, and the workmanship. All they care for is the appearance presented 
by their work. When they labour professedly for the good of their fellow-men, they 
are like the builder who uses rotten stone and daubs it with untempered mortar. The 
structure is for a time imposing to the eye of the beholder; defects are hidden, and all 
looks well. Those who mislead the Lord's people are in the habit of saying, "Feacel" 



eiB. iiii. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 237 



when there is no peace. Their visions are illusive, and their prophecies are felse- 

hoi ids. 

II. Stobu ».nd bain. The plausible appearance is but for a season. Time tries all. 
There is ever a day of reckoning at hand. The prophet of the Lord reminds pretenders 
and hypocrites that an overflowing shower, great hailstones, and a stormy wind shall 
come. The anger and fury of the Lord will not always be restrained. It was so la 
the history ot the Jewish people. Smooth things had been prophesied, but not with 
Divine authority. The peace was superficial and brief. The calamities which false 
counsellors had represented as imaginary proved to be an awful reality. What, then, 
became of the work which had been carried out with loud professions of authority, and 
which had appeared to the unobservant so fair and sonnd? The wall was broken 
down, the daubing disappeaied, and they who daubed it were no more seen. " Who 
can abide the day of his coming?" In the hour of trial there is no security save in a 
Divine foundation, in workmanship wrought upon Divine principles and in accordance 
with Divine plans. The building which is of God shall stand. But the worthlessness 
of all beside shall be made manifest. What is not of God shall be swept away by the 
flood and tempest of inevitable judgment. 

Application. 1. The solemnity and responsibility of the ministry to souls are 
impressively taught in the imagery of this passage. Let every man take heed what 
and how he builds. 2. The importance is made apparent of applying to wise and 
faithful counsellors. It is not the learned, the prudent, the pretentious, who must 
needs be right and trustworthy. Let every man try the spirits, whether they are 
taught of God.— T. 

Vers. 17 — 23. — False prophetesses. Women have always played an important part 
in the religious history of every nation, sometimes for good, sometimes for evil. The 
Scriptures, with their proverbial impartiality, record instances of both kinds — of women 
who rendered signal service to their people by their fidelity to God, and of women who 
used their influence to corrupt and to mislead those over whom their power extended. 
Of the prophetesses whose pretensions are exposed in this passage we know nothing 
irom other sources of information. But if curiosity is unsatisfied, enough is here 
revealed to justify us in thinking of these women as a very pernicious element in the 
Hebrew nation at the era of the Captivity. 

I. Thbib bbduotivb and imposino abts. It is not important for us to understand 
all the allusions in this passage. Whatever were these pillows and kerchiefs, it seems 
clear that they were used in connection with superstitious divinations, and were 
intended to impress all beholders with a sense of the dignity and mysterious powers of 
these sorceresses. The mystic veil that robed the tall form of the prophetesses, the 
paraphernalia with which such persons were wont to invest themselves, tended to inspire 
reverence and awe, as if for a supernatural power revealed in the stately presence and 
authoritative voice. 

II. Thbib mercenabt ends. There is something picturesque and striking in the 
description given by the prophet of the poor, deluded victims who resorted to the 
sorceresses, carrying with them " handfuls of barley and pieces of bread " — the common 
tribute paid in such cases and to such persons. Probably the women loved to exercise 
power and to exact respect; yet with most of them the motive was mercen;iry, and 
they were content to deceive others if they could enrich, or even support, themselves. 

III. Their pkophecibs. The term could only have been applied to their utterances 
in ironv. For it is evident (1) that their inspiration came from their own heart, and 
(2) that the substance of their so-called prophecies was false. They were animated 
by a desire to please those who resorted to them ; and this they did to gratify their 
own prejudices or to display their own worldly wisdom. In such oommuuications 
there was nothing that deserved the name of prophecy ; for a prophet is one who speaks 
in the place of God, and who shows no regard to the person or tu the wishes of those 
addressed. It was no spirit of rivalry or of jealousy which induced the Prophet Ezekiel 
to speak thus severely of these female impostors; it was for the public good that their 
deceptions should be exposed. 

rV. Theie perversion of righteousness. They are said to have hunted the souls 
of the Lord's people; and this they did by their perverse and unjust oracles. Tin 



238 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xin. 1— 23, 

lasguage used concerning them is very remarkable, and it could not have been UHed 
through inere delight in antithesis. It is said that the ministry of the " prophetesses " 
was " to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not 
live." They were reproached with their attempt to subvert God's righteous provi- 
dence : " With lies ye have grieved the heart of the righteous, whom I have not made 
sad ; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his 
wicked way." A more scathing denunciation could not have been uttered than this ; 
these women strove to overturn the moral order, to encourage the rebellious, and to 
depress the just and godly I 

V. Thbib unmasking and bxposueb. The God of truth and rectitude declared 
himself opposed to these seducers of his people. The symbols of their delusive arts 
should be stripped from them. Their hypocrisy should be unveiled, and their pretences 
should be ridiculed. The means by which they had been wont to ensnare men should 
be taken from them. Their reputation and their power should be destroyed, and their 
influence should come to an end. 

VI. The dblivebancb op their victims. Those whom the false prophetesses sought 
to entangle and to capture were the Lord's people ; and the Lord claimed his own. It 
was his purpose to deliver them out of the hand of their spiritual foe, and to let the 
hunted souls go fi:ee. The means by which this result was to be brought about are 
not stated ; but the resources of the Omnipotent were sufficient to ransom and liberate 
bis own. Thus it should be made apparent to all observers that the Lord reigneth, and 
that he is ever mindful of his own. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The perils of falseness. The work of God's prophets is made more 
difficult by the competition of pretenders. They cater for jiopularity by predicting 
only what is pleasing to flesh and blood. Hence they bring discredit on all God's 
revelations. In Ezekiel's day the false teachers were specially busy in Jerusalem, 
confronting and counteracting Jeremiah; and the sad effect of false hopes was felt at 
Chebar as well as in Judeea. 

I. Cabnal ambition is often the pabent of falsehood. The prophecies and 
counsels of Jeremiah ran counter to all the prejudices and predilections of the people. 
Their fleshly nature rose in arms against such possible disaster. Heedless of God and 
God's plans, they would create for themselves a better fortune. The worldly wise 
among them, gifted with superior speech, resolved to outrival God's prophets — to 
become candidates for popularity — to aspire after political power. Amidst a nation's 
disaster and weakness there is always opportunity for the crafty to gain some sinister 
end. They countenanced any intrigue that promised temporary advantage. Under 
pretence of patriotic zeal, they sought mainly, if not wholly, a personal elevation. 

II. Carnal ambition leads to self-assumption. It is very likely that, at the 
outset, these false prophets deceived themselves. They imagined that they saw a way 
out of the catastrophe, and urged the rulers, against Jeremiah's advice, to pursue that 
way. If it was pleaded that God had ordered otherwise, these men set up a counter- 
authority. Stung by the suggestion that their counsel was not equal in value to that 
of Jeremiah, they boldly claimed to be the messengers of God. In their fanatic zeal 
they deemed their sagacious plans to have been given them from heaven. They were too 
much bent on gaining their end to inquire carefully into this matter. Where was the 
proof that Jeremiah or Ezekiel was more favoured to receive Divine intelligence than 
they? The end would justify the means! Heedless of consequences, they would 
publicly claim to speak as the ambassadors of God. 

III. Self-assumption employs sophistical akts of speech. They are described as 
foxes — notorious for cunning — ^yea, cunning as hungry foxes in the desert. All their 
wits were exercised to weave the most plausible web of argument. Every possible 
circumstance favourable to their desians was seized upon, and made to prop their 
nefarious policy, until what they had induced others to believe, they believed also 
themselves. They ensnared themselves in their own nets. From knaves they gra- 
dually became fanatics. Careless about the exact truth at the beginning, they lost at 
length the power to discern between truth and falsehood. 

IV. Self-assumption is dead to the interests of others. In the fifth verse the 
prophet accuses them thus : " Ye have nut gone up into the gaps, neither made up ilia 



OH. xni. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKTBL. 2M 

hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the battle." They used others, as the monkey 
did the cat's paw. Where arduous toil, and especially where serious danger, appeared, 
they were conspicuous by their absence. Truth makes men at all times courageous, 
but falsehood corrodes the metal of a man's bravery. These pretentious prophets 
desired the honour and the advantage; the risks they devolved on others. Honest 
men were made the ladder by which they sought to climb, 

V. Self-assumption is bube to collapse. Vaulting ambition overleaps itself. 
The frog that would swell its dimensions to the size of a bull destrciyed itself. 1. 
False teachers make Ood their direct enemy. " I am against you, saith the Lord God." 
The God of truth hates hypocrisy. All falseness shall be like empty thistle-down, 
which the wind sc?,tters. 2. They shall be excluded from the circle of honour. They 
had assumed to be heads and leaders in the councils of the nation ; they shall be 
dishonoured, and cast out. of the deliberative assembly. The false shall be, sooner or 
later, excommunicated — blackballed. 3. T/ieir posterity shall hecome extinct. There 
shall be none to perpetuate their name. New honour often comes to the memory of 
a righteous man from children of renown. Such honour and satisfaction shall be 
denied to them. They shall perish root and branch. 4. They shall not participate 
in the coming restoration. " Meither shall they enter into the land of Israel." The 
distinctive possession which God gives shall be for the true Israel, "even for those 
who have no guile." In the time of Israel's real prosperity there " shall not come into 
them the uncircamcised or the unclean." He is a Jew who is one inwardly. — D. 

Vers. 10 — 16. — ITie foolish builders — a parable. In order to make the lesson more 
impressive and more abiding, it is repeated in the form of a parable. Our generous 
God takes immense pains to engrave his truth on human hearts. 

I. National polity ib ANALOSons to a builmno. As the human body requires 
some sort of material dwelling to protect it from external evils, so society requires 
■ome system of national administration that shall protect it against external foes. 
That administration, to be successful, must be a combination of wisdom and strength 

an edifice both moral and material. If a nation cannot withstand all invaders by 

means of its armies and its fortresses, it must maintain itself by means of mutual 
treaty and mutual concord. Some defence it must have. 

II. This BuiLDiNa was framed with slendbb and supekficial materials. The 
weakness and rottenness of the vvalls were concealed with untempered plaster and with 
mere whitewash. An unsound and leaky ship is made no more seaworthy by painting 
her in gay colours. Plausible words do not make a sound policy, neither does good 
raiment m:>ke an honest man. Solid foundations and sound materials are essential to 
make a wall safe or a national policy prosperous. 

III. There was am evil conspibaot. "One built up a vpall, and, lo, others daubed 
it with untempered mortar." EvU men will do, in combination with each other, deeds 
they would not venture on alone. Union is strength, even in wickedness. The base 
policy would commend itself all the more to popular acceptance if it had the support 
(apparently independent) of several advocates. It is a crime to lend ourselves to an 
enterprise merely because it has the sanction of numbers. The quality of its supporters 
must be pondered. 

IV. Testing events wbbe at hand. Every wall or building is designed to resist 
wind and rain. If it cannot do this, its purpose is vain. If it succumbs to storm, it is 
worse than useless; it adds to the peril. It is safer to be in the operi field during 
a storm than t« be within a rickety house. The very provision made for secm-ity, 
if it be ill founded and ill constructed, becomes a new danger. The Jews were aware 
that extraordinary danger was imminent, and therefore ought to have been the more 
careful in their sound defence of the state. Eeckleasness is only sham courage, and is 
the foe of wisdom. 

V. OvBBTHBOW WAS CEBTAIH. If God be against our plans, sueceiB ii impossible. 
No human undertaking can resist Omnipotence. The destruction was foretold, but the 
warning only excited ridicule. It was not simply that the cunning policy of these men 
should be overthrown — that would be a small evil; but the overthrow would be destruc- 
tion to their persons and destruction to the kingdom. They were involving a nation 
in dioaster. We know not nherc the mischief of evil deeds will end. 



240 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZKKIEL, [oh. xm. 1—23. 

VI. Great kbpboach will ensue. " Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be 
said unto you. Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?" The surround- 
ing nations were eagerly watching how thu nation, which boasted of Jehovah as their 
God, would deport itself. If it was seen that the pnnces and captains were bolstering 
up the kinudom with craft and intrigue and falsehood, they would despise their pro- 
fessed faith — yea, despise their God. The names of these foolish builders would be 
bandied about as a byword and a reproach. Their ill fame would follow them 
through many generations. Perpetual discredit and reprobation are a part of God's 
punishment. — D. 

Vers. 17 — 23. — Effeminate religion. Moral evil is sadly contagious. The boastful, 
arrogant temper of the false prophets spread to the women also. It was a time ot 
great excitement — a national crisis, in which all political considerations were inter- 
mingled with religion. Amid the general panic ot fear, women as well as men were 
stirred to action. The party who sought God and desired to know his will were a 
sm.ill minority. The major part of the people, both men and women, were carried 
away by a spirit of carnal wisdom. They cared far more to secure pei'sonal advantage 
than to please God. But the gravamen of their offence was that they falsely assumed 
to speak in the stead of God. 

I. Self-made religion is vain. In every age men have ventured to invent for 
themselves religious creeds and forms. The human mind has chafed against Gud's 
requirements as being irksome and severe, and the world has carved out a religion 
that shall be self-pleasing, a lullaby to conscience, a sedative to fear. The doctrines 
and creeds have been spun out of men's self-consciousness, and have had no foundation 
outside themselves. In the pride of their heart they have imagined that Keason was 
a god, and that this internal god was supreme. They see vanity and prophesy 
falsehood. 

II. This belf-made religion is luxubious. All its beliefs and practices are 
regulated by pleasure. What ministers to present enjoyment is tolerated; what is 
unpleasant is denounced. " They sew pillows to all arm-holes." Bodily ease is para- 
mount. To crucify the flesh is a heresy. To wear a jewelled cross upon the breast is 
an ornament, and is therefore approved ; but to obey commands which are a burden 
to the flesh, to bear Christ's cross of pain and reproach, this is contemned. He who 
really desires acceptance with God may well suspect any religion that panders to 
bodily pleasure. " He who is a friend of the world is an enemy of God." 

III. Self-made religion seeks earthly advantage. "Will ye pollute me 
among my people ior handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread?" These self-styled 
servants of God really cared nothing for the honour of God. They did not scruple 
to profane his Name, and to trample on sacred things, if only they could gain a pittance 
of bread thereby. They made merchandise of religion. It was a religion lor the body, 
not for the soul. They acted as if gain were godliness. So is it ofttimes now. If 
religion would ensure prosperity to sucular business, many men would profess to be 
religious. But if religion frowns upon fraud and deceit, they will eschew it as 
unfriendly to their woildly prospects. Yet, in the long run, godliness is lavourable 
to every human interest. " It is profitable for all things." 

IV. Self-made religion is hostile to righteousness. These false prophets 
sought " to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should 
not live." It seeks to frustrate all God's purposes, to overturn the very foundations 
of righteousness. God's plan of government is to make righteousness contribute to 
life. "The just shall live by faith;" "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." But this 
self-made religion ol proud men strives to arrest the processes of God's rule, and 
endeavours to make the worst things appear tlie best. "It puts darkness for light, 
and light for darkness." It would fain slay the righteous ; for the godly are as thorns 
in the sides of the hypocrite. It seeks to confuse men's ideas of truth and error, of 
right and wrong. 

V. This self-made religion is injurious both to the wicked and to thb 
bighteoub. " Ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made 
sad ; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his 
wicked way." It is God's wise intention that, in proportion as men are righteous, 



OH. xm. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 241 

* 
they should have joy. This is their encouragement and, in part, their reward. He 
who seeks to provunt this is fighting against God. But it is • greater wrong slill to 
encourage the wicked in their evil ways. The pains and disappointments which the 
wicked experience are the thorns with which God would hedge up their way and 
turn them hack. He who promises heaven to sinners is a confederate in their sin, 
and shall share their punishment. Such a one is a soul-murderer. On his skirts is 
indelibly fixed the blood of human souls. To encourage false hopes is treason gainst 
humanity. 

VI. Self-made beliqion shall snFFKR a collapse. Sooner or later the bubble 
will burst, for it has no foundation in truth or in reality. It is a mirage of men's 
heated imagination, and cannot lung endure. The God of truth will, in his own time, 
appear ; will scatter to the winds the flimsy fancies of men ; and the mischief they 
have sought to do to others shall return in tenfold disaster upon their own heads. If 
men will not know and acknowledge God in the day of his kindness, they shall recog- 
nize him in the night-time of his vengeance. Falsuhood cannot perpetuate itself. 
Like Jonah's gourd, it springs up in a night, and in a night it perishes. But the 
truth, like its Author, is omnipotent, and must prevaiL 

" Tmth, crushed to earth, shall rise again. 

The eternal years of God are hers. 

But Error, woimded, writhes with pain, 

And dies amid hra worshippers." 

JX 

Vers. 1 — 16. — The tin and punishment t^ false prophets. "And the word of the 
Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel," etc. 
This subject has already been introduced in oh. xiu 24. In that verse we have as it 
were the text, and in this chapter the sermon. It has been suggested that this chapter 
should be read in conjunction with Jer. xxiiL 9 — 40. "The identity of phrases and 
ideas forces upon us the conclusion that the author of the one must have hsid the other 
before him. We know that Jeremiah's writings were forwarded to the Jews in Chaldea 
(Jer. xxix.), and there is therefore no reason to doubt that Ezekiel took up a well- 
known prophecy to enforce and apply it to his companions in exile. They probably 
had read Jeremiah's words as ajjplying to others than themselves. Ezekiel now would 
teach them that it is not at Jerusalem alone that false prophets are to be discovered 
and reproved. The present chapter, therefore, must be taken as addressed to the Jews 
in exile, which agrees with the whole tenor; see for instMnce ver. 9" (' Speaker's Com- 
mentary '). Two principal lines of thought are followed by the prophtt, viz. the sin 
of the false prophets, and the judgment of God upon them because of their sin. And 
these lines of thought are not kept separate from each other, but they interlace each 
other. We will notice each apart. 

I. The sin op the false prophets. Certain prominent features of their sin are 
brought into view. 1. Their prophecies were self-originated. They prophesied " out 
of their own heart" (ver. 2); they "followed their own spirit, and had seen nothing" 
(ver. 3). In the case of the true prophet, a communication was received by him from 
God wliich he communicated to the people, or a vi,-ion was unfolded to him which he 
afterwards made known to them. There was an objective reality of that which he 
was conscious of within himself; his consciousness of the things which he published 
arose from their verity impressed upon him by the Spirit of God ; his consciousness 
as a prophet was a consequence of Divine influence. But the things proclaimed by 
the false prophets had no existence except in their own mind and heart; they were 
entirely subjective, having no objective truth answering to them. And they were 
not sent of God (ver. 6); they had not received any commission fi'om him; yet they 
presumed to speak in his Name, and to impose upon the people their own imaginations 
as communications received from him. 2. Their prophecies were untrue. "They have 
seen vanity and lying divination, that say. The Lord saith ; and the Lord hath not 
sent them," etc. (vers. 6, 7). " Thus saith the Lord God ; Because ye have spoken 
vanity, and seen lies," etc. An example is given of their lying prophecies: "They 
have seduced my people, saying. Peace ; and there is no peace," etc. They encouraged 
the Jews in Jei usalem to believe that they had nothing to fear from the Chaldean 

EZEKI£li. ■ 



2« THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xm. 1—23. 

I lowers (cf. Jer. xiy. 13 ; xxviii. 1 — 4). And when the people endeavoured to strengthen 
themselves by the coalition with Egypt, they encouraged them in that course ; for as 
we understand it, that is the meaning of the prophetic figure : " When one buildeth up 
a wall, behold, they daab it with untempered mortar." The figure itself ia tiius 
explained by Dr. Kitto; "It is a wall made of beaten earth rammed iuto moulds or 
boxes, to give the parts the requisite shape and coii;sistence, and so deposited, by the 
withdrawal of the mould, layer by layer, upon the wall, each layer drying in its place 
as the work proceeds. The blocks are usually of considerable size, and are of various 
quality and strength, as well as cost, according to the materials employed, and the 
time expended upon them. The simplest are merely of earth, or of earth compacted 
with straw. This is the kind which the prophet had in view, and which is used in 
Devon and in Morocco, as well as in the East. It cannot stand against heavy rains ; 
and therefore, unless the climate be very dry, it requires to be faced or coated with 
a tempered mortar of lime or sand, as a fence against the weather. Without this the 
body of the wall is liable to the contingencies described by the prophet" ('Daily Bible 
Illustrations'). The people built their slight and flimsy wall of political alliance 
against the Chaldeans, and the false prophets coated it with their untempered mortar 
of vain assurances of safety; and the people believed them to their own dread dis- 
comfiture. 3. They claimed Divine authority for their lying prophecies. They said, 
" The Lord saith," although he had not spuken unto them. Great was their presump- 
tion and impious daring in making this high claim. " They counterfeit," as M. Henry 
says, " the broad seal of heaven, than which they cannot do a greater indignity to 
mankind, for hereby they put a reproach upon Divine revelation, lessen its credit, and 
weaken its credibility. When these pretenders are found to be deceivers, atheists and 
infidels will thence infer. They are all so." 4. I'heir influence was destructive. It 
was so in two ways. (1) Negatively. They made no attempt to save the people firom 
the ruin which was coming upon them. " Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither 
made up the fence for the house of Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the 
Lord." When a city is besieged and a breach is made in its walls, the leaders of the 
defence take prompt measures for stopping the breach. The Lord had come against 
his people as a besieger by reason of their sins, but these false prophets, who aspired 
to be leaders of the people, ma<le no effort to save them (cf. cb. xxii. 30). They did 
not call for that repentance and reformation which might have averted the approaching 
ruin, as it did in the case of Mineveh (Jonah iii. 6 — 10). They did not call upon God 
in prayer to spare the sinful people, as Moses did on several occasions (Exod. xxxiL 
11—14, 31—34; Numb. xiv. 13—24; Ps. cvi. 23). False prophets are not likely to 
be famous intercessors. (2) Positively. They actively promoted the ruin of the 
people by assuring them of peace and safety when there was no peace, and peril was 
imminent and sure. They were "like foxes in the waste places" for destructiveness. 
Nowhere in the sacred Sciiptures are foxes mentioned because of their cunning, but 
because of their injuriousness (cf. Song of Sol. ii. 15). " The foxes here correspond to 
the ravening wolves in Matt. vii. 15, and the grievous wolves in Acts xx. 29, repre- 
senting false teachers." Terrible is the injury which is wrought by corrupt religious 
teachers (cf. Isa. ix. 16 ; Jer. xii. 10 ; 1. 6 ; Acts xx. 29 ; 2 Pet. ii. 1 — 3). 

II. Thb jcdouent of God upon the false prophets. This judgment is expressed 
generally in ver. 8, and in a way that should have awakened serious concern. " Behold, 
I am against you, saith the Lord God." When God is against any one, nothing 
can be really well with him. " If God is for us, who is against us ? " If God is 
against us, who is for us in any true sense? But the judgment is set forth with 
something of detail in vers. 9 — 16. It has two chief features. 1. Their exclusion 
from the community of Israel. (Ver. 9.) They had sought prominence and dis- 
tinction among the people, and had attained their object ; but a complete reversal 
of their position awaited them. They should not have won a place among the chosen 
people ; their names should be erased or omitted from the authorized register of the 
Israelites ; and when the exiles returned unto their own land, they should not return 
with them. As Fairbairn says, " Inheriting the curse of the covenant, ' they should ba 
cut off from among their people.' " There is, perhaps, in this a hint of a darker doom, 
even the omission of their names from a much more important register (Luke x. 20 ; 
PhjL iv. 3 i Bev. xii. 27), and their non-recognition by tlie Lord Jesus Christ (Matt. vii. 



OH. XIII. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIBL. 243 

22, 23). 2. The total overthrow and ruin of both themselves and their work. (Vers. 
11 — 16.) Their work was to be swept away by overwhelming forces. The stonny 
wind, the overflowing shower, and the great hailstones represent the Chaldean army. 
That army would make an utter end of the vain hopes which the false prophets had 
originated and fostered. No work can be stable which is begun and carried on against 
the will of God. Every wall which is built in defiance of his laws will soon fall into 
ruin. And in the case before us the presumptuous and foolish builders were ruined 
witli their work. " It shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst thereof." The 
wall of delusive hopes, which they had daubed with untempered mortar, would be 
thrown down, and Jerusalem would be destroyed, and in its fall the false prophets 
would be ruined. " Thus will I accomplish my fury upon the wall, and upon them 
that have daubed it with untempered mortar," etc. (vers. 15, 16). 

Api'Lioation. Here is solemn warning atiaiust false prophets and teachers, who are 
not confined to any one age or people. When God is represented as love without 
righteousness, or mercy without judgment ; when men are assured of salvation without 
repentance for sin or renewal of heart; when peace is proclaimed to men who are 
living in sin, — then the spirit of the false prophets of Ezekiel's age is reproduced. We 
are warned in the New Testament of the rise of false Christs and of m my false pmphets 
(Matt. xxiv. 11 ; Mark xiii. 22), of " false apnstles, deceitful workers" (2 Cor. xi. 13), 
of some who " would pervert the gospel of Christ " (Gal. 1. 7), and of " false teachers 
who sliall bring in destructive heresies " (2 Pet. ii. 1). Wherefore let Christians take 
heed what they hear and read and receive. Happily, the test by which tu prove 
religious teaching is not abstruse or difficult. Does it agree with "that which is 
inscribed in the writing of truth?" Does the teaching of man harmonize with the 
eternal law of God ? Does it " make for righteousness" ? " If any man willeth to do 
his will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it be of God, or" whether the 
teachers " prophesy out of their own heart." Vigorous physical health is one of the 
most effective safeguanls against the diseases which assail the body. And when 
the heart is susceptible to Divine influence, and the conscience loyally responds to the 
will of God, and the life is governed by that holy will, the man is not in much danger 
Df being misled by erroneous teaching. — W. J. 

Ver. 5. — Hie breaches of ain, and the duty of closing them. " Ye have not gone vr 
into the gaps," etc. Our text suggests the following observations. 

I. Tub pbaotici: of sin exposes men to the gbeatest dangers. The text suggests 
the figure of a besieged city, in the walls of which breaches have been made, through 
which the enemy rushes in to fight with its inhabitants and to take possession of its 
treasures. There is perhaps a reference to the approaching siege of Jerusalem by the 
Chaldeans, in which that city would fall because of the sins of its inhabitants. So sin 
makes wide gaps in the defences of a people, deprives them of the Divine protection, 
and exposes them to the assaults of their enemies. The sins of the people of Sodom 
and Gomorrah made the wide breaches which let in the fiery flood which consumed 
them. The sins of the Israelites in the wilderness on one occasion made a gap in their 
defences tlirough which the plague entered and slew fourteen thousand and seven 
hundred persons (Numb. xvi. 41 — 50). The sin of Achan in coveting, stealing, and 
concealing some of the spoils of Jericho, in defiance of express commands, opened a 
wide breach through which the enemies of Israel rushed, and put them to ignominious 
flight, and slew six and thirty of them (Josh. vii.). And when David sinned in num- 
bei'ing the people he maile a gap through which the pestilence entered and destroyed 
seventy thousand men (2 Sam. xxiv. ; cf. Isa. xlii. 24, 25). 

II. The continued peaotiob of sin lkads on to a cbisis in which judgment 
WILL BE EXECUTED UPON SINNERS. That crisis is here called " the day of the Lord." 
" The day of Jehovah," says Schroder, " is the time fixed by him with reference to the 
reckoning to be given in to him." It seems to us more correct to say that it is " the 
time of the arrival of the judgment." This crisis was rafudly drawing near to the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem. If sinners persist in making the gaps, it is certain that their 
punishment will enter thereat and seize upon them. Sinful character and conduct 
advance towards maturity, and wheu that is attained, if not before, the siimer, or the 
(joipmunity of sinners, will meet with just retribution. " WlijiUcaver a man soweth, 



244 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xni. 1— 23. 

that shall he also reap." The forbearance and long-suffering of Grod with the wicked 
are Tery great ; but if these be trifled with and presumed upon, he will cease to exercise 
them, and will Appear for the execution of his judgment (cf. Bom. ii. 4 — 11). 

III. It is the duty of the faithful servants of God to bndeavoub to ouabd 

THE IMPBKILLBD PEOPLE AOAINST THE DAKGEBS WHICH THEEATEN THEM. When the 

people by their sins have expo.>!ed themselve.i to their enemies, it behoves the faithful 
to go up into the gaps, and to make " up the fence for the house of Israel to stand in 
the battle in the day of the Lord." This may be done : 1. By preaching repentance 
to the guilty people. When the peojile of Nineveh repented, the destruction of tlieir 
city, which had been threatened because of their sins, was averted. If the prophets 
had summoned the people to repentance, and the people had responded truly to that 
summons, then would the breach in the fence have been made up, and they would 
have been able " to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord." " There is no better 
wall than reformation of life." " If they have stood in my council, then had they 
caused my people to hear my words," etc. ( Jer. xxiii. 22). 2. By presenting intercession 
for the guilty people. There are a number of impressive examples in the sacred Scrip- 
tures of the servants of God stepping into the gap and saving the imperilled people by 
their prayers (cf. Exod. xxxii. 11 — 14, 31 — 34; Ps. cvi. 23; Numb. xiv. 13 — ^24; xvL 
41 — 48 ; 1 Sam. vii. 8 — 10). God has often graciously heard the cry of his faithful 
servants on behalf of the guilty, and turned aside from them the stroke of his judg- 
ment. He has spared the wicked for the sake of the righteous. 

IV. False pkophets and unworthy leadebs in the Chfbch of God altogetheb 
FAIL IN THIS impobtant DUTY. These false prophets had "not gone up into the gaps, 
neither made up the fence for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of 
the Lord." They had neither preached repentance to the people, nor pleaded with God 
on their behalf; but bad positively encouraged them in their sinful and false security ; 
therefore the judgment of the Lord fell ujion them to their utter overthrow. " I sought 
for a man among them, that should make up the fence, and stand in the gap before me 
for the land, that I should not destroy it : but I found none," etc. (cf. ch. xxii. 30, 31). 
" False prophets cannot pray." They have neither " interest in heaven nor intercourse 
with heaven." And they have no heart to make a stand against the sins of their 
people, and so save them from ruin. 

Conclusion. 1. Eow great a curie to a community are corrupt rdigioue teachers and 
leaders I They lure the people to ruin, while they assure them that all is well. 2. Boui 
great a Messing to a community is the presence of godly and praying persons \ They 
are "the salt of the earth ; " they are saviours of society. — W. J. 

Vers. 10 — 12. — False hopes encouraged and destroyed. " Because, even because they 
have seduced my people, saying. Peace ; and there was no peace," etc. We have in 
our text — 

I. False pkophets proclaiming a delusive salvation. The false prophets of 
Israel assured the people that by reason of their alliance with Egypt they were quite 
safe against Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and should soon be utterly inde- 
pendent of his control. Thus " they seduced the people, saying. Peace ; and there was 
no peace " (cf. Jer. vi. 14 ; xxiii. 16, 17 ; xxvii. 14—16 ; xxviii. 1 — 4, 15 ; xxix. 8, 9). 
The conduct of these ancient prophets has its analogue in spiritual relations. When 
religious teachers proclaim their own fancies or speculations as Divine revelations; 
when they present the traditions and creeds of men as the saving truth of God • when 
they lead men to expect salvation apart from sincere repentance for sin, and hearty 
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and loyal obedience to his will, — then are they false 
prophets, " sayino', Peace ; and there is no peace." 

U. Sinful and misguided people trusting in a delusive salvation. The Jews 
believed their false prophets, and strengthened their alliance with Egypt, and cherished 
their vain hope of safety, independence, and prosperity; and the false prophets 
encouraged them in this course. The misguided people built up a slight wall, and the 
misleading prophets daubed it with untempered mortar. And in spiritual things men 
are building walls for their personal salvation apart from Jesus Christ. Some build the 
wall of external morality. They are diligent in the cnltivation of correct and virtuous 
conduct, without any vitalizing and inspiring fajth and love. Their gospel is one of 



OH. xm. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEU H^ 

goiid works and of fancied personal merit. A delusive confidence is theirs, Otliers 
build tlie wall of theological orthodoxy. They hold what they regard as a sound 
creed, and in some cases are zealous in maintaining it against everything and every one 
that appears opposed to it, and hecause of this they consider that their salvation ir. 
euie. But their assurance is vain. Others build the wall of Ohurch-memlership, 
deeming their eternal interests secure because they are members of a Christian Church. 
But their names may he enrolled in the register of a true Church on earth, but have no 
place " in the Lamb's book of life." And others build the wall of religious observances. 
They have been duly baptized and confirmed, they partake of the communion of the 
body and blood of our Saviour, and are exemplary in their attendance at public worship, 
and liierefore they conclude that their salvation is at^sured. Perilous, and if persisted 
in fatal, is their delusion. Flimsy walls are these, each and all of them. Yet there are 
not wanting religious teachers to encourage builders such as these, and to daub their 
•light walla with untempered mortar. 

III. False hopes of salvation swept aw at bt the obeat God. "Say unto 
them which daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall," etc, (ver. 11). 1. A 
period is approaching when the works and hopes of men will be severely tested. " There 
shall be an overflowing shower; and ye, great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy 
wind shall rend it." Our Lord spake in a very similar strain of his hearers, and how 
they and their works would be tried. "Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, 
and doeth them," etc. (Matt. viL 24^27). And St. Paul wrote, " The fire shall prove 
each man's work of what sort it is." The testing-time sometimes occurs in this life. 
Change of circumstances, temptation, afiliction, the near approach of death, each of 
these sometimes proves a crucial test of the character and the hopes of men. And 
after death "God shall bring every work into judgment, with every hidden thing, 
whether it be good or whether it be evil." 2. In the great testing-time no works and 
hopes shall abide but those which accord with the will of Ood. The slight wall of these 
fonlish builders, daubed with untempered mortar by these false prophets, would be rent 
and destroyed by the storms of God. The Chaldean army would soon shatter the 
unsubstantial fabric of their vain hopes, and destroy both them and their city. And 
in the spiritual testing every faith which does not work through love, and cleanse the 
heart and life, wiU prove a fatal delusion. Every character which is not founded upon 
Christ, and fashioned after his, will be found ruinously defective (cf. I&a,xxviii. 16, 17; 
1 Cor. iii. 11). 

IV. The utter failure of the vain hopes which thet encouraged wili. 

COVER THE FALSE PROPHETS WITH REPROACH AND SHAME. " Lo, when the wall is 

fallen, shall it not be said unto you. Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed 
it?" The detection of false prophets is certain, and will certainly be followed by 
bitter derision. "What cause," says Greenhill, "had these prophets to blush, when 
God brought Nebuchadnezzar to besiege the city, when the walls were broken down, 
and they discovered to be false prophets, and their foundation, with which they upheld 
the hope of this |iei>ple, to be lies, flatteries, and false divinations!" Unspeakably 
terrible will be the retribution of those who, professing to make known the will of God, 
have misled others in respect to the things which make for their eternal peace. The 
bitter reproaches of those whom they have ruinously deceived, and the just punish- 
ment adjudged them by the holy Lord God, will be a doom of intolerable anguish. 

Conclusion. 1. Let religious teachers regard it as of supreme importance that their 
teaching be in harmony with the will of Ood. 2. Let every one earnestly inquire upon 
what foundation, with what materials, and in what manner, he is building his perawial 
character and his religious hopes. — W. J. 

Vers. 17 — 23. — False prophetesses, their charaeteristtct and condemnation. "Like- 
wise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people," etc. God 
sometimes raised up and inspired women to be prophetesses to his people. Miriam 
(Exod. XV. 20), Deborah (Judg. iv. 4), Hannah (1 Sam. iL 1—10), and Hnldah 
(2 Kings xxiL 14 — 20) were genuine prophetesses of the Lord in the times of tha 
Old Testament. And in the time of Ezekiel there were false prophetesses — women 
who pretended to possess Divine inspiration, and to speak with Divine authority, but 
who "prophesied out of their own heart," and grievously misted the people. Greenhil) 



246 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xra. 1— 23. 

suggests that theyproTiaWy exceerled the false prophets in doing miscTiief; "for women, 
by reason of the tenderness of their nature, sweetness of their voices, i espect amongst 
men, have the Rdvantage to insinuate their opinions, and persuade more powerfully, 
especially when they have a repute for holiness, and are esteemed prophetical, as these 
were." 1'here are difficulties in the interpretation of this paragraph; but, happily, the 
permanent moral instruction which it conveys is not obscure. It sets before us— 

I. The accommodating and flattering character of false prophecy. The 
pretended prophetesses aie spoken of as " the women that sew pillows upon all elbows, 
and make kerchiefs for the head of persons of every stature." The precise meaning of 
these pillows and kerchiefs is very uncertain ; but it seems to us that they should be 
interpreted- figuratively. The aim of these false prophetesses was to make the people 
feel secure i>iv\ at ease. They represented the state of national affairs as safe, comfort- 
able, and full of promise. Tliey thus ministered to a delusive rejiose and pleasure. 
They, in this respect, resembled the prophets who said, "Peace, wlien there was no 
peace," and who daubed the flimsy wall of false hopes with the unteinpered mortar of 
deceptive assurances. As M. Henry expresses it, " They did all they could to make 
people secure, which is signified by laying them easy, and to make people proud, which 
is signified by dressing them fine with handkei'chiefs." False prophets, preachers, and 
teachers whom God hath not sent make it their object to say what will please the 
people and bring popularity to themselves. 

II. The pernicious power of false prophbct. 1. It is blasphemous towardi 
Ood. " Ye have profaned me among my people." They blasphemed the sacred Name 
by employing it to authorize their false and evil communications. Moreover, as Heng- 
Bt«nberg remarks, " They profane God among the people, inasmuch as they assign hini 
a friendly position towards sin." 2. It is ruinous to man. The false prophetesses are 
charged with hunting the souls of the Lord's people, slaying the souls that should not 
die, and strengthening " the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his 
wicked way, and bo saved alive." They encouraged sinners in their sins by assuring 
them that they were secure. The propagation of religious error is destructive of the 
health and life of souls. Such errors act as deadly poisons upon the moral life of those 
who receive them. 

III. The selfish motive of false prophecy. " Ye have profaned me among my 
people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread." They propliesied for their own 
profit, not for the good of the people. "There is nothing so sacred," says M. Henry, 
" which men of mercenary spirits, in whom the love of this world reigns, will not pro- 
fane and prostitute, if they can but get money by the bargain. But they did it for 
poor gain ; if they could get no more for it, rather than break they would sell you a 
false propiiecy that should please you to a nicety for a beggar's dole, a piece of bread 
or a handful of barley ; and yet that was more than it was worth." False and corrupt 
teachers are never actuated in their work by zeal for the glory of Goil or the good of 
men. They seek their own popularity or power, their temporal enrichment or comfort. 
Our Lord said, " I seek not mine own glory." And the true Christian minister can say, 
with St. Paul, " I seek not yours, but you." 

IV. The ready acckptanoe of false prophecy. "Your lying to my people that 
hearken unto lies." Isaiah speaks of people who say to the prophets, "Propliesy not 
unto us right things, speak unto us smooth things, prophesy deceits." And there are 
people still who would raiher hear pleasing fallacies than unpleasant truths; who wish 
to be soothed and comforted rather than summoned to repentance and conversion. 
What madness is theirs! "Is it wise in the man who has nearly ruined his constitu- 
tion by intemperance, to ask the physician to tell him that he is in good health, and 
is carrying on a harmless course of indulgence? Is it wise in the man who is wasting 
his property by neglect or extravagance, to persuade his friends to hush their reproving 
voice, and flatter him that his prosperity is secure? Would the deceit in the former 
case change the con>1ition of the patient? or the falsehood in the latter repair the 
fortunes of the spendthrift? How much greater is the folly of the sinner, who, instead 
of turning from sin to God, through faith in Christ, and thus getting rid of his alarms 
by abandoning his course of sin, refuses to change his conduct, and asks for a false 
representation of bis condition I He is walking to the edge of a precipice, and solicit* 
those who see his danger to tell him that he is sate " (James). 



OH. xiT. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHfiT EZEKIEL. 



tit 



V. TlTB JTTDOMENT OP GoD AOAIXST THK AUTHOBS OF FALSB PBOPHEOT. 1. H« 

v> ill strip them of their nedud 10718. "Thus saith the Lord God: Behold I am against 
your pillows," etc. (vers. 20, 21). When the Chaldeans took Jerasalem, slew its 
inhabitants, or seized and carried them into captivity, the seductions of these false 
prophetesses were completely destroyed. They would " no more see vanity, nor divine 
divinations." They would be put to utter silence and clothed with guilty shame. 
Teachers of error must sooner or later be confounded ; for in its conflict with truth 
falsehood must ultimately be completely vanquished. 2. Be will defeat their designs. 
" I will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly [or, ' as birds '] ; 
. . . and deliver my ppople out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your 
hand to be hunted." The dark desijins of the false prophetesses would be frustrated 
by God, and they themselves would be involved in the diie miseries that were coming 
upon the people of Jerusalem. Every one who cherishes purposes and is enga.;ed in 
enterprises which are opposed to the holy will of God is advancing to total and terrible 
disappointment. 3. He wiU convince them of his own Being and supremacy. "Ye 
shall know that I am the Lord" (see our notes on these words in ch. vi. 7, 10: zL 
10).— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Ver. 1. — ^As the result, probably, of the 
previous utterances, certain elders of Israel, 
i e. of the exiles in Tel-Abib, came to con- 
sult Ezekiel, wishing to know what coun- 
sels or what predictions he had for them. 
In ch. viii. 1 we have " the elders of Jndah," 
and it is possible that there were two groups 
in the population of the town, and thnt these 
represented feri el as distinct from Jiuhili — 
a deputation, as it were, from the earlier 
exiles. The term appears again in eh. xx. 1. 
More probably, however, the terms are used 
interchangeably. 

Ver. 3. — These men, etc. The prophet, 
taught by the word of the Lord, reads the 
hearts of those who came to him. The words 
do not imply, rather they exclude, the open 
practice of idolatry. The sin of the in- 
quirers was that they had set up idols 
{gillulim, Ezekiel's favourite word ; see note 
on ch. vi, 4) in their liearts. The LXX. 
gives Siavoiiii.aTei, " thoustitu of their hearts," 
as if to express this. Tliey were hankering 
after tlie old false worships in whicl i they had 
once taken part. The stumbling-hlook (see 
ch. iii. 20) of their iniquity was set up there. 
That divided heart, the " double mind " of 
Jas. i. 8, made true inquiry, as it made true 
prayer for guidance, impossible. Shall I be 
inquired of at all, etc. ? The " at all " re- 
presents the emphatic iteration of the verb 
in the Hebrew. The Vulgate, Numquid 
interrogatus respondebo eist gives a fair 
paraphrase. 

Ver. 4. — I will answer him that cometh, 
etc. Tlie two last words represent the K'ri, 
or marginal reading of the Hebrew; the 
** therein " of the Bevised Version, the Kh'- 
Ub, or written text. Probably we should 



read, as in ver. 7, " I wHI answer him hg 
myself" (Hitzig). 

Ver. 5. — That I may take the house of 
Israel, etc. The words are a threat rather 
than a promise. The " double-hearted " 
shall be teken in the snare which they have 
made for themselves. 

Ver. 6. — Turn yourselves, etc. ; literally, 
turn them. But there is no sufficient ground 
for the margin, " Turn others" the objective 
suffix being the " faces " of the following 
clause. In ch. xviii. 30, 82 the verb is used 
by itself. The prophet's call is to a direct 
personal repentance, not to the work of 
preauhing tliat repentance to others. 

Ver. 7.— The stranger that sojoumeth 
among you. It is noticeable that Ezekiel 
uses here and elsewhere (ch. xlvii. 22, 23) 
tlie familiar phrase of the books which moet 
intiuenced his teaching (Lev. xvi. — xxv. ; 
Numb, ix., xv ; Deut. passim). It is probable 
that some such proselytes were found among 
the pxiles of Tel-Abib. I the Lord will 
answer him by myself, etc. This, as has 
been seen, was probably the right reading 
in ver. 4. What it means is that, inatead at 
a spoken answer by the mouth of the pro- 
phet, there should be an answer in the dis- 
cipline of life, in the immediate utterance 
through the conscience, which was the voice 
of God. The inquirer who came with un- 
confessed and unrepented hankerings aftei 
the worship of other gods deserved and would 
receive no other answer. 

Ver. 8. — To make him, add, with Bevised 
Version, an astonishment ; or better, I vnll 
mahe him amazed, as in ch. xxxii. 10. The 
words are an echo of Deut. xxviii. 37. The 
man's punishment shall be open and noto- 
rious, so as to strike terror into others. 

Ver. 9.— I the Lord lutve deeeived that 



248 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiv. 1— 23. 



prophet, etc. The teaching of modem 
tliought is to soften language like this into 
" I have permitted him to be deceived." The 
distinction was selilom, if ever, present to 
the mind of the Old Testament, or indeed of 
the New Testament, writers. It is Jehovah 
who sends the "lying spirit" in 1 Kings 
xxii.20 — 23. It is he who in the latter days 
shail send men " strong delusions " that they 
shall believe a lie (2 Thess. ii. 11). In both 
cases it is implied that the delusion is a 
righteous punisliment, is indeed the natural, 
because the divinely appointed, punishment 
of the sin. J'opulue vuUdeeipi et decipiattir, 
but the very deception is a means for unde- 
ceiving them. At last their eyes shall 
be opened. The punishment of the false 
prnphel and of those who trust him is at 
onco retii butive, and a discipline, and, if the 
discipline fails for them, at least a warning 
for others. 

Ver. H. — The words come as a gleam of 
lijjlit through the darkness. A restored 
nation, walking in the truth, the true people 
of God, — this lies beyond the mystery of the 
evil which is allowed, or even made, to work 
itself out to the bitter end. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — A new section begins, im- 
plying as before an interval of silence. What 
follows presents a striking parallelism to 
Jer. IV. 1, 2. There also we have the " four 
sore judgments," the declaration that not 
even the presence of Moses and Samuel 
would avail to save the people. They were 
obviously selected by Jeremiah as examples 
of the power of intercession (Exod. xxxii. 11, 
12 ; 1 Sam. vii 9 ; xii. 23). Ezekiel's selection 
of names proceeds on a different fiuiting. He 
chooses exceptional instances of saintliness 
that had been powerless to save the genera- 
tion in which they lived; perhaps, also, such 
as were well known, not only in the records 
of Isiacl, but among other nations. Noah 
had not saved the evil rate before the Flood; 
Job had not saved his sons (Job i. 18); 
Daniel, though high in the king's favour, 
had not been able to influence Nebuchad- 



nezzar to spare the people of Jndah and 
Jerusalem. The mention of this last name 
is significant, as showing the reputation 
which even then Daniel had acquired. 
There is no sliadow of evidence for the 
view of some commentators that an older 
Daniel is referred to. Had there been such 
a person, eminent enough to be grouped with 
Noah and Job, there would surely have been 
some mention of him in the Old Testament. 
In ver. 13, for the land, read "a land." For 
staff of bread, see ch. iv. 16. The phrase 
comes from Lev. xxvi. 26. 

Ver. 15. — Noisome beasts (see note on ch. 
T. 17). 

Ver. 19. — Pestilence is joined with blood, 
as in ch. r. 17 ; xxxviii. 22, as indicating its 
death-bearing character. 

Ver. 22. — The words end with a gleam of 
hope shining through the judgments. For 
Ezekiel, as for Isaiah, there is the thought 
of a " remnant that shall return " (Isa. x. 20 — 
22). It has been questioned whether " the 
ways and the doings" which are to bring 
comfort to men's minds are those of the evil 
past or of the subsequent repentance. I 
incline to the view that they include both. 
Men should see at once the severity and the 
goodness of Jehovah. His puuisliments had 
not been arbitrary nor excessive. They had 
also been as a discipline leading men to re- 
pentance. In eacii of those facts there was 
a ground of comfort for men who asked the 
question, which Abraham asked of old, 
" Shall not the Judge of all the earth do 
right? "(Gen. xviii. 25). In either aspect 
men will recognize that God has not done 
without cause all that he has done. In this 
way the propliet seeks, as others have done 
since, to justify the ways of God to man. 
Ezekiel's word for " remnant " is, it may be 
noted, not the same as Isaiah's, its primary 
significance being "these that escape." 
Ezekiel does not quote the earlier prophet, 
though his thoughts are in harmony with 
him. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 3. — Idols m the heart. I. The heart is the beat of idolatry. There may 
be splendid temples in a city, containing innumerable idols — horrible monsters or 
beautilul statues, works of marble, ivory, or gold. Yet if the people do not worship 
them no sin is committed. We have many idols in our museums. The idols in a 
missionary society's museum do no harm to its custodians. On the other hand, though 
no idul-temple stands in our land, and the last vestige of the old heathenism has been 
swept away centuries ago, and the very notion of worshipping stocks and stones seems 
to us ridiculous, yet in our hearts there may be things which alienate us from God. 
The essential question is as to what is there enthroned as in the citadel of the soul. 

II. EvERTTHUfO THAT TAKES THE I'LACE OF GoD IN THE HEART IS AN IDOI,. It 11 

not everything loved that we are to regard as an idol. Gud does not claim the only 
itll'ection of our hearts. We may love God through the love we bear to those eartbl^ 



OH. XIV. 1— 23.J THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 249 

friends who are dear to ub. But God claims the first place, the throne within. What- 
ever stands first in our estimation is our god. If some human afiFectioo, pleasure, or 
sin takes this pre-eminent position, and refuses to yield, when required, to the supreme 
will of God, that is our god, our idol. 

III. Idols in the hbabt exclude communion with God. It is in reference to 
people who cherish such idols that God asks, " Should I be inquired of at all by them ? " 
It is not likely that such people would be disposed to seek counsel from the true 
spiritual God. The idols would seem to be sufiBcient. But if they should think to add 
the worship of the supreme God to that of their idols, they would find that this is 
impossible. There are men for whom all access to God is cut off. Tliey who cherieh 
evil things or any rival affections, made evil by rivalry with the true love of the 
soul for God, find that they cannot reach to God. " Ye cannot serve God and 
mamm'in." Observe, however, this only applies to idolatry in the heart. Heathen 
people who follow the instincts of natural religion and feel after the unseen spiritual 
God may find him, thougli they have scores of idols in their houses, because such a 
genuine search for God impUes the expulsion of idols from the heart. 

IV. Idolatet in the heart will not bs neglected by God. We may disown 
God and substitute our idols. But he will not, cannot, give us up. He is still our Lord, 
and he must take note of the rebellion of his people. But he is also still our Father, 
and, though we may not care for him, he has not ceased to love us. Therefore he will 
seek his idolatrous children and plague them with many a trouble, until he has induced 
them to see their folly, cast their idols out of their hearts, and welcome back their Lord 
to his rightful throne. 

Ver. 6. — Repentance. I. The first step towards salvation is ebpbntancb. It 
is true that God has moved towards us- before we have thought of turning to him. It 
is his goodness that leads us to repentance (Rom. ii. 4). " While we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us " (Bom. v. 8). But all this precedes our action. When we begin to 
see salvation, the first step must lead us to the wicket-gate of repentance, and until 
that has been passed through there is no hope fur us. John the Baptist prepares the 
way for Christ. " Bepent : for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." We may try the short 
cut of priile, and think to begin the happy Christian life without owning our sins and 
turning from them. It is impossible. The result will only be a miserable hypocrisy. 

II. Bbpentanob consists in TURNmo PROM THE EVIL WAY. "Repent, and turn 
yourselves," etc. It is an action, not merely a feeling. . It cannot be without deep 
grief of soul, yet it does not consist in the grief; that is but an accompaniment, 
though undoubtedly an inevitable accompaniment. We cannot measure our repent- 
ance by the number of tears shed, but by the thoroughness of our revolt against our 
past. Neither is there any value in the amount of time spent in abject contrition. 
We are not in this way to consider whether we have repented sufficiently. The sole 
question is as to the reality and thoroi^hness of the change by which we turn from 
the old way and seek a better way. 

III. RePJSNTANCE is CONPIBMED BT the ABANDONMENT OF THE EVIL ONCW LOVED. 

The penitents are to turn from their "idols." Insincere repentance weeps for ihe 
sins it still clings to. The action of repentance is inward. But its consequences are 
seen in outward conduct. Savonarola, when called to the dying-bed of Lorenzo di 
Medici, refused to offer any hope of pardon to the great Florentine, because, though he 
professed great concern for his soul, and deep grief for his sins, he refused to give back 
their liberties to the citizens. He would not act according to the profession of repent- 
ance, and therefore the stern reformer justly judged that the penitence could not be 
true and thorough. 

IV. Eepbntanob 18 MET BT THB SAVING QBACB OF GoD. He calls upou UB to repent, 
but he does not require us to create new hearts in ourselves. He expects a sincere 
desire for a better way. We must show our loathing for our old past by doing all in 
our power to relinquish it. Then God gives that redeeming grace which is the new 
birth, and whence springs the power for better living. Still, after receiving the grace, 
we need to preserve the lowliness of the penitent, although all tears are wiped away 
by the pardon of God. For we are always in danger of being dragged back into ouf 
pld selves. " Illusion is brief," says Schiller, " but repeutauce is long." 



250 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiv. 1— 28. 

Ver. 7. — Ood^s answer. "I the Lord will answer him by myself." The people 
inqviire of the false prophets, but God himself will answer them._ The question con- 
cerning the coming danger will be settled by the event. That will be God's answer, 
and it will put an end to all doubt on the one side, and to all deception on the other. 

L The pbomisb op God's answeb. There are questions which grievously perplex 
us, and to which, as yet, we can get no reply. Those that are frivolous may never be 
answered; e.g. Clement's illustration, "Whether the number of the stars be odd or 
even ? " It can be of no use for tis to know the answer to such a question. No doubt 
there are also greater problems which still do not concern us personally, and of these 
we may never have the solution. There is no reason to suppose that we shall ever 
become omniscient. But, on the other hand, there are deep, heart-searching questions, 
which bear directly upon our life. We crave an answer to such questions, and God 
will not leave us for ever in the dark concerning them. We may .have our patience 
tried for a season, but at length the light will dawn. 

II. The souece of God's answeb. It will come direct from himself. The foolish 
Jews inquired of false prophets. But not even a true prophet such as Ezekiel would 
be entrusted with the reply. God himself is to answer them. God does not act by 
proxy. He has servants and agents. But he is in them, and he can dispense with 
them altogether whenever he chooses. He has direct dealings with souls. If the 
answer comes from QtoA, it must be true and sufficient. In momentous questions 
concerning the soul and its eternal life we cannot be satisfied with a reply from any 
delegated authority, not from the greatest prophet, apostle, or archangel. We want to 
hear the voice of Gtod himself. 

III. The charaotbb of God'b answeb. In the present case it was to be g^ven by 
events. The destruction of Jerusalem was to be God's answer to the disputing Jews. 
That was as truly a Divine answer as a voice from heaven would have been, for the 
voice would have been a shaping of air-waves, a work of God in nature. This event 
was God'i working in providence. God speaks to us through his providence. History 
is a record of God's answers to man's questions. Such an answer has many merits. 
1. It is perceptible to all. The fall of Jerusalem sent a shock through the Jewish 
world. 2. It is dear and unmistakable. God had threatened judgment. Would his 
threat prove true ? Who could doubt the meaning of the terrible response? 3. It it 
irreversible. An event which has once occurred can never he tmdonei The lessons of 
history are eternal. 

IV. The advent of God's answeb. 1. It may come untoaght. The futhless 
Jews neglected their God, and inquired for oracles from the false prophets. Yet he of 
whom they sought no word spoke by the awfiil thunders of judgment. 2. It may 
come from, an unexpected quarter. These unbelieving Jews were not expecting to hear 
the voice of Qui. Therefore they were made to hear it in most terrible tones. It ii 
better not to wait for such a startling reply. God has spoken in the great events of 
Bethlehem and Calvary, and there his voice is one of grace and benediction. 

Ver. 10. — The prophet's punishment. The prophet is to be punished equally with 
the rest of the people, because his guilt is equal to theirs. 'The pleas and excuses 
"hich he might suggest are all swept away as so many refuges of lies. 

I. Ecclesiastical bank. There was a recognized professional distinction between 
the prophets and the people ; the prophets belonged to a separate order. But " orders " 
liave no saving efficacy. The status of the Christian ministry affords certain earthly 
|)rivileges, while it confers certain spiritual obligations. But it is only economic, 
temporary, and for this world's service. Before God the distinction between cleric and 
laic vanishes, and each soul stands in its simple human character. God judges an arch- 
Inshop as a man, not as a dignitary. His office appertains to his powers and duties, 
the talents for which he will have to account. But in this respect it is like the office 
of any other person — a measure for his service, not a shelter for his sinfulness. In the 
world beyond the grave each soul is but a soul ; rank and office are left behind like cast- 
off vestments. Therefore the sinful ecclesiastic will be treated as any other sinner. 

n. Divine gifts. The false prophets of Ezckiel's day do not appear to have had 
auy peculiar Divine gifts. They were mere pretenders. But even those men who are 
especially endowed are not to consider themselves as thereby lifted above common 



OH. XIV. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEU 261 

standiirds of judgment. The prophet of Bethel was a true messenger from God, yet 
a lion met him in the way and slew him for his disobedience (1 Kings xiii. 26). 
The apostle may " have the gift of prophecy," yet if h« " have not charity " he ii 
" nothing " (1 Cor. xiii. 2). 

III. Knowledge. If the prophets did not know the right way, they should have 
made themselves acquainted with it, for they were supposed to hold the keys of 
revelation. But as the s-igiipost never reaches the city to which it is constantly point- 
ing, the man who knows the way, anil who is capiible of showing it to others, may 
yet be never treading it himself. Then his knowledge will not save hirn. It is the 
same in respect to those who are enlightened by Divine teaching, though they are not 
called upon to tea'h others. A clear conception of "the plan of salvation" will not 
save a man. If a prophet will be punislied like any other man, surely the merely 
orthodox believer in the dogmas of the Church will stand in a similar position of peru 
if he does not add practice to creed. 

IV. PopuLAKiTY. Those guilty prophets of Israel were popular men. Their doom 
was to suffer the fate of the people they fawned upon. A moment's reflection must 
make it apparent that the favour of the world, and even the favour of the Church, are 
no guarantees for the favour of Heaven ; for men may be deceived or may jvidge by low, 
unworthy standards. But appearances are so flattering that people fall into the snare, 
and take comfort from the thought that all is going well with them among men. The 
one vital question is, " How do we stand before God ? " 

Ver. 11. — Religious redproeity. The relations of the soul with God are reciprocal. 
There is first of all a mutual approach, and there will be a communion so long as the 
religion is a living fact. The mutual relationship may be looked at from either of its 
centres. But first its common character must be considered. 

I. Religion consists in bfibitual ownership. There is an appropriation on both 
sides. This involves certain important facts. 1. Close connection. We hold what we 
own. It is true a man in England may be the proprietor of an estate in New Zealand, 
but even then he is connected with it by immediate agency. Religion implies a close 
relation between the soul and God. 2. Powers of use. We have rights over what we 
own. The inheritance which is so tied up that the heir cannot touch it or do anything 
with it, is scarcely to be called property ; the rights of ownership are shadowy indeed 
in such a case. Real ownership confeis rights and powers. So it is in religion. The 
mutual ownership here confers mutual rights and powers. 3. Value. A man may 
own what is worthless — leagues of Siberia or tons of desert sand. Still, as a rule, he 
makes the most of his property, and if he is proud of owning anything, we may be sure 
that he values it. Now, the mutual religious ownership of God and the soul is referred 
to in a way to show that it is prized. 

II. The sfibitctal ownership of the Bible is beciprooau 1. Ood owns the souls 
of his people. "That they may be my people" is the expression in regard to God's 
design in the discipline of Israel. God regards his people as liis "inheritance" (Ps. 
xxviii. 9). (1) He has close relations with them. Truly connected with all his 
children, he draws more near to his own people, and commnnicates himself especially 
to them. (2) He exercises special powers over them. God has a double right to com- 
mand his confessed servants. (3) He values them, as his jewels (Mai. ui. 17), as the 
" apple of his eye " (Ps. xvii. 8). 2. Ood's people own Ood. They do not only confess 
his Name. (1) They realize a close fellowship with him. (2) They have rights of 
access and privileges of reconciled children in the home which do not as yet belong to 
the poor, wandering prodigals, (3) They value these privileges, or, if they do not, they 
are like the elder son of the parable, and do not truly realize their ownership in God. 
It is indeed a great joy to be able to say, " My God." 

III. The establibhino and confirming of this beoifbooal belationshif is thx 
GBEAT END OF THE DISCIPLINE OF LIFE. It is the re-establishing of an old broken con- 
nection. Israel had once stood in this happy relation with God ; she bad lost it by 
sin. We are all Qod'a children by birth ; but by sin we too have lost the privileges of 
lonship. The great hindrance lies in our rebellion against Ckid. Israel could not 
boast of her descent from Abraham, nor of her covenant relationship with God, for th« 
covenant ma tooken by sin, and the family claim disowned. The only way to seouie 



«52 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiv. 1-23. 

this happy condition again is to pve up the newer connection with sin. Now, God 
■ends severe discipline to lead to that result (ver. 10). He uses his rod to drive the 

wanderer home. 

Ver. 14. — Noah, Daniel, and Jaib. I. The splendid prb-eminenob or Koah, 
DanieT', and Job. These three men are selected from ages far apart, and from the 
greatest diversity of circumstances. In temperament and external history there is little 
resemblance i)etween them. Noah the patriarch looms on the horizon of history in 
epic grandeur ; Daniel is the brave hero in a tyrant's court, and the man of skill and 
science ia a civilized society; Job belongs to the region of pastoral life, and his tragio 
story carries us out among the Bedouin. So wide is the range of excellence! Good 
men are not confined to one age, nor to one set of circumstances, nor to one school of 
thought, nor to one style of life. They are not found exclusively in antiquity, in 
moderu times, in town, in the country, among the great, among the simple. There is 
• breadth and a variety in the possibilities of saintliness. We need not all copy one 
type. He who cannot emulate the knowledge of Daniel may follow the patience of 
Job. Nevertheless, in spite of these diversities, there are certain great common features 
that belong to the three Old Testament saints, and account for the present association 
of their names. 1. All three were holy men, true to God and upright in life. His 
goodness is the greatest fact in a good man's character, and it constitutes a bond of 
union betweeu all the true people of God. 2. All three were faithful in eireumstance* 
of isolation. They all had to break from prevalent habits, and dare to stand alone- 
Noah against the world's sin and impenitence, Daniel against heathenism. Job against 
a false orthodoxy. 3. All three were torely tried. The faith of each was assailed in a 
severe and most exceptional manner. 4. All three were victorious hy mean* of firm 
fidelity. They conquered, and they conquered in quiet ways — ^by obedience, patience, 
faith, and steadfastness. 

II. The nsELESSNEss of the inteboebsion of trf.be thbee ore at baintb. Though 
Noah, Daniel, and Job united to plead for Jerusalem, their intercession would be all in 
vain. 1. 1'his was contrary to expectation. There is power in intercession; there is 
an especial power in tlie intercession of a " righteous man " (Jas. v. 16) ; there is a still 
greater power in united prayer (Matt, xviii. 20). Yet here the union of three of the 
very best men, selected from all ages, could not secure the safety of Jerusalem. 2. The 
cause of the predicted failure of such an intercession was hardened impenitence. God 
is not inexorable. He is ready to listen to prayer; nay, he is more anxious to save 
than we are to plead for salvation. He sent his Son to save the world, an infinitely 
greater act than the most impassioned pleading of the best men. Therefore the failure 
cannot be attributed to his hardness. But it would be unjust and injurious to spare 
the impenitent on any plea. 3. The intercession of Christ succeeds where that of the 
best men fails. His prayers are worth those of ten thousand Noahs and Daniels and 
Jobs. " He ever liveth to make intercession for us ; " and he alone, bearing the weight 
of the whole world's guilt, makes atonement for the sins of all men with ample suffi- 
ciency. We could not trust to the intercession of the saints, even if we were sure of 
obtaining it; and the words of Ezekiel are only hypothetical, merely by way of illus- 
tration. Christ is our one Advocate with the Father. Nevertheless, for the impenitent 
even his mighty intercession, which shakes the very gates of hell, is ineffectoaL Christ 
shed tears over Jerusalem, yet Jerusalem perished. 

Ver. 23. — Purpose in providence. I. God mat appeab to act without oavsb. 
We cannot discover design in all the movements of nature so easily as we may detect 
this in its structure. Though we may be startled at times by the aptness of the provi- 
dential overruling of history, too often we are perplexed, dismayed, confounded. The 
wicked man flourishes like a green bay tree, and the good man is persecuted or perishes 
in a vain conflict with adverse circumstances. Psalmists of old noticed this familiar 
fact, and grieved over it (f.g. Ps. xvii. 10). We must be prepared to expect mystery 
In nature and providence, since the experience of the past points to the very same 
difficulties which puzzle and perplex us when they suddenly confront us. " Lo, these 
•re but the outskirts of his ways : and how small a whisper do we hear of him I But 
the thunder of his power who can understand ?" (Job xxvi. 14). 



CH. XIV. 1—23 1 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. »6» 

II. God does not act without oatjsb. 1. Tlte faUitre to discover a cause U no 
jrroof that it does not exist. Wo caanot limit the range of existence to the scope of 
our knowledge. There are hidden physical causes which the most searching scientific 
analysis has failed to trace: why may there not be also hidden final causes, deep 
purposes of God, which no mind of man can reach ? 2. 2%e proved pur/jose of &od 
in known regions suggests the existence of a like purpose in unknown regions. We can 
trace more purpose in creation than in providence ; but since the same God rules over 
both, it is to be presumed that the spirit of design which pervades the one runs through 
the other. We know that God has mind, and that he exercises what with us would 
be called forethought. Moreover, it is impossible to suppose that his principal dealings 
with his own children will be aimless when his less momentous works are instinct 
with purpose. 3. The righteousness and love of Ood make it certain that he does not 
act without a cause. Reckless action is morally defective. Ethics bears directly on 
motive and purpose. A just God must have a righteous object with which to act. 
The love of God emphasizes the assurance of purpose in providence, for no one would 
treat those dear to him with heedless indifference. This is especially applicable to the 
infliction of chastisement. A just and merciful God cannot send chastisement without 
adequate cause. 

III. The cause of God'b action will be ultimately deolabed. It is impos- 
sible for us to see it yet, for we cannot look beyond the grave, nor can we scale the 
heights of Divine thought in the infancy of our spiritual experience. The schoolboy 
cannot Bee the utility of all his lessons. But if he has been well taught in boyhood, 
when he is a man he will look back on the hard training with appreciative satisfaction, 
and will therefore order a similar process for his children. It would not be well for us 
to see the end yet, for we must be trained by faith. But earthly experience often 
throws hack light on dark passages of life, and they then flash into a new meaning 
which calls forth gratitude as well as wonder. Beyond this world the fuller explana- 
tion will come. With the discovery of the hidden cause there will be ample consola- 
tion. The revelation of a good purpose in chastisement is its appropriate consolation 
(2 Cor. iv. 17). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Idolatry. It certainly seems strange that, at this period of their 
national history, the Israelites should be chargeable with the folly and sin of idolatry. 
The admonitions against this ofience had been so numerous, and the chastisements 
following its commission had been so severe, that the reader of Old Testament history 
is surjirised to find that at so late a period the temptation had not been outgrown. 

I. The multitude and vabibtt of the idolatries of Israel. The chosen 
people were exposed to corruption from neighbouring peoples — from the Phoenicians 
upon the north, the Syrians and Chaldeans upon the east, and the Egyptians upon 
the south. Each of these idolatries had its own characteristics, and in some way 
sprang from, and ministered' to, the evil passions of human nature. It would almost 
seem as if the kings, the great men of the land, and the common people generally, 
chose such idols as harmonized with their own tastes or suited their own conveni- 
ence. At all events, the prophet speaks of idols, in the plural, of the multitude of 
the idols, and of every iiiolater's own special and peculiar divinities. 

II. The seat of these idolatries. The people are said to have set them up " in 
their heart." Hills, valleys, groves, high places, and altars and temples, were indeed 
consecrated, or rather desecrated, by idol-worship. But all this was external. There 
was something much worse; the idols were set up in the inner nature of the wor- 
shippers, and there were honoured and served. That is to say, the belief in the govern- 
ment of a righteous and holy God having been abandoned, many of the Israelites 
exalted the vices and crimes which the deities of the heathen embodied, sanctioned, 
and encouraged, and came in their hearts to love the evils against which, as a nation, 
they were called to witness. 

III. The ESTBANaEMBNT FBOM GoD WHICH IDOLATBT FBODUCED. In Betting Up 

the idoli in their hearts the people had been putting " a stumbling-block of iniquity " 



254 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xiv. 1—23, 

before their face. The idols came between them and their God. The house of Israel, 
Jehovah (.xclalmg, "ave all estranged from nie tlirini:.;h their idols." There can be no 
rivalry between the false gods and the true. 'I he choice has ever to be made. To 
exalt an idol, a passion, a taste, a liabit, an association, to a position above that occu- 
pied by the supreme Lord of all, is to dethrone tiim from bii> rightful place, to forfeit 
his regard, to ensure his displeasure. 

IV. The indignant response of God to the dishonour donb to him. It was 
presumed that, witfi wicked inconsistency, some of the Israelites who had been seduced 
into idolatrous practices would nevertheless in some time of perplexity or affliction 
resort to the prophets of Jehovah to seek counsel, guidance, and comfort. In such 
circumstances, how would their conduct be regarded by the Lord ? The word of the 
Lord to tlie prophet should be attentively considered, "Should I be inquired of at all 
by them? ... I the Lord will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of 
his idols." We are not to believe that any sincere, lowly, penitent, and believing 
suppliant would be rejected. But those who in their hearts cherished the idolatry 
which was their shame, and yet for some selfish purposes had the effrontery to 
approach the Lord for counsel and for help, were assured that their application should 
meet with no favourable response. They were double-hearted and insincere ; and for 
such there is nu blessing, and indeed no tolerance. 

Application. It is the same to-day. If with all your hearts ye truly seek him, 
the request shall not be offered in vain. But it is useleu to draw near to God with 
the lips while the heart is far from him. — T. 

Ver. 6. — Repent I This was the admonition of erery herald of Ghjd, whether under 
the old covenant or the new. It was the burden of Isaiah and Ezekiel, and it was also 
the burden of John the forerunner and of Jesus the Messiah. From this it may be 
inferred that human nature and life, on the one hand, and the character and govern- 
ment of God on the other hand, are such that repentance is an indispensable condition 
of the establishment of right relations between God and man. 

L The need of repentance. If we are upon Divine authority summoned to 
change, this must be because there is something wrong and reprehensible and 
dangerous in man's heart and condition ; if called upon to turn, we must be going 
the wrong way. The admonition of the text follows upon a picture of Israel's idolatry 
and rebellion against a righteous God. The form of the sin may vary, but the principle 
of sin is ever the same. Whether in ancient or in modern times, in barbarous or in 
civilized states of society, men are universally prone to sin and guilty of sin. Where 
there is no sin, repentance is needless. It is in the departure of the heart's affection 
and the life's loyalty from the righteous God that man's error lies. Israel's idolatry 
■ymbolizes human iniquity. 

IL The nature of repentance. As more fully explained in New Testament 
Scripture, this is a change of heart, of disposition, leading to a change of character and 
of life. Mere sorrow for sin is not repentance, inasmuch as emotion of every kind is 
to some extent matter of temperament, and sorrow does not always lead to reformation. 
True repentance goes much deeper, and prepares the way for every spiritual blessing. 
He who repents looks at things otherwise than before, turns his thouglits into another 
channel, his steps into another path. 

III. The call to repentance. 1. It is a gracious call. The justly offended 
sovereign may leave the rebel to the consequences of his acts. It is not thus that 
God deals with us. It is not his wish that any sliould perish. He sends his messengers 
to the offending race, with a summons to submission, with proffers of mercy. 2. It is 
an authoritittive call. He commandeth men everywhere to repent. It is true that our 
Creator and Judge does not interfere with our liberty. Yet he publishes his will as 
binding upon every moral agent. He has a right to our repentance. It is our place to 
obey his suuiraous, to offer the repentance wliich he demands and requires at our hands. 

IV. The difficulty or repentance. This lies in the very character itself of 
the change. If verbal submission or outward conformity only were required, this 
would be comparatively easy. But God, who searoheth the heart, will not be satisfied 
save with the heart's subjection and conversion. Old habits of iinspirituality, worldli- 
neiss, and selfishness are not readily abaudoqed. Especially in advanced life a raiiic»l 



OH. XIV. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 255 

and inward change is effected, for the most part, only with effort and difficulty. It 
needs a supernatural motive and a supernatural power to cause old things to pass 
away and all things to become new, to exchange darkness for light, and the service of 
Satan for God. Such a supernatural motive we have in the gospel ; such a super- 
natural power and agency in the Holy Spirit. 

V. Thb fruits or eepentanob. 1. These are exactly opposed in character to the 
fruits of self-indulgence. Other seed in other soil yields other harvest. 2. Beconcilia- 
tion with God replaces enmity towards God. The conditions of salvation, as laid down 
in the New Testament, are " repentance towards God, and faith in the Lord Jesus 
Christ." 3. Repentance works a change in a man's own character ; the principles and 
motives and ends of life are all new. 4. Through the power of repentance a man's 
relations to his fellow-men are changed — justice takes the place of wrong, and love 
that of hatred and uncharitableness. — T. 

Yer. 10. — TA* misleader and the misled. One of the features of Israelitish life at 
this epoch of the Captivity was the evident number and power of false prophets. 
General excitement and change are, of course, favourable to imposture. Men sought 
everywhere for guidance, comfort, hope; but, instead of having recourse to the 
authorized prophets of the Lord, they went to the pretentious and deceptive religious 
guides who seem to have traded upon the misfortunes of their country. These men 
were in the habit of saying what was expected and desired, of uttering smooth things, 
of buoying up the people with the hope that threatening calamities might be averted. 
Thus the effect of these meu's counsels was to prevent the people from true repentance 
and to hasten the counti'y's ruin. Ezekiel was directed to denounce these misleaders 
of the nation, and to declare that they should participate in the approaching calamities. 
" The punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh 
unto him." 

L Pbophet and people WEBB PABTAKEBS IN BIN. The siu in essence was departure 
from Grod. Those who should have repaired to the Source of all wisdom and authority 
turned aside, and "sought unto" ignorant, self-seeking impostors. In this they 
sinned ; and the sin was shared by those to whom they had recourse. These pretended 
prophets knowingly misled the people ; for they saw no vision and heard no voice, 
and their utterances were dictated, not by the law of Divine righteousness, but by 
the aims of human policy. People and prophets sinned together, and sinned alike. 

IL Fbophet and people were pabtakebs in consequent ebbob. The counsel 
which was thus given and accepted, and consequently acted upon, led the people astray. 
The only hope for Jeiusalem and for the Jews was a general humiliation, confession, 
and repentance, a turning unto the Lord. From such a course they were deterred by 
the deception which they practised upon one another, and the delusion which they 
mutually encouraged. Hence the error into which they were misled, the error of 
continued idolatry, unbelief, and rebellion. 

IIL Prophet and people were fabtakebs in common punishment. It would 
have been unjust to punish only those who were led astray, for their false guides and 
evil counsellors were to blame for misleading them. It would have been unjust to 
punish only the false prophets ; for these men were induced and encouraged to practise 
their deceiving arts by the readiness of their dupes to receive and to act upon their 
advice. Hence a common guilt entailed a common penalty. There was little 
distinction in crime; there was little distinction in punishment. Retribution is a 
fact in the government of the Supreme, who can never look upon iniquity, "Though 
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished." — T. 

Ver, 11, — 77te purposes of punishment. No thoughtful person can believe that the 
supreme Lord of all inflicts p\mishroents upon men because he delights in the sufferin<Ts 
of his creatures, or is indifferent to those sufferings. This passage of Scripture, liku 
other passages, teaches us that, when God punishes, it is with a view to the good of 
those who are punished, or of others, or of both, 

I. The iumediate and bemedial purpose of pun^hmbnt. It ia a question how 
far puni^liiiHiit shmild aim at the correction of the individual offender, how far at tbc 
producii. !• u! » whuk-soiiie impression upon society. Whether the false proj'hets a ,; 



256 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [cat xir. 1—28. 

those who resorted to them were spared to profit hy the chastisement which befell 
them, we have Dot the means of judging. But in any case the punitive afSictioni 
were intended for the general good of the house of Israel. 1. Badical error is corrected. 
" That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me." 2. The habits of trans- 
gressors are reformed. "Neither defile themselves any more with all their tians- 
gressions." 

II. The ultimate and posititb pnEPOsB of punishment. The remedy for disease 
must first be applied, then health will follow. So it is in spiritual things. For- 
giveness is a means to sanctification. Salvation is both from sin and unto obedience 
and holiness. Accordingly, the prophet represents the re-establishment, the fresh 
ratification, of the covenant between Grod and Israel as the final purpose of all the 
chastening inflicted. The two sides of this covenant are presented as in their harmony 
and completeness justifying the discipline appointed by Divine wis lom and beneficence. 
1. " That they may be my people." That is, not only in name, but in reality ; not 
only de jure, hut de facto. 2. "That I maybe their God." That is, theirs to acknow- 
ledge with sincere reverence, to love with devotion and fervour, and to serve with 
diligence imd fidelity. — ^T. 

Yer. 14. — llluatrioui piety. Ezekiel was especially commissioned to set forth and 
to impress upon the people the individual, the personal, aspect of religion. In many 
places, as here, he lays stress upon the accountability of each several man to God. One 
cannot deliver another firom deserved punishment. Each must answer for himself, 
must reap the reward of his deeds, whether good or evil. A ihan's piety cannot save 
his ungodly neighbour when the time of reckoning and judgment arrives. No matter 
how good our friends may be, their goodness does not excuse our irreligion. If the 
city has sinned, the city must suffer. Even if the wisest and the best of men are in 
it and plead for it, the city cannot be justified or spared for their sake. Men so con- 
spicuous for virtue and piety as Noah, Daniel, and Job have not power to save the land 
from famine, from the sword, from noisome beasts, from the pestilence, when these are 
sent as chastisements from the Lord of all. 

I. The vibtues fob which these three men webk celebbated. Why these, 
rather than other illustrious instances of human goodness, were selected is a question 
which cannot be answered with certainty. But the context disposes the student 
of this passage of prophecy to consider these men as instances of remarkable piety 
in the midst of surrounding ungodliness. Thus Noah stands in contrast with the 
self-indulgent and irreligious population of the world immediately before the Flood; 
as a preacher of righteousness, he protested against the sins and the secularism and 
unbelief of his time. Daniel also was " faithful among the faithless ; " he and a 
selectod few were called upon to witness against the idolatry of their heathen rulers 
and masters, and agiunst much unfaithfulness on the part of their companions in 
captivity. Job was a true servant of Jehovah, who was encompassed by idolatries to 
which he did not yield, and who alone of his own kindred was faithful to his God in 
all his ways. These three men all saw disasters come upon those with whom they 
were associated. If they could not deliver their neighbours in the day of judgment, 
if their virtues and piety availed only for themselves, was it credible that their pre- 
sence in Jerusalem would save the city and the land from destruction ? It is observable 
that the "righteousness" of these three men is admitted, and with commendation, by 
the Lord God himself. There may be danger in praising and flattering the good 
because of their goodness. But there are occasions when it is just and right to 
acknowledge the moral excellence, the human merit, of men, always with a clear 
understanding that all goodness is from God, that in his view all human character is 
imperfect, and that nothing can be claimed from him as a just reward even by the 
purest and the most useful among mankind. 

IL The fayoub with whioh these thbbe ken were beoardbd. It was an 
honour to be selected by a good man and a prophet like Ezekiel for special approval 
and commendation. But it was a higher honour to be mentioned thus by the direction 
of the Lord God himself. It is not erroneous to attribute to the Eternal a personal 
interest in the sons of time, a regard of that nature with which one who judges with 
justice and appreciation esteems the excellent among his fellow-beings. On the oon> 



cat xiT. 1—23.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKTET,. 2'<1 

trary, Scripture justifies ns in taking such a view of our Father God, who is neyer 
represented as indifferent and heartless, but rather as looking with satisfaction and 
favour upon those who delight in his Law and do his wilL There have been occasions 
upon which the intercessory prayers offered by such have been received with favour, 
and have been graciously answered, to the relief and comfort of those for whom they 
have been presented. 

III. The powbblessness of Even such biohteods and beloved bebvants of (Jod 
TO DEUVEB THE BEBELLious FBOM PUNISHMENT. It is evidently intended to convey 
the impression that God was willing to do great things at the intercession of men so 
good and so favoured as those named; but that he would not for their sake contradict 
his own declarations, reverse his own laws, and abandon his own moral government. 
Hence the lesson may be learnt that " every man shall bear his own burden," that in 
the day of account no man shall deliver his brother. No hope can be vainer than that 
of those who rely for their salvation upon the merits and influence of their family, 
their friends, their Church, however dear to God. It is plain that, as religion is a 
personal matter, as its claims come home to the individual, every hearer of God's Word 
IS bound to use for himself those means by which he may, by Giod's grace, be delivered 
from the chain of sin and the doom of death. — ^T. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The reasonableness of God's action. There is that in human nature 
to which religion appeals, and by which religion asks to be judged. Religion does 
indeed speak with authority, but the authority is that of wisdom and righteousness. 
Man's judgment and conscience approve the order of Divine providence, and the tenor 
of Divine revelation. More particularly, upon the suggestion of this passage, it should 
be remarked that — 

L The deaunos of God ikolude both JTrodMEUT and spabino uebot. The pro- 
phet speaks both of " the sore judgments upon Jerusalem," and also of " the remnant 
that shall be brought forth, both sons and daughters." God is ever a God of justice 
and a God of mercy. 

II. God's dealings oftkb febplex obsebvbbs. " His ways are in the great waters." 
" Who can by searching find out God ? " The firmest believer in Divine providence 
has frequent occasion to confess his utter inability to explain the events which happen 
around him. Why are some men prosperous, whilst others pass through afSiction and 
calamity ? Why do some escape in seasons of disaster, whilst others are overwhelmed? 
Why are God's ways often to all appearance inconsistent with a regard to the equit- 
able treatment of the wicked and the good? Such questions ever recur. They may, 
indeed, in the case of some observers, never be put ; but when put they cannot be 
answered. 

III. Yet to bbflectino bdnds Gton's DEALiNas do, on the whole, apfbab con- 
sistent with season and bighteoitsness. Individual facts may be difiScult to 
reconcile with our religious beliefs, but general principles and laws, when we rise to 
them, are recognized as just and good. And the higher the view we take of human 
nature and human life, the more do anomalies disappear. If we clearly perceive that 
man is made for goodness, and net for enjoyment, that the earthly life is a discipline 
and a preparation, that the great end of all is that man may share the Divine nature 
and the Divine life, — such convictions will help us to see and feel the wisdom and the 
goodness that distinguish God's government of men. There is in God's ways no error 
and no caprice. 

IV. Gk>D's DEALINOS with nations, as with INDrVIDUALB, ABE INTENDED TO FBO- 

mote hobal mPBOVEMENT. The expression used is very remarkable. The Lord assures 
those who observe his treatment of Israel that upon refiection they shall be " comforted " 
concerning the evil brought upon Jerusalem. The wisdom, and even the true benevo- 
lence, of the Divine ways shul in due time be made apparent. The cause for which 
what has been done has been ordered by providence shall be recognized and shall be 
approved as justifying the great Ruler and his government. Thus shall his Name be 
glorified.— T. 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — Disastroits anewen to prayer. Ezekiel's prediotionB had been m 
gloomy and advene, that the elders of Israel in Babylon were staggered. They oould 

E7iKlfIW» • 



268 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xiv. 1— 23. 

not aequiesce in their nation's ruin. Hopeful that lome message more favourabla 
might come from ttod, they sought (it may be on the sabbath day) the prophet's pre- 
leuce. We must not place these elders in the same category with those in Jerusalem 
who pnferred the flattering speeches of the false prophets. Neyertheless, they were 
not right at heart. The taint of idolatry was upon these also. Good and evil may be 
mingled in men's hearts in different degiees. 

I. OuTWABD TEOUBLit OFTEN DBITEB MEN TO GoD. It is not always 80. It Some- 
times chafes and exasperates men. In their pain they sometimes curse God and 
blaspheme him yet the more. Perhaps affliction, in itself, has no softening, subduing 
influence. But the Spirit of God frequently uses affliction as his instrument, his 
pruning-knife, in order to make the soul fruitful. This much is certain, that many 
have found a season of affliction a season of salTation. Certain it is that " whom the 
Lord loveth he correcteth ; " and not a few of the redeemed adopt David's language 
as their own, " Before I was afflicted, I went astray ; but now have I kept thy Word." 

n. Ykt thb betdbn is sometimes OUTWABD, NOT COMPLETE. In human nature 
there is a strong bias to be satisfied with what is merely outward in religion. To utter 
words of prayer, we imagine, must be auccessful. To come into God's house, no matter 
what may be our motives or intentions, we thick, must please God. Do we not confer 
a favour on him ? Has he not engaged to do us good ? Yet how often is the heart 
tway when the body is present? How often do we bring our idols with us into that 
sacred place ? How often do we worship mammon, or pleasure, or fashion, under pre- 
tence of worshipping God ? How often do our words far exceed our desires ? Hypocrisy 
and idolatry are as common in sanctuaries now as in the days of ancient IsraeL Fre- 
quently the heart is preoccupied with its own wishes and plans and ambitions, while 
we are using the words, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" We want our own 
ends, while we profess to yield unto God. 

IIL God beplieb, not to oub wobdb, but to onB tempeb of mind. " I the Lord 
will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of bis idols." Men often think 
that they lay a trap for God, but God takes them in their own snare. We try to use 
God for the attainment of some worldly end, and we think sometimes that we succeed, 
but we are always outwitted. Men's words are often veils to hide the facts, and we 
may deceive others ; we cannot deceive God. To give to such men blessing would be 
to do them harm. For such the only real blessing is self-humiliation, inward contri- 
tion. True faith in God is the only measure of success, and faith is loyal, candid, 
■elf-submissive. Foul- sympathetic men brought a paralytic to Jesus; but Jesus first 
read the yearning desire of the sufferer's heart, and said, " Man, thy sins are forgiven 
thee." For God is a Spirit, and deals with the human spirit. Therefore in prayer we 
should always imitate David, " I lift up my soul unto thee." 

rV, God's aim is loftier than the aim of the suppliant. The aim of the 
suppliant is usually temporary relief — deliverance from some present evil. But God 
sees that present trouble is the best blessing — the rough husk that contains nourishing 
meat. Our object is enjoyment ; God's object is soul-profit. He yearns to see repent- 
ance — the first cry of the new life. " Thus saith the Lord God ; Repent." God's aim 
is remote, but right noble. His design is that " the house of Israel may go no more 
astray." His purpose is that " they may be my people, and I may be their God." If 
we will not allow God's purpose to prevail, he will not al}ow our low and vain 
purposes to succeed. If we set ourselves in hostility against God, only ruin can result. 
If God sends us to Nineveh, and we sail away to 'i'arshish, we may expect to meet an 
overwhelming storm. God's will must become our will; then only shall we have rest. 

v. God turns unsuccessful suppliants into beacons. " I will set my face against 
that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb." As battle-fields, saturated with 
human gore, yield larger crops of grain, so out of all evil God will brina; ultimate good. 
Cain's published sin served as a restraint upon others. Lot's wife became a standing 
witness for God and fur righteousness. In the long run, everything contributes to the 
good of mankind. The wrath of man shall bring praise to God. Man's crime at 
Calvary has become the fount of greatest blessing. Even human sin shall serve as a 
dark background, the better to set forth the brilliant hues of Divine mercy. Yet how 
■low men are to note the various warnings which God gets upt Self-examination is » 
rare virtue. 



OH. xiT. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOFBDET KZEKTKL. 250 

VL Anbwkbkb fbatkb kat bb hbatiest DTSA8TKB. The Oadarenes prayed that 
Jesus would depart out of their coasts, and he departed. The man who has practised 
deceit shall be himself deceived. Pharaoh hardened his heart i^ainst Gk>d nntS at 
length God joined in the process : " The Lord hardened Pharaoh's heart." He who will 
not accept any answer from QoA except that which chimes in with his own wishes 
shall have his wish gratified, but it will prove his ruin. To Ephraim God at last said, 
"He is joined to his idols: let him alone." He who blasphemes against the Holy 
Spirit is " in danger of eternal sin." And this is the heaviest punishment a man can 
receive. " He that is filthy, let him be filthy still." The most notable example of this 
principle in God's government is seen in the case of Ahab. He had set his heart upon 
war against Ramoth-GKlead. He would not be dissuaded. Yet he wished to have the 
appearance of God's approval, in order to gain allies. At length the Lord said, "Who 
shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead ? " " And there 
came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And 
the Lfird said, Wherewith ? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in 
the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persuade him, and shalt pre- 
vail also." If foolish men prefer flattering delusions to the naked truth, God will at 
length abandon them to this fatal influence. He punishes sin with sin. 

VII. The law op bmhteousness AUiOws of ko exemption. Pauper and prince 
are amenable to the same law in the kingdom of God. " The punishment of the 
prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that seeketh unto him." No office, 
however honourable, will serve as a cloak for sin, nor alleviate the weight of punishment. 
Righteousness deals with man as man, and takes no note of names or titles. If a king 
di-inks poison, it produces the selfsame effect as if a ploughboy drank it It wUl avail 
us nothing to say to the white-robed Judge, " Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in 
thy name ? " Office may increase onr responsibility ; it does not add to our purity ; it 
gives no passport to heaven. Not genius, nor power, commends men to God; only 
moral goodness. " In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject to you ; but rather 
rejoice that your names are written in heaven." — D. 

Vers. 12 — 23. — Human atonement valudest. The hopeful among the Jews probably 
remembered that in times of former correction God had yielded, in some measure, to 
the intercessions of the saints. If they had not gained aU that they asked, they had 
gained some advantage. Why might that not occur again ? Might not God concede 
some of his demand? This was impossible, for the first necessity was that righteous 
government be maintained. No good can ever come to men by tampering with 
righteousness. 

L Sim against God is an imheabttbable evil. It is a common thing for men to 
afiect surprise at the severity of God's chastisement. Yet this is only an outcome of 
their ignorance. They have no conception of the tremendous evil of sin. Its magnitude 
defies all human measurement. We cannot follow it into all its ramifications of mis- 
chief. We see the beginning of the vicious stream ; the ending is beyond our sight. It 
is an injury to the moral universe, and we cannot estimate it Had Eve foreseen all the 
painful results of taking the forbidden fruit, surely she would have resisted the tempter. 

XL Plagbant bin demands evebt bobt oy penalty. It is not always possible 
for men to discriminate between great sins and small ; yet even men can discover when 
sin becomes rapidly contagious, and when it is largely influential for eviL When a 
man, by • plausible embellishment of vice, entraps ten thousand others into the snare, 
and makes liiB vice fashionable, popular, universal, — his sin is heinous. As for a disease 
that has become epidemic the severest remedies are employed, so when a sin becomes 
national, terrible chastisement is demanded. To vindicate his righteous law, God 
sometimes employs the scourge of pestilence; sometimes famine;, sometimes war; 
sometimes a plague of locusts. But when iniquity breaks out with virulence, oi 
becomes aggravated and stubborn, he will combine all his methods of chastisement, im 
order to cleanse the land. Always his punishments ore well-apportioned, never 
excessive. The balance is in the hand of Infinite Wisdom. 

in. Men ABE nmuENTiAL fob good aocobdino to their bishteotibnebs. The 
messenger of Jehovah singles out for mention three men who were eminent for piety 
and faiSi. His language implies that if any men could prevail with God to abate his 



260 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiv. 1— 23 

penaltieii, these were the men. It was useless for Urn to make mention d men of 
inferior jiiety. Any righteous man would not sufBoe. To have any hope of success, he 
must be a man of transcendent purity. This conviction was universal in the minds of 
the peiiple. It was founded on reason, on experience, on the records of past history. 
Haii nut Moses gained a respite for the nation by his righteous intercession ? Had not 
Siimucl averted the stroke of Divine anger from Israel ? Had not Noah's righteousness 
stjcured the safety of seven persons beside himself? Why should it not be so again? 
Daniel was living among theifi — a man eminent for loyalty to Jehovah. Were not 
Jiremiah and Ezekiel interceding for the people? If anything could save the nation 
from utter destruction, surely it was the righteous zeal of these godly men I 

IV. Yet hdman eighteotjsness is incompetent to abate a single penalty 
FROM OTHERS. A mau's personal riglueousness will always serve as a screen for him- 
self, never as a shield for others. Far be it from God to destroy the righteous with the 
wicked 1 This would be to obliterate eternal distinctions. This would be for Gh)d to 
act against himself. The righteous are safe when dangers are thickest. They have an 
invulnerable panoply. And the prayers of the righteous have often gained temporary 
advantages for the unrighteous. Such intercession has obtained a brief respite for 
repentance — has obtained a postponement of the catastrophe. Yet as a righteous man, 
however zealous, has no power to transform the moral nature of another man, he cannot 
deliver him when God appeareth for judgment. Eternal justice is the main pillar of 
the universe, and, if justice fails, the universe will be shivered. 

V. Much less can hdman eiohteodsness avert from men all Divine penalties. 
This is an argMmeut ad hominem. If the righteousness of the best men that ever lived 
cannot quench one fiery dart of God's vengeance, much less can it quench all the darts 
in God's quiver. There was a propriety in every particular form of chastisement which 
God employed ; it would therefore be unbecoming every attribute of his nature to 
suspend that chastisement, while the causal sin } et remained. Men little surmise the 
terrible necessity there is for retribution, because they do not perceive the magnitude 
of sin. It is a fearful thing to provoke the anger of the living God. 

VI. God will ultimately make his wisdom and eighteousness oleab to mek. 
It is possi ble that the elders of Israel did not immediately acquiesce in the first necessity 
for this severe course. They did not know the full extent of Israel's sin. Ignorance 
is often the root of discord. But God would spare a few — most probably the best— of 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem. These should in due time be conveyed to Tel-Abib, and 
join the older members of the Captivity. But so base and intolerable will the 
characters of this remnant appear, that the elders themselves will confess that Gbd's 
judgments were not a whit too severe — that a less chastisement would be inadequate. 
This act of God exhibits the graciousness of his character. He deigns to explain and 
to justify his ways unto his trustful children. " The secret of the Lord is with them 
that fear him." He takes them into his fullest confidence. — D. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Hypocritical inqmrers of God. " Then came certain of the elders of 
Israel unto me, and sat before me," etc. In the former chapter false prophets and pro- 
phetesses were severely rebuked by the Lord God through his true prophet. In this one 
certain elders wlio came to Ezekiel to inquire of the Lord through him, while their 
hearts were given up to idols, are reproved, exhorted, and warned. The paragraph 
before us presents the following connected topics for consideration, which we will notice 
In the order in which they are presented by the prophet. 

I. Men hypoceitioallt inquiring of the Loed GIod. " Then came certain of the 
elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me. And the word of the Lord came unto me, 
saying," etc. (vers. 1 — 3). These elders who came to inquire of God through his 
prophet were probably of the number of his fellow-exiles. They came to consult the 
prophet of Jehovah, jet they were idolaters at heart. They had "set up their idols in 
their heart," etc. (ver. 3). Their idolatry involved practical atheism. Genuine belief 
in the existence of the Lord Jehovah would have effectually precluded idolatry. Men 
of such character could not sincerely inquire of God. There can be no real approach 
unto him without faith in the reality of his being. " He that cometh to God must 
believe that he is," etc. (Heb. xi. 7). Their seeking information or counsel of the Lord 
was not true ; they were not whole-hearted in so doing, but hypocritical. They are. 



OH, xnr. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 261 

■ays Hengstenberg, the " representatives of those who only outwardly fear God, but 
inwardly serve the spirit of the world and the age." How many meet in God's house, 
unite in his worship, and listen to the ministry of his holy Word, as though they were 
genuine inquirers of his will, who yet have idols in their hearts I Seeming to sincerely 
" inquire in his temple," yet they are devoted to the pursuit of rank or riches, power or 
pleasure, etc. 

II. HyPOCRITIOAL INQUIRBR8 OF GoD ANSWERED ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN HBABT. 

" Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God ; Every 
man of the house of Israel that setteth up his idols in his heart," etc. (vers. 4, 5). 
Different interpretations are given of these two verses. Thus Hengstenberg: "The 
question in ver. 4" (he places a note of interrogation at the end of that verse ; so also 
does Schroder) "is in the sense of a negative, 'I wUl not answer;' and this negative 
has its ground in ver. 5. God leaves sinners without answer or help, that they may 
come to a knowledge of their sin. ' To take in the heart' (ver. 5) is to touch the con- 
science." Another interpretation is that he would give them an answer as delusive 
as the idols which they had taken into their hearts. The case presents itself to us 
thus : The spiritual state of these elders prevented them from truly hearing the word 
of the Lord. They were not sincere in their inquiries of him. They would not 
receive the truth which his servants Jeremiah and Bzekiel proclairaeii. Nay, more, in 
their then moral condition they could not receive the truth of God. With their hearts 
devoted to idols, how could they apprehend and hold fast the pure words of the Lord ? 
So he would send them a message answerable to their own character. These " idolatrous 
oracle-seekers have to expect what corresponds to their state." Hence their own hearts 
were their seducers. God deals with men according to their character. " With the 
merciful thou wilt show thyself merciful," etc. (Ps. xviii. 25, 26). " The sin and shame, 
the pain and ruin, of sinners are all from themselves, and their own hearts are the 
snares in which they are taken ; they seduce them, they betray them ; their own con- 
sciences witness against them, condemn them, and are a terror to them. If God take 
them, if he discover them, if he convict them, if he bind them over to his judgment, 
it is all by ' their own heart.'. ' O Israel ! thou hast destroyed thyself.' The house of 
Israel is ruined by its own hands, * because they are all estranged from me through 
their idols ' " (Matthew Henry). 

III. Hypocritical inqtjirbrs op God exhorted to comply with the conditions 
OF ACCEPTABLE APPROACH UNTO HIM. " Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus 
saith the Lord God; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away 
your faces from all your abominations." Here is a true message from God for them if 
they will accept it. Repentance towards God was their present and imperative duty. 
Prom the Lord the house of Israel had grievously departed, and their true repentance 
would be a returning to him, and renunciation of their abominable idolatries. Repent- 
ance is not mere regret, or self-reproach, or sorrow, or tears. It is that grief for sin 
which leads to reformation of life. " Repentance," says Shakespeare, " is heart's sorrow, 
and a clear life ensuing." Now, this was necessary as a condition of approaching God 
acceptably. " If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me " (Ps. Ixvi. 
18). Men should "pray in every place, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and 
doubting" (1 Tim, ii. 8). "Let us draw near with a true heart in fulness of faith," 
etc. (Heb. x. 22). When men inquire of God in this spirit, he will grant unto them 
gracious answers. 

IV. Hypocritical inquirers op God warned op the consequences of pebsist- 
ENCE in sin. " For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojoumeth 
in Israel, which separateth himself from me," etc. (vers. 7 — 11). Here they are 
solemnly warned that, if they would not turn from sin unto God: 1. They should 
encounter the Divine displeasure. " I will set my face against that man," etc. (ver. 8). 
God cannot look upon sin with indifference. Hb hates it. And if sinners persist in 
it, he will set his face against them, and visit them because of their transgressions. 
He did this in the case of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Siege and famine, pestilence, 
slaughter, and captivity were the consequences of their aggravated and long-continued 
gins and crimes. 2. They should become the victims of their chosen delusions. " If the 
prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that 
prophet," etc. (vers. 9, 10). They hsd chosen idols for their gods; they believed the 



262 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHBT EZEKIBL. [oh. xiv. 1— 28. 

ialse prophets rather than the true ones ; and if they persisted in their choice they 
must take the consequences thereof. This was God's answer to their inquiries. Ha 
had shown them that by true repentance they would put themselves into right 
Telations with him. But if they would not repent, he would no more speak to them 
ly his prophets, but by his judgments in the just consequences of their sins. Their 
chosen prophets would be deceived, and would deceive those who inquired of them, 
and both the prophets and the inquirers should "bear the punishment of their 
iniquity." But in what sense can the Lord be said to deceive the false prophet, and 
then to punish him ? It is certain that he cannot sin, and that be is not the author 
of sin. " The deception proceeds originally from indwelling sin (Jas. i. 14), otherwise 
it could not be the object of punishment." But it was both permitted and regulated 
by God. He controls both sin and the consequences thereof for the accomplishment 
of his own glorious piirposes (cf. Ps. Ixxvi. 10). When Nebucliadnezzar besieged 
Jerusalem, he did so of his own accord, with no thought of doing the will of the Lord 
Jehovah, yet unconsciously he was doiug that will ; and frequently the Lord says that 
he would do those things which the army of the Chaldean monarch did (cf. ch. iv. 16; 
V. 8 — 17). God employed the Chaldeans, and regulated and controlled their move- 
ments, for the working out of his own plans ; yet they were free in those movements, 
and had no idea that in them they were the agents of the Lord God of IsraeL So 
these false prophets were used by him in the way of judgment, and were controlled by 
him; but they acted voluntarily in the course which they pursued, and they who 
consulted them did so of their own will ; and both of them shonld become the victims 
of their cherished delusions, and " bear the punishment of their iniquity." 3. They 
should become the means, wider Ood, of leading his people to fidelity unto him. " That 
the house of Israel may go no more astray from me," etc. (ver. 11). This was the 
Divine design in the punishment of the sinful people. " ' God punishes sins by means 
of sins,' but the end is the re-establishment of righteousness. His people, purified by 
trials, will cleave to him whom they have forsaken, and become a converted, sanctified 
people, joined unto their God by a covenant which they will not break " (' Speaker's 
Commentary '). The judgments of God aim at the promotion of the well-being of man. 
CoNOLUsioN. 1. Sere is solemn warning against insincere approach unto Ood. 2. 
Sere is encouragement to approach God sincerely and humbly. (Vers. 6, ll.)-^W. J, 

Ver. 20. — The privilege and power of the godly, their nature and limitation, 
"Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God," etc. Three 
very distinguished men are here mentioned, two of whom had long passed away from 
this world and all its scenes, the other was yet amongst men upon earth. Yet Noah 
and Job are spoken of as still in being. Absent from this world, they were yet Uving 
and present in the great universe of Gud. These undesigned testimonies to man's 
immortality, to be met with frequently in the Scriptures, afford the basis for a strong 
argument in support of that fact. 

" The dead are like the stars by day. 
Withdrawn from mortal eye ; 
Bat not extinct, they hold theii way 

In glory through the sky. 
Bpirits from bondage thus set free 

Vanish amidst immensity. 
Where human thought, like human sight, 
Fails to pursue their trackless flight." 
Daniel at this time, like Ezekiel, was an exile in Babylon, and was eminent both for 
his piety and his position. Neah, Daniel, and Job were all good men and great men ; 
they are enrolled amongst the most illustrious of our race. The prophet in this 
paragraph predicts " four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, 
»nd the noisome beast, and the pestilence," by reason of their idolatry and other sins.* 
And in the text he declares that, when the hour of judgment arrives, even the presence 
•f such men as Noah, Daniel, and Job in the doomed city would not avail to save any 
but their own souls. 

■ Most of these jvdgmanta w« have noticed in our nurey of earlier ohapten of this 
Mok. 



OH. XIV. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. KB 

L The PRiviLEaES of oood men. Our text announces the safety of good men even 
in the extremest dangers and the most irresistible judgments. " They shall . . . deliver 
their own souls by their righteousness." History affords remarkable examples of the 
deliverance of the good in times of sore peril (cf. Gen. vii 23 ; xviii. 32 ; xix. 15 — ^26). 
But it is not often that the godly are exempted from the calamities and judgments 
which befall the wicked. Thus Daniel, Bzekiel, and other holy men were carried into 
Chaldea with those to whom the exile was the punishment of idolatry, and were now 
suffering that exile with them. But invariably " they deliver their own souls by their 
righteousness." " If their bodies be not delivered, yet their souls are." Amid the 
overthrow of cities, the ruin of countries, or even the wreck of the world, their spiritual 
interests are secure. Moreover, though they are not exempt from general calamities, 
yet to them the calamities wear a different aspect from that which they present to the 
wicked. They are sustained under them, and enabled to bear them with heroic 
patience. The suffering which comes to the wicked as the judgment of a stern Buler 
comes to the righteous as the chastisement of a loving Father. And, by his grace, out 
of the scars of suffering, God will evolve the beauties of holiness. The darknesB and 
anguish which embitter and harden the heart of the wicked will increase the trust and 
tenderness and refine the graces of the righteous. 

II. The powbe of soon men. Our text implies that Noah, Daniel, and Job had 
power to do much for their fellow-men ; that they could do much in averting destruc- 
tion and saving man. The warning that these three saints would not be able to screen 
them firom this judgment implies the belief on the part of the people of Jerusalem that 
the good men amongst them, by their lives and prayers, would turn aside the threaten- 
ing storm. If any can turn away the judgments of Heaven from a nation of evil-doers, 
good men can do it. God may spare the wicked because of the righteous. The power 
of good men to avert Divine wrath from a people has at least two branches. 1. The 
power of moral influence with men. They are " the salt of the earth." Were it not 
for their influence society would become hopelessly corrupt, and the storm of God's 
judgment would sweep the guilty race from the earth. 2. The power of intercession 
with Ood. We have illustrious examples of this (cf. Gen. xviii. 23 — 32 ; Bxod. xxxii. 
11—14, 30—34 ; Numb. xi. 1—3 ; xiv. 13—20 ; xvi 44—50). Who can estimate the 
power of the intercession of good men ? 

III. The limitation of the power of oood men. " Though Noah, Daniel, and 
Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son nor 
daughter." " When the sin of a people has come to its height, and the decree has 
gone forth for their ruin, the piety and prayers of the best men shall not prevail to 
finish the controversy. This is here asserted again and again, that, though these three 
men were in Jerusalem at this time, yet they should deliver neither son nor daughter, 
not so much as the little ones should be spared for their sakes." This shows how dark 
and terrible the guilt of the inhabitants of Jerusalem must have been (cf. Jer. xv. 
1 ; vii. 16 ; xL 14). When the forbearance of God is exhausted, any number of the 
holiest of men cannot ward off the stroke of doom. Character may become so utterly 
depraved that reformation is impossible, and then nothing but judgment remains. 
Moral disease may become so deeply rooted and strong that no influence can overcome 
it, no power eradicate it, and then destruction is inevitable. When the Divine means 
of reformation have all been tried, and all have failed, what remains but utter ruin ? 
" Abused patience will turn at last into inexorable wrath." 

Conclusion. 1. Our subject speaks earnestly to parents concerning the salvation of 
their children. If you would save your children you must begin to work early and 
wisely. While the chains of evil habits are unforged, and the heart is susceptible of 
sacred impressions, and the conscience sensitive, and the sympathies tender, we must 
seek the salvation of our children if we would secure it. Oh, the time may come 
when the holiest of men "shall deliver neither son nor daughter" from the storms of 
God's judgment I 2. Our text reminds us all that salvation is a personal concern. 
Our kinsfolk and friends may be pious in life and powerful in prayer ; but their piety 
will not avail for them and for us. No man possesses superfluous grace. Continuance 
in sin may lead, nay, must lead, to a moral condition in which the prayerg of the most 
loving and sainted parents may avail nothing for their own son or <btnghter. Tou 
must believe on Jesus Christ for yourself, repent of your lins yourself. Yon must 



264 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xiv. 1—23. 

" work out your own salvation." There is no working by proxy here. " Each man 
shall bear his own burden." " Each one of ub shall give account of himself to God." 
Therefore " strive to enter in by the narrow door," etc. " Give the more diligence to 
make your calling and election sure." — W. J. 

"Vers. 22, 23. — The righteousness of Qod doubted and vindicated. "Yet, behold, 
therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth," etc. Our text, as Fair- 
bairn points out, " is addressed to the people already in exile, who are regarded as 
viewing the destruction about to be executed on Jerusalem with astonishment and 
some degree of dissatisfaction. The prophet tells such there would certainly be a 
remDant — not, however, in the proper sense, as if they were themselves deserving 
persons, or spared for blessing for the sake of the pious among them — but a remnant 
stiU so wedded to sin, and so manifestly deserving of severe chastisement, that every 
one would recognize the justice of God's dealings toward them. ' Ye shall see,' to use 
the language of Calvin, ' the men to be so wicked, that ye shall be forced to confess 
the city was deserving of destruction, and the men themselves worthy of death. And 
instead of murmuring and fretting against God, ye shall be satisfied it could not have 
been otherwise ordered, their wickedness was of so desperate a nature ; so that with 
soothed and tranquil minds, ye shall henceforth proclaim my righteousness, and cease 
any more to utter the complaints which now disturb your minds ! ' " Let us consider — 

I. The concern of the good foe the righteousness of God in his judgments. 
Bzekiel foresaw that bis fellow-exiles would be amazed at the sternness of the judgments 
of God upon Jerusalem. Those judgments would be of great severity. And amongst the 
exiles there were some pious persons who would be troubled with doubts as to whether 
the Lord had sufficient cause for what he had done there. They would be distressed 
with the suspicion that perhaps the visitation of God had been disproportionate in its 
severity — that the sins of the people had not merited such punishment. And they 
would be distressed with misgivings as to the righteousness of Grod in the matter. 
" So long as we do not understand that God on just grounds acts sternly, so long are 
our souls distressed and tormented." Somewhat thus Abraham felt respecting the 
doom pronounced on Sodom and Gomorrah. " That be far from thee to do after this 
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked, that so th« righteous should be as the 
wicked; that be far from thee: shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" We 
have here, as Bobertson, in fragmentary but striking and suggestive notes, remarks, 
" a suspicion of the Divine justice : the most horrible with which the mind of man 
can be tempted. Dreadful to doubt one's own salvation, and feel suspeuded over the 
gulf! But a more terrible gulf when we doubt whether bll is right here. 'Oh, to see 
the misery of this bleeding world I' Consider for a moment the misconception of these 
words, ' Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ?' They have been used to prove 
the sovereignty of God. God is Judge, therefore what he does is right. He has a 
right, and therefore it is right. But Abraham does not say that. So far from acquiescing 
in the predestinarian feeling — ^it is to be, and therefore it is right ; God is a sovereign, 
and may do what he pleases — he is precisely doubting this, whether, though God be 
Judge, his deeds are right, taking the moral sense of Abraham as a text, and consider- 
ing it horrible if God's acts do not aijree with it. It is a perilous way of speaking, 
, ' God has a right to decree what he will ; my salvation, your damnation.' It is not so 
the Bible speaks. It appeals to tho sense of justice, 'Are not my ways equal?' etc. 
God never says, 'I create a thing right, therefore 1 do it.' God's will does not make 
a thing right. It is God's character which determines his will. For else, if the devil 
had created this world, wrong would be ri^ht, because bis will, and we should have 
the terrible doctrine — mi;;ht makes right" ('Life and Letters,' Appendix iii.). This 
is as applicable to the doubts and fears of the exiles as to the righteousness of Gud in 
his judgments upon Jerusalem, as to the doubts of Abraham as to the doom of the 
cities of the plain. This concern of godly men for the righteousness of God's dealings 
implies : 1. An inward sense of righteousness. It is a testimony to the existence and 
exercise and majesty of the moral sense in man. It is an outcome of the working of 
conscience. 2. Deep solicitude for the honour of Qod. Any doubt of his holiness, or 
of the rectitude of his doings, causes sore pain to his people, and it does so because tbt 
glory of his character is unspeakably dear to them. 



OH.XT. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHBT B^BKllgT., 



26S 



IL ThK OONTICTION OF THE OOOD OF THK BiaHTEOUBNEBB OF GOD IN HIS JTn)OMBNT& 

The Lord, by the prophet, assures the troubled exiles that they should know that h« 
had not done without cause all that he had done in Jerusalem. 1. This conviction 
would be wrought by the manifestation of the wickedness of the people. " Therein shall 
be left a remnant that shall be carried forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they 
shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings," etc. The 
remnant that should be carried into captivity would make it clear, from their degrada- 
tion and sin, that the judgments inflicted upon Jerusalem were deserved by the guilty 
inhabitants thereof. The exhibition of their wickedness would manifest the justice of 
Qfld in_ their punishment. The pious exiles in Chaldea would perceive " that such 
corruption had deserved such destruction." " God's righteousness is clearly manifest 
in those that perish, as well as by means of those that escape." 2, This conviction 
would bring peace to the good. " Ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I 
have brought upon Jerusalem," etc. "The comfort lies in the justification of the ways 
of^ God." Their painful doubts as to his righteousness would be destroyed. Their 
faith in him would be established. And faith brings peace and rest to the soul. 3. 
The production of this conviction was ordered by Ood. He did not chide or condemn 
them for their painful doubts ; but promised them evidence for the invigoration and 
confirmation of their fnith. And he so controlled events as to bring about this result. 
It appears from this that he is concerned (1) for the vindication of his own righteous- 
ness, and (2) for the peace of his people. Wherefore in his own time he will remove 
every cloud that veils the rectitude of his works and ways, and make it apparent to 
the whole intelligent universe that all his purposes and operations are just and true. 

Conclusion. 1. Let us cherish a strong assurance of the righteousness of Ood in aU 
his designs and deeds. 2. Jf in anything his righteousness seems hidden from u(, let 
«M wait patiently for hit own vindication thereof. — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBB XV. 



Ver. S. — What is the vine tree, etc. 7 The 
prophet's mind had apparently been dwell- 
ing, after the close of his previous utterance, 
on the imagery of earlier writers, in which 
Israel had appeared as the vine of Jehovah 
(Gen. xlix. 22; Fs. Ixxx. 9 ; Hos. x. 1 ; Isa. 
V. ; Deut. xxxii. 32 ; Jer. ii. 21), and to 
wliich he himself refers again in eh. xix. 10. 
He eaw how men might pervert that image 
to their own destruction. And he expands 
the parable, aa our Lord does in John xv. 
Men might dwell, perhaps were actually 
dwelling, on the thought that they were 
branches of the true vine, and therefore eould 
not perish. He exposes the groundlessness 
of that hope in tones of scornful sarcasm. 
If the vine did not bear fruit, or if it only 
brought forth wild grapes, then its special 
excellence was gone, and it challenged 
comparison with other trees only as a 
timber tree, and what was its worth as such ? 
If Israel was not true to its vocation, it was 
poorer and weaker than the heathen nations 
round it. So far the general thought is 
dear. In dealing with details, we note 



that the words in italics, "or than," ihonld 
disappear, and that the words should stand 
as in the Bevised Version, What is the vine 
more than any tree, the vine branch which u 
among the trees of the forest t 

Ver. 3. — Shall wood be taken thereof, 
etc. ? As a timber tree, then, the vine was 
confessedly valueless. No carpenter would 
use it, even for the peg upon which men 
hang their cups, and which had become, as 
in Isa. xxii. 23, the symbol of political 
stability (comp. also Zeoh. x. 4). For 
the unfruitful vine branch there remained 
the doom of being cast into the fire (John 
XV. 6). What was its worth when it was 
half-burnt at either end and in the middle ? 
What would Israel be fit for when it ki»d 
been laid low by the " fire " of Ooa's 
judgment ? Probably the vivid picture of 
the charred branch points to the successive 
judgments which had fallen first on the 
ten tribes, then on Judah, and lastly on 
Jerusalem itself The word " trespass " may 
refer either to the general guilt of the 
people, or to the last crowning crime of 
Zedekiah's rebellion. I rather incline to th* 
latter, the noun being in the singular. 



266 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. XT. 1— a 



HOMILETICS. 

Yen. 1 — 8. — The worthleu vine. The vine represents Israel, and in its degenerate 
.state it stands for the fallen, corrupt nation. Our Lord has taken up the image already 
lamUiar to us from Ps. Ixxx. and Isa. v., M well as from this passage in Ezekiel, so 
that his Church, now regarded as the spiritual Israel, may be typified in the old analogies 
of the vine (John xv.). 

I. Wherein the worth of thb vinb consists. " What is the vine tree more than 
any tree ? " It is usually regarded as of supreme excellence. While fig trees grow by 
the wayside, vines are carefully walled in and the vineyard protected by watchmen 
(Isa. V. 2). Much labour is spent upon the vine in tilling the soil, cleansing and 
pruning the branches, and so preparing for the vintage. All this points to a special value 
in the vine above ordinary plants. It is not difficult to see the ground of this valuation. 
The vine is prized simply for its grapes. The abundance and quality of the fruit give 
it its sole worth. "And he looked that it should bring forth grapes " (Isa. v. 2). Christ 
values his people just according to their fruitfulness (John xv. 8). 

II. How THE VINE HAT BS WORTHLESS. If the vine be fruitless, it can no longer 
sustain its proud pre-eminence. On the contrary, regarded as a tree, it must be taken 
for one of the poorest of its class. The forester can set no price upon its limp and 
straggling boughs. If it bears no fruit, and is therefore to be considered on it8 own 
account and not for the sake of its product, it is of less value than other trees. Regarded 
as timber it is worthless. Degenerate Israel was less valuable than heathen nations. 
The Jews were then far inferior to the Greeks and Romans at the height of their 
greatness. The Church of Christ, when barren of spiritual fruitfulness, is a noxious 
institution ; political clubs, scientific societies, chambers of commerce, — ^these so-called 
secular institutions are superior to a degenerate Church. The fallen Christian is 
lower than the " man of the world," and of less use to society, as the fruitless vine ii 
of less account than the forest tree. 

III. What I8 to bx done to the wobthlebb tine. It has failed in fruit-bearing ; 
it is useless as timber ; there remains only one possible use for it. Flung into the oven 
it may serve as firewood. Indeed, this is necessary. Similarly, the fruitless fig tree 
cannot be allowed to stand, occupying space, absorbing nutriment from the soil, casting 
shade where healthy sunshine would develop more profitable vegetable growth. " Cut 
it down ; why cumbereth it the ground ? " (Luke xiii. 7). A fruitless Church stands in 
the place of a useful one, and therefore it is positively injurious. There is but one 
good that can come of it. The very destruction of it may be a warning to others. 
Unfaithful souls are preparing for themselves a fitte of destruction. Negative fruit- 
lessness is enough to doom them (Matt. xxv. 30). 

IV. How the WOBTHLESB tine IB TO BE BUBSEQUBNTLT BEOABDED. It waS of UO 

use before it was burnt. What, then, will be its value afterwards (see ver. 6)? 
Chastisement, which corresponds to pruning, is sent in order to improve its subject. 
But destruction cannot benefit the thing destroyed. If " the wages of sin is death," 
such wages cannot be turned to any good account. We may submit to wholesome 
correction, but we should " flee from the wrath to come " when that wrath is the 
consuming &n of destruction, the awful consequences of persistent un. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — 37k« worthhm vineyard. The prophet was inspired to point the 
reproach of the Hebrew people, by reference to their ingratitude, their unfaithfulness, 
and their failure to fulfil the special purpose for which they were exalted to a positioo 
of peculiar priTilege. In this passage, as in a similar passage in the fifth chapter of 
Isaiah's prophecies, the similitude of the vine is employed to set forth, on the one hand, 
Divine care, culture, and forbearance ; and, on the other hand, national barrenness and 
uselessness. Plain truths are uttered which serve to justify before every rightly judging 
mind the action of the Lord in this time of Israel's calamities and distresses. 

T . TsRAEIi WAB BGLIOTXD FBOM AMOSO THE NATIONS ON AOOOUNT Or NO SXOELLENOE OE 



OE.XV. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIBL, 2«7 

UEBIT OF HGB OWN. So far as ito wood is concerned, the vine has no advantage above 
other trees ; in fact, it " is meet for no work," and compares unfavourably with other 
and serviceable timber. Similarly, although in the progenitors of the Hebrew race 
there were remarkable gifts and remarkable moral qualities, and although in the 
course of Jewish history many great men arose, still it is not to be dented that the 
nation, as such, was a rebellious, disobedient, stiff-necked people. God had a purpose 
in selecting Israel, but his selection was one to prove his independence of human 
agencies and instrumentalities. The people were wont to boast of their ancestors, but 
in themselves there was nothing of which to boast. 

II. Thk purpose of God in selecting Isbabl was the peoduction of pbeoiottu 
AND ACCEPTABLE FRUIT. If the wood of the viue is of little use, its fruit is wholesome 
and delicious, and the juice of the grape, though too often, like other gifts of God, 
abused, " malieth glad the heart of man." But if the vine yields no clusters of grapes, 
what is its use ? Israel was appointed to privilege in order that the Law given might 
be reverently obeyed, in order that Jehovah, revealed in temple-worship, might be 
purely and devoutly worshipped. God looked that his vine should bring forth fruit, 
valuable, wholesome, and acceptable to himself. 

III. Israel failed to fulfil this fubfose. Qoi came, year after year, seeking 
fruit, but found none. He looked for progress, and there was deterioration. He looked 
for obedience, and there was rebellion. He looked for spirituality, and there was 
formality and hypocrisy. He looked for sincere and cordial worship, and there was 
idolatry. Opportunities of devotion and of service were neglected and abused. 
Temptations, instead of being resisted, were succumbed to. The long-suffering of God 
led not to repentance. 

lY. Israel thus became utteblt useless fob ant pbofitable and Divine end. 
It was this which especially oppressed the mind of the prophet ; it was this which 
aroused the displeasure of the great Lord and Judge. " They have committed a 
trespass " was the complaint and reproach of Jehovah against his people. Because they 
were barren, they were unprofitable. 

v. Divine dissatisfaction was expressed against Ibbael. There is something 
truly terrible in the declaration of Jehovah: "I will set my face against them. 
Such expressions are objected against by some who are indignant at such anthropomorphic 
representations of the Eternal. But the acts of God, as recorded in history, support 
the representations of his feelings as thus expressed. Bemoving, as we should do, vom 
our conceptions of Jehovah anything suggested by such language which is derogatory 
to his perfect character, we have still a view of the Divine justice and retributive 
government which it is most important that every reader of Scripture should take, and 
that habitually. 

VI. Divine chastisement is appabent in national dibabteb. The worthless 
wood of the unfruitful vine was cast into the fire for fueU And of the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem the Judge declared, "They shall go out from one fire, and another fire 
shall devour them." The history of the nation informs us how exactly such predic- 
tions were fulfilled. The calamities which came in rapid succession upon Israel and 
Judah were as repeated castings into the furnace of righteous retribution. The 
rebellious and idolatrous people were chastened, were humiliated, were decimated, exiled, 
despised, and all but consumed. Their land was made desolate, and their national life 
eeemed all but extinguished. But a remnant was spared. The fires through which 
they passed purified, but were not suffered to consume them. In the midst of wrath 
God remembered mercy. There was a witness for Israel to bear, and a work for Israel 
to do, among the nations ; and he who first chose the nation did not now abandon 
it.— T. 

Yers. 1 — 8. — Useless, i/ fruitless. The nation of the Hebrews is often rmresented 
under the image of a vine. This, with the olive, was its staple production. It may be 
that ever since the visit of the spies, who brought back the gigantic cluster of grapes 
from Eshcol, the vine had served as a standing emblem of the empire. In the Psalms 
of David, and in the poetical utterances of Isaiah, frequent mention is made of Israel 
under the symbol of a vine. And amid the ruins of ancient buildings in Palestine^ 
clusters of the vine, carved in stone upon lintel or architrave, may still be seen. 



268 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHBT EZBKIBL. [oh. xr. 1— 8. 

L Most tbees bebvb uaxt uses. From root to topmost twig, every part of some 
trees is seryiceable to man. The bark is used for cordage or for tanning. The root is 
often a valnable medicine. The juice which exudes is a precious gum. The fruit is 
wholesome food. And when cut down, the wood is devoted to house-building or forms 
implements of husbandry. Which fact is a parable. For some cations serve many 
good purposes. A nation may produce a superior literature which shall serve for the 
education of other lands. It may bring to perfection the decorative arts — painting and 
architecture and sculpture. It may invent a useful system of jurisprudence. It may 
be famous for legislation, for commerce, for manufactures. If it should faU in one 
respect, it might yet excel in others. Egypt and Greece and Home were justly 
celebrated for many of these things. These taught the world ; they moulded humanity. 
By their literature and art and systems of government they are teaching mankind 
stilL " Being dead, they yet speak." 

n. The vine tree has bot one use — its feuit. Of all trees it is the most 
prolific in bearing fruit. Under proper culture, its fruitfulness is certain, regular, 
copious. All the life and vigour of the tree are poured into its clusters. But failing 
this, it renders no other service to man. Its cells are not stored with any known 
medicinal qualities. Its wood is too brittle to bear any strain or burden. Hence, 
unless fruitful, it is worthless. In this respect the vine is an apt figure of the Hebrew 
nation. It was raised up by God for a single purpose, viz. to exhibit to the world 
righteousness, loyalty to the will of the invisible God. Israel's message was to be 
addressed to the conscience of mankind. Israel was designed to be a lighthouse, to 
diffuse on every side the rays of moral and spiritual truth. If it failed in this, it faUed 
altogether. It may as well not have been. For Israel to fail in exerting a moral 
influence upon the Gentile nations was a loss incalculable to humanity. It was a 
check upon the development of manhood, 

III. A FRUITLESS VINE IB DESTINED FOR THE FLAHE. Other trees, whcu felled, are yet 
valuable to man. They exude a fragrance. They possess qualities suited for dyeing 
or tanning. They are useful for edifices of all kinds. They afford timber for ship- 
building. But the vine has no such virtues. If fruitless, it is cut down and set apart 
for fueL So was it with Israel's nationality. The picture sketched by the prophet ii 
impressive. It is that of a vine branch severed from the tree and already burnt at 
bom ends. The final doom of such a branch had already begun. Israel had committed 
a grievous trespass. The nation created to he a witness for God had become a witness 
against him. The medicine had become a poison. Hence the dunghill was its fittest 
place. The doom of Israel had already begun. Its glory was in part consumed. Fire 
should succeed to fire, calamity to calamity, until the lowest degradation should be 
reached. The decree of God is written in steel, and cannot in the nature of things be 
revoked. " My word shall not return unto me void." — D. 

Vers. 1—8. — I%e true olject of the life of man. " And the word of the Lord came 
unto me, saying. Son of man. What is the vine tree more than any tree ? " etc. Israel 
is here compared to a vine. The figure is frequently applied to her (cf Ps. Ixxx. 8—16 ; 
Isa. V. 1 — 7). If a vine be fruitful, it is very highly valued. Its fruit is said to make 
" glad the heart of man," and to " cheer God and man." But if it be not fruitful, of 
what use is it ? It is of no use as timber. If other trees fail to bring forth fruit, they 
may at least render good service as timber. Not so the vine. If it is not fruitful, it is 
fit only for burning. So Israel was " planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed," with 
the express purpose of bringing forth fruit, i.e. of continuing faithful to the one true God, 
and doing righteously amongst men. If they had fulfilled that design, they would have 
occupied a position of noble pre-eminence amongst the nations of the world. But failing 
in that, they failed totally, and were fit only for destruction. " In respect of those 
things which constitute the natural greatness of kingdoms — antiquity of origin, extent 
of territory, abundance of resources, attainments in arts and science — what could they 
boast of in comparison of Egypt, Ethiopia, Babylon, and the greater kingdoms of the 
earth ? " Hence if they failed religiously, like a fruitless vine they were fit only for the 
fire. Their destruction was already in a great measure accomplished (vers. 4, 5), and its 
further accomplishment was at hand (vers. 6 — 8). The principles involved here apply 
to all men and to every man. We are designed and created by God to produce the 



OH. XV. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF THE PROFHET EZEKIEIi. 269 

fruits of holinesis and usefulness. If we do so, we honour Um, occupy an exalted 
moral position, and benefit society. If we fail to do so, we dishonour God, sink in 
moral character and condition, and are worthless or injurious to society. What is the 
fruit which God designs that we should hear? Personal holiness and social usefulness. 
" Ye have your fruit unto holiness." " Bearing fruit in every good work." These are 
the two great characteristics of the fruit which God requires of us. They should not 
be severed. The holy character must bring forth good works. The good works must 
ever be connected with, and the expression of, a holy character. This fruit will 
be produced in various degrees and in various forms, according to personal idiosyn- 
crasies, abilities, and opportunities. God does not require that Christian character 
shall be rigidly uniform, or that Christian service shall all be of the same kind. What 
he demands is that every one shall be faithful in the pui-suit of holiness and usefulness, 
and shall endeavour to realize these things in the best manner in each individual case. 
Our text further suggests — 

L That the teue object op man's life is that he mat thtts bear feuit. 
1. Ee is formed hy God fur this object. Man is endowed with faculties fitting him for 
this. He has mind and soul by which he may perceive the revelation of God. He 
has a wiU which was designed to work in sweet harmony with that of God. He has 
a conscience which was constituted to accord with and respond to the eternal righteous- 
ness of God. He has affections and aspirations which find their true object in God, 
and their highest exercise in his worship. Moreover, he has powers for expressing all 
these things in his life ; for feeling and speaking and acting holily, and so honouring 
God by producing the fruit which he requires of us. We are also fitted by God 
for usefulness in various ways. We have the power of sympathy, of kind and 
earnest speech, of loving brotherly help, of tender and trusty support, by which to be 
useful to ieach other. There is no one but may help another in some form and to some 
extent. 2. Man is blessed by God with cvUuring agencies for this object. What 
agencies of help and cidture God gave to his people Israel ! — the moral Law, religious 
ordinances, sacred memorials, consecrated priests, inspired prophets. How many and 
infiuential' are the means which we possess for promoting our mental and spiritual 
growth and usefulness ! — an inspiring history, a glorious literature, the sacred Scriptures, 
opportunities of religious worship, divinely instituted sacraments, various Christian 
ministries, the influences of the Holy Spirit. Even the very trials under which we 
smart and bleed are but the prunings of the great Vine-dresser, that we may bear more 
tmit. What does such a constitution as ours mean? What do all these agencies 
mean ? What is their mission ? That we may bring forth fruit, even holiness and 
usefulness. 

"Heaven doth with ns, as we with torches do; 

Not light them for themselves : for if oui virtue* 

Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike 

As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely tonch'd. 

But to fine issues : nor nature never lends 

The smallest scruple of her excellence. 

But, like a thrifty goddess, she determine* 

Herself the glory of a creditor. 

Both thanks and use." 

(Shakespeare, ' Measure for Measnie,' act i. so. 1.) 

IL This is the only teue object of man's life. If the vine tree does not 
produce grapes, it fails of the one object of its existence, and is worthless. If man does 
not produce the fruit of excellence in himself and serviceableness to others, he misses 
the end of his being. Other objects for which men live are unsatisfactory. The 
pursuit of pleasure, the race for riches, the struggle for power, the toil for_ knowledge, 
or the possession of any of these things or all of them, cannot be the chief object of 
human life. I assign only one reason in proof of this assertion, but that is a sufficient 
one viz. because they secure only a partial development of our nature. God has 
endowed" us with no superfluous powers. He would have us exercise and develop every 
faculty of our being. He is ever opposed to waste. But any one of the objects men- 
tioned, or all of them combined, involve the neglect of certain great faculties of our 
being the wasting of important powers. He whose supreme aim is the attainment of 



270 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 68. 

pleasure generally develops only his sensuous tastes and appetites, to the grave neglect 
or injury of his mental and moral powers. He who lives for riches develops his 
acquisitive faculties, to the detriment of his communicative powers; he grows in 
commercial sagacity and keenness, to the great risk of his tenderness, uprightness, and 
reverence ; he becomes rich in his purse, but poor in his soul. He whose great object 
is to obtain power, if he pursue it wisely will develop several faculties of his nature ; 
e.g. his powers of observation and analysis, of self-control and control of others ; he 
will acquire knowledge of men and of times ; but he is likely to lose conscience, to 
become unscmpulous, overbearing, tyrannical. And he whose chief purpose is to 
acquire knowledge will develop his mental faculties, become more clear in intellectual 
perception, more comprehensive in mental grasp ; but he will lose sensitiveness and 
strength of sympathy, tenderness of feeling, reverence of spirit. We see, then, that, 
taken singly, these things are not satisfactory as the chief object of human life. But 
supposing one could combine all four — knowledge, power, riches, pleasure — as his object 
in life, and attain them, what then ? Still he has not the true object of life, and for 
the reason already assigned ; for in all (1) the acquisitive faculties are developed at 
the expense of the communicative ; (2) man's relationship to God is ignored; (3) man's 
highest nature is neglected. Tenderness, sympathy, adoration, service, are overlooked. 
Turn now to the object suggested by our text — ^holiness of heart and life, and useful- 
ness of influence and action. (1) It affords scope for the harmonious development of 
every faculty of our nature. (2) That development is beneficial, not ordy to the 
individual, but to society also. This, indeed, is part of the object or purpose itself. 
(3) That development is acceptable to God. It includes reverent worship of him, loyal 
obedience to his will, etc. Hence we conclude that this, and this alone, is the true 
object of the life of man. 

III. If a mak's life dtterlt fail of this object, it is fit only fob dbbtbuo- 
TiON. Of what use is a hopelessly fruitless vine? "What is the vine tree more 
than any tree, the vine branch which is among the trees of the forest ? Shall wood be 
taken thereof to make any work ? " etc. If the vine does not produce fruit, it is not 
fit for timber ; it is fit only for fuel. The Jews at this time had signally and com- 
pletely failed as to the end of their existence as a nation, and they were doomed to 
national destruction. So with the life of men. If we do not answer God's design we 
are doing harm rather than good, our life is a bane instead of a blessing; and if there 
be no hope of thorough change in this respect, we are fit only for destruction. Of the 
fruitless vineyard the Lord saith, " I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be 
eaten up ; I will break down the fence thereof, and it shall be trodden down ; and I 
will lay it waste : it shall not be pruned nor hoed ; but there shall come up briars and 
thorns : I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it." " The axe 
is laid unto the root of the trees : every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good 
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire." " He said unto the vine-dresser. Behold, 
these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none : cut it down ; why 
doth it also cumber the ground ? " Persistent fruitlessness means ruin, destruction. 

Application. Have we our fruit unto holiness? Are we bearing fruit in good 
works? Then let us seek after increased fruitfulness. But if it be otherwise with us, 
let us penitently seek to amend our ways, lest our barrenness leads to our ruin. — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTBB XVI. 

The seotion on which we now enter, with 
its companion picture in oh. xziii., forms the 
most terrible, one might almost say the most 
repellent, part of Ezekiel's prophetic utter- 
ances. We have, as it were, his story of the 
harlot's progress, his biography of the Mes- 
•alina of the nations. We shudder as we 



read it, just as we shudder in reading the 
sixth satire of Juvenal. The prophet speaks, 
like the satirist, of things which we have 
learnt, mainly under the teaching of Chris- 
tian purity, to veil in a reticent reserve, 
with a Luoretian and Dante-like vividness. 
The nearest parallel, indeed, which literature 
presents to it is found in the 'Epistola sd 
FlorentinoR ' of the latter poet. We need to 



OH. xvL 1— €3,] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. 



271 



temember, as we road it, that his standard 
was not ours, that those for whom he wrote 
had done or witnessed the things which he 
describes, that there was in them no nerve 
of pudioity to shook. He did not write 
tirginibut puerisque, but for men to whom 
the whole imagery was a familiar thing. It 
is obTious, however, that the interpreter 
lives nnder other conditions than the pro- 
phet, and cannot always follow him in the 
minuteness of his descriptions. 

The thought that underlies Ezekiel's 
parable, that Israel was the bride of Jehovah, 
and that her sin was that of the adulterous 
wife, was sufficiently familiar. Isaiah (i. 21) 
had spoken of the " faithful city that had 
become a harlot." Jeremiah (ii. 2) had re- 
presented Jehovah as remembering " the 
kindness of her youth, the love of her 
espousals." What is characteristic of Eze- 
kiel's treatment of that image is that he 
does not recognize any period in which 
Israel had been as a faithful wife. But 
even here he had a forerunner in Hosea, 
who, in order that his own life might be 
itself a parable, was ordered to take to him- 
self " a wife of whoredom," one, i.e., whose 
character was tainted before her marriage 
(Hos. i. 2). Ezekiel would seem to have 
dwelt upon that thought, and to have ex- 
panded it into the terrible history that 
follows. 

Ver. 3. — Thy birth and thy nativity, etc. 
A prosaic literalism (as ».g. in interpre- 
ters like Hitzig and Kliefert) has seen 
in Ezekiel's language the assertion of ttn 
ethnological fact. " The Jebusite city," the 
prophet is supposed to say, " was never really 
of pure Israelite descent. Its people are 
descended from Canaanites, Amorites, Hit- 
tites, and are tainted, as by a law of heredite, 
with the vices of their forefathers." So taken, 
the passage would remind us of the scorn 
with which Dante (ut iitpra) speaks of the 
cruel and base herd of Fiesole, who cor- 
rupted the once noble stock of the inhabit- 
ants of Florence (so also 'Inf.,' zv. 62). 
Rightly understood, it is believed that 
Ezekiel's words imply the very opposite of 
this. As Isaiah (i. 10) had spoken of " the 
rulers of Sodom, and the people of Qo- 
morrah ; " as Duut. xxxii. 32 had spoken 
of the vine of Israel becoming as "the 
vine of Sodom ; " as our Lord speaks of 
the Jews of his time as not being "the 
children of Abraham" (John viii. 39); 
so Ezekiel, using the strongest form of 
Eaftera vituper^tipn, (aunts the people of 



Jeruntlera with acting as if they were de- 
scended, not from Abraham, Isaac,and Jacob, 
but from the earlier heathen inhabitants of 
what was afterwards the land of Israel. It 
is not necessary to enter into a history of 
the three nations whom he names. Briefly, 
the Canaanites represented the dwellers in 
the lowland country nest of the valley of tlie 
Jordan — ^the plains of Philistia, Sharon, 
Esdraelon, and Phoenicia ; and their leading 
representatives in Ezekiel's time were the 
cities of Tyre and Zidon. The Amorites 
were people of the mountains, at first, west 
of the Jordan, on the heights over the Dead 
Bea and as far as Hebron, but afterwards, 
under Sihon, on the high tablelands east of 
the Jordan. The Hittites, on whose history 
much light has been thrown by recent 
Egyptian and other discoveries, appear 
first in the history of the purchase of the 
cave of Macphelab, at Eirjath-arba, or He- 
bron, and that history implies commerce and 
culture. Esau's marriage with the daughters 
of two Hittite chiefs implies, perhaps, a re- 
cognition of their value as allie^ (Gen. zxvi 
34). They are always numbered with the 
other six nations, whom the Israelites were 
to conquer or expel (generally in conjuno- 
tion with the Canaanites and Amorites as 
the three first, though not always in the 
same order, Exod. iii. 8 ; xiii. 5 ; xxxiii 2 ; 
xxxiv. 11). And this fact obviously deter- 
mined Ezekiel's choice. In the later his- 
torical books they appear but seldom. One 
Hittite captain, Uriah, occupies a high posi- 
tion in David's army (2 Sam. xi. 3). The 
kings of the Hittites trade with Solomon, 
and give their daughters to him in marriage 
(1 Kings X. 29). They meet us for the last 
time as possible allies of the kings of Jndah 
(2 Kings vii. 6), and in the list of the older 
nations in Ezra ix. 1 and Neh. ix. 8. 'Then 
they disappear firom the page of history till 
the discovery and decipherment of Egyptian 
records in our own time shows them to have 
been among the mighty nations that have 
passed with their rulers into the Hades of 
departed kingdoms. 

Ver. 4. — As for thy nativity, eto. We 
ask, as we interpret the parable, of what 
period in the history of Israel Ezekiel speaks. 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are ignored by 
him, and he starts from a time of misery 
and shame. It is obvious that the only 
period which corresponds to this is that of 
the sojourn of Israel as an oppressed and 
degraded people in the land of Goshen, 
He paints, with a Dantesque minutenesa, 
the picture of a child just born, abandoned 
by its mother and neglected by aU others 
trom the very moment of its birth. It lie* 
unwashed, and foul to look upon. No 
woman's care does for it the commonest 
offices of motherhood. For to supple, read, 



272 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1—63. 



with the Bevised Version, to cleanse. The 
practice still met with in the East of rub- 
bing the new-born child with salt may have 
rested partly on sanitary grounds (Jerome, 
in he. ; Galen, ' De San.,' i. 7), partly on its 
symbolic meaning (Numb, xviii. 19). When 
this was done, the child was wrapt in swad- 
dling-clothes (Luke ii. 7), but these too 
were wanting in the picture which Ezekiel 
draws. The whole scene may have been 
painted from the life. Such a birth may well 
have been witnessed during the march of 
the exiles, when the brutality of their Chal- 
dean drivers allowed no halt, and the child 
was left to perish of neglect, and the thought 
may then have flashed across Bzekiel's mind 
that the pity which he felt for the deserted 
infant was a faint shadow of that which 
Jehovah had felt for Israel in the degrada- 
tion of their heathen bondage. 

Ver. 5 For to the loathing of thy person, 

read, with the Revised Version, for that thy 
person was abhorred. 

Ver. 6. — For polluted, read, with the Re- 
vised Version, weltering, the primary 
meaning of the verb being that of stamping 
or treading, and omit " when thou wast," as 
weakening the condensed force of the origi- 
nal. The marvel of that unlooked-for pity 
is emphasized by the iteration of the word 
of mercy, Live. The commentary of the 
Chaldee Targum is sufficiuiitly curious to be 
quoted : " And the memory iil my covenant 
with your fathers came into my mind, and 
I was revealed that I might redeem you, 
because it was manifest to me that ye were 
aiBicted in your bondage, and I said unto 
you, ' I will have compassion on you in the 
blood of circumcision,' and I said unto you, 
' I will redeem you by the blood of the Pass- 
over'" (Eosenmuller). The thought under- 
lying this strange interpretation is.that blood 
might be the means of life as well as of pol- 
lution, and in that thought there is a signifi- 
cance at once poetical and profound, almost, 
as it were, anticipating the later thoughts 
that the blood of Jesus oleanseth from all 
sin (1 John i. 7 ; Bev. L 5), tliat we make 
our robes white in the blood of the Lamb 
(Rev. vii. 14). There is no reason, however, 
for believing that such thoughts were pre- 
sent to the prophet's mind. 

Ver. 7. — The tenses should be in the 
simple historic pabt: I caused; thon didst 
increase and wax great ; thou attainedst, 
and so on (Bevised Version). In the word 
"multiply" (Exod. i. 7) the figure passes 
into historical reality. To excellent orna- 
ments ; Hebrew, to ornament of ornaments. 
The word is commonly used of jewels, 
trinkets, and the like (Exod. xxxiii. 4 ; 2 
Sam. i. 24 ; Iga. ilix. 18). So Vulgate, mun- 
(lus miUiebrit. Here, however, the external 
I'lorning cornea in vers. 10, 11, andl instead 



of the plural we have the dual. Hitzig is, 
perhaps, right in taking the phrase to refer 
to the beauty of the cheeks, which are 
themselves tlie ornaments of the golden 
prime of youth. The LXX., following 
either a different reading or paraphrasing, 
gives, " to cities of cities." The two clauses 
that follow point to the most obvious signs 
of female puberty. For whereas, read, with 
the Revised Version, yet, etc., as describing, 
not as the Authorized Version seems to do, a 
stitte which had passed away, but one which 
still continued even when full-grown girl- 
hood would have demanded clothing. 

Ver. 8. — The words point to the time of 
the love of the espousals of Jer. ii. 2, inter- 
preting the parable, when Israel had grown 
to the maturity of a nation's life, and gave 
promise, in spite of previous degradation, 
of capacities that would render it worthy of 
the love of the Divine Bridegroom. I spread 
my skirt over thee. Garments were often 
used as coverlets, and the act described was 
therefore, as in Ruth ili. 9, the received 
symbol of a oompluleil marriage (oomp. 
Deut. xxii. 30 ; xxvii. 20). The historical 
fact represented by the symbol here was 
probably the formal covenant between Jeho- 
vah and Israel (Exod. xxiv. 6, 7). It wag 
then that he became her Gud, and that she 
became his people. 

Ver. 9. — The "washing" and "anoint- 
ing" were part of the customary prepara- 
tions for the marriage union (Ruth iii. 3 ; 
Esth. ii. 12 ; Judith x. 3). The mention of 
blood receives its explanation, not in the facts 
of ver. 6, but in the ceremonial rules of 
Lev. XV. 19—24. 

Ver. 10. — Broidered work; the "raiment 
of needlework " of Ps. xlv. 14 ; Judg. v. 30 ; 
Exod. XXXV. 35; xxxviii. 23. The word 
meets us again in ch. xxvii. 24, as among 
the imports of Tyre from Egypt. Curiously 
enough, the Hebrew verb (rakam) has 
passed through Arabic into the languages 
of Western Europe, and we have the Italian 
ricamare, the Spanish reeamare, the French 
reeamer, for " embroidering." Badgers' skin. 
Elsewhere in the Old Testament the word is 
found only in the Pentateuch (Exod. xxviii. 
5 ; xxvi. 14 i Numb. iv. 6, 8, 10, et al). It 
has been commonly taken as meaning the 
skin of some animal — badger, dolphin, or 
porpoise, or, as in the Revised Version, teal, 
which was used for sundals. All the older 
versious, however, take it as a word of colour, 
the LXX. giving iaxiveov ("dark red"); 
Aqnila, Symmachus, and Vulgate, ianOiino 
(" violet "). Possibly the two meanings may 
coalesce, one giving the material, the other 
the tint which met the eye. Fine linen. The 
byssus of Egyptian manufacture (Exod. xxv. 
4 ; xxvi. 1 ; xxxix. 3, et al.). Silk. The 
Hebrew word (here and in Ter. 13) doei 



OH. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. 



273 



not ooonr eleewheie. The word sotranalated 
in ProT. zxzi. 22 is that which we find here 
and elsewhere for " fine linen." Silk, in the 
strict sense of the term, bad its birthplace in 
China, and there is no evidence that even 
the commerce of Tyre extended so far; 
but the context points to some fine texture 
of the lawn or muslin kind, like the Goan 
vestments of the Greeks. So the LXS. 
gives TpixoifT^x, as though it were made of 
fine hair ; the Vulgate, suhtilia. It is signi- 
ficant that three out of the fonr articles 
specified are prominent (as the references 
show) in the description of the tabernacle 
and the priestly dress, in Exod. xxviii., 
zxxix. The dress of the bride symbolized 
the ritual and cultns of Judaism. 

Ver. 11. — Ornaments. Same word as in ver. 
7, but here taken in its more usual sense. 
(For bracelets, see cb. xxiii. 42 ; Gen. xxiv. 
22, 30 : Numb. xxxi. 50. For chain, Gen. 
xli. 42). 

Ver. 12. — A jewel on thy forehead ; better, 
vrith the Bevised Vereiou, a ring upon thy 
twee. The word has the same meaning in 
Gen. xxiv. 47 (" ear-ring " in the Authorized 
Version) ; Isa. iii. 21 (where the Authorized 
Version gives " nose jewels ") ; Prov. xi. 22. 
Jerome, however, notes (t» Zoo.) that the 
Syrian women of his time wore pendants or 
lockets that bung from the forehead to the 
nostrils. The crown, or diadem (LXX., o-re- 
ipayos Kavx)l<rf<»s),ihe thin circlet of gold con- 
fining the hair, completed the catalogue of 
ornaments. The Cbaldee Targum continues 
its spiritual interpretation : "I gave the ark 
of my covenant to be among yon, and the 
cloud of my glory overshadowed yon, and the 
angel of my presence led you in the way." 
And, if we assume, as we legitimately may 
assume, that Ezekiel, above all others, the 
prophet of symbolism, did not fill up his 
picture with details which were only meant 
to fill it np,thia seems a not unfitting inter- 
pretation. 

Ver. 13. — ^Thon didst eat fine flonr, and 
honey, and oil. From the dress of the bride 
we pass to her luxuries in the way of food. 
The things named might, of course, be only 
chosen as the delicacies for which the land 
of Israel was famous (Dent, xxxii. 13, 14), 
which in the prophet's own time were in 
demand in the markets of Tyre (ch. xxvii. 17). 
Cakes of flonr and honey were in common 
nse in various forms of Greek ritual, and are 
probably referred to in Jer. xliy. 19, but in 
that of the Jews (Lev. ii. 11) honey takes 
its place, side by side with leaven, as » 
thing forbidden. Then didst grow into » 
kingdom. History crops out through the 

E arable, and points to the stage which it 
as now reached, i.e. that of the magnificence 
of the kingdom under Solomon. 
Ver. 14. — It was perfect, eto. (compare 

EZEKIEL. 



the phrase, "perfection of beauty," in Pi. L 
2; Lam. ii. 15, as applied to Jerusalem). 
The prophet, in the words, my comeliness— 
majesty (Bevieed Version) — lays stress on 
the fact that that " perfection " was itself 
the gift of God. 

Ver. 15. — We enter on the history of the 
apostasy, and the rout-evil was that the 
bride of Jehovah bad been unfaithful to 
her Lord. She looked on her glory as her 
own, and did not recognize that every- 
thing in it was the gift of God (Hos. ii. 8). 
The words obviously point to the policy 
which Solomon had initiated, of alliances 
with the heathen and the consequent adop- 
tion of their worsliip. This, as from the 
earliest days of Israel, was the " whoredom " 
(Bevised Version) of the unfaithful wife 
(Exod. xxxiv. 15, 16 ; Lev. xvii. 7 ; Deut. 
xxxi. 16 ; Judg. ii. 17 ; Isa. i. 21 ; Jer. ii. 20 ; 
Hos. i., ii.). And it wag, so to speak, a promis- 
cuous whoredom. Every passer-by was ad- 
mitted to her embraces, every nation that 
offered its alliance had its worship recog- 
nized and adopted. In the closing words of 
extremest scorn, the prophet adds, his it was. 
Jerusalem was, as I have said, the Messa- 
lina of the nations. 

Va. 16. — (For high places, see note on 
ch. vi. 6.) The words imply that the shrines 
upon them were decked with hangings of 
many-coloured tapestry, presenting an 
appearance like that of a Persian carpet, as 
in 2 Kings xxiii. 7, of the image of the 
Asherah. Those bauginss were, as in Prov. 
vii. 16, the ornaments of the adulterous bed. 
The "high places" are named first, as the 
earliest form of idolatry. The like things 
shall not come. The wonls are obscure, and 
the text probably corrupt. As they stand, 
they seem to say that the world would 
never again witness so shameful an apostasy. 
The Vulgate, Sicut non ett fcuitwm neque 
/uturum est. extends the comparison to the 
past. Possibly, though it is a strain upon 
the grammar, the words may be rendered, 
" such things should not come, should not be." 

Ver. 17.^Images of men, eto. ; Hebrew, as 
falling in with the symbolism of the history, 
"male images." The words point to the 
teraphim, the penates, or household gods, 
of which we read in Gen. xxxi. 19 ; Judg. 
xviii. 14 ; 1 Sam. xix. 13 ; Hos. ui. 4 ; and 
which, like the statues of Baal-peor, may 
have exiiibited the phallic type of idolatry. 

Vers. 18, 19. — Mine oil and mine incense. 
This, as afterwards in ch. xxiii. 41, was the 
crowning aggruvation of the guilt. The very 
gifts of God, designed for his worship, were 
prostituted to that of his rivals. The " oil " ia 
that of Exod. xxx. z3 — 25, perfumed and 
set apart tor sacred uses. The act of cover- 
ing the idol was, as in ver. 8, the symbol of 
the marriage union. In the sweet savoni 



874 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEU [ch. xvt 1— fia 



vfl lufa the familiar phrase of eh. Ti. 13. 
'I'be aoene brought before ns is that of a 
■aorifleial feast, in which cakes of flour, 
bouey, and oil were eaten whilst incense was 
offered. So we have the " adorea liba " of 
Virgil, 'iEneid,' Tii. 109, or more flilly 
in Tibnllus, ' Eleg.,' I 7, 53, 54, the "thuris 
honores," the "liba . . . dulcia melle." 
Thus it was, etc. As in ver. 16, the descrip- 
tion seems to ronse an instinctive abhorrence 
in the prophet's mind, which finds utterance 
in this form ; " Yes, it was even so." The 
words are, however, taken by the LXX., 
Vnlgate, and Luther as opening the follow- 
ing verse : " And it came to pass that." 

Ver. 20. — The next stage of idolatry is 
that of Moloch- worship, which never wholly 
ceased as long rs the monarchy of Judah 
lasted (2 Kings xvi. 3 ; Ps. evi. 37 ; Isa. Ivii 
5; Jer. vii. 32; xix. 5; Micah vi. 7; Lev. 
zviii. 21 ; xx. 2). It will be noticed that 
the words, "the fire," are in italics, t.e. 
are not in the Hebrew, the ve.b "to pass 
throngh" having acquired so technical a 
meaning that it was enough without that 
addition. This, as the closing words 
indicate, was the crowning point. As though 
idolatry in itself was a small matter, it was 
intensified by infanticide. 

Ver. 22. — ^Thon hast not remembered. The 
words gain a fulJer significance when we 
leooUeot those of Ezekiel's master (Jer. ii. 
2). The husband remembered " the love of 
her espousals ; " the faithless wife forgot from 
what a life of shame and misery she had 
then been rescued. 

Ver. 23.-^^06 unto thee, etc I The inter- 
jeotional parenthesis, half-anathema and 
naif-lamentation, looks forward rather than 
backward. Up to this point Ezekiel had 
dwelt on the forms of idolatry which were 
indigenous to Canaan and the nations in 
immediate contact with it. Now he enters 
on the later forms of evil which had been 
adopted from more distant nations. We 
pass from the time of Solomon to that of 
Ahaz and Manasseh. 

Ver. 24.— An eminent place ; lofty (Re- 
vised Version) ; but the word strictly points 
to the form of a vanit, with the added 
meaning, as in the LXX., otxTj/m TropvixSv, 
and the Vulgate, lupanar, of its being 
used for prostitution. It is, at least, a 
curious fact that the Latin foruieari and its 
derivatives, take their start from the fnmicet, 
the vaults or cells which were tlie haunts 
of the harlots of Borne. Looking to the fact 
that all the worst forms of sensual evil came 
to Borne from the East, and specially from 
Syria— 

■ 'tmpri.Um la Tiberim Synia defluxit 
( Ironic* " 

(Jnv., ' Sat.', iii. 62) 



— ^it seems probable that the practice wag a 
survival of the custom to which Ezekiel 
refers. As in the Mylitta-worstiip at Baby- 
lon (Herod., i. 262 ; Bar., vi. 13), and that of 
Aphrodite at Corinth, prostitution assumed 
a quasi-religious character, and the harlot 
gat in a small cell, or chapel, inviting the 
passers-by, and treating her hire as, in part, 
an offering to the goddess whom she served. 
Such chapels of prostitution were to be 
found naturally in the "high places" of 
Judah (the word, however, is not that 
commonly so translated), and in the cross- 
ways of intersecting roads. To such a harlot 
Ezekiel compares the daughter of Judah, 
and proceeds to paint her life with a terrible 
minuteness, even to the very attitude that 
invited to sin. 

Ver. 26.— With the Egyptians. The 
words point to political and commercial 
alliances, in themselves a whoredom (Isa. 
xxirL 17; Nab. iii. 4), such as Zedekiah, 
like some of his predecessors, had trusted in, 
as well as to the adoption of Egyptian 
worship, such as we have seen in ch. viii. 10, 
the one leading naturally to the other. The 
words, great of flesh, may point, as we inter- 
pret the parable, to the supposed strength of 
the stout and stalwart soldiers, the chariots 
and horses of the Egyptians, but possibly 
also may be a euphemism for the mere 
animal vigour whioli stimulated passion. 

Ver. 27. — Have diminished thin* ordinary 
food. The husband was hound to provide 
his wife with food and raiment (Exod. xxL 
10). Here his flrst discipline for the un- 
faithful wife is to place her on a short allow- 
ance. Jehovah, to interpret the parable, bad 
placed Israel under the discipline of famine 
and other visitations that involved a loss of 
wealth and power. Hos. ii. 9, 10 supplies 
a striking parallel. The daughters of the 
FhUistines. So in ver. 57. The phrase, like 
"the daughter of Zion," indicates the 
Philistine cities. Tlicse had been, from 
the days of Samuel to those of Ahaz (2 
Chron. xxviii. 18), among the most persistent 
enemies of Judah (oomp. Amos i. 6 ; iii. 9 ; 
Joel iii. 4; Isa. ix. 12; xiv. 29). In the 
words, were ashamed of thy lewd way, the 
prophet points, as his master had done 
(Jer. ii. 10), to the fact that other nations 
liad at least been faithful to their inherited 
religion, while Judah had forsaken hers. 

Ver. 28. — With the Assyrians. Here also 
the words include political alliances like that 
of Ahaz with Tiglath-Pileser (2 Kings xvi. 
7), as well as the adoption of idolatrous 
worship. The latter probably followed 
under Ahaz as a consequence of the former, 
and afterwards spread tnrouf ' tlie influence 
of the Assyrian colonists — eucii nation with 
its own deities — in Samaria (2 Kinpa xvii. 
24) The culliia cif tlie qut-eu of heaven 



OH. rvi. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 



275 



(Jer. xliv. 17), i.e. of the Assyrian Ishtar, 
may have had this origin. Yet coTildest not 
be satisfied. One is reminded once more of 
Jnvenal (' Sat.,' vi, 180). 

'Ver.29. — In the land of Canaan, etc. The 
words at first eeem to give the nearest and 
furthest points of the intercourse of Israel 
with foreign nations. I incline, however, 
with Smend and the margin of the Bevised 
Version, to take Oanaan in its secondary sense 
as " the land of traffiok," Chaldea being in 
apposition with it (comp. Isa. xxiii. 8 ; Hos. 
xii. 7 ; Zejjh. i. 1 1, for a like use of the Hebrew 
word). Chaldea thus comes in its right 
place as closing the list of the nations with 
whom the harlot-city had been unfaithful. 

Ver. 30. — How weak, etc. 1 The weakness 
is that expressed in the Latin impotent 
libidini$, with no strength to resist the 
impulses of desire. The word imperiouB 
(perhaps maxterful would he better) is that 
of one who is subject to no outward control. 
One is reminded of Dante oh Semiramis 
('Inf.,' T. 56). The strange renderings of 
the LXX. (ri iiaBa t^u Bvyarepa <rov) and 
the Vulgate (in quo mundabo cor tuvm) are 
difficult to account for, but probably indicate 
that the present text is corrupt. 

Ver. 81. — In that, etc. It is better to 
take the words as beginning a fresh 
sentence : " when thou didst build," etc. 
The historical survey of the harlot's pro- 
gress is brought to a close, and the prophet 
points with bitter scorn to what aggravated 
its degradation. Other nations, like Tyre 
and ZidoD, had risen to prosperity and 
eminence through their intercourse with 
foreigners. To Judah it had brought only 
subjection and the payment of tribute. 
She had given gifts to all her lovers, instead 
of receiving from them the rewards of her 
shame. She was as the adulterons wife 
who forsakes her husband, and gives what 
belonged to him to strangers. The conduct 
of Ahaz in stripping the Temple of its gold 
and silver to pay tribute to Assyria (2 Kings 
xvi. 8), gives an apt illustration of what 
the prophet means (comp. Hos. zii. 1 ; Isa. 
XXX. 6). 

Ver. 35. — ^From the task of painting the 
guilt of Judah the prophet proceeds to that 
of denouncing its punishment. 

Ver. 86.— Thy filthiness; literally, fhy 
bram ; probably as alluding to the tribute 
referred to in the previous verses, " brass " 
being taken as used Bcomfully for money 
generally. Possibly, however, as in Jer. vi. 
28, the word stands for the symbol of shame 
•nd vileness (compare our " brazen-faced "), 
and so justifies the rendering of the 
Anthorized Version and Bevised Version. 
Thy nakedness disoovered ; >.«., interpreting 
the p;irable, the intercourse of Judah with 
fbreigu nations had simply exposed the 



points that were most open to attack (Gen. 
xlii. 9). By the blood of thy chUdren. The 
words may refer specially to tlie Molooh- 
socrifices of ver. 21, but may also include 
the lavish waste of lite as weU as treasure 
wliich had been the consequence of the 
foreign alliances. The harlot-city is indi- 
cated as being also a murderess. 

Ver. 37. — I will gather all^thy lovers, etc. 
Interpreting the parable, the " lovers " are 
the nations with which Judah had allied 
herself, and whose religion she had adopted. 
In that confederacy of Moabites, Ammonites, 
Syrians, Philistines, Edomites, and Chaldeans 
there should be small difference between 
those whom she had loved and those whom 
she had hated. All alike would exult in 
her shame and her fall (comp, Ps. cxxxvii. 
7; 2 Kings xxiv. 2). 

Ver. 38. — The bloodshed may refer, as in 
ver. 86, to the Moloch-sacrifices, or may 
include also other crimes, assassinations and 
judicial murders (Jer. n. 34). Strictly 
speaking, the punishment of the adulteress 
was death by stoning (Lev. xx. 2, 10 ; Dent 
xxi. 21 : xxiL 21 ; John viii 5). Did Eze- 
kiel think of the stones cast against the 
city from the catapult-engines of the 
Chaldeans as a literal counterpart of that 
punishment ? In the last clause read, with 
the Bevised Version, I wiU bring upon thee 
the llood of fury and Jealousy ; sc. the death 
which was inflicted by the indignation of 
Jehovah as the Husband against whom 
Judah had sinned. 

Ver. 39. — (For eminent place and high 
place, see notes on ver. 24.) These the 
Chaldean conqueror treated as local 
sanctuaries, and laid them waste. The 
clothes and the jewels are, of course, all 
outward tokens of stateliness and prosperity. 
The (or a) holy city, the perfection of beauty, 
should be as "some forlorn and desperate 
castaway " (comp. Lam. L 1 — 10 for a com- 
panion picture). 

Ver. 40. — The punishment of stoning was, 
as a rule, inflicted by the " congregation " 
(Nnmb. xv. 86), or by the men of the city 
(Lev. XX. 2). Other forms of punishment 
for impurity were those of the sword and 
burning, as in Lev. xx. 14; xxi. 9. The 
thrusting through (better, heming ; the word 
is not found elsewhere) probably points to 
mutilation after death, as in the case of 
Agag (1 Sam. xv. 33 ; comp. Jndg. xix. 29 ; 
Dan. ii. 5; ill. 29). bi this case the "con- 
gregation" or "company" is the army of 
the Chaldeans, and each form of punishment 
has its counterpart in the various agencies 
which they employed for the punishment of 
the city. 

Ver. 41. — They shall bull thine houses 
with fire, etc. (comp. 2 Kings xxv. 9and Jer. 
lii 13, for the fulfilmeDt of the prediction). 



276 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKTBL. [oh. xvi. 1— 83. 



Th« women ttand for the "cities" whicli 
looked on, with awe or exnltatinn, at the 
destruction of the guilty. Possibly, how- 
ever, the words may include a literal sense, 
u in Lam. ii. 10. 

Ver. 42. — So will I make my fury, etc. ; 
read, with the Revised Version, tuill satisfy. 
The words are not primarily words of 
comfort. Xb^y speak of the satisfaction of 
the jealous husband's righteous anger, and 
therefore of a completed punishment. And 
yet that thought was, as the sequel shows 
(vers. 53, 60 — ^63), tlie beginning of hope for 
the future, as the prophet thought of his 
people. For here the forms of punishment 
were not final. The daughter of Zion 
survived the stoning, the sword, and the 
burning. And so, when wrath had done its 
work of retribution, it might become cor- 
rectiveand purgatoriaL Theinjured husband, 
in the bold anthropomorphic language of 
the parable, would be no more angry. The 
TiOrd God of Israel would remember his 
covenant, and forgive. 

Ver. 43. — Because then bast not re- 
membered (comp. Jer. ii. 2). There is, so to 
speak, a certain dawn of tenderness in the 
new form of reproach, as compared vrith the 
(ternness of what had gone before, and this 
in itself implies the pity which is the ground 
of hope. Pretted. Ezra (v. 12) uses the same 
word, there rendered "provoke." Had 
Ezekiel's use of it stamped it as the right 
word for conf ssion? Thon shalt not com- 
mit, etc. The Vulgate follows a reading 
which gives, " I have not done according 
to thy lewdness," etc. ; t.e. the guilt had 
deserved a greater punishment. The Revised 
Version margin gives, "Hast thou not 
committed," etc.? The word for "lewd- 
ness " (" lewd way " in ver. 27) is specially 
characteristic of Ezekiel, who uses it eleven 
times. Elsewhere it is translated " wicked- 
ness" (Lev. xviii. 17, et oJ.), "lewdness" in 
Judg. XX. 6; Jer. xiii. 27. It conveys 
always the sense of a guilt tliat revolts and 
■hocks us. 

Ver. 44. — ^Every one that speaketh pro- 
Terbs, etc. As in oh. xviii. 2, we have an 
example of the tendency of the Eastern mind 
to condense the experience of life into the 
form of proverbial sayings. Here the pro- 
verb expresses what we call the doctrine of 
heridite. We say, in such cases, " Like 
father, like son ; " but the feeling of tiie East 
recognized, especially in the case of 
daughters, that the mother's influence was 
predominant. 

Ver. 45. — Ezekiel returns to the thought 
of the spiritual parentage of Jerusalem and 
Judah, as in ver. 3. Reading between the 
lines, we find something like an anticipation 
of St. Paul's thought that Jehovah was the 
God of the GentUes aa well as of the Jews 



(Bom. iii. 29). The Hittites and Sodom and 
Samaria, to whom she is compared, had all 
alike been guilty of unfaithfulness to their 
husbands. Their idolatry was therefore, like 
hers, an act of apostasy. Jehovah was their 
husband also, their children were his chil- 
dren (ver. 21). He claimed them as his own, 
had entered with them also into a relation 
which, though less close than tliat with 
Israel, was as that of the husband to the 
wife. The thought expands, as we shall 
see, in the sequel of the chapter. 

Ver. 46. — No very adequate reason appean 
for the assignment of the respective ages of 
the two sisters. Historically, Sodom, as the 
oldest representative of evil, would have 
seemed to claim precedence. Samaria may 
have had this position assigned to it as more 
closely connected with Judah. The left and 
right hands indicate respectively a position 
to the north and south of Jerusalem, the 
observer of the heavens looking east, as, we 
may note, the temple did (ch. viii. 16), The 
comparison with Samaria is developed more 
fully in ch. xxiiL The daughters are, as 
elsewhere, the cities dependent on Sodom 
and Samaria respectively. 

Ver. 47. — The words in italics indicate, aa 
usual, a difSculty. A better construction 
gives. Thou hast not , . . done after a. muUl 
measure only. So the Vulgate, Neqae secun- 
dwm ecelera earam fecisti pauxiUum mintu. 
The LXX. connects the words with the 
clause that follows : " Thou wast all but (irapii 
liiKphv) corrupted more than they." 

Vers. 49, 50. — ^It is noticeable that what 
we commonly speak of as the specific sin of 
the cities of the plain is not mentioned here. 
The prophet fixes on the point which made 
Sodom a luxurious and sensual city, the 
graver evil being just hinted at in the word 
abominations, and as the outcome of the 
evil tendencies. So in like manner the 
special sin of Samaria, the worship of the 
calves, is not named, but taken for granted. 
(For fulness of bread, see Prov. xxx. 9: Hos. 
xiii. 6 ; Deut. viii. 12.) Prosperity and luxury 
in her case, as in that of other wealthy cities, 
hardened the hearts of men a^inst the poor 
and needy. There was probably a suflioient 
reason for the omission which has been 
pointed out It was wiser to dwell on the 
sins which were common to the two cities 
rather than on the vice wliich, though it 
existed in Jerusalem (2 Kings xxiiL 7X was 
probably not prevalent there. As I saw 
good ; better, according to what I saw. The 
word " good " is not in the Hebrew, and the 
words apparently refer to Gen. xviii. 21. 

Vers. 51, 52.— Thon hast justified, etc 
The word has a touch of sarcasm. Sodom 
and Samaria might claim a verdict of ao- 
quittal ("justify," in its technical sense) aa 
compared with Judah. They had not pr^ 



OH. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



tn 



lented, as she had done, a confluence of all 
the 'worst idolatries. The words find some- 
thing like an echo in our Lord's teaching in 
Matt, X. 15 ; xi. 21, And, as is common in 
Buch cases, " she had judged," j.«. had passed 
sentence of condemnation on those who 
were more righteous than herself. The 
Bevised Version changes both meaning and 
punctuation : Bear thine own shame, in that 
thou hast given judgment for thy sisters; 
through thy sine that thou hait committed more 
ahominahle than they, they are more righteous 
than thou ; but the Authorized Version seems 
preferable. It may be questioned whether 
the word for judged is ever used of an 
acquittal The point of the sentence is that 
Judah condemned those who were less guilty 
than herself (oomp. Horn. ii. 17 — 23). 

Ver. 5S. — ^When I shall bring again; better, 
with the Eevieed Version, both here and in 
ver. 55, and I will turn again. The Autho- 
rized Version reads like a sentence of hope- 
less and perpetual condemnation, as per 
impossible. When Sodom and Samaria 
should be pardoned, then, and not till 
then, should there be hope for Judah. But 
all that follows in the chapter shows that 
what is meant is a promise of restoration, not 
for Judah only, but also for her less-guilty 
sisters. EzeHel sees a far-off hope for his 
own nation, and he cannot limit the mercy 
of God in bringing them also, as she was to 
be brought, to repentance. For them also 
punishment was a means to an end beyond 
itself, corrective, and not merely retributive. 
The language of Isaiah (xix. 23 — 25) as to 
Egypt and Assyria presents a striking 
parallel, and may have been in Ezekiel's 
thoughts. 

Ver. 54. — Even in that restoration, how- 
ever, there should be a further element of 
humiliation. Judah should be a comfort 
(see ch. xiv. 22) to those who should see her 
placed lower than themselves, content, at 
last, to fake the lowest place, humbling her- 
self that she might be (ver. 61) afterwards 
exalted. 

Ver. 55. — Bead and for when, as in ver. 63. 

Ver. 56. — Thy sister Sodom, etc. The words 
are obscure. The most tenable interpreta-. 
tion may be expressed by a paraphrase. 
The name of Sodom was not in the lips of 
Judah in the days of her prosperity. It was 
too vile for utterance, except as a byword 
of reproach. Isaiah (i. 9, 10) had in vain 
reminded her that she had made herself hke 
them. Her fate could never be like theirs. 
Now, in the day of the discovery (the un- 
covering, or laying bare) of her wickedness 
(ver. 57), she had learnt the lesson. 

Ver. 57. — For thy reproach, read, with the 
Bevised Version, the reproach. The words 
point primarily to the disasters, not of 
Jndab. but to those that fell on the dtiea of 



Syria and Philistia— the Assyrian and Chal- 
dean invasions. (For the grouping of the 
two nations as enemies of Judah, see Isa. ix. 
12 ; and for special acts of hostility, 2 Kingi 
XV. 37; xvi. 6; and 2 Chron. xxviiL 18, 19.) 

Ver. 58. — Thou hast borne, etc. Judah, 
i.e., had received the full measure of iti 
punishments. The righteousness of God had 
been adequately vindicated. And so, if the 
punishment led to repentances, there was 
room for pardon (compare for the thought^ 
Isa. xl. 2). 

Vers. 59, 60. — I wiU even deal with thee, 
etc. The law of retribution is stated in all 
Its fulness. Falling back upon the idea of 
the espousals of Israel in the covenant made 
at Sinai (Lev. xxvi, 42, 45 ; Deut. xxix. 11, 
12), Ezekiel presses home on Judah the 
thought that she had broken that covenant. 
She must suffer as though it no longer 
existed. She must "dree her weird" and 
"accept her punishment" (Lev. xxvi. 41). 
And tiien Jehovah would show that he had. 
not really been unmindful of his part in it. 
He had remained faithful in spite of her 
unfaithfulness. And so in the day of her 
repentance he will not only renew it, but 
will give it a higher and more permanent 
character. The " new covenant " of which 
Bzekiel's master had spoken (Jer. xxxi. 31) 
should not be as the old, decaying and van- 
ishing away, but should be for everlasting. 

Ver. 61. — Then thou shalt remember thy 
ways, etc. The pardon which God gives 
is not, as men sometimes dream, a water 
of Lethe, blotting oat the memory of the 
evil past. Ezekiel represents that memory 
as quickened to a new intensity in the very 
hour of restoration. The shame which it 
brings with it Is necessary as the safeguard 
of the new blessedness. Thy sisters, thine 
elder and thy younger. It is significant 
that, as in the Bevised Version, both the 
adjectives are now in the plural. What 
was possible for Sodom and Samaria was pos- 
sible also, as for the cities more immediately 
connected with them, bo also for other 
nations of the heathen world. They too 
should be admitted Into fellowship, not now 
as sisters, but as daughters, acknowledging, 
t.e.,her superiority. The limitation which 
follows, not by thy covenant, asserts, as it 
were, the restored prerogative of Jndah, 
much as St. Paul asserts it in Bom. ix. — xi. 
Those who are within the covenant of Israel, 
including, as it does, those who are the heirs 
of the faith of Abraham as well as Iiis 
children according to the flesh, are in a 
closer relation to him than others who share 
in what have been called (the phrase, per- 
haps, taking its origin from these very 
words) the "uncovenanted mercies" of God. 

Ver. 63. — That thou mayest remember. 
The words paint vividly the attitude of tfai 



278 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. xti. 1—63. 



penitent adultereai, hnmble, contrite, silent, 
Bshametl (Hos. iii. 3—5), and yet with a sense 
that she is p.irduned, and that the husband 
against « horn she hassinned is atlast pacified. 
Revised Version, when I have forgiven thee. 
The Hebrew verb so rendered is that which 
expresses the fullest idea of forgiveness, and 
which marked both the "day" and the 
"sacrifice" of atonement (Numb. viii. 12; 
Lev. xxiii. 27, et al.). This, according to the 
received etymology, was represented in the 
mercy-seat, the t\a<rTiipioi>, of the ark of the 
covenant (eophereth, as from eaphar). So 
the prophet closes with the words of an 
etenml hope what had at first seemed to 



lead up to nothing but eternal condemna- 
tion. How far the prophet expected a literal 
fulfilment in the restoration of Sodom and 
Samaria, we cannot define with certainty ; 
but the . ideal picture of the purification of 
the waters of the Dead Sea in ch. xlvii. 8 
suggests that it entered into his vision of 
the future. For us, at least, it is enough 
to pass from the temporal to the eternal, 
from the historical to the spiritual, and to 
see in his words the noblest utterance of 
mercy prevailing over judgment — a theodi- 
k^a, a " vindication of the ways of Qod to 
man," like that of Bom. zi 33—36. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 8. — EvU parentage. The Jews boasted of their descent from Abraham, but 
Ezekiel told them that they were children of the Canaanite aborigines of their land, 
because it was from those people that they drew their present character. 

I. Okiginal parentage mat be lost, a man may inherit the throne of a 
great king, but if he has a mean and servile disposition, and inherits no kingly 
natm'e, he is not a true son of his father. Titles aud estates may pass from men of 
high powers to imbeciles. The good name of a worthy Christian man may be borne 
by a worthless descendant. We cannot entail character. No man can be certain that 
his children will follow his example, however good and attractive that may be, and 
when it is not followed the true man is not represented by his children. Thus Christ 
would not permit his contemporaries to call themselves Abraham's children (John viii. 
39 — 41). This does not mean that he disputed their genealogical records. Apart from 
those prosaic tests of pure blood were the more serious signs of apostasy and disin- 
heritance. In like manner, it is possible to lose the status ot Divine sonship, although 
by nature we are all God's children. It may even be surmised that Ezekiel had lost the 
recollection of the true origin of the Israelites, and had come to regard them as 
descendants of the Canannites. 

II. A NEW PAEENTAGB MAT BE ACQUIRED. The Jews Were not Amorites and Hittites 
by natural descent. But though on their entering Canaan there was an express under- 
standing that they were to drive out the inhabitants of tbe land and form no league 
with them, they failed in that enterprise, leaving many of the original inhabitants in 
their midst, from whom they contracted habits of idolatry. We are all more or lesa 
influenced by our surroundings, and it is therefore of great importance that we should 
not choose hurtful companions. But there is a way of resisting a bad example when we 
cannot escape from its physical proximity. To yield to it is a sign of weakness and sin. 
The result is to make us spiritually the children of those we follow. The most vital 
inheritance is that of character. Though tbe blood of Abraham flowed in the veini 
of the apostate Jews, the spirit of Amorites and Hittites had possession of their minda 
and hearts. Therefore the chief part of their lives was derived from the adopted 
ancestors. A natural Christian parentage is of little account if a spiritual parentage of 
sin has been accepted by the degenerate children. 

III. The exchange op an original wobtht parentage fob a new evil fabentaoe 
18 AK unspeakable disgbaoe. Israel had been accustomed to despise the Canaanites. 
To have to own a father and motlier among those effete subject-races was a shame for 
the proud conquerors of Canaan. But a worse disgrace lay in the abandonment of the 
lofty spirit of the patriarchs and the adoption of the degraded character of the heathen. 
It is a shame when the children of Christian parents sink into the condition of children 
of this world. They know better ; they have seen worthy examples ; they have been 
trained under good influences; they have received high privileges. We expect the sow 
to wallow in the mire, but when a person of higher origin foUowg her example he 
degrades himself for below the shameful state of the unclean animaL 



OH. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 279 

Vers. 9 — 13. — The glory of redemption. Under the similitude of • wretched child 
cast off by its mother and picked up by a passer-by, Israel is shown to have been found 
by God in a miserable condition and cared for and blessed by him. This idea may be 
carried further as a symbol of the redemption of the Church by Christ. 

I. The fiest condition is one of pollution and neglect. Israel was in a miser- 
able condition in Egypt when Grod had pity on his people. But the spiritual state of 
souls in sin is moie wretchtd and forlorn. 1. It is a condition of polluHon. Sinners 
lie in the defilement of their own sinfulness, and their wretched plight is the direct 
consequence of their own moral corruption. 2. It is a condition of neglect. Until God 
interfered, Israel in Egypt was Triendless. No kindred Semitic tribe cared or dared to 
rescue the nation of slareB. No being came to save the world before God made bare 
his arm. 

IL The first step to kecovbrt bprinqs from the pity of God. The good 
Samaritan is a type of our great Father. There is no beauty in sinful man to attract 
the attention of God. It is not our claim, but his pity, that moves God to save the 
world. The love of Christ, not the worth of man, brought our redemption. Pity — 
commiseration lor the wretched — lies at the root of the gospeL God is love, and there- 
fore he comes to the miserable in supreme compassion. 

III. The redemption begins in oleaitsins. Sin must be washed away before the 
soul can be received into the privileges of the family of God. Even this early process 
is preceded by God's adoption of the wretched castaway, and the cleansing is done by 
God himself. It is as when a miserable child of the street has been taken by a charit- 
able person into bis own home. The child cannot make itself clean. But the first act 
of the kind rescuer is to wash it. Christ cleanses from sin with his own blood. 

IV. The redemption is crowned with bplendodb. The poor wastling is not 
treated as a workhouse child or put to low drudgery. She is clothed in purest apparel 
and decked with rarest ornaments. So the prodigal is to wear the best rolje and to have 
a ring on his hand. God does not save grudgingly or by halves. He does not content 
himself with plucking the brand from the burning. He gives royally of his best to the 
miserable sinners whom be has redeemed. The gospel promises glory as well as grace. 

V. The rescue and redemption establish a new relation with God. Accord- 
ing to the richly illustrative picture of Ezekiel, when the poor abandoned infant ia 
grown up, her rescuer makes her his bride. God i* often regarded as the Husband of 
his people. But here the picture is not of God marrying any human soul, but of his 
marrying the most abandoned. This illustrates his marvellous condescension. At the 
same time, it shows the supreme duty of fidelity to God on the part of the Church that 
has been rescued from so dire a fate and then raised to so great an honour. 

Ver. 14. — The renown of Israel. I. The natubb of this bbnowh. 1. The renown 
of great deliverance. The fame of the escape from Egypt and of the overthrow of 
Pharaoh's host in the Bed Sea spread over the neighlrauring lands, so that when the 
wandering tribes reached the borders of Canaan, they were known as a people mar- 
vellously favoured by God. The renown of the redemption by Christ is less appreciated 
by those who do not share in that redemption. Still it exists. It is a great thing to 
be among those on whom God's pity has taken efiect, and who have been saved from 
spiritual destitution. 2. The renown of glorious victory. Israel had made her way 
safely through the wilderness in spite of the arrows of Amalek and the wiles of Moab. 
She had crossed the Jordan and conquered Canaan. Since then, though often in adver- 
sity, she had in the main triumphed over her enemies. The history of the Church is 
a history of victory over opposition and persecution. Often the faithless people of God 
have had to suffer shame for their sins. Still, on the whole, there has been success and 
victory. 3. The renown of acquired splendour. It is the beauty of the bride that is 
renowned. The wealth and wisdom of Solomon brought renown to Israel. For ni the 
renown of Israel is that of her religion — the revelation of God that comes to xa through 
her, and the beautiful stories of her saints and heroes. The Church of Christ has won 
such a renown through her " noble army of martyrs," and the charity and holiness of 
her less conspicuous children. 

IL The significance or this renown. 1. It redounds to the glory of Ood. Th« 
bride of Ezekiel's parable had been a wretched castaway. All her splendour of jeweli 



280 TEE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. [ob. ztl 1— 63. 

•nd raiment came from the kindness of her repcuer. All the beauty of holineBS in the 
•aints of God is due to the giace of him who has redeemed them from a state of sin 
and ruin. 2. It attracts the admiration of men. Israel was envied and admired by the 
nations in the days of her prosperity. The true beauty and greatness of the Church 
win men to Chrjst, as her sin and shame hinder them. The gospel is preached by 
the renown of Christian lives. A good biography thus declares the truth on which the 
life it describes has been built. 3. It aggravates the shame of unfaithfulness. That 
so beautiful and famous a Viride should degrade herself, and exchange renown for 
infamy by proving herself false to her husband, is most shameful. The old renown of 
beauty adds notoriety to the present disgrace of sin. Israel's apostasy was the more 
scandalous because her previous condition had been famous. The fall of the Church 
would be doubly shameful after the glorious history of past achievements. Men who 
have borne a high character before the world will be marked with a stigma of the 
greatest contempt if they fall into notorious wickedness. 4. It preserves an ideal for 
restoration. The former glory may be recovered. We see in Christian history types 
of character to which we should seek to restore the Church. Christ's redemption will 
confer a higher beauty than that which was lost by Israel's apostasy. 

Ver. 15 (first clause, "Thou didst trust in thine own beauty"). — Trust in leauty. 
I. The possession of beauty tempts to uheeasonablb sblf-confidbnce. 1. It isfdt 
to he a pleasant endowment. The national beauty of Israel could not but please the 
people. Bodily grace and mental gifts are naturally valued by those who own them, 
for undoubtedly in themselves they are good. 2. It is flattered with admiration. The 
beautiful bride is renowned (see ver. 14). This implies that her beauty was much 
spoken of. Such a fact could not but be pleasant to one who loved admiration. But 
the pleasure of receiving flattery is dangerous and deceptive. The person admired it 
likely to attach too much weight to it. 3. It is seen to he a rAeans of influence. There 
is power in beauty. Admiration rules the admirer. The person who is fawned upon 
by flattering neighbours seems to exercise a certain power over them. 

II. This trdst in the possession op beauty is deceptive. 1. The leautt/ is not 
an original possession. The beauty of the bride was developed through the kind treat- 
ment of her rescuer. The gifts and possessions of Israel were not won by her powers, 
but conferred by the providence of God. Christian attainments are all endowments 
of Divine grace. To trust these things to the neglect of him from whom they come, 
aiid even to claim them as original resources, is to lean upon a falsehood. This must 
fail. 2. The beauty is fleeting. Nothing is so fragile, Wlien it is most needed it may 
be found to have dejiarted. To trust it is to lose it (see ver. 39). 8. The leauty it 
feMe. Beauty is not strength. A goi geonsly clad army may suffer ignominious defeat 
in the day of war. Grace and attractiveness in speech and bearing do not signify 
btreugth of character. The most winning people may be the most helpless when 
energy and determination are in requisition. 

III. Tkub seoubity is found only in looking aw at from self to Chbist. 1. JJ 
must comt from the abandonment of self-trust. Even though we are flattened into 
believing great things of ourselves, taken at the very best, human strength and good- 
ness fail before the assaults of sin. We have to learn that we are " miserable and blind 
and naked," and to give up the Pharisee's boast for the publican's only plea, " God be 
merciful to me a sinner ! " owning that " all our righteousness is as filthy rags." 2. The 
needed security will be found in Christ. He is strong to save, even though he appears 
before us in the weakne.ss of human suffering, and with the shatne of his cross. At 
first we may exclaim, " He hath no form nor comeliness ; and when we shall see him, 
there is no beauty that we should desire him " (Isa. liii. 2). But in the end we can 
believe the promise, "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty" (Isa. xxxiii. 17). 
For if we begin by trusting Christ's saving strength in this world of sin and need, we 
shall afterwards behold his beauty and glory in the world of light. 

Ver. 30 (" How weak is thine heart ! ").—A weak heart. I. Thb natubb of a wbax 
HBAKT. It has certain characteristics. 1. Coldness of affection. The first ardour of 
love IS forgotten, and has given place to a Laodicean in^fi'erence. It cannot be said 
that the soul has lost all interest in God, But the old passion has faded and left only 



OH. m. 1—63.] THE BOOK OP THB PBOPHET BZBKIBL. 281 

the dull embers of a listless devotion. 2. Lack of energy. The weak heart beats 
feebly, and the person who is af9icted with it does not feel equal to any great exer- 
tions. There are souls in this condition of torpor. 3. Readinese to give way. The 
weak heart may be overstrained ; its action may be depressed ; or it may be excited to 
unhealthy palpitation. The sold that is similarly affected lacks stability. 

IL The bigkb of a weak heart. 1, Yielding to evU influences. If the heart were 
true to God, temptation would be harmless. It is the feeble soul that first falls. Wheo 
a little fear depresses us, and a little worldly joy distracts from the love of God, the 
heart cannot be strong in its affection. The stout heart will stand out bravely against 
the agonies of martyrdom. Thus with the Christian, sin is always a sign of we^cness 
in the first instance. 2. Failure in service. Apparent failure may indicate no weak- 
ness in God's true servant. The best seed sown by the best sower will fail of fruitful- 
ness if it fall by the wayside or on stony ground. Real failure is in ourselves — it is 
the giving up of earnest, faithful endeavour. This only comes from a weakness of love, 
w nen the heart beats strong and true to God, the service of the life does not flag. 3. 
Inability to repent. The true servant of God is sometimes found in sin. But he 
grieves over it, and seeks forgiveness with tears of anguish. When he despairs of 
recovery or will not exert himself to repent, he proves that his love is cold and his 
heart feeble. 

III. The sinfulness of a weak heart. We have every reason to love God with 
•II our heart, and with a warmth and decision of character that nothing can shake, for 
we are embraced by his infinite love. The strong heart of God has cared for us in 
trouble and redeemed us in sin, and we can only measure his love by the preciousness 
of the gift of his Son. In view of the great love of Christ, proved to us by his death 
and Passion, any love short of the warmest and strongest shows ingratitude on our 
part. Note, farther, that weakness of heart is sinful on certain definite grounds. 1. 
Ood expects love in the heart, not merely obedience in the life. 2. Ood it not satisfied 
with measured devotion ; he seeks a whole-hearted love. 3. Sin in the heart leads to 
sin in the life ; for " out of it are the issues of life." 

lY. The danoeb of a weak heabt. 1. It provokes the wrath of Ood. It is an 
insult to the wonderful love of God that we should receive it with a half-hearted 
response. Christ says to all Laodiceans, " I would thou wert either cold or hot." In some 
respects weak-hearted devotion is worse than ardent enmity ; for it confesses an obliga- 
tion it does not satisfy. 2. It leads to death. The weak heart will become the heart 
of stone (ch. xi. 19). This degeneracy caunot stay in its present stage. When love to 
Christ cools, it is on its way to extinction. 

Ver. 32. — The shameful sin of apostasy. Apostasy is repeatedly compared to 
adultery by the Old Testament prophets, but the comparison is nowhere so full and 
powerful and even appalliog as in this long sixteenth chapter of Ezekiel, which consists 
in an elaborate indictment of Israel on that terrible charge. A mealy-mouthed modem 
fastidiousness resents this style of describing sin as though to name it were more 
shameful than to commit it, for the fact of apostasy from God is by no means excluded 
when the old name for it is condemned as too coarse for polite society. It may be well 
for us to brace up our nerves to endure the strong words on the sin of unfaithfulness to 
God which the inspired messengers of Jehovah felt themselves impelled to utter. In 
what respects, then, may apostasy be compared to that shameful thing, adultery ? 

I. It peesctpposbs a makeiagb eelation between God and his people. That 
relation has been described with graphic pictures in the preceding verses. God had 
chosen Israel in her forlorn condition as a miserable castaway child, reared her in kind- 
ness, and then adomr-d her with splendour and taken her home to himself as his bride. 
In like manner, all God's people have been first found by him, and then brought into 
the closest bonds of union with himself. Such a union with God is like marriage, 
because it implies (1) love ; (2) dose fellowship ; (3) a sacred and indissoluble tie. 

II, It consists in unfaithfulness to God. The people of God are not at liberty 
to leave him whenever they choose. 1. Love shonld bind them. There is no such 
thing as innocent " free love " under any circumstances ; for love always implies obliga- 
tions. Its bonds may be soft and silken, but they are strong and sacred. God's love to 
us, accepted by us, carries with it a duty of gratitude and loyalty. 2. The pledges qf 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 68. 



faith must ever bind God'8 people to the duty of cleaving to him. When we accept 
the blessings of the gospel we enter into a covenant relation like that of marriage vowg. 

III. It bpbinos fbom yielding to a lower love. God's people do not forsake him 
from weariness or without motive. But some fatal fascination lures the heart of the 
foolish wife from her true husband. In the case of Israel this was the sensuous and 
florid idolatry of the Canaanites, with its coarse, cruel, lustful charms. Anything that 
draws us from God by counter-attractions is an " idol of the heart." Money, pleasure, 
power, success, may thus deceive and destroy. Yet a prior condition of unfaithfulness 
is the failing of love to God. " How weak is thine heart 1 " 

iV. It IB A GREAT SIN. Adultery is confessedly a black and awful sin, standing side 
by side with murder, as a horror of great wickedness. So, according; to the Hebrew 
prophets, is unfaithfulness to God. Ag we are not free to forsake him who has 
purchased us at the great cost of his own Son, and to whom we are doubly bound by the 
ties of our own vows, to " change our mind " in this matter and fling up our religion 
is not a light affair of private convenience. In the sight of God it is adultery. 

Y. It is a peculiar source of shame and borrow. No sin is so Bhameful as that 
of adultery, and none brings in its train such heart-rending sorrow. 1. It is shamtfiA 
to be unfaithful to God ; for it outrages the deepest instincts of the soul and violates the 
secret sanctuary of life. 2. It is certainly a source of bitter sorrow, if not now, yet 
hereafter ; for it means banishment from the home of heaven, with the pangs of remorse 
to gnaw like a worm, long after the short pleasures of sin have Bunk to ashes. 

Ver. 42. — How God's anger ceases. I. It oahnot cease while the oaube tor it 
REMAINS. An irascible person is provoked to wrath by slight causes ; but inasmuch as 
his anger springs chiefly from his own fiery disposition, the cooling of passion allays 
the rage of wrath, even though circumstances remain unchanged. But God is "glow 
to anger " (Ps. ciii. 8) ; he is not wrathful by natm-e, because in essence he is love. 
But the anger which is slow to begin is the more deep and terrible, as it does not arise 
without adequate reason. Further, a weak person may tire of his anger, even though 
the cause of it remains unchanged. An explosion of wrath exhausts him. He has not 
the energy for sustained anger. The fire simply bums out. But this cannot be the 
case with the great, the unexhaustible nature of Grod. God is ever the same, always 
true, just, active. Therefore so long as the cause for anger is unchanged, the anger 
too must remain. "God is angry with the wicked every day " (Ps. vii. 11). As long 
as men continue in sin, so long must God abide in wrath. An eternity of sin must 
be accompanied by an eternity of Divine anger. 

IL, It will oeabb when the objects of it are destboyed. This appears to be 
the terrible goal of the text. Gracious as it reads in word, the purport of it is most 
fearful. It stands between passages of denunciation and condemnation ; it cannot 
describe a kindly cessation of wrath. The anger of God will burn till it has nothing 
further to consume. Then his fury will rest. Thus it was with Israel nationally. 
The people were swept away, consumed off the land. Only a " remnant" was spared, 
% mere stump of the old tree, from which new growths could sprout. We see no more 
of God's anger against a man when he has been killed. If nothing were interposed 
for the saving of his soul, the natural consequence of sin run out to its extremity 
would be destruction. Then God would cease to be angry with the sinner, for the 
plain reason that there would be no sinner left against whom his wrath would be called 
forth. 

IIL It will oeabb when the cause fob it obaseb. There is another way by 
which the anger of God may be allayed. He is not desirous t» see his children 
destroyed, for he is merciful and gracious. When sin is pardoned, God's fury towards 
the sinner rests and his jealousy departs. But this pardon does not depend only on the 
will of God, or he would forgive all his children. 1. It is dependent on repentance. 
So long as the soul persists in impenitence, God's anger cannot cease to bum. It is not 
simply a question of the amount and guilt of the sin which first provoked God's wrath. 
"The continued impenitence is virtually a prolongation of the guilt. But when th« 
sinner truly repents, God's anger abates. 2. It is also dependent on Chrisft atonemeaL 
We are able to read the words of Ezekiel with a more hopeful meaning than that which 
the prophet seems to have put upon them, because " we have an Advocate with th» 



«B. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 288 

Father, Jesus Christ the righteous ; and he is the Propitiation for our sins : and not for 
ours only, hut also for the sins of the whole worid " (1 John ii. 1, 2). We read that 
" the mercy of the Lord endureth for ever," but never that the anger of the Lord 
endureth for ever. On the contrary, " He will not always chide, neither will he keep 
his anger for ever " (Ps. oiii. 9). Still, God only ceases to he angry either because sin 
destroys the sinner or because God destroys the sin. 

Ver. 43. — Remembering tne days of youth. I. It is natdaal to bemembeb the datb 
OF TOUTH, The fact that Israel has not done so is remarked on as something strange 
and unbecoming. Memory is a marvellous possession at which the materialist stumbles, 
for it involves that mystery, personal identity. We can not merely recall the scenes 
of bygone years, but, what is more wonderful, we can detect the connecting link of 
personality that runs through those scenes. Each one of us can say, " I was there in 
that dreamlike past." Now, vvhile all memory thus recalls the personal past, the memory 
of our early days does this with peculiar vividness. As time runs out while interme- 
diate scenes are but faintly impressed on the mind and tend to fitde off rapidly, the 
early days remain stamped upon the memory with indelible portraiture. Thus the old 
man looking across the near past with growing forgetfulness^ is able to call up the most 
vivid^recollectioDS of his childhood, as one may look across a valley that lies wrapped 
in mist, and see the mountains in the far distance rising beyond it sharp and clear. 
Whatever else we forget, it is most unnatural not to remember the days of ovir youth. 

" Sweet memory, wafted by thy gentle gale^ 
Oft up the stream of time I turn my sail 
To view the fairy-haimts of long^lost houis, 
Blest with far greener shades, far fresher flowers." 

(Rogers.) 

n. It IB WISE TO BEMEMBEB THE DAYS OF YOUTH. There 18 no use in simply lament- 
ing lost happy days, especially as we are likely to view them in the delusive glamour 
of a fond affection. There can be little good in exclaiming, with Coleridge — 

" When I was yonng I 
When I was yonng I Ah, wofu when I " 

But there U a wise and helpful use of the memories of youtli, 1. In thank/idneu. It 
was the sin and shame of Israel that she forsook her Deliverer, not remembering those 
days of her youth whea he had found her forlorn and destitute, and had saved her from 
destruction. She forgot the deliverance from Egypt. We have had many mercies 
from our youth up. It is right to remember them with thankfulness. 2. In warning. 
Remembering Egypt should have kept Israel from the danger of Babylon. Porgetful- 
ness of the old bondage led to a heedless encounter with the new captivity. It is well 
to remember the sad scenes of youth. Some of these may be burnt into the memory 
beyond hope of forgetfulness. " If cutting off this hand," said a great speaker, holding 
out his right band, " would blot out all memories of my misspent youth, I would gladly 
lose it." But he who orders our lives knows that even these terrible memories may bis 
converted into helpful warnings for the future. Certainly it would be far better if we 
had not done the deeds which created such memories and necessitated such warnings. 
3. In hwnUity. Israel's recollection of her old abject condition should humble her. 
Proud in her later prosperity, she scorned to remember the pit from which she was digged. 
People who have risen in society do not like to be reminded of their lowly youth. Yet 
the humility that comes from knowing how feeble we once were is wholesome. 4. In 
eacoun-agement. When in the most abject wretchedness Israel was saved by Gud. 
That was a glorious fact to be ever treasured up in the memories of youth. The recol- 
lection of such a deliverance should cheer with hope of similar mercy in future times of 
need. 

Ver. 63. — 3%« salvation of Sodom. That the notoriously wicked cities of the plain 
should come under the saving grace of God would seem to be one of the greatest 
paradoxes of redemption, and the more so as those cities had been utterly destroyed 
knd the very sites of them obliterated. A reference to such an event opens up to ui 
• marrellouB vista iu the deep possibilities of the future. 



■84 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— «8. 



I, Thbt who abk KQUAii IN SIN WILL BE EQUAL IN EEDBMPTION. There is BTen 
some comfort to ub in the sight of the great wickedness of the Jews, or rather in what 
is based upon it We read of repeated promises of restoration for Israel. Now, if the 
chosen people had been exceptionally virtuous, or but mildly culpable in comparison 
with the rest of the world, it might well have been surmised that the salvation which 
was possible for Israel could not be stretched to reach others of greater wickedness. 
But if the "Jerusalem sinners" are equal to the worst of the world's wicked people, if 
Jerusalem is sister to Samaria and Sodom in evil, the salvation which touches the 
one class of sinners may extend to the other. God is no respecter of persons. He has 
no favouritism. Redemption is as wide as sin. 

II. Chkist's bedemption aims at embracing ALL BiNNBES. His redemption is 
universal in two respects. 1. In extent. As the Lamb of God, he came to take away the 
sin of the world (John i. 29), not the sins of a certain nation, or those of one section 
of society. He commanded that " repentance and remission of sins should be preached 
in his Name among all nations " (Luke xxiv. 47). If the gospel is to be offered to all, 
it must be that the salvation is effective for all. Nothing less could satisfy the heart of 
Jesus, and " be shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied " (Isa. liii. 11). 
2. In intensity. Not only are sinners of all nations and of all sections of_ society 
included in the redeeming love of Christ ; sinners of blackest guilt are also within its 
merciful and mighty embrace. (1) Christ is willing to save the worst, even the sinners 
of Sodom and Gomorrah ; for there is no limit to his pity. (2) He is able to save the 
worst ; for he is " able to save unto the uttermost all that come unto God by him." To 
doubt that the worst can be saved is either to malign his love or to insult his power. 

m. Christ's bedemption should be applied to all sinkers. It is not sufficient 
that he has died for the sins of the whole world, nor that he is willing to save all — 
Jerusalem, Samaria, Sodom, the very worst. For only they are efiFectuaUy saved who 
have personally partaken of the grace of Christ. 1. It must le offered to aM. Herein 
lies the duty of universal missionary agency. The gospel should be preached to the 
most remote nations, to the most degraded savages, to the most abandoned sinners. It 
is not for us to say that any are beyond its saving grace. But how of the heathen 
dead? how of Sodom, that has been utterly destroyed? how can Sodom be 
redeemed? Sodom may stand typically for the worst contemporary sinners. Tet the 
truth of the text will be most completely satisfied if we deem it possible that Christ's 
preaching to the spirits in prison extended to the men of Sodom (1 Pet. iii. 20). 2. It 
needs to be taken by all. Christ died to redeem all, even the worst sinners, yet none 
share in his redemption save through penitence and faith. 

Ver. 60. — 77ie everlasting covenant. God's relations with his people are repeatedly 
described as determined by covenants. Adam, Noah, Abraham, and the nation ol 
Israel, all had their covenants with God, and Christ established a new covenant. 

I. The covenant relation. 1. It~originales in Ood. The covenant is not an 
agreement made by two parties who meet on equal terms. It cannot be compared 
to the bond which seals a bargain after mutual concessions. It is rather an institu- 
tion of God which man accepts. We cannot determine or in any way modify the 
conditions of God's covenant. As the Giver of blessing and the Lord of service, God 
offers us his settled covenant. 2. It must be accepted by man. The covenant relation 
has two sides. When we desire to share its privileges we must ourselves enter into it. 
We must freely accept it. 3. It involves mutual obligations. (1) God graciously 
undertakes to do certain things for man, even condescending to bind himself with 
promises. (2) We are bound to loyal obedience, and the seal of the covenant ratifies 
those obligations. Thus it gives man a right to "covenant mercies," and God a right 
to " covenant service." 

II. The old covenant. God had covenant relations with Israel in ancient days. 
The sinful people had violated the conditions of the covenant, and so, while excluding 
themselves from its privileges, they had brought its penalties down upon their heads 
(ver. 59). God might therefore only remember his covenant in order to carry out its 
penal clauses. But he is seen to remember it on its gracious side. This could not be 
because he held himself bound to its promises, for the Jews had forfeited all rights in 
those promises. Therefore God's remembrance of the covenant is his merciful calling 



OH. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



to mmd of previous happy relations. God is not ready to forsake his people with 
whom he made a covenant ia the olden times. It may be the same with the indi- 
vidual souls. There are men who followed God in their childhood, perhaps learning 
to love him from • mother's teaching, and entering into solemn promises to live 
for him in the hopeful days of youth. They may have forgotten those fair times 
of the long-dead past. But God remembers them, and in his wonderful, enduring 
love he delights to revive them, and therefore he calls his erring children back to the 
forsaken paths. 

III. The new covenant. 1. Its necemty. (1) On account of tU failure of the 
former covenant. The old covenant being broken and having proved inefifectual, a new 
one must be instituted. (2) On account of the new needs of new times. The new wine 
must not be put into the old bottles. The Jewish Law which suited ancient Israel is 
not adapted to Christendom. 2. Its origin. It is based on the old covenant. Gkid 
remembers that old covenant in granting a new one. The New Testament rests on 
the foundation of the Old Testament. Christ came to fulfil the Law by establishing 
the gospel (Matt. v. 17). The same Divine grace, which in its dawn shone through 
the earlier dispensation, in its noon glorifies the later one. 3. Its stability. It is to 
be an everlasting covenant. The old covenant was local, temporary, and fragile on the 
human side, though firm as adamant on God's side. "The new covenant must have 
other characteristics to' make it more enduring. (1) It is an inward, spiritual principle 
(Jer. xxxi. 33). (2) It is sealed by the blood of Christ (1 Cor. xi. 25), is bound to the 
cross by bis sacrifice and our love. - 

Ver. 63. — Confownded by memory, I, It is possible to be confounded by 
MEMOBT. 1. Memory of sin. We desire to forget our sin ; but even if no recording 
angel wrote it down in the books of Divine judgment, the tooth of conscience would 
bite the memory of it into the very fibre of our hearts. We may succeed in drowning 
the hideous recollection for a time, but it seems to be proved that the forgotten past 
may be revived, and that all our life may be brought to mind in an awful flash of 
recollection, as in the experience of drowning men, or as we all find in the unexpected 
reminders of old associations suddenly encountered. When our hideous old sins thus 
glare upon our startled gaze, surely we must be confounded ! 2. Memory of mercy. 
We may not note the favours of providence with which we are daily visited, and we 
may be accepting them with ingratitude and even abusing them with disobedience. 
But some day the goodness of God in our past will rise up in memory and accuse our 
ill reception of it. 3. Memory of opporiimity. When the day of service is past 
and the night wherein no man can work has fallen upon us, it wUl be useless to plead 
our lack of opportunity for following QoA. Many a warning voice, many an appealing 
invitation, many an open door, many a day of grace, will confront our guilty souls. £ 
Memory of the lost. If we have not been true or kind to those near to us, we shall 
remember the wrong, when, alas I it is too late to make amends, and the recollection 
will be confounding. 

II. To BE OONFOITNDED BT MEMORY WILIj BE A JUST PUNISHMENT. 1. It wM he 

a punishm,ent. Many consequences of sin may be met with a brazen face, but not 
this. We may even cherish the memory of our evil past with a bad affectionateness, 
but when it meets us to confound us, all our bravado will be killed, and nothing will 
remain but shame and anguish and remorse. To be confounded means to have our 
career arrested, to be put to confusion, to be cast down in dismay, to make shipwreck 
of life. When we fully face the memory of our evil past, impenitent and unpardoned, 
no less a result can follow. This sin is its own chastisement. The serpent of evil 
inflicts a deadly wound with its own fangs. There is no necessity for heavenly 
thunderbolts to dash the sinner to destruction. No demon tormentors need be 
summoned from Tartarus to torture his guilty soul. His own memory will strike him, 
his ovm thoughts will burn and tear and rack his miserable conscience. " Unnatural 
seeds do breed unnatural troubles." 2. Tliis punishment will be just. It will be the 
direct consequence of sin. There can be no pretence that the accusation is false. No 
man can set up the plea of an alibi against the charges of his own memory. Here is 
a witness who cannot be upset by the most rigorous cross-examination, nor discredited 
\fy the bitterest opprobrium. Accused by his own memory, the sinner cannot but be 



2S6 THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 6S. 

BpeecIilesB. There is no conceivable escape when the court of justice is a man's own 
breast and when witnesses, judge, jiuy, and executioner are all found in his own 
thoughts. 

" To be left alone 
And face to face with my own crime, bad beeM 
Jnst retribution." 

(Longfellow.) 

These terrible thoughts are not written to drive us mad, but to nr^e us to amend- 
ment. When there is no door of escape from the awful chamber of self-judgment the 
great necessity is to seek a new heart and a Divine pardon that we may never be 
" confounded by memory." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—4. — TJtideserved and lavish kindness. The Prophet Ezekiel was a prophet 
of reproach. His ministry largely consisted in rebuke and denunciation. His lot Cell 
upon the time of his country's calamity. Defection and apostasy were punished by 
national disaster; for whilst the exiles endured the ills of bariishment, the remnant in 
Jerusalem and in Judah endured the horrors of siege. That alf the evils inflicted upon 
the Hebrew people were of the nature of righteous punishment is apparent from the 
record of their departure from God. It is this point which the prophet presses in this 
chapter — one of the most painful in the inspired volume. The distinguishing favour, 
bounty, and forbearance of God are described as aggravating the national guilt. That 
a people so &voured should forsake him to whom they owed everything, and should 
addict themselves to the worship and service of idols, was guilt of no ordinary kind, 
entailing no ordinary chastisement. The figure under which the prophet sets forth the 
Divine fevour towards Jerusalem, and Jerusalem's disloyalty to God, is a very bold and 
effective figure; and if it were less painful and distressing it would be less just. 
Jerusalem is represented first as a low-bom, neglected babe, taken under the kindly 
protection of the Lord, and by him nourished and trained to lovely womanhood, and 
taken for his ciwn spouse. Ungrateful for this kindness, Jerusalem is pictured as 
unfaithful to him to whom she owed everything, as prostituting herself to her 
idolatrous neighbours, indulging her own passions, and dishonouring her rightful Lord. 
In plain and pungent language her monstrous guilt is exposed, and its due punishment 
is threatened. Yet, in his amazing compassion, the Lord does not abandon and 
repudiate her whom he had chosen, but invites her to repentance, and promises to 
renew the covenant of his loving-kindness. In the early part of the chapter the 
goodness and pity of God towards Jerusalem are portrayed in terms the most touching 
and affecting. 

L God's gbaoiotts kindness apfeabs fbom thb beoord of the obioin and eablt 
STATE OP Jerusalem. In ver. 3 the prophet reminds Jerusalem whence she had 
sprung. Her native place was the land of Canaan, a land notorious for the cruelty and 

vileness of its inhabitants. Her father was an Amorite, and her mother a Hittite an 

ancestry of which she could not be vain. There was, accordingly, nothing in the birth 
and breeding of Jerusalem which could commend her to the Divine regard ; that 
regard must have been altogether disinterested, benignant, and compassionate. 

II. God's spabinq meroy appears from his treatment of Jbrubalbm in the 
TIME of her woethlessness AND WRETCHEDNESS. Under the graphically depicted 
figure of a deserted new-bom child, the condition of Jemsalem is portrayed as one of 
neglect, destitution, and friendlessness. When in such a state she was seen and pitied 
by the Benevolent One, who rescned her from death, who nurtured her gently, and 
provided for her all that could minister to her health, her growth, her vigour, her 
beauty. Whatever was justly written in praise of Jerusalem, in her fairest and 
brightest days, must be read in connection with this authoritative statement of the 
grace and kindness of God her Saviour. She had nothing which she did not receive 
from him who made her to differ. 

IIL God's lovino-kindness appeabs ih the oovehant dtxo weigh hb xntebbo 
WITH Jebubaleu. In the eighth and following verses is described in glowing language 



OH.XTtl— 63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 287 

the favour which God had to Jerusalem in the day of her egponsals. The covenant o( 
love was entered into, and the bride was arrayed in magnificent and costly attire, 
indicative of the bounty and kindness of her Lord. The poet-prophet rises to his 
highest strain in singing of the beauty and majesty of the elected spouse of Jehovah. 
"Thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou didst prosper unto royal estate. And thy 
renown went furtli among the nations for thy beauty : for it was perfect through my 
majesty, wliich I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God." 

IV. God's GKACB appears in the exaltation op jBRUSAtEM TO A POSITIOU OP 

PAVOUB AND HONOUR. The Wealth and splendour, the power and renown, of Jerusalem, 
especially in the reign of Solomon, are matters of liistory. The fame of Jerusalem was 
spread afar: she was "the joy of the whole earth." And this was the explanation: 
" The Lord hath chosen Zion ; he hath desired it for an habitation." " I," said the 
Lord — " I sware unto thee, and thou becamest mine." — T. 

Vers. 16 — 59. — Inexcusable infidelity. Universal consent accounts that woman vile 
who, married to a kind and honourable husband, in order to gratify her own unchastened 
desires, commits adultery with her neighbours and acquaintances, and expends her 
husband's substance in rewarding her numerous and profligate admirers. The guilt of 
Jerusalem must indeed have been great if it could only be adequately set forth under 
the similitude of guilt so flagrant and abominable as that described in this most 
appalling chapter. Passing away from the figure to the reality, we have to trace the 
unfaithfulness of Jerusalem to him who had saved her from death, distinguished her 
by favour, and exalteri her to honour. 

L JeBUSALBM'S disloyalty ORiaiNATED IN HER ASSUMING AS HER OWN WHAT WAS 

■EALLT THE GIFT AND GRACE OF GoD. What a lessou is there in the striking 
expression, " Thou diiist trust in thine own beauty" I — thine own, as if for that beauty 
thou hadst to thank thyself; as if it were aught else than the gift of Divine bounty 
•ud the token of Divine favour! We are far less likely to abuse onr position and our 
possessions if we do but remember that they are not ours, save by God's kindness, and 
that we are not our own. 

IL Disloyalty originate* in forqetfulness op Divdib grace and compassion. 
Very touching is that expression in ver. 22, " Thou hast not remembered the days of 
thy youth." Here is the radical error. It is pride and self-confidence tliat leads men 
astray. They who are forgetful of God are in danger of being unfaithful to him. 
Jerusalem said, "I sit a queen 1" And saying so, she feU. It is a too common 
experience. The Christian may learn to cultivate the spirit of complete dependence 

Xn God ; for the consciousness that he owes aU to God will help to bind him to loyal 
giance and constant service. 

III. Disloyalty was manifested m the adoption or the idolatby of subbound- 
INO NATIONS. In Jerusalem and the neighbourhood the deities of the several peoples 
to the east, north, and south of Palestine had their deluded votaries ; and not only so, 
idolatry was openly practised. With spiritual wantonness the citizens of the great 
and glorious city admitted and embraced every form of idolatry, and that even within 
eight, if not within the precincts, of the very temple of Jehovah. 

IV. Disloyalty led to oonfoemitt to all the tilb practices wmoH abb 
ooNNEOTED with IDOLATRY. Cruel and lustful rites, it is well known, were associated 
with heathen worship. In vers. 20 and 21 reference is made to the practice, connected 
with the worship of Moloch, of causing sons and daughters to pass through the fire. 
lliiB was but one of the abominable and reprehensible practices encouraged by heathen 
priests. When these practices are compared with the observances of the Law of 
Moses, who can avoid the conolnsion that, whereas the former were the invention of 
sinful men, the latter bear marks of appointment by a pure and merciful God ? Once 
let men abandon the true religion, and " go after false gods," and none can tell into 
what excesses of iniquity they may be led. 

V. Disloyalty was carried to an extent extravagant and monstrous. 
Jerusalem is compared with Samaria and with Sodom, and is represented as " corrupted 
more than they in all her waysl" Indeed, had not the abominations wrought in 
Jerusalem been flagrant, the language of this chapter would not have been justified. 
The abuse of the best is ever the worst. The greater the height from which the fall, 



288 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvl 1—68. 

the severer is the hurt received. The Lord was aggrieved by the lengths to which tha 
disobedient proceeded, the riot of iniquity into which they ran. 

VI. POBBEABANOB WITH DISLOYALTY GAVE PLACE TO DiVINB DISPLEAS0RK, INDIGNA- 
TION, AND WRATH. The conduct of Jerusalem is not unobserveii and is not uncensured, 
Mercy has been defied, and just authority has been set at naught. It is not possible 
that infidelity so flagrant can be overlooked. Severe and righteous is the resolution of 
the almighty King, "I will judge thee; " "I will even deal with thee as thou hast 
done." Not only has Jerusalem to reckon with justice that cannot be perverted and 
with wisdom that cannot be eluded; it has to reckon with power that cannot be 
resisted. When God arises to judgment and calls the nations before him, a righteous 
sentence is pronounced, to which all must submit, and which none can question. 

VII. Those who tempted Jebusalem to disloyalty webb made instbuments is 
Jeritsalem's punishment. The lovers are called in to minister punishment to the 
adulteress ; the surrounding nations, especially the Assyrians and Chaldeans and the 
Egyptians, were made instrumental in chastising the people that had permitted them- 
selves to be deluded and seduced by their vile idolatries. Jerusalem's sin was great in 
proportion to her privileges, and her alBiction was as her sin. And there was an awful 
appropriateness in the employment of the heathen people to chastise those who should 
have witnessed against their follies instead of being partakers of their sins. — T. 

Vers. 60 — 63. — Reconciliation. It is not possible to conceive a more sudden and 
extraordinary change than that which occurs in passing from the fifty-ninth to the 
sixtieth verse of this chapter. From an exposure of the vilest treachery and threats of 
condign and awful punishment, the Lord, speaking by the mouth of his prophet, passes 
to promises of the most gracious and tender character. It is a wonderful revelation of 
the Divine heart. As the moral Governor, the Administrator of the affairs of nations, 
the Lord protests against his people's defection, and denounces upon them the just 
punishment of their sins. But he does not forget that they are his people. He fore- 
sees that the discipline through which they are to pass will not be lost upon them, 
that their heart will be wrung by contrition, and that their life will witness to their 
repentance. He promises that he will be pacified towards them, and that reconciliation 
shall take the place of rebellion and of punishment. 

I. On God's side mercy is remembered in the midst op wbath. The King pities 
his subjects even when they are in insurrection against him. It is their own interests 
that they are jeopardizing, their own sentence of condemnation that they are writing. 
The Lord of all, whilst he is displeased with the ingratitude and disobedience of hii 
subjects, still retains his own character; there is no vindictiveness in his government; 
he ever delights in mercy. 

II. On the bide of Jerusalem there ib sinceke repentance and shame. While 
God remembers his covenant, Jerusalem remembers her ways, and the memory awakens 
shame and confusion. The poignant appeal has not been made in vain. The mirror 
has been held up before the face of the sinful and abandoned, and the guilty heart has 
been conscious of its sin. Conduct, which has been the outcome of unrestrained passion 
or of an unrefiecting yielding to external influence, is now seen in its true light. Delibe- 
rate wickedness is deliberately regretted and deliberately loathed. " To us belong 
shame and confusion of face." 

III. There is re-establishment or the broken covenant. This covenant dates 
back from the time of Jerusalem's youth; her infidelity has indeed cancelled it; but 
God, in his grace, is willing to overlook and forgive all that is past, and to renew the 
sweet and happy relations of other times. It is a miracle of mercy. God's ways are 
not as our ways. Human magnanimity, in its noblest exercise, falls short of this 
action of the holy God. Here is a revelation of the Divine character which may well 
bring comfort and hope to the sinner who has forsaken and defied his God, but who 
sees and repents his folly and his guilt. In the light of the gospel of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ the language is infinitely encouraging. There is a covenant of 
grace into which the righteous God admits, not Israel only, but mankind — a covenant 
in which all the giving is on God's side, and all the receiving is on ours. 

IV. There ib an assurance op aooeptanoe and paoipioation. The false prophets 
had proclaimed a false peace ; » true peace comes only from him who is the Qod alike 



Oil. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 289 

of righteousness and of mercy. When he declares, in the langnsge of the text, " I 
km pacified toward thee," then it is welL When he giveth peace, who can give 
trouhle? The transgressions of other days are forgotten; the estrangement of other 
days has given place to concord and harmony. Beverence and love are offered by 
those who were once in rebellion. And favour and everlasting love are revealed by 
him who but lately uttered words of reproach, and inflicted chastisement and punish- 
ment. It is the happy experience of the justified and accepted believer in Christ which 
breaks forth into the joyful exclamation, " Therefore, being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ." — T. 

Vers. 1 — U.'^Superhuman love. The main difficulty in producing a moral reforma- 
tion among men is to convince them of their degradation — of the low level to which 
they have sunk. The first thing to be done is to hold up to their view some bright 
mirror, in the which they may discern clearly what manner of men they are. Such a 
mirror is provided in the chapter under consideration. We have pictured here — 

I. A FUBMEB LOATHSOME CONDITION. Sin is not merely resistance against proper 
authority, it is also personal pollution — a defilement of the soul. 1. A base vrigin. 
" Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother was a Hittite." It is often edifying 
to look " to the rook whence we were hewn " — to the meanness of our earthly parent- 
age. The ancestors of the Hebrews were idolaters — a branch of that very race whom 
they despised and drove out. They had no superior dignity from their forefathers. 
All the superiority they enjoyed, had come from the special &vour of Jehovah. 2. 
Their neglected condition. The kindness of common humanity had been denied to them 
in their infantile state. Their ancestors, the Amorites, cared nothing for them ; yea, 
treated them as aliens in the land. Again and again Abraham was driven away by 
famine, and had to find sustenance by favour in the land of Egypt. At length, in the 
days of Jacob, " they were cast out into the open field," i.e. into the land of Egypt. 
They soon had no protection nor security from the Egyptian government. They were 
reduced to thraldom ; their lives were made bitter. 3. They were even loathsome to aU. 
To the Egyptians they were an abomination. They were hated of all men. It may 
have been on account of pusillanimity and mean-spiritedness — the effect of long servi- 
tude. It may have been on account of their peculiar customs — their clannishness. 
It may have been because of their peculiar religion, so different from all the nations. 
Yet there was the fact that no nation would make alliance with them. 1. Their forlom 
and abandoned state. As a female child is often, in Eastern lands, abandoned on the 
hills — ^left to perish from want, or to be devoured by wild beasts — so, as far as human 
protection was afforded, Israel was exposed to early death. The Egyptians did their 
utmost to exterminate the race. The Amalekites and the Edomites followed in the 
same track. Israel was isolated in the world — treated as a foe by alL 

II. Generous tbbatment bt God. Dispossessed of all natural attractions, God 
chose to show to this abandoned child special favour. The only explanation is, " So 
it seemed good in his sight." He giveth not to men a reason for his doings. 1. There 
was a look of love. The extreme helplessness of a little child often moves to pity the 
heart of a stolid man. Unless friendly help be at once afforded by the passer-by, the 
puny child must perish. So the time of Israel's desolatoness was the time of Jehovah's 
love. No other sentiment came into play then but the royal sentiment of love. The 
very heart of God looked out through his eye. 2. There was kindly protection. True 
love is not content with sentiment, nor yet with smiles, nor yet with words : it 
goes out in practical deeds. The best thing to be done was done at once. " I spread 
my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness." 3. There was appropriate changing. 
As soon as the imperilled life was secured, the health and comfort of the child became 
Jehovah's concern. " I washed thee with water ; yea, I throughly washed away thy 
blood." The God of heaven condescended to do this menial work. His real glory is 
■een in his amazing humility. He deigns to wash us still — to wash the soul from all 
its foulness. 4. 2%ere was theforthputting of vital power. " I said unto thee, live I " 
The voice of Ctoi is a resistless energy. God's word is creative : " He speaks, and it is 
done." He who spake to the primitive chaos, " Let there be light I " and light was, 
speaks also to the soul dead in sin, and says effectually, " Live I" However near the 
brink of doom, they shall live, if God speaks the quickening word. "la not tUs a 

EZEKIEL. V 



290 THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1—63. 

brand plucked from the burning?" 5. MuIHpUcation of life. He made the one into 
many. "I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field." He who in the 
beginning of creation ordained that every plant should produce seed after ita own 
kind, ordained that Israel should be fruitful above the ordinary measure of mankind. 
" As the stars of heaven, so shall thy seed be," was the promise to Abraham. And 
the promise was fulfilled. "They of the city flourished as the grass of the earth." 
Growth of population is an accepted sign of national prosperity. 6. A gracious alliance. 
" I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, saith the Lord God, and 
thou becamest mine." Though other nations refused to make alliances with Israel, 
Jehovah did so of his own accord. He treated them with most favourable considera- 
tion. He dealt with them as with free men — men endowed vfith reason and judgment. 
He made a compact with them, by which he hound himself to befriend them, on 
condition that they would loyally serve him. This was an act of stupendoiis grace. 
G«d dealt with them as if they were his equals. It was a voluntary marriage. 7. 
There wan also splendid adornment. " I clothed thee also with broidered work," etc. 
This once-abandoned child was not only rescued, but was raised to dignity and honour. 
Her clothing was costly ; her beauty set off to the greatest advantage. From the lowest 
grade of human life she was lifted to the very highest. Her person was adorned with 
richest ornaments, embellished with jewels and gold. Her dowry was magnificent, 
princely. Her condition was made by God a condition of luxury and splendour. 
8. 'JTiere was conferred on her queenly honour and renown. " I put a beautiful crown 
upon thy head." " Thou didst prosper into a kingdom." To this rescued child no 
earthly good was denied. She had more than heart could desire. Other countries 
were despoiled to enrich her. She was exalted to a place of high renown. Foreign 
nations became her servants, and kings her ministers. On the summit of earthly 
glory she sat enthroned, the wonder and the envy of the world. Which thing is an 
allegory. From the mire of moral pollution we hav« been raised : we have been put 
among God's sons. " And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ ; " " Fear not, littl* flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
kingdom." — ^D. 

Vers. 20—34. — Idolatry is spiritual adultery. Imagery borrowed from nature and 
human society, to set forth Israel's sin, is at the best feeble and imperfect. If it it 
possible for God to make some impression on man's guilty conscience, he will do it. 
What is more abominable among men than adultery ? Yet connivance with idolatry 
is a sin blacker yet. It is adultery, ingratitude, robbery, treason, rolled into one 
crime! 

I. Mark thb boots of thts sin. 1. Vie first root mentioned is pride. "Thou 
didst trust in thy beauty." Love of admiration led her astray. The desire to obtain 
alliance and friendship with neighbouring cations paved the way. Pride is a 
bewitching sin. It is often the first rift in the lute that spoils the music of the life. 
2. Another root was ingratitude. " Thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth." 
The Hebrew nation forgot its singular origin. If God had net called Abraham out of 
Chaldea, there would have been no Hebrew nation. Had God not appeared again and 
again to defend them, they would have perished. They were singularly indebted to 
God, and they were singularly ungrateful. This comes of a stony heart. Be shocked 
at the first appearance of ingratitude, whether towards man or towards God. 3. 
Another root was irresolution — a lack of firmness and courage. " How weak is thy 
heart ! " Feeble-minds often go astray. Indolence is incipient sin. The neglect of 
sound moral culture in youth is a fount of sin, a fount of misery. To be safe, there 
must be robustness in every virtue, vigour in every good quality. A weak man 
becomes vain, and is the dupe of the first temptation. 

II. The bbanohbs of this sm. 1, A mvlthUdty of idols. " Thou pouredst out 
thy fornications on every one that passed by." The taste of every inhabitant was 
indulged. They had "lords many and gods many:" "According to thy cities are 
thy gods, Israeli" He who refuses to be ruled by one Supreme Father soon 
becomes the slave of a thousand tyrants. 2. Sacrilege. " Thou hast also taken thy 
fair jewels, of my gold and my silver ... and madest to thyself images of men." This 
was a Tile desecration of Jehovah's property. "What have we th»t we have not 



OH. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 291 

received?" Every endowment of mind, every organ of body, every item of material 
substance, belongs to God by right inalienable. They are his by right of creation, by 
right of sustentation, by right of purchase. They are " redeemed by precious blood." 
Every coin of silver or of gold has God's image impressed on it. To use any such treasure 
in the service of idols is basest sacrilege, is wanton felony. 3. Foul murder. " Thou 
hast slain my children." Idolatry of every sort is cruel in its spirit and desolating in its 
ejlects. Beligioa is the truest philanthropy. In proportion as we love God we love our 
children, love our fellow-men. Idolatry reverses all the machinery of human nature 
and poisons all its springs of affection. It changes life to death. 4. Utter shamelessnets. 
" Thou hast made thee a high place in every street." Every eminence, yea, every 
shady grove, they had consecrated to some stupid idol. Not content to have a whorish 
heart, Israel had a whore's forehead. She did not blush for her sin. Worse, she 
gloried in her depravities. Stupor of conscience is a foul branch in tlus upas tree. 

III. The FBUiTS of this bin. 1. Unprofitableness. " Thou givest a reward, and no 
reward is given unto thee." As a rule, men yield to sin because they think it will bring 
them some temporary advantage. But idolatry brings no gain. It is imbecile to expect 
any boon from a senseless idol. It is expenditure with no return ; hard ploughing and 
no reaping. 2. Discontent. " Thou couldst not be satisfied." The more gods they 
had, the more they wauted. Idolatry excites desire ; it does not appease the craving. 
Discontent is incipient hell. 3. Famine. " I have diminished thine ordinary food." 
God tried lesser chastisements before he employed the greater. A good physician will 
cut off a limb if thereby he can save a life. If the people had had a ray of light in 
their understanding, they would have discovered that Jehovah alone had the power to 
bestow good or to inflict evil. 4. Thraldom. " I have delivered thee unto the will of 
them that hate thee." Here is the culmination of disgrace and sorrow and ruin. To 
fall into the power of a malicious foe is slavery, which sends its fetters into the soul. 
Better death than this ; for this is perpetual crucifixion. Under this brand of righteous 
indignation the land of Israel still continues. — ^D. 

Vers. 35 — 43. — Judicial verdict. It is a great kindness done by may one if he 
disclose to us the real nature of our sin. Light from any quarter should be welcomed. 
To demonstrate to the Hebrews that their idolatry was the worst form of adultery 
was an act of condescension on the part of God. By their own state law they knew 
that this sin incurred the penalty of death. With all the circumstance of judicial 
solemnity, the Supreme Judge summons the attention of the culprit : " harlot, hear 
the word of the Lord ! " 

I. The JT7DICIAI. scMMiNO-UP. The accusations against Israel were twofold. 1. 
Conjugal infidelity. The covenant made between Jehovah and Israel — the covenant 
more sacred than between bridegroom and bride — had been wantonly broken. Of this 
proof was fmnished in abundance. It was openly displayed. Shameless publicity 
marked the deed. 2. Murder of children. The children created by God, and on whom 
he had set peculiar affection, were cruelly sacrificed unto the insatiable idols. It was 
murder of the worst sort — ^murder of innocent and helpless victims. No language of 
man could exaggerate or over-colour the crime. 

II. The eighteous sentencb). " I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock 
and that shed blood are judged." 1. 2%e criminal is condemned to public shame. She 
had openly boasted of her sin ; she shall be openly exposed. She shall be made a 
spectacle to the world. Care shall be taken to bring her companions and paramours to 
the sight. The most secret intrigue shall be set in the clear light of day. Friends 
and foes alike shall witness the disgrace. 2. Forfeiture of all possessions. " They 
shall take thy fair jewels." All the instruments of sin riiall be sequestered. The 
illicit gains of iniquity soon turn to loss. " The wages of sin is death." 3. Summary 
deatlt. " They shall stone thee with stones." This was the penalty assigned to adultery 
in the Jewish code. This was the penalty for an individual culprit. But for a 
community, the punishment ordained was the sword. Therefore it is added, " They 
shall thrust thee through with their swords." In God's world neither adultery nor 
idolatry shall long be tolerated. 4. It was an equitable recom^oente. " I will recompense 
thy way upon thy head." The entire punishment proceeded in the most natural way ; 
ay, it proceeded in the way of nature. No strange portent appeared in heaven or earth, 



a2 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xvi. 1—83. 

To the carnal eye no hand nor sword of God was manifest ; yet full execution of the 
sentence was done. As at the creation every plant had the latent power to propagate 
itself, equally every sin carries in itself suitable and adequate punishment. Death is 
only ripe sin. 6. It was a satisfaction to eternal riyhteousnesi. " I will be quiet, and 
will be no more angry." The righteousaess of God is a force of tremendous energy, and 
can only be quieted by adequate repentance or adequate retribution. As the sea cannot 
be calm while a tempest of wind sweeps over its surface, no more can the justice of 
God be complacent while sin is rampant. But when sin is atoned for, there is pro- 
foundest peace — an eternal calm. — D. 

Vers. 44 — 59. — Sin seen in the light of comparison. If men are so encased in 
worldliness that they cannot see their sin in the light of God's perfect righteousness, 
they may yet discover some features of their sin in the light of others' conduct, in the 
light of others' doom. God has employed manifold methods for convincing men of sin. 

I. Sin mat be seen in the light op another's fall. In the case of Israel 
it might have been seen in a parent's disaster and doom. For their idolatries, and the 
vices bred of idolatry, the Amorites and Hittites were swept out of the land ; yea, 
swept out by the sword of Israel. Th.iy had seen the judgments which God had brought 
upon idolatry. It was a fact indissolnbly linked with their own history. For them to 
fall into the same sin is inexplicable ; it is the climax of depravity. 

II. Sin mat be seen in the light op privilege. The Hebrews had seen the 
result of idolatry in the sister-kingdum of Samaria. The calves encted at Dan and 
Bethel had not availed to save Israel from defeat and ruin. They in Judasa had greater 
privilege. The visible presence of Jehovah was in their holy of holies. They had the 
priesthood and the daily sacrifice and the smoking altar of incense in their midst. If 
some kind of excuse could be framed on behalf of Israel's lapse, no such excuse could 
be framed for Judah. They knew the better course, yet they chose the worse. 

III. Sin mat be seen in the light of bepeated warning. The disaster which 
ell upon Samaria and upon Sodom was in the nature of warning to them. It was the 
dearest warning, written in largest characters. Beside these matter-of-fact warnings, 
th'y were rebuked by a succession of messengers from God. The sin which was gieat 
priM to Samaria's fall was greater still after that fall. To continue in sin after repeated 
warning is to contract fresh sin. Contumely and insubordination are now added. 
WarniiAg despised is itself a sin. 

IV. T.MB mbascee op bin is seen in the light op its injukioos influence 
ON 0THB»j. The inhabitants of Jerusalem had encouraged others to commit idolatry. 
Other peoples were cloaking themselves under Israel's name. All sin (like some 
diseases) is ierribly contagious. The Jews were inducing others to say, " Well, if these 
sticklers for «n invisible God betake themselves to idols, there must be a reason. Their 
Jehovah must have failed them. After all, idolatry must be at least permissible." 
" Thou hast justified thy sisters in all thine abomination." 

V. The Doasi of sin mat br seen in the light op God's consistent jtistice. 
" "When thy siUers, Sodiim and her daughters, shall return to their former estate . . . 
then thou and Jihy daughters shall return to your former estate." God has not one 
tribunal for the Jews and another for the Canaanites. Out of one statute-book all 
shall be alike j\.<iged. Human conduct in every land and in every age shall ha 
measured by one jtandard rule. As God has dealt with transgressors in former ages, 
BO assuretily will Ue deal with transgressors in times to come. Other things may change, 
but Gud and law ^nd righteousness never. — D. 

Vers. 60—63. — A rift in the storm-cloud. Human life is a season of probation. Far 
better to be chastised here, however severely, than to hear the sentence of doom at the 
last assize. Present corrections have a merciful design. Above the moral tempest 
calmly beams the star of mercy. To restoration repentance is needful. 

I. The source o» eepentanob. " I," said God, " will remember my covenant with 
thee." Although God may severely punish, he does not cast off, if there be a vestige of 
hope. Though they had forgotten God, God had not forgotten them ; nor had he for- 
gotten his covenant. Though gleams of anger were in his eye, and vengeance bared his 
arm, the love of hii heart had not dried up. He ploughed up the field deeply, that the 



CH XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, 293 

rain of his grace might penetrate the soil. It is pure love that originated the covenant, 
and pure love that maintains it. 

II. The natubb of true repentance. " Thou shalt be ashamed." Bepentance 
comes from reflection. Sin is the effect of slumber of mind, callousness of conscience. 
When the real man awakens and reflects, he is filled with shame. He sees himself in 
the mirror of truth, and his emotional nature is pained, wounded, abashed. He loathes 
himself. He is willing to give anything, to hear anything, if only he might undo the 
guilty deeds. A sense of shame is self-inflicted punishment. It is not simply remorse 
because the sin has been discovered. It is change of mind with respect to sin itself. 
It is dislike for all sin. 

III. The proofs of repentance. Great humility is an evidence of repentance. 
The old pride is sapped and eradicated. Old prejudices and antipathies disappear. 
Better still, there springs up concern for others — an ardent desire to bless our rivals and 
our foes. Sodom and Samaria should be received as daughters. The good we obtain 
we long to share with the worst of men. Generous and benevolent affection is good 
evidence of repentance. " Then will I teach transgressors thy ways." 

IV. The effects of repentance. Two effects are mentioned. 1. Intimate friend- 
ship with Ood. " They shall know that I am the Lord." There is meant here, not 
simply intellectual knowledge, but strong conviction, intimate acquaintance, familiar 
friendship. This knowledge will increase and ripen into life eternal. 2. Greater 
telf-reslraint. " Thou shalt never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame." 
This indicates great tenderness of conscience ; yea, a sensitive dread of offending God. 
The more we know of God the more reverence we have for him, and the stronger 
becomes our desire to please him. As is our knowledge, so is our humility — ay, our 
self-extinction. 

" The more thy glories meet my eye% 
The humbler I shall lie ; 
Tet while I sink, my joys shall ria* 
Immeasurably high." 

D. 

Vers. 1 — 15. — A picture of human depravity and destitution, and of Divine con- 
descension and favour. " Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of 
man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations," etc. " We have here," says Heng- 
stenberg, " one of the grandest prophecies of Ezekiel. The prophet surveys in the Spirit 
of God the whole of the development of Israel, the past and the future." In this 
development we have the following stages : The condition in which the Lord found his 
people ; the condition to which he raised them ; their shameful departures from him ; 
his severe judgments upon them ; and their restoration to his favour. Each of these 
developments of Israelitish history may be viewed as an emblem of man's moral con- 
dition or relations with God, or of God's dealings with man. It seems to us that it 
would be unwise to attempt to deal with the chapter as a whole in one homily. We 
shall therefore consider its chief paragraphs separately. In the section before us we 
have two graphic pictures. 

I. A PICTURE OP HUMAN DEPRAVITY AND DESTITUTION, OB OF THE CONDITION IN 

WHICH THE Lord found his people. 1. ITieir depraved moral parentage. " Thus 
saith the Lord God unto Jerusalem ; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canaan ; 
thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite." The people of Israel are here 
designated " Canaanites," to indicate their degraded moral character and condition. " The 
Amorites and the Eittites are two chief Canaanitish tribes, that elsewhere so often 
represent the whole of the Canaanites; the Amorites already, in Gen. xv. 16, where 
they specially represent the Canaanitish people in their sinfulness." Moral character and 
conduct are often viewed as indicative of moral parentage. "When men live according 
to the courses, natures, manners of others, they are styled their sons, or children." Thus 
the Jews are called " sons of the sorceress," etc. (Isa. Ivii. 3). The Jews in the time of our 
Lord's ministry upon earth claimed to be " Abraham's seed. . . . They said unto him, 
Abraham is our father." But Jesus said imto them, " Ye are of your father the devil" 
(John viii. 33—44). And St. Paul, filled with the Holy Ghost, called Elymas the 
sorcerer a " child of the devil " (Acts xiii. 10). The tendency to sin which churacterizes 



894 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xti. 1—63. 

human nature indicates sinful parentage. The doctrine of original sin has often been 
stated in a very objectionable manner. Bat there is a basis of fact underlying that 
doctrine. It is certain that human beings manifest in early life a proclivity to sin. 
The modem scientific teaching as to inherited tendencies conducts to the conclusion 
that we inherit a depraved moral nature. 2. Their destitute moral condition. " And 
as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast bora thy navel was not cut," etc. (vers. 4, 5). 
These verses point to the condition of Israel in Egypt, where the family grew into a 
nation, or the nation may have said to have been born. There was nothing there to 
foster the moral life and health of the young nation. Nay, mure, their physical condition 
was one of cruel oppression and bitter persecution (cf. Exod. i. 7 — 22). They were 
abhorred, aflflicted, and brutally ill treated. But the verses illustrate man's spiritual 
condition apart from the grace of God and the provisions of that grace. Man is morally 
unclean as an unwashed infant, morally neglected as an uncared-for infant, left to live 
or die, no one taking an interest in its condition, and being completely incapable of 
self-help. Is not that a picture of man's spiritual state apart from the grace of God? 
We inherit a sinful nature. We cannot convert or sanctify ourselves, or even do any- 
thing with a view to such results without Divine influence. We cannot repent except 
as we are summoned and strengthened to do so from heaven. And man cannot save us 
if he would ; for every man is a sinner, and needs salvation himself. Neither can angels 
save us. Their utmost wisdom, love, and might are inadequate to the difficult task. 
God alone has pity enough and power enough for this work. If he leaves us we must 
perish. If we are to be saved he must begin and carry on the gracious work. And 
we rejoice to know that he does not leave any people to perish without witness of him- 
self, or without some gracious infiaences from him (cf. Acts xiv. 17 ; Bom. L 19, 20 ; 
1 Tim. ii. 4). 

K. A KCTURK OF DiVINB CONDBSCBNSrOK AND PAVOTJB, OB THE CONDITIOH TO 

WHICH THB LoBD BAISED HIS PEOPLE. (Vers. 6 — 14.) Here, as Fairbairn observes, 
" everything is fragrant with the matehless grace and loving-kindness of God." 1. Ood 
graciously regarded them in their outcast wndition. " I passed by thee, and saw thee 
polluted [Revised Version, • weltering,'] in thine own blood." He looked compassion- 
ately upon the Israelites in their afflictions and sorrow in Egypt. " The Lord said, 
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt," etc. (Exod. iii. 
7 — 10). He saw our race ruined by sin, and of his own free and unmerited grace he 
had pity upon us. We had no claim upon his compassion or assistance. By our sin 
we had forfeited every title to his favour. We had no grace or beauty to commend us 
to his regard. We were rather, as in the picture drawn by the prophet (vers. 3 — 6X 
fitted to awaken repulsion. Yet God looked upon us in mercy ; and be did so of his 
own good pleasure. " Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us," etc. 
" God commendeth his own love toward us, la that, while we were yet sinners, Christ 
died for us." 2. Ood eonferred life upon them. " I said unto thee in thy blgod. Live 1" 
He saw the Israelites in Egypt as it were naked, abhorred, and perishing, and he designed 
them for life, and caused them to live, notwithstanding the cruelty of their oppressors. 
And it is God of his grace, through Christ Jesus and by his Word and Spirit, who 
quickens dead souls into life. " God being rich in mercy, for bis great lore wherewith 
he loved us, even when we were dead through our trespasses, quickened us together with 
Christ," etc. (Eph. iL 4—10 ; cf. Col. ii. 13 ; John iii. 5— S). 8. He blessed them with 
growth and increase. " I caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field," etc. The 
explanation of this verse is in Exod. L 7, 12. The great increase of the children of 
Israel excited the fears of the Egyptian monarch, and led him to oppress them ; " but 
the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew." Their growth was 
of God, and accorded with his great purposes concerning them. Spiritual growth in the 
individual is the product of Divine influences. God quickens and sustains and increases 
the life of the soul. Hence St. Paul prays " that he would grant you, according to the 
riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner 
man," etc. (Eph. iii. 16—19). The increase of the Church also is of him. " The 
Lord added to them day by day those that were being saved " (Acts ii. 47). " I planted, 
ApoUos watered ; but God gave the increase " (1 Oor. iii. 6). 4. He took them into 
lunien with himself. " Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy 
time was the time of love ; and I spread my skirt over thee," etc. (rer. 8). The child 



0H.XVL1— 63.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. 295 

is represented as having now arrivedftt womanhood. The casting of the skirt over her 
is an action indicative of taking her Under one's protection with a view to betrothal (of. 
Euth iii. 9). And keeping up the. figure, the espousals are indicated by the words, 
"Yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, . . . and thou becamest 
mine." This covenant was entered into at Mount Sinai (cf. Bxod. xix. 3 — 8 ; xxxiv. 
27). " What grace when the Holy and Almighty One condescends to enter into 
covenant with so sinful and miserable a people! " And still God graciously enters into 
covenant with all who heartily believe on his Son Jesus Christ (cf. Heb. viii. 6 — 13). 
In this covenant we give ourselves to him as loyal subjects and servants; and in 
addition to many other blessings, he gives himself to us as the crowning blessing of the 
covenant. And if we are in this covenant, we may without presumption address him 
as our Father and our God (cf. John xx. 17). " The Lord is my Portion, saith my 
soul ; therefore will I hope in him." 5. He sumptuously clotJied and adorned them. 
"Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blood from 
thee," etc. (vers. 9 — 14). The washing and anointing (ver. 9) are suggested by the 
custom in the East of purifying the bride for her royal husband (of. Esth. ii. 12). Israel 
is repre.'iented as having been thoroughly cleansed and anointed as the bride of the 
Lord. Then the prophet speaks of the dress and jewellery of the bride. (1) The 
clothing and adorning were glorious. " I clothed thee also with broidered work," etc. 
The reference is to the condition of the people during the reigns of David and Solomon, 
before the kingdom was divided, when they were at the height of prosperity and power. 
God clothes his people with " the beauty of holiness." They have " the ornament of a 
meek and quiet spirit." " I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in 
my God ; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation," etc. (Isa. Ixi. 10 ; and cf. 
Luke XV, 22). (2) The clothing and adorning were admired. " Thy renown went forth 
among the nations for thy beauty." The renown of the Israelites and their king is 
mentioned in 1 Chron. xvii. 8, 21. When men are clothed with the beauties of moral 
excellence they awaken the admiration of the world. Men respect genuine religion when 
they see it embodied in human lives. (3) The clothing and adorning were of God. " It 
was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God." 
The prosperity, power, and glory of Israel came from him. And Christians have not a 
righteousness of their " own, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness 
which is of God by faith." He arrays them in glories like his own. " Let the beauty 
of the Lord our God be upon us." Spiritual, unfading, and eternal are the garments and 
glories in which God invests bis people. — W. J. 

Ver. 2. — Leading sinneri to a knowledge of their sint. "Son of man, cause 
Jerusalem to know her abominations." 

I. That bin is essentially vile in its chaeacteb. The sins of the inhabitants 
of Jerusalem were "abominations" in the sight of God. David says of the wicked, 
" They are corrupt, they have done abominable works ; " " Corrupt are they, and have 
dune abominable iniquity." And Jehovah said to the Jews, "Oh, do not this abomin- 
able thing that I hate 1 " In its own nature sin " is an evil thing and a bitter." It is 
a polluting thing, defiling the soul ; it is a degrading thing, dishonouring the soul. It 
is an infraction of the order of God's universe, and is inimical to its true interests. Sin 
is evil " in every respect — ^hateful to God, hurtful to man, darkening the heavens, 
burdening the earth." 

II. That sinneks often fail to recognize their own snf. The inhabitants of 
Jerusalem at this time were sadly corrupted by sin, but were so oblivious to the fact 
that the prophet is summoned to bring them to a knowledge of their abominations. 
David did not recognize as his own the foul crimes which he had committed when they 
were set before him parabolically. It was not until the Prophet Nathan said unto him, 
" I'hou art the man ! " that he saw himself to be the sinner he really was (2 Sam. xiL 

1 14), The Pharisees in the time of our Lord's ministry were really great sinners, 

but they regarded themselves as the excellent of the earth. We are quick to behold 
the mote that is in our brother's eye, but we take no notice of the beam that is in our 
own eye. This failure of sinners to recognize their own sin may arise : 1. From the 
nAtlety of sin. Sin approaches the soul in dangerous disguises. " Were the vision of 
■in seen in a full light, undressed and unpaiuted, it were impossible, while it so 



296 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEEIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 6X 

•ppeared, that anj one soul could be in lore with it, but all would rather flee from it 
•s hideous and abominable." Wickedness veils itself in the garb of what is harmless, 
respectable, or excellent Avarice hides its hard and hungry features under the name 
of economy. Harsh censoriousness wears the cloak of honest plaiu-spokenness, etc. 
2. From theproneness of men to excuse sin in themselves. Until man is brought to see 
and feel his sins aright, he is ready to palliate or to extenuate them. Men are cruelly 
indulgent to themselves in this respect. And in some cases pride and self-flattery 
blind men to their own offences. 

III. That thb hikibtebs of God should endeavoub to BBora sinnebs to a 
KSOWLEDGS OF THEIB BINS. To this duty Ezekiel was summoned in our text. And 
this is incumbent on the ministers of Jesus Christ. 1. For the conversion of the 
sinners. " Without the knowledge of sin, repentance and conversion are not to be 
thought of." "As a physician, when hp wisbes to heal a wound thoroughly,- must 
probe it to the bottom, so a teacher, when he wishes to convert men thoroughly, must 
first seek to bring them to a knowled°;e of their sins." 2. For the deliverance of their 
own souls, (pi. ch. iii. 17 — 21 ; xxxiii. 7 — 9.) 3. For the vindication of the Law and 
government of Ood. Sin is an outrage of his holy Law, and it should be exhibited as 
such. Persistence in sin calls down Divine punishment, and the sin should be set 
forth unto men, that they will recognize the righteousness of the punishment. If sin 
be not properly estimated by men, how shall the Divine dealings in the punishment of 
it be justified unto them ? Therefore the ministers of Jesus Christ should endeavour 
to cause sinners to know their sins. — W. J. 

Vers. 16—34. — A picture of flagrant apostasy from God, " But thou didst trust in 
thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown," ete. The prophet 
now passes from what God had done for his people Israel to set forth how they had 
requited him. He had shown how, under his fostering care, the outeast child had grown 
into a beautiful maiden, whom he had espoused and arrayed in robes and ornaments of 
beauty, until she had become renowned amongst the nations. Now he exhibits the 
apostasy of the people under the figure of the gross unfaithfulness of this wife to her 
husband, with whom she had entered into solemn covenant, and to whom she owed 
everything good and valuable that she possessed. Idolatry is frequently set forth in 
the Scriptures under the similitude of fornication or adultery (cf. Jer. iii. 20). The 
chief point of the comparison is perhaps this, that, as the marriage covenant is an 
endearing and sacred one, and the violation of it is therefore a heinous sin, lo the 
covenant between God and hii people is intimate and holy, and to violate it is to 
incur the darkest guilt. The wife is under the most solemn obligations not to turn 
aside from her husband to another man, or to allow any one to rival him in her 
affections. And those who have entered into covenant with God ought not to allow 
any person or thing to compete with him for the supreme place in their hearts. We 
can only view this representation of the people's apostasy " generally," as Fairbaim 
observes, " and with respect to its leading features ; as from the very nature of the 
image it is impossible to be minute, without at the same time falling into indelicacy." 

I. Thb babb BEonnmias or thib apobtaby. 1. Forgetfulness of the past. " In all 
thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy 
youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood." The 
Israelites forgot the helpless and afSicted condition in which the Lord found tliem in 
Egypt, and how he had championed their cause, delivered them from their oppressors, 
and raised them into an independent, prosperous, and powerful nation. Had they 
remembered these things, the recollection would have bound them to him by the tender 
and tenacious ties of gratitude. 

* They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies. 
They soon forgot his works. 
They forgot God their Saviour, 
Which had done great ttkings in Egypt." 

(Ps. cvL 7, 13, 21.) 
A lively recollection of what God has done for us, and of how much we owe to him, 
will prove a powerful preventive to our departing from him. 2. Confidence in them- 
selves and their possessions. ' Thou didst trust in thine own beauty." The things 



OB. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEEIEL. 297 

whicli God had eoabled them to acquire — ^position, prosperity, power — thejr had abused 
by making them occasions of sin. They reposed in them the trust which they should 
have reposed in God alone. How often have men abused their prosperity in a similar 
manner I A man by the blessing of God succeeds in his business undertakings, and 
then attributes all his success to his tact, perseverance, and energy, and places his 
supreme cooGdence in those powers or in himself. How vain is such confidence 
(cf. Frov. xxviii. 26 ; Jer. ix. 23) I And another, who has prospered in his worldly 
affairs, places his trust in his riches. This also is vain (cf. Fs. xlix. 6, 7; liL 7; 
1 Tim. tL 17). "He who has a high opinion of himself has no desire for grace; and 
the more he trusts in himself, the more quickly will he squander gifts and blessings. 
Self-exaltation leads from grace, just as self-knowledge leads to grace " (Schroder). 
3. Perversion of the position which they had attained through the favour of God. 
" And playedst the harlot because of thy renown." The eminence which they had 
attained by means of his blessing they turned into an occasion of exalting themselves 
against him. " God made this people above all nations," says Greenhill, " in praise, 
in name, in honour, that they might be a holy people unto him (Deut. xxvi. 19) ; 
their renown should have encouraged them to holiness, and it was an incentive unto 
looseness. Solomon had great renown abroad in the nations (1 Kings iv. 31) ; that 
drew the princes to bestow their daughters upon him (1 Kings xi. 3) ; he had seven 
hundred wives, princesses ; his name made way for unlawful marriages, and they made 
way for unlawful gods." Their prosperity and fame they thus perverted in saddest, 
BinfuUest manner. 

II. The dbbad pboqbess of this apostast. The apostasy itself consisted of the 
worship of idols, or the giving unto idols the homage which was due to God alone, and 
the formation of forbidden political alliances, or reposing in nations the confidence 
which should have been placed alone in God. The beginning of the apostasy seems to 
have been in the latter part of the reign of Solomon, when his heathen " wives turned 
away his heart after other godg" (1 Kings xi. 4 — 8). It entered upon another stage 
when the ten tribes under Jeroboam began to worship the true God by means of the 
images of the calves which were set up at Dan and Bethel. Afterwards the people 
began to adopt the vile idols of their heathen neighbours. But in the paragraph before 
us the chief stages of this apostasy are : 1. 2%e manufacture and worship of idols. 
(Vers. 16 — 18.) 2. 2%« huilditig of chambers for their idolatrous practices. (Vers. 
24, 25.) Not content with the high places, or natural heights, set apart for worship, 
they erected these vaulted chambers in the thoroughfares of the city. " The natural 
heights," says Hengstenberg, "are too far from the people hungering after idols. They 
wish to plant idolatry in the city thoroughfare, and so build for themselves artiflci^ 
heights. We must distinguish between the thought and its clothing. The thought 
is that the objects of idolatry became the prime impulse of the popular life, by which 
is to be understood much less religious than political adultery, though both went hand- 
in-hand." 3. The sacrifice of their children to Moloch. (Vers. 20, 21.) From ch. xx. 
26 it appears that they offered their firstborn to this revolting heathen deity. The 
god was supposed to be present in the fire, and the children who were made to pass 
through it were devoured by it. Aben Ezra says that " to cause to pass through " is 
the same as " to burn." And the Jews did this notwithstanding the most solemn and 
stem warnings against it. "The oflfender who devoted his offspring to Moloch was to 
be put to death by stoning ; and in case the people of the land refused to inflict upon 
him this judgment, Jehovah would himself execute it, and cut him off from among his 
people (Lev. xviii. 21 ; xx. 2 — 5)." But they had become guilty even of this atrocity. 
The Lord calls these children whom they so cruelly sacrificed, his children. " Thou 
hast slain my children." They were his because he is " the Father of spirits.'' His 
also because they were bom under the covenant, and bore in themselves the mark of 
the covenant. So these people had gone from bad to worse, until their sins were now 
calling loudly for Tengeance. There is no standing still in sin. When man has 
departed from God, unless means he used and efforts be made to return unto him, he 
will depart ever to a greater distance ; the breach between them will grow wider until 
it becomes a great and awful gulf. Beware of the first faint alienation of the heart 
from him. Stop the very beginnings of departure from him. Keep close to him ia 
trae and tender affection, and loyal and loving service. 



298 TflE BOOK OF THE PROPHET E2EKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 61 

III. The sorb AaoRAVATious op this apostasy. 1. Their extreme readiness to 
depart from Ood. (Vers. 25 — 34.) The nations did not seek after them, but they 
after the nations. They were ea^er to adopt their idols, and to enter into political 
alliances with them. " The treacherous and wanton dealing was all on Israel's part," 
•ays Fairbairn ; "she conceded everything to them, they yielded back nothing in return 
to her — her wickedness was gratuitous and unrequited folly. A solemn and pregnant 
truth, which the Church of God should never forget. She loses all, and the world 
gains all, when she foolishly stoops to impair the testimony of God, or adjust tha 
claims and services of religion to the tastes and practices of the carnal mind. A 
nominal advance or apparent reconciliation may possibly be made by the manceuvre; 
but it can be no more than nominal and apparent ; the interests that really profit by 
such a policy are those of the flesh and the world. It is only when the Church is 
faithful to her testimony — when she stands in the truth of Christ, and in that truth 
shines forth ' bright as the sun, clear as the moon,' that she is found also, in her con< 
flict with evil, 'terrible as an army with banners.'" 2. Their abuse of his gifts in 
dqjarting from him. (Vers. 17 — 19.) " My gold and my silver . . . mine oil and 
mine incense . . . my meat also I gave thee," — these things he charges them with 
having applied to idolatrous uses. The ' Speaker's Commentary ' points out an illustra- 
tion of this in its notes on ver. 33 : " The picture is heightened by the contrast between 
one who as a prostitute receives hire for her shame, and one who as a wife is so utterly 
abandoned as to bestow her husband's goods to purchase her own dishonour. The 
conduct of Ahaz in purchasing aid from the King of Assyria with the silver and gold 
that was found in the house of the Lord (2 Kings xvi. 8) is an excellent illustration, 
and may perhaps be referred to in this very passage." And very often still men abuaa 
the gifts of God to his dishonour, as in the employment of their abilities for base or 
unworthy purposes, the use of riches for vain or sinful objects, etc. 3. Their resolute 
persistence in departing from him. Nothing stopped them in their apostasy ; or, if 
checked for a time, it was speedily resumed again. The bestowment of many and 
precious favours upon them did not bind them to the Lord. They actually made these 
(as we have seen) an occasion of apostasy. Nor did the infliction of chastisement 
effectually restrain their great and persistent unfaithfulness. Such chastisement is 
spoken of in ver. 27. The blessings which God had promised to his people on condition 
of their fidelity to the covenant, and which in former times had been so abundantly 
bestowed (cf. vers. 9 — 14), he diminished as a punishment for their sins. By their 
religious and political unfaithfulnesses they had been great losers "in land, and people, 
and influence, and splendour ; " but still they were bent upon backsliding from luui. 
Neither mercies nor judgments, rewards nor punishments, availed to secure their 
fidelity to the Lord their God. " My people are bent to backsliding from me." Their 
hearts were " fully set in them to do evil." — W. J. 

Vers. 35 — 43. — A picture of righteous retribution because of apostasy. " Wherefore, 
harlot, hear the word of the Lord : Thus saith the Lord God ; Because thy filthiness 
was poured out," etc. The scope and meaning of this paragraph is clearly and forcibly 
stated in the ' Speaker's Commentary : ' " The punishment of Judah is represented by 
the same figure as her sin. She has been portrayed as an adulteress and a murderess. 
She is now represented as undergoing the punishment adjudged to an adulteress and 
murderess. The scene is a court of justice, before which the Lord himself appears to 
arraign the guilty woman. There are present those who are now her lovers, and those 
whom she has loved and deserted (the idolatrous nations with whom Judah has had 
guilty intercourse), to witness, to share, or to exult in, her disgrace. In proportion to 
her former honour shall be her present shame. As a woman suspected of infidelity to 
her husband bad her head uncovered by way of disgrace, so this convicted adulteress 
shall be stripped bare, exposed to utter shame, shall be stoned and slain, and her house 
shall be made desolate. Only in her utter destruction shall the wrath of the Lord, the 
jealous God, cease." In our text — 

I. The 8IN8 OP WHICH THE FEOFLS 09 JERUSALEM WERE GTHLTT ABl STATBS. 

These have been set forth at length in the preceding paragraph, and we have considered 
them here. And, indeed, all the important points in the section now before us have 
come under our notice in earlier portions of the writings of Ezekiel, most of them more 



CH. xvL 1— 63.] THE BOOK OF THE tBOPHBT laEKlBL. 299 

than once ; a brief consideration of them will therefore be sufficient in this place. The 
gins of which the people are here convicted are these. 1. Sin/id forgetftdneu of their 
early history, " Thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth " nrer. 43 ; of. ver. 
22). They forgot the low estate in which the Lord found them in Egypt, and from 
which he had raised them into a condition of national life, prosperity, and power. This 
forgetfulness involved base ingratitude. 2. Shameful apostasy from God. " Thus 
■aith the Lord God ; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness dis- 
covered," etc. The " filthiness " of the Authorized Version should be " brass." The 
word is used either " for metals of all kinds, or goods and chattels generally, or money 
in particular. ... It is put instead of the ' whoredoms' of ver. 16, because, according to 
ver. 33, these were purchased by means of presents " (Schriider). 3. I%e idolatrous and 
cruel sacrifice of their own children. " The blood of thy children which thou didst give 
unto them" (ver. 36; of. vers. 20, 21). 

II. The sentence on acooxtnt of these sins is pbonounoed. L The end of th«ir 
prosperity and the destruction of their city. " I will also give thee into their hand, 
and they shall throw down thine eminent place," etc. (vers. 39, 41). There is unmis- 
takable reference here to the siege of Jerusalem, and to the destruction, loss, and 
misery connected therewith. The people had abused their prosperity to the dishonour 
of God, and he would completely strip them of prosperity, deprive them of power, and 
leave them naked and bare as they were when the Lord first interposed for them (ver. 
7). " The unfaithful use of the gifts of God inevitably brings on their loss. Gkid cannot 
be mocked." 2. Their violent death for their spiritual adultery and physical murder. 
" I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed blood are judged ; and I will 
give thee blood in fury and jealousy. . . . They shall also bring up a company against 
thee," etc. (vers. 38, 40). According to the Law of Moses, adultery was to be punished 
with death by stoning (Lev. xz. 10 ; Deut. zxiL 24 ; John viii. 6) ; death was also the 
penalty of murder (Exod. xxi. 12). Such were the judgments of adulteresses and of 
murderers; and in the siege and capture of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar such judg- 
ments were inflicted upon the guilty people of that city. 3. 7%etV violent death in the 

Presence of and inflicted hy the nations with whom they had tinned. (Vers. 37, 41). 
'he " many women " of ver. 41 are the neighbouring nations. These nations should 
behold the downfall and degradation, the shame and misery, of the apostate people ; and 
the Chaldeans should be the instruments for accomplishing their overthrow, into whose 
hands they were given by the Lord. It is often so ordered, in the providence of God, 
that the companions of sinners in their sins become the weapons by which they are 
punished for those sins. " This is the curse of sin," says Schroder, " that those with 
whom we have sinned make common cause with our enemies for our punishment. . . . 
Friends may in certain circumstances be the most painful rods in God's hand." 

III. The EIGHTE0U8NES8 OF THE SENTENCE IB INDICATED. " I will recompense thy 
way upon thine head, saith the Lord God " (ver. 43). The Revised Version is more 
correct: " I also will bring thy way upon thine head." Sinners "are dealt with not 
only as they deserved, but as they procured. It is the end which their sin, as a way, 
ha'l a direct tendency to," which God will bring upon their bead. 

Conclusion. Our subject utters solemn warning against sin, especially on the part 
of those who have been much blessed by God ; for the heinousness of sin is proportionate 
with the greatness of privilege, and the severity of punishment will correspond with the 
heinousness of sin. — W. J. 

Vera. 44 — 52. — A picture of comparative iniquity. " Behold, every one that useth 
proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her 
daughter," etc. The following observations are suggested by this paragraph. 

I. The heinousness of sin is propobtionatb to the position and fbiviIiEOeb of 
THE 8INNBB8. "The more mercies people enjoy, the greater are their sins if they 
answer not those mercies." It is by the application of this principle that the people of 
Judah are pronounced greater sinners than they of Sodom or Samaria. Judah was 
immeasurably richer in moral and religious advantages than Sodom. " They had Moses 
and the prophets ; " they had a clearer and fuller revelation of the Divine will ; th^ 
had more frequent warnings and exhortations from holy prophets of the Lord ; they 
had regular religious ordinances, and other aids to a true and righteous life, whidk 



300 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvi. 1— 63. 

Sodom possessed not. The people of Judah had greater privileges than Samaria also, 
in having the temple of God in their midst, and in having kings of the line of David 
to reign over them, some of whom were eminent for their piety. Because of their 
grievous sins, notwithstanding their superior privileges, they are accounted more guilty 
than the people of Sodom and Samaria (vers. 46 — 48). The sins of Sodom are specified 
by the prophet. " Behold, this was tlie iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of 
bread," etc. (vers. 49, 50). Her grossest, foulest sin is not mentioned here. Before it 
was destroyed, Sodom had become a moral plague-spot upon the face of God's fair earth. 
And the sins of Samaria, or of the ten trilies, were many and dark. Yet the highly 
favoured people of Judah were accounted guiltier than either Sodom or Samaria, because 
they had committed their sins despite the greatest advantages and privileges. Their 
wickedness had become proverbial. It was common to say of them, "As is the mother, 
so is her daughter," etc. (vers. 44, 45 ; and of. ver. 3). The principle with which we 
are dealing was clearly and explicitly stated by our Lord (Matt. xi. 20 — 24 ; Luke xii. 
47, 48). Viewed in this li^ht, how heinous are the sins of Great Britain ! This land 
has been most richly blessed by God with civil and religious freedom, with a splendid 
literature, a noble ancestry, an open Bible, a weekly day of rest and religious service, 
abundant provision for public worship, and countless Christian ministries. And If 
these great advantages be not truly prized and improved, a darker, deeper guilt will be 
ours than that of less favoured peoples. 

IL Thk hore heinous sins of a uobb fatoubed people justify vbx ewB OP 
FEBSONS OF iNFEBioB PBiviLEOES. " Thoii hast justified thy sisters in all thine abomi- 
nations which thou hast done " (ver. 51). " The justification ii a comparative one : in 
relation to thee, Sodom and Samaria must appear as righteous." Great sins appear 
small when compared with greater ones. Thus professedly religious people, when they 
give way to sin, cause those who make no profession of religion to think less gravely, or 
even lightly, of sin. When religious people have a low standard of practical life and 
conduct, they thereby lower the standard of those who are about them. Sin in thos* 
who occupy the place of the people of God seems to excuse sin in those who occupy 9 
lower position, and in this way afibrds encouragement to wickedness. Let those " wht 
profess and call themselves Christians " take heed that they so live as not in any waj 
or degree to justify or countenance sin in others. 

IIL The obeatest sinnebs abe sometimes most beadt to judoe cteeb biknek^ 
" Thou also hast judged thy sisters " (ver. 52). " Judah had concurred from the heart 
in the Divine judgment on Sodom and Samaria, and exalted herself above them on thit 
account, as the Pharisee in the GospeL" They had spoken harshly of their fellow- 
countrymen who were in exile, and with self-righteous assertion of their own privileges 
(oh. xi. 15). Yet in some respects, as we have seen, they were the greatest sinners. 
And still it is not the holy, but the wicked, who are most ready to condemn sin in 
others, and to judge others with rigorous severity. But mark the teaching of our Lord 
on this matter (Matt. vii. 1 — 5 ; John viii. 2 — 11). 

IV. The obeatest sinners will meet with the sbvbbest punishment. "Thou 
also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast 
committed more abominable than they," etc. (ver. 52). Punishment is proportion'^ta 
with guilt. Terrible were the judgments of God upon Jerusalem (cf. oh. v. 9 — J2; 
Lam. iv. 4 — 11). Jeremiah cries, "The punishment of the iniquity ot the daughter of 
my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown m 
in a moment, and no hands stayed on her." " Sodom's punishment was sharp but 
short ; Jerusalem's was sharp and long." " We are sure that the judgment of God is 
according to truth." " The righteous judgment of God, who will render to every mau 
according to his deeds." 

Conclusion. Even the greatest sinners may obtain free and full forgiveness through 
the infinite mercy of God. "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man 
his thoughts," etc (Isa. Iv. 6, 7).— W. J, 

Vers. 60 — 63. — A picture of reneioed favour, "Nevertheless I will remember my 
covenant with thee in the days of thy youth," etc. There is perhaps a reference hei« 
CO the return of the Jews from their captivity in Babylon to their own land. But it 
seems beyond doubt that the prophet points to the gospel covenant and its spiritual 



.H. XVI. 1—63.] THE BOOK Oi> THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 801 

blessings. Two facts seem to us to afford conclusiTs proof of this. (1) That this new 
covenant is more fully described by Jeremiah (xxxi. 31—34) ; and (2) that this passage 
from Jeremiah is directly applied to the Christian covenant in the Epistle to the Hebrews 
(viiL 8 — 12). The renewed favour of God to his people is seen not so much in temporal 
as in spiritual blessings. 

I. ThB BENEWED favour of Gk)D TOWARDS HIS PEOPLE ORIGINATED WITH HIMSELF. 

" Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I 
will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant." Notwithstanding their breach of the 
covenant, and their countless and enormous sins, God will return to them in blessing. 
And he will do so of his own unmerited and unsought grace. When Jesus Christ came 
into our world he came without any solicitation from man. " He came unto his own 
possessions, and his own people received him not." " God commendeth his own love 
toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." The contrast between 
God and the Jews in respect to the covenants shows that the existence of the new one 
was entirely owing to his grace. 1. They forgot him and the covenant into which 
they entered with him. But he says, " I will remember ray covenant with thee in the 
days of thy youth." He does not forget the engagements into which he enters, or the 
promises which be makes. " If we are faithless, he abideth faithful ; for he cannot 
deny himself." 2. They outrageously broke the covenant. " Thou hast despised the 
oath in breaking the covenant " (ver. 59). But the Lord says, " I will establish unto 
thee an everlasting covenant." Clearly this was not of their merit, but of his mercy. 
"By grace have ye been saved through faith ; and that not of yourselves : it is the gift 
of God : not of works, that no man should glory." 

II. The renewed favour of God to his people awakens within theh penitent 
RECOLLECTIONS. " Then shalt thou remember thy ways, and be ashamed." This 
remembrance is not mere recollection, but recollection and reflection upon the things 
remembered. Moved by the grace of God, the Jews would recall to mind their sinful 
ways, and consider them, and take to themselves shame because of them. Like the 
psalmist— 

** I thought on my ways, 
And tuned my feet unto thy testimonies," ete. 

(Fa. cxiz. 59, 60.) 

Like the prodigal also : " When he came to himself he said. How many hired servants 
of my father's have bread enough and to spare I" etc. (Luke xv. 17 — 12). There is no 
real repentance without this remembrance and consideration of our ways ; again, there is 
no real repentance except when such remembrance and consideration lead to shame and 
self-reproach. Now, according to our text, it is the grace of God which produces this 
desirable condition of mind and heart. " Law and terrors do but harden." " The good- 
ness of God leadeth thee to repentance." TJomerited kindness is like coals of fire 
melting the hearts of sinners. When the mercy of God is realized by man it leads to 
loathing of sin, and sincere sorrow, because we have been guilty thereof, and lowly love 
towards him. 

III. The renewed rAvouR of God expressed in the bestowkent or bich 
BLESBINQS. The blessings mentioned and referred to in the text are those of the new 
covenant which God would make with man. " I will establish unto thee an everlasting 
covenant. . . . And I will establish my covenant with thee " (vers. 60, 62 ; and cf. Jer. 
xxxi. 31 — 34). 1. These lilessings are spiiiliial. The knowledge of God is one of them. 
" And thou shalt know that I am the Lord." We have frequently read of their knowing 
him as a consequence of his judgments. Now we come to their knowing him as a result 
of liis grace. This knowledge is more true and tender, more intimate and influential, 
than that. This is a saving acquaintance with him. "This is life eternal, that they 
should know thee the only true God, and him whom thou didst send, even Jesus Christ." 
The forgiveness of sin is another of the blessings mentioned in the text. " When I am 
mcified towards thee for all that thou hast done " (ver. 63), should be, as in the Revised 
Version, " When I have forgiven thee all that thou hast done." "I will forgive their 
iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more " (Jer. xzzi. 34). Says Schi^er, " As 
the Covenant springs from pure mercy and faithfulness, so in its inmost essence it con- 
sists in forgiveness of sins." Wliat a blessing this is I But the chief blessing of the 
covenant is not expressly mentioned by EzekieL God gives himself as the crowning 



302 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvu. 1— 24. 

blesring of the covenant. " I will be their God, and they shall he my people " (Jer. 
xxxi. 33). Having him for out Portion, we have all eood in him. 2. These blessings 
are universal. " Thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger." By these 
tisters probably Samaria and Sodom are meant (cf. ver. 46). But they must be taken, 
in connection with Jerusalem, as representing the world-wide extent of the blessings of 
the new covenant. The gospel is not for one nation or people, but for humanity, 
" Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ; " " He died for all ; " " Who gave 
himself a ransom for all ; " " The living God is the Saviour of all men, specially of them 
that believe." And our Lord sent forth his servants into all the world to preach the 
gospel to the whole creation. Judah is said to receive these sisters, and they are said 
" to he given to her for daughters, because through her they should attain to the inherit- 
ance of blessing." " Salvation is of the Jews ; " " Of whom is Christ as concerning the 
flesh." The first Christians were Jews. The apostles who offered the blessings of the 
new covenant unto the Gentiles, and received those of them who believed into the 
Church, were Jews. 3. These blessings are perpetual. " I will establish unto thee an 
everlasting covenant." The first covenant was said to be " everlasting " (Gen. xviL 
7); and it was so in the sense that it led the way to and was fulfilled in this one. And 
this covenant shall never he abolished. With all its wealth of blessings it abides per- 
petually. God, the Supreme Blessing of it, is the soul's unchangeable and eternal Portion. 
" God is the Rock of my heart and ray Portion for ever." 

IV. The renewed favoub of God produces most dbsibablb effects. 1. Sincert 
repentance for sin. " That thou mayest remember, and be confounded." The repentance 
which consists in abhorrence of sin, and grief because we have sinned against so gracious 
a God and Father, and in love to him and to all goodness, is not decreased by the recep- 
tion of his forgiveness and favour, but rather increased. The more we know of God 
and the more we enjoy of his grace, the more base and wicked will sin appear unto us. 
"Sanctified knowledge will produce sanctified shame, sorrow, and tears. When we 
apprehend God to have taken us into covenant with him, to be our God, to have done 
great things for us, to have promised great things to us, and to have been very good to 
us, then the remembrance of our wretched ways causeth a holy shame and a holy 
sorrow " (Greenhill). 2. Devout submission to his will. " And never open thy mouth 
any more " in murmuring, or complaint, or rebellion against him. It is the silence of 
trustful acquiescence in his will. "I was dumb, I opened not my mouth ; because 
thou didst it." Thus Divine grace received into the heart produces gracious results in 
the lives of those who receive it." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 
CHAPTER XVII. 



Ver. 2. — Put forth a riddle, etc. Again 
there is an interval of silence, till another 
tlieme is suggested to the prophet's mind 
and worked out elaborately. This he de- 
scribes as a "riddle" (same word as the 
"dark speeches" of Numb. xii. 8, the "bard 
questions " of 1 Kings x. 1). It will task 
the ingenuity of his hearers or readers to 
iiit( rpret it, and so he subjoins (vers. 12 — 
24) the interpretation. That interpretation 
enables us to fix the occasion and the date 
of the prophecy. It was the time when 
Zedekiah was seeking to strengthen himself 



11 the "ravenous bird" represents Cyrns. 
Possibly the eagle-head of the Assyrian god 
Nisrooh (2 Kings xix. 37 ; Isa. xxxvii. 88) 
may have impressed the symbolism on 
Ezekiel's miiid. A doubtful etymology gives 
'• the great eagle " as the meaning of Nisroeh. 
The divers oolours indicate the variety of 
the nations under tlie king's sway (Dan. 
iii. 4; iv. 1). If the eedar was chosen to be 
the symbol of the mdunroliy of Judah, then 
it followed that Lebanon, ns the special 
home of the cedar, should take its place in 
the parable. Possibly the fact that one of 
the stateliest palaces of Solomon was known 
as the " house of the forest of Lebanon " 



against Nebuchadnezzar by an Egyptian i (1 Kings vii. 2 ; x. 17, 21) may have made 

alliance. | the symbolism specially suggestive. The 

Ver. S. — ^The eagle with great wings and I word for highest branch is peculiar to 

long pinions (Revised Version)— probably | Ezekiel (here and in ver. 22). The branch 

the goklen eagle, the largest species of the j so carried oif was carried into " a land of 

genas— stands for Nebuchadnezzar, as it I traffiok " (Hebrow, LXX., and Vulgate, " a 

does in Jer. xlviii. 40 ; xlix. 22. In Isa. xlvi. I land of Canaan," the word being generalized 



OH. XTii. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHEV EZEKIEL. 



303 



in its meaning, as in oh. zvi. 29), fa. to 
Bnbylon, as pre-eminently the mercliant- 
city of the time. This, of course, refers to 
Nebuchadnezzar's deportation of Jeconiah 
and the more eminent citizens of Jerusalem 
(2 Kings xxiv. 8—15). 

Ver. 5. — The seed of the land is Zedeltiiah, 
who \>ea made king by Nebuchadnezzar in 
Jeooniah'g place. The imagery of tlie 
willow (the Hebrew word occurs here only) 
seems suggested by Ezekiel's surroundings. 
No tree could stand out in greater contrast 
to the cedar of Lebanon than the willows 
which he saw growing by the waters of 
Babylon (Ps. cxxxvii. 2, though the word 
is different). The choice of the willow 
determined the rest of the imagery, and 
the fruitful field and the great or " many " 
(Revised Version) waters represent Judah, 
possibly with reference to its being in its 
measure a "land of brooks of waters," of 
"fountains and depths," of "wheat and 
barley and wine" (Deut. viii. 7—9; xi. 
10—12). The kingdom of Zedekiah, i.e., 
was left with sufficient elements ^r mateiial 
prosperity. That prosperity is indicated in 
ver. 6 by the fact that the willow became a 
vine. It was of "low stature," indeed, 
trailing on the ground. It could not claim 
the greatness of an independent kingdom. 
Its branches turned toward the planter 
(ver. 6); its roots were under him. It ac- 
knowledged, that is, Nebuchadnezzar's 
suzerainty, and so, had things continued 
as they were, it might have prospered. 

Ver. 7. — The other great eagle is, of 
course, Bgypt, then under Apriea, or 
Fharaoh-Hophra (Jer. xUv. 30). We note 
the absence of the "long pinions" and the 
" many colours " of the first eagle. Egypt 
was not so strong, nor did her sway extend 
over to great a variety of nations as Baby- 
lon. To that eagle the vine bent its roots, 
•'.«., as in ver. 15, Zedekiah comrted the 
alliance of Pharaoh (Apries), and trusted in 
his chariots. He was to water the vine, 
which so turned to him fzom the beds of 
her plantation (Bevised Version). 

Ver. 8. — Ezekiel repeats, as justifying 
Nebuchadnezzar's action, that his first in- 
tention had been to leave Zedekiah under 
conditions which would have given his 
kingdom a fair measure of prosperity. The 
vine might have home fruit. 

Ver. 9. — The prophet, like his contempo- 
rary Jeremiah (xxxvii. 7), like his predecessor 
Isaiah (xxx. 1 — ^7), is against this policy of 
an Egyptian alliance. The question which 
he a^, as the prophet of Jehovah, implies 
•n answer in the negative. The doom of 
failure was written on all such projects. 
The h« of the next question is not Nebu- 
chadnezzar, but indefmite, like the French 
en. Fui leaves of her sprinfr read, with 



the Revised VersioTi, fresh-tpringing leaves; 
or, the leavet of her sprouting. The Autho- 
rized Version and the Bevised Version of the 
last clause seems to assert that Nebuchad- 
nezzar would have an easy victory. It 
would not take great power or much people 
to pluck up such a vine, from its roots. I 
adopt, with Keil and Hitzig, the rendering, 
not with great power or much people mU 
men be able to raise it up from its roots ; i.e. 
no forces of Egypt or other allies should be 
able to restore Judah from its ruins. Its fall 
was, for tlie timo, irretrievable (comp. ver. 17). 

Vor. 10. — Thf question. Shall it prosper ? 
comes with all the emphasis of iteration. 
The east wind •«, as elsewhere, the symbol 
of scorching and i'lvastating power (oh. xix. 
12; Hos. xiii. 15; v^onah iv. 8; Job xxvii. 
21). For furrows, -cad beds, with Bevised 
Version. In the ca«) of the Chaldeans, who 
came from the east, there was a special 
appropriateness in the symbolism. 

Vers. 12,13. — The payable has been spoken. 
Ezekiel, after the pause iiL>plie.^ in ver. 11, 
now becomes its interpreter. And that 
interpretation is to be addressed to the 
"rebellious house" (ch. ii. S, fi) among 
whom he lived. Probably even anpong tho 
exiles of Tel-Abib there were some whr 
cherished hopes of the success of thf 
Egyptian alliance, and of the down&H c 
the power of Babylon as its outcome. Th( 
tenses are better in the indefinite patt— 
" came," " took," " brought," and so on ii 
ver. 13. The history of Jeconiah's depor- 
tation and of Zedekiah's oath of tealtj (3 
Chron. xxzvi 13) is recapitulated. He 
dwells specially on the fact that the mighty 
of the land had been carried off with Jeco- 
niah. It was Nebuchadnezzar's policy to 
deprive the kingdom of all its elements of 
strength — to leave it " bare. " Even masons, 
smiths, and carpenters were carried off, lest 
they should be used for warlike preparations 
(2 Kings xxiv. 16). It could not lift itself 
np. It was enough if "by keeping its 
covenant " it was allowed to stand, 

Ver. 15. — That they might give him 
horses. The "chariots and horses" uf 
Egypt seem, thiougliout its whole history, 
to have been its chief element of strength. 
Bee for the time of Moses (Exod. xiv. 7), of 
Solomon (1 Kings x. 28, 29), of Behoboam 
(2 Chron. xit S), of Hezekiah (Isa. zxxi. 1 ; 
xxxvi. 9). Shidl ht prosper 1 What had 
been asked in the parable is asked also, in 
identical terms, in the interpretation. 
Ezekiel presses home the charge of perfidy 
as well as rebellion. Like Jeremiah, he 
looks on Nebuchadnezzar am reigning by a 
Divine right. 

Ver. 16. — Ezekiel repeats the prediction 
of ch. xii. 13. The prison in Babylon, under 
the eye of the king against whom he had 



304 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xvn. 1—24 



rebelled; tbU wtM to be tbe ontcome of the 
ollianoe with Egypt. The prophecy was 
probably written wnen the hopes of Zede- 
kiah and his counsellors were at their 
highest point, when the Chaldeans had, in 
fact, raised the siege in anticipation of the 
arrival of the Egyptian army (Jer. zszvii. 
5 — 11). Ezekiel, like Jeremiah (loe. eit), 
declared that the relief would be but 
temporary. 

Yer. 17. — ^By casting np monnts, etc. ; 
better, with the Bevised Version, when they 
east up mounts. Tbe words describe the 
strategical operations, not of the Egyptians 
against the Chaldeans, bnt of the Chaldeans, 
when they recovered from their first alarm, 
against Jerusalem (2 Kings xxv. 1 ; Jer. 
xxxix. 1). The Egyptians, Ezekiel predicts, 
would be powerless to prevent that second 
and decisive siege. In vera. 18, 19 the 
prophet emphasizes the fact that this would 
be the just punishment of Zedekiah's perfidy. 

Ver. 20. — The words receive a special 
■ignificance as being identical with those 
which Ezekiel had uttered in oh. xii. 13, 
ntith the addition that the sin against 
Nebuchadnezzar as the vicegerent of 
Jehovah, was a sin against Jehovah himself 
as the God of faithfulness and truth. Theie, 
in Babylon, the real character of his sin 
should he brought home to the conscience 
of the blind and captive king. What follows 
in ver. 21, in like manner, reproduces ch. 
xiL 14, 15. 

Yer. 22. — From the message of deserved 
chastisement the prophet passes to the 
promise of rostoration. The cedar of Israel 
is not dead. Jehovah would, in his own 
time, take the highest branch, tender and 
slender though it might be, the true heir of 
David's house, and deal with it far other- 
vise than the Chaldean conqueror had done. 



The latter had carried off the branch to the 
" land of trafSck " — so. had brought Jeconiah 
to Babylon. Jehovah would plant his branch 
upon the " mountain of the height of Israel " 
(Isa. ii/2 ; Micah It. 1). It was not to be as 
a willow in a low place, but to flourish, true 
to its origin as a cedar, so that " all fowl of 
every wing " should dwell in the shadow of 
its branches (comp. ch. xxxi. 3 — 9, where 
the same imagery is used of Assyria; and 
Matt. xiii. 32). As with like prophecies in 
Isa. xi. 1 and liii. 2 (where the "tender 
one" finds a parallel), the words paint an 
ideal never historically realized, but finding 
a pai tial fulfilment in Zerubbabel and the 
rebuilding of Jerusalem and the temple, 
merging in the still unfulfilled vision of the 
kingdom of the Messiah and the restoration 
of Israel. To Ezekiel, as to other prophets, 
it was not given to know the times and the 
seasons, or even the manner of the fulfil- 
ment of his hopes ; and when he uttered the 
words, the vision may have seemed not £u 
off, but nigh at hand. 

Yer. 24.^— All the trees of the field, etc. 
As the cedar of Lebanon stands here for the 
royal house of David, so the other " trees " 
represent the surrounding nations, who are 
thought of as witnessing, first the strange 
prostration, and then the yet stranger resur- 
rection of the house and the miglit of Judah 
and Israel. The thought, which reproduces 
that of 1 Sam. ii. 7, finds an echo in Luke 
i. 51, 52. Another echo of the words may, 
perhaps, be traced in the " green tree " and 
the " dry " of Luke xxiii. 31. Here then, 
also, as in ch. xvi., the utterance which 
begins with judgment, ends in mercy. 
Behind the picture of the blind, discrowned 
king the prophet sees that of the Divine 
ideal King in the fulness of his majesty and 
power. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Yer. 2.— A riddle and aparahh. In the present instance the riddle and the parable 
are one, the riddle being expressed in the form of a parable. Both of these oblique 
forms of expression are characteristic of Oriental literature, and appear frequently in 
the pages of the Bible. Let us consider their advantages. 

L The biddle. This is not a mere puzzle to amuse ; nor is it propounded to Tex 
and perplex the listener. Unlike our idle conundrum, it has a grave purpose. 1. To 
arrest attention. Ezekiel was required to prophesy to people with blind eyes and deaf 
ears (ch. xiL 2). The methods of direct instruction had failed to impress his som- 
nolent hearers. Called upon to try more rousing means, the prophet now launches into 
parables and riddles. Novelty of method may be desirable in the expression of old 
familiar truths. It is useless to preach if we have not the ears of the audience. Yet 
it is dangerous to shock reTerenco by frivolous eccentricity. There was nothing 
frivolous in Ezekiel's riddle, — it was grave, and even sublime ; neither was there any- 
thing eccentric about it, — it followed a recognized method. 2. To provoke thought. 
While a direct statement may not be strongly grasped just because it is intelligible in 
a moment, an oblique phrase, which demands thought for the understanding of it, may 
■;ink the deeper into the mind. It is not only requisite that we should see the truth ; 



OH. xvn. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 305 

we need also to take hold of it. An easy comprehension of it doe* not satisfy all its 
demands, and we should not only think about it, but think our way into it, using our 
own minds. Truth that is thus held is most truly our own possession. 8. To enditre. 
The riddle will be easily remembered and readily transmitted. Truth is not the 
private property of its discoverer nor of his first hearer. It is the heritage of all ; it 
claims eternal remembrance. We want to make the teaching of it tell and stay. 

II. Thb pabable. Ezekiel's riddle was thrown into the form of a parable. Usually 
the riddle appears to have been of the character of a parable, though perhaps, as a rule, 
more brief and less easily interpreted than an ordinary parable ; e.g. compare Samson's 
riddle with Jotham's parable (judg. xiv. 12 and iz. 7 — 16). The one is curt and 
enigmatical ; the other fuller and more easily understood. The parabolic form of speech 
has its own peculiar advantages. Sharing the three advantages of the riddle already 
discussed — t.e. arraUng attention, provoking thought, and enduring— iHumgh in a 
milder form when the parable is simpler and less concise than the riddle, it is com- 
pensated for any apparent inferiority to the riddle in these respects by the possession 
of certain good points of ita own. Let us consider its special miseion. 1. To take 
possession ^ the imagination. The parable appeals to the pictorial faculty. It handles 
truth on its poetic rather than on its philosophical side. It is therefore realistic, for 
nothing is so realistic as poetry, nothing so paints upon our inward eye the things it ia 
describing in words. Now, it is not enough that we should understand the truth in 
word and naked idea. We want to see it, to handle it, to feel the glow and power of 
its presence. 2. To connect truth with present /acts. The parable brings heaven down 
to earth. When dealing with earthly things it draws them into relation with nearer 
objects. Thus it shows that the subjects it treats of are closely connected with us. 
Theology is too much discussed as though it belonged to the star Sinus. Parables 
remind us that it belongs to our earth. Following analogies with nature and life, they 
indicate links of connection between the material and the spiritual, between nature and 
Qoi, and also between nature and man. 

Vers. 3 — 10. — The parable of the two eaglet. L Tnn fibst eaous aud th« oksab. 
The eagle is the King of Babylon. The cedar is the house of David. Nebuchadnezzar 
cut off the topmost twigs of this tree when he deported Jehoiakim and his court to 
Babylon. 1. Ood uses powerful instrumenti. The eagle is the king of birds. The 
one here described is of exceptional splendour, with variegated plumage (ver. 3). 
Nebuchadnezzar was the most powerful monarch of his age, and he carried with him 
the glory of conquest over various nations, together with those resources which he drew 
from them which added to the sweep of his mighty wings of victory. Yet this awful 
tyrant was a puppet in the hands of the King of kings, who used him to work out 
deep designs of providence. 2. Earthly greatnest is no security against ruin. The 
house of David was great, ancient, and glorious, like a cedar of Lebanon among the 
trees of the forest. No cattle of the field could pluck the topmost twigs that waved 
proudly in the wind. But the eagle swooped down upon them, tore them ofT, and bore 
them away to his distant eyrie, wiih greater ease than if they had been obscure boughs 
of lowly shrubs. The greatness of the house of David did not protect Jehoiakim 
against Nebuchadnezzar when the Babylonian monarch seized that wretched king and 
carried him captive to Chaldea. There is an earthly exaltation which springs from the 
favour of Heaven. Yet when that favour is lost, all its former glory will not save it. 
Let no one Iwast in his privileges and attainments ; they are flimsy shields before the 
fiery darts of judgment. 

II. The second eaolk abd the vike. This eagle is Pharaoh of Egypt. The vine 
is Zedekiah, whom Nebuchadnezzar set up as king in Jerusalem in place of Jehoiachin. 
I. It is letter to be fruitful than famous. If Zedekiah had acted wisely he might have 
had a safe, though a humble, reign. He could no longer rule in pride, like Jehoiakim 
before him, as the top twig of a glorious cedar ; but as a lowly young vine, feeble and 
small, he might bear good fruit. A humble, useful life is better t^n one (if proud 
pretensions, and safer too; for the vine would not have attracted the destroying eagle 
if it had grown in quiet. 2. Hie feeble are tempted to seek inefficient help. The vine 
appealed to a second eagle. Zedekiah sought an alliance with Pharaoh. This waa bad 
policy, for it was certain to provoke the vengeance of Babylon, and then even the 

EZEKIEL, X 



SOe THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvn. 1— 24. 

might of the ancient empire of Egypt wonid be nnequal to cope with the enraged 
power from the Euphrates, even if Pharaoh proved true to his alliance in the hour of 
need. But Zedekiah was more than politically foolish. He had lost faith in God, the 
one sure Protector of Israel. Men trust to policy, money, friendship, etc. But no 
earthly alliance will save in the hour of greatest need. 3. Confidence in a worthiest 
defence will lead to ruin. The vine had better never have appealed to the second 
eagle. Zedekiah suffered grievously through leaning on Egypt. If we turn from our 
true Eefuge to any earthly supports, we shall not only find them fail us ; wu shall also 
provoke wrath and judgment. Deceitful cunning will only aggravate the fate of the 
(inner. Zedekiah's treachery made his doom the more certain. 

Ver. 10. — "Shall it prosper t" I. Pbospeeitt is nattjballt sonaHT apteb. 
False ideas of prosperity may blind us as to its true nature. There is a prosperity 
which none need covet, a swollen worldly success that leaves the soul starved, barren, 
and sapless. It may be more blessed to suffer from the stimulating shocks of adversity 
than to be surfeited with s\ich a false prosperity. But real prosperity is naturally and 
rightly desired. No one ought to be content to make shipwreck of life. We may not 
attain to the objects which we set before ourselves, and we may never realize any very 
great success in the eyes of men. But that our lives should break up in ruin is of all 
things most to be deplored. The question, " Shall it prosper ? " is thus to be asked 
with natural anxiety. We may ask it in regard to (1) the soul ; (2) the Church ; 
(8) a specific enterprise. 

II. Pbosfebitt uay be eabilt mibsed. The vine in the parable did not prosper. 
Zedekiah's diplomacy was a failure. Many men make shipwreck of life. Churchei 
sink into deafness. The inquiry should go back to the possible causes of failure. 
1. A false aim. Zedekiah thought only of his own throne. He did not give evidence 
of the genuine patriotism which would have preferred the welfare of the nation to his 
own safety. Selfishness may win worldly success. But it is certain to starve the roots 
of soul-prosperity. 2. A false trust, Zedekiah trusted to Pharaoh instead of God. 
If we are looking for prosperity in any region to the neglect of our trust in God, we ar« 
courting failure, for with him are the issues of life. 3. A false character. Zedekiah 
not only leaned upon a broken reed in trusting to Egypt ; he acted treacherously in so 
doing. Deceit is fatal to the soul. Fraud never secures true prosperity, though it may 
win earthly pelf. 

III. Pbosfebitt need not be hissed. Here, ^ain, we must bear in mind the 
nature of true prosperity. We cannot all be rich or successful in earthly enterprises. 
But no soul need be wrecked, for it is within the power of all to attain to a life which 
shall be reckoned successful in the sight of God. We should see to it that we have the 
secret of this prosperity. 1. Living for Ood. This will give us a right aim. The soul 
that lives for self, for the world, for any lower aim, is running for the rocks. But no 
one who truly lives for God can utterly fail. 2. Trusting in Ood. It is not easy to 
pursue this high aim ; indeed, it is impossible to do so without the aid of Divine grace. 
The life of faith is the only perfectly prosperous life. The heroes of faith whose fame 
is celebrated in Heb. xi. were all of them truly successful, though many of them 
suffered and some died as martyrs. 

IV. Peospebitt IS WOETH INQUIRINO ABOUT. Ezeklcl's questlou is pertinent. Every- 
thing else may look fair, but if this vital question receives a negative reply, all the 
other points of excellence count for nothing, or even tell against us in mockery of the 
one fatal flaw. The life may be comfortable ; the Church may be sound and orthodox, 
or popular and attractive ; the plan of work may be clever and original. But what is 
the use of all these pleasant features if they are to end in failure ? 

Vers. 18, 19.— 2%e broken covenant. In turning to Egypt for protection Zedekiah 
had broken faith with Nebuchadnezzar ; but he had done worse, for he had broken the 
covenant between God and the house of David. 

I. Ukfaithfulnesb to man IB DHrAiTHFULNESB TO GoD. All Bin against man it 
also sin against God. The second table of commandments lies upon the first, and a 
breach of the one involves a breach of the other. David confesses that he had'sinned 
against Ood, and God only (Ps. li. 4), though his crime was directly committed against 



CH. xvu. 1—24.] THE BOOK OP THE PEOPHET EZEKIBL. 807 

Uriah the Qittite. The penitent prodigal charges himself with having sinned against 
heaven as well as hefore his father (Luke xv. 18). God enters into all earthly arrange- 
ments. The oath is a direct call upon Crod to do this; but without any such solemn 
appeal Ood cannot but take note of all we say and do, and as the Guardian of truth 
and justice he will consider any earthly unfaithfulness as wrong against himself. 
II. Those who are pledged to the sebvicb of God are especiallt unfaithful 

TO EIU WHEN THEY ABE UNFAITHFUL TO THEIE FELLOW-MEN. Zedekiah WaS the king 

of a covenant nation, and his throne was bound by God's solemn covenant with David. 
He was, therefore, in an especial sense a servant of God. If the servant behaves ill in 
the world his Master must take note of the fact. It is a wrong against the Master, 
who is dishonoured by his shameful conduct. When a professedly Christian man shows 
a lack of integrity be rore the world, his sin is intensified by contrast with bis high 
profession. It is bad for the common person to be faithless, but when a knight of 
honoured title shows the same failure of character, he brings disgrace upon his order. 
If one who stands before men as a Christian proves himself to be dishonourable in 
business, he injures the holy Name of his Master, and he breaks faith with the God 
whom he hag promised to serve. 

in. Unfaithfulness to a covenant with God is a heinous sin. The Jews were 
peculiarly privileged ; therefore their sin was especially guilty. They were bound to 
fidelity by exceptional pledges; their disloyalty was, therefore, the more culpable. 
Christians now stand in the ancient position of the Jews. 1. Christians are peculiarly 
privileged. They not only receive the general mercies of God which all men may share. 
They are partakers of his choicest covenant blessings. Jesus Christ, who has pled°;ed 
the new covenant in his blood., has brought with it the highest blessings. For 
Christians to fall into sin is doubly guilty. 2. Christians are especially pledged. If 
we take the Christian name we incur the Christian obligations. The vows of God are 
then upon us. We are pledged to loyalty to Christ. It is no common sin to break 
rows of Christian service. The prophet called this sin in Israel adultery. It carries 
the shame and guilt of that outrage on honour. 

Vers. 22, 23. — Christ, the new Cedar, After words of darkness and ruin, there appears 
the wonderful Messianic prophecy of restoration and future blessings. Sometimes this 
prophecy is expressed in general terms ; but here the personal Messiah is distinctly pre- 
dicted under the image of a shoot taken from the fallen cedar. 

I. The planting or the new Cedab. 1. It is a cutting from the old cedar. 
That proud and once venerable tree has been cruelly torn by the fierce eagle. One of its 
topmost twigs has been carried away, for Jehoiachin has been taken to Babylon. But 
another shoot from the same tree is destined to a glorious future. Christ is of the stock 
of David. He is called Gk>d's Servant, " the Branch " (Zech. iii. 8). The people hailed 
Jesus as the " Son of David " (M&tt. zx. 30). Christ comes as a King, and he comes 
to fulfil God's ancient promises to David. He unites the present to the past, and 
accomplishes in himself what the throne of David had failed to attain. 2. It appears 
as a slender ttvig. It was said of the Christ, " He shall grow up before him as a tender 
plant, and as a root odt of a dry ground " (Isa. liil. 2). Jesus entered the world in the 
lowly estate of the infant ChUd of a poor woman, and his earthly life was one of 
humiliation and slight visible achievements. 3. /( is planted on a mountain. (1) At 
Zion. Christ appears on the holy hill of Zion. He was welcomed with hosannahs as he 
went up to Jerusalem.' His truth first shone out of Judaism, and for the benefit of the 
people of Zion. (2) In exaltation, Christ was exalted by God, although he presented a 
humble appearance to men. (3) In a conspicuous place. Christ appeared openly before 
men. His gospel is for the world. 

II. Teb gbowth of the new Cedab. 1, B is to grow in size. It shall bring 
forth boughs. The cutting becomes a cedar tree. The mustard seed grows into a great 
tree. Christ not only grew in stature, wisdom, and grace as a Child (Luke IL 14). 
He grew in power afterwards, being made perfect by the things that he suffered (Heb. 
y. 8, 9), and being exalted to the right hand of God on account of his great self-aacrifiee 
at the cross. Christ continues to grow in the extension of his kingdom, in the progress 
of the Church, which is hie body. 2. It is to be fruitful, " And bear fruit" TUs cedai 
ii to share the merits of the vine. Great as the monarch of Lebanon is it is to he 



308 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvu, 1—24 



fruitful as the tender plants of the vineyard. Christ is not only great and exalted, and ever 
growing in the power of his kingdom. He gives out grace. His fruit is for the healing 
of the nations. He is the Bread of life, and his people feed upon him. Christianity 
is not merely a big success, like Mohammedanism. It is a blessing to the world, as 
beneficent as it is victorious. The great Oriental monarchies were destructive, bringing 
a blast from the desert over the countries they conquered. The kingdom of heaven is 
healthful and fertilizing, promoting goodness, enterprise, civilization. We do not simply 
admire a great Lord in his solitary grandeur, like some awful, barren, Alpine peak. We 
are grateful to One who is as a fruitful tree. 3. It it to afford shelter. The birds are to 
roost in its branches, and take refuge from the storm under its foliage. So was it to be 
with the mustard tree (Matt. xiiL 31). (1) Christ is a Itefuge. (2) His shelter is /or 
all who need him, as under the cedar " shall dwell all fowl of every wing." 

Ver. 24. — The great reversal. The great tree is to be cast down and withered, while 
the lowly growth is to be planted on high, and is to flourish. This was true of 
Zedekiah and Christ, as of Saul the king and David the shepherd. It is recognized in 
the Magnificat (Luke L 52) ; for the lowly Mary of Nazareth is honoured, when the 
great families of Jerusalem are slighted. The principle that it illustrates is pointed 
out by Christ, who tells us not only the general truth that " the first 'shall be last, and 
the last first," but also its moral justification. " Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be 
abased, and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted " (Matt, xziii. 12). 

L The fact of the obeat reversal. 1. The Itumiliation of the great. Thia 
takes two forms. (1) Lowered, rank. The great cedar is to be cast down. Shame 
follows honour. (2) Exhausted resources. The green tree is dried up. Earthly 
prosperity is followed by misery, the fulness of resources by penury. 2. The exaltution 
of the low. This also takes two forms, corresponding to the humiliation. (1) Higher 
rank. The low tree is exalted, and the twig becomes a mighty cedar. . So the lowly 
Jesus becomes the great Christ, and the humble servant of Grod is raised to heavenly 
glory. (2) Improved condition. The dry tree flourishes. The once depressed good 
cause lifts up its head and becomes prosperous. This was seen in the growth and 
success of early Christianity after the shame of the cross, and the consequent depression 
of the earthly state of Christ's disciples;. Jesus Christ predicted a similar great reversal 
in the future judgment of the world. 

n. The cause of the qbeat betebsal. 1. It is attributed to Qod. He it ii 
who makes great, and he also makes low. The most lofty rank is not above the reach 
of his terrible hand of justice; the lowest estate is not beneath his condescension. The 
great sweep of providence embraces all men. 2. It is con ditioned by human character. God 
is not capricious. He does not grudge prosperity to his children. There is no Memesis 
threatening human success apart from that of justice against wrong-doing. Inuucent 
prosperity is not regarded with disfavour by God. The selfish envy with which the 
unfortunate are tempted to pursue their more happy brethren can find no justification 
in the ways of God. On the other hand, present misfortune is not in itself a ground 
for future favour, though it may be a plea for simple pity and needful mercy. The high 
are not cast down just because they are high, nor are the low exalted solely because they 
are low. Christ has given us the secret of the great reversal in the passage already 
quoted, viz. humiliation ia to be the punishment of self-seeking, and exaltation is to 
be the reward of self-sacrifice. That is the great lesson which St. Paul draws from the 
cross of Christ (Phil. ii. 4 — 11). 

IlL The becookition of the obeat betebsal. " All the trees of the field shall 
know," etc. God's providential judgment is public ; so will the great judgment be. 1. 
The shame of the fall of the great cannot be hidden. High reputations have been 
trampled in the mire. 2. The/o7»e of the exaltation of the low will not be kept secret. 
3. These facts contain warning lessons for the proud and self-seeking, and encourage- 
ment for the humble and unselfish. They are meant to be noted. 4. They glcrify 
God, who thus shows himself just and good, and mighty against the ttrong. 



OH. XVII. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 309 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 4, — " A city of merchants." An apt designation this of Babylon the great, the 
very centre and emporium of commerce in the East. The deportation of the chief men 
among the Jews from their own land to Mesopotamia is pictorially described under the 
similitude of the highest branch of the cedar of Lebanon carried by the great Assyrian 
eagle away Eastward " into a land of traffic " and set in " a city of merchants." The 
description of Babylon is applicable to the great centres of population in our own and 
other lands, which serve both to concentrate and to diffuse the products which consti- 
tute so large a part Of the wealth of the world, and which minister to human convenience 
and luxury. As an important factor in civilization, such cities should be considered in 
the light of reflection and religion. 

I. UOUMERCIAI. CITIES ABE AN EXPRESSION OF A DEEP-SEATED TBNDBNOT OF 

HUKAN NATURE. There are, indeed, impulses which estrange and isolate men ; but 
there are others which draw them together. We are by nature social ; we have natural 
sympathies ; we depend one upon another ; we only live intellectually and morally in 
virtue of our mutual intercourse. Not only so; men find their interest and pleasure in 
close associations of various kinds. It is to their mutual advantage to gather together 
for the interchange of services. Thus it is in accordance with laws imposed upon our 
constitution by the Maker of all that men gather together in cities. In such populous 
centres the busy and active, the laborious and the influential, find scope for the exercise 
of their powers. Craftsmen and tradespeople, the bees of the social hive, spend in 
town life almost the whole of their earthly existence. And even those whose vocation 
is more distinctively intellectual, and who prefer retirement and quiet, still do not allow 
themselves to be cut off from the busy haunts of men ; but ever and anon plunge, if but 
for a brief season, into the rapid, whirling tide of humanity that sweeps through their 
country's capital. 

II. COUMEBCIAL CITIES ARE THE SCENE OF YEBT VARIED SXFEBIENCES AND OF 

REMARKABLE FRICTION OF MIND WITH MIND. As Compared with those engaged in 
rural pursuits, the dwellers in cities are quick and enterprising. They are brought more 
frequ<«ntly into contact with one another, and each man meets daily a far richer variety 
of character. They are more ready to take in new ideas and to form new habits. In cities 
there are great contrasts. The life of the farm labourer and that of the country gentle- 
man are not so contrasted as the life of the artisan and that of the merchant. In cities 
wealth and luxury are side by side with poverty and wretchedness. The poor have 
fewer to care for them, and the rich have fewer natural claims and responsibilities. 
There is a rush and scramble for wealth and position, which renders a great city the 
natural theme of the cynic's sneer and the satirist's Invective. Yet beneath all this 
there is much in city life which cannot but be regarded with interest and admiration ; 
and the contempt which is felt for tpwnspeople is often superficial prejudice. 

IIL Commercial crriES abound with temptations to sin. There is a bad as 
well as a good side to city life. In the race for riches there are many opportunities for 
theft, peculation, embezzlement, and forgeiy, and the widespread desire for rapid enrich- 
ment furnishes motives to which too many sooner or later yield. In a vast popu- 
lation provision is made for amusement and excitement, and for vicious gratification, 
and in this whirlpool multitudes of the young and heedless and pleasure-seeking go 
down, never to emerge. There is in great cities a possibility of concealment, by wliich 
many are encouraged to form habits of self-indulgence and dissipation, from which they 
might in more favourable circumstances have been restrained by the gentle pressure of 
home influence and wholesome public opinion. No wonder that, when parents send a 
son to the metropolis to earn a living or to seek a fortune, their minds are distressed 
and anxious at the thought of the manifold temptations to which the child of many 
prayers is to be exposed. 

IV. Commercial cities aee the centres and boubces of great influence fob 
BOTH good and EVIL. A great capital, the seat of government, of literature, of manu> 
facture, of commerce, is often compared to the heart in the body, whence the streams of 
life flow constantly and regularly to reach the remotest extremity. In the great 
monanshies, empires, and republics of the world, how great a part has been playwl by 



310 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. xvn. 1— 24. 

the cities in which wealth and power hare been concentrated, and by which national 
policy has been so largely shaped 1 How could the history of mankind be written with- 
out reference to Memphis, to Nineveh, to Babylon, to Rome, to Constantinople, to Paris, 
to London? Intelligence and wealth, laxury and vice, patriotism and public spirit, 
law and reli^on, spread from the great centres of population, industry, and prosperity, 
and affect the remotest regions. 

V. COMMEROIAIi CITIES AFFORD ESPEOIAIi OPFOBT0NITIEB FOB WOBES OF BENEVOLENCE 

AND EVANGELIZATION. They abound in enterprise and public spirit, and these may be 
employed as truly in the enlightenment and improvement of men as in the acquisition 
of wealth. They abound in population, and furnish persons of every grade of natural 
and acquired qualificatiua for the several departments of Christian usefulness. They 
abound in wealth ; and material means are necessary for the conduct of educational, 
philanthropic, and missionary plans. They have abundant means of communicating 
with localities near and far, which it may be desired to reach and affect for good ; from 
them roads radiate to every part of the land, and ships sail to every port. These and 
other circumstances lead to the belief that our great cities will become in the future, 
even more than in the past, centres and ministers of blessing to mankind. — T. 

Vers. 5, 6. — Prosperity in adversity. In figurative languge Ezekiel describes the 
position of the remnant permitted by the monarch of Babylon to remain in the land 
of their fathers, and to pursue their industries in peace under their own rulers, enjoying 
the protection of the Eastern power. The lowly vine is suffered hy the mighty eagle 
to take root in the soil, to spread, and to bear fruit, unmolested and in a measure 
prosperous. The prophet is aware of the foolish and treacherous conduct of his 
countrymen, who, instead of accepting and acquiescing in their lot, are intriguing with 
the neighbouring state on the south, hoping that Egypt may come to their aid and deliver 
them from subjection to Babylon. A more false and foolish policy the helpless remnant 
could not have adopted ; and it was a policy Jehovah, the King of nations, did not suffer 
to be successful. Even in their political adversity it was open to them to enjoy some 
measure of peace and prosperity. Their plotting was against their own interests, their 
own well-being. 

I. A nation's humiliation is permitted by Divine peovidbnob. God raiseth up 
one, and setteth down another. It is a foolish and superficial view of political affairs 
which they take who attribute the rise and fall of nations to chance and accident. 
The Lord reigneth. There is wisdom and righteousness in his government of the 
world. 

IL National humiliation should be beoarded as a probation and a disciflinb 
roB BRionTBR DAYS. They who see the hand of God in what happens to them will not 
bo slow to believe that there is a purpose in human experience, and that this principle 
applies to communities as well as to individuals. There are lessons to be learnt in 
adversity which prosperity caunt)t teach. Schooled in the " waste, howling wilder- 
ness," Israel was made strong to enter and to possess the land of promise. The same 
principle has operated in the history of our own and of other nations. 

III, The eblativb prosperity which is possible even in homiliation mat be 

OHBCKBP AND DESTROYED BY SELFISHNESS AND TREACHERY. It Was the poUcy of the 

remnant patiently to wait for better times ; and it was their duty to observe the 
covenant into which they had entered with Babylon. The discontented vine which 
sought other patronage was to be plucked up and to wither. Increase of prosperity 
should not be sought by unlawful and forbidden means. 

IV. Submission and patient improvement op advantaqss may be the means of 
NATIONAL good. The subject sons of Abraham might not be eminent and majestic as 
the cedar of Lebanon. But they might be as the fruitful vine, planted in a well-placed 
and well guarded vineyard, which bears abundance of fruit, and does not enjoy its 
advantages and opportunities in Tain. — T. 

Vers. W— 21.— The sacredness of treaties. The Old Testament •bounds in illustra- 
tions of the bearing of religion upon national and corporate life. In this passage of 
prophecy Ezekiel rebukes his countrymen for their discontent under the Assyrian rule, 
■Dd for their treacherous intrigues with Egypt. Speaking in the name of the King ol 



CH. xvn. 1— 24] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 811 

kings, he upbraids them for deliberate infraction of a coyenant which tbej were boiind 
to observe. He shows them that political action may be sinful, and that, when saoh 
b the case, the Divine Buler will not suffer it to go impunished. 

L Tbb justice of God is discernibls in national oalauitiss. This was most 
•vident in the case of Judah and Israel, who by their defection and apostasy incurred 
the righteous displeasure of the Almighty Buler, and brought upon themselves the 
judgment beneath which, in the time of Ezekiel, they were smarting. The King of 
Babylon had come to Jerusalem, had taken the king thereof and the princes thereof, 
and had led them with him to Babylon ; he had takea of the king's seed, and had 
established him in authority over the remnant in the land, that the kingdom, though 
base, might stand. In all this the righteous hand of God was visible to every observant 
and reflecting mind. 

XL The mebot of God is disoebniblb n thb covenant between the oonquebobs 
AND THE conquebed. Judah would hare met with the fate she deserved had she been 
treated as an ordinary subject province. But God's providence ordered matters other- 
wise. The King of Babylon was disposed to deal favourably with the conquered sons of 
Judah. He made a cuvenant with Zedekiah, and took an oath of him. Thus some 
semblance of self-government was left with the vanquished. Although their chiefs 
were carried captive, those who were permitted to remain did so under the sovereignty 
of a member of the royal house. We are taught to see in this arrangement an evidence 
of the favour and forbearance of the Most High. 

III. The sanction of God bests upon national bnqagements solemnly undeb- 
TAKEN AND BATiFiED. An oath is an appeal to God, and he will not hold him guiltless 
that taketh his Name in vain. A nation may appeal to Heaven, as may an individual. 
Peoples come voluntarily into certain relations with each other in the great community 
of mankind. As surely as there is an Almighty Buler who sways a righteous sceptre 
over the nations, so surely does sacredness attach to those obligations which nations 
take upon themselves with regard to one another. They are not indifferent and trivial 
matters, but matters with which the moral life of nations is bound up. 

IV. The displbasube op God is upon those who violate solemn tbbaties. In 
language of truly prophetic indignation, the prophet upbraids the king and those 
who acted with him in secretly rebelling against the court of Babylon, to whose 
favour they owed whatever national existence was left to them, and with whom 
they had entered into sacred and binding treaty. " Shall he prosper? shall he escape 
that doeth such things? shall he break the covenant, and yet escape?" The 
Eternal regarded this conduct as a wrong, not so much to Babylon, as to himself. 
" Mine oath he hath despised ; my covenant he hath broken." " He hath trespassed 
against me." It is to be feared that this is a consideration which never enters into 
the minds of some rulers and statesmen ; they think of the effect of their conduct 
upon the great and mighty of this world, but they do not ask themselves how their 
falsehood and treachery are regarded by him who rules not in heaven only, but <m 
the earth. 

V. The judgments of God will oveetakb those who beqabd ihtbbbst and 
expedienot bathbe than principle and PB0MISE8. It was foretold that Judah should 
gain nothing by her deceptive and base conduct. Pharaoh should not deliver the people 
with his mighty army. Judah's conduct should be recompensed by Divine interposi- 
tion; the king who had rebelled should die in the midst of Babylon, and should not 
escape; the fugitives should fall by the sword, and they that remained should be 
scattered toward all winds. The lesson is one of universal import. Be they high or 
low, men who violate the compacts and disrecfard the engagements into which they 
have voluntarily and deliberately entered, shall not be unpunished, shall not escape 
the righteous judgments of the Judge of all the earth.— T. 

Vers. 22, 23. — The goodly cedar. These verses contain a prophecy which oa* 
scarcely be deemed susceptible of an interpretation which should refer it to the estab- 
lishment of the throne of any human, earthly sovereign. It is usually regarded as 
pointing on to the advent of the Messiah. This hope sprang up with irresistible power 
Ui the heart of Israel during the period of depression through which the people passed 
•8 a judgment for their defection, rebellion, and idolatry. The less of light the 



312 THE BOOK OF THE FBOPHET EZEKIEL. [oa. zth. l->24. 



present afforded, the more did the captWes and the conquered strain their eyes looking 
into the dim future. There were those who, like Isaiah and Ezekiel, were inspired to raise 
the courage and hopes of their coontryjnen by predicting the coming of a Divine 
Deliverer who should be raised up as a horn of utlration in the house of his father 
David. 

I. Chbist's obigin >bom a dibpibbd ahd offbessbd, tbt noM a botal, stock. 
The members of the royal house of David were, in the lifetime of Ezekiel, reduced to 
comparative feebleness and obscurity. Either in Eastern exile or in the half-deserted 
land of their fathers' splendour, they were a deserted and dejected race. Yet from 
them — from the highest branch of the high cedar — Christ according to the flesh was 
to come. 

n. Christ'b bblection and appointmemt thb token op God's fatoue to ma 
PEOPLE. The Messiah was " the Lord's Christ," and was set to be " a Light to lighten 
the Gentiles, and the Glory of Ghid's people Israel." The temporal sovereignty might 
be lost, but a spiritual sovereignty should be established. 

IIL Christ's exaltation, eminence, and olobt. The twig was to be planted 
upon " a high mountain and eminent " — in " the mountain of the height of Israel." 
The Son of God was indeed " a Plant of renown." Unto him was given a Name above 
every name, a kingdom ruling over all. He has become, and has remained for long 
centuries, the one great central Figure in the history of mankind. His kingdom is 
vaster and more glorious than the empire of Rome or of England — a kingdom over 
human hearts, over human society, over the moral life of man. 

IV. Chbist's office as the Shelter of all the nations, the Pboyision fob all 
THEIR SPIRITUAL NEED. The goodly tree is to " bear fruit," and " under it shall 
dwell all fowl of every wing." This metaphorical and poetical language portrays alike 
the extent and beneficence of the Saviour's spiritual reign on earth and over the children 
of men. His influence ever grows. By his bounty myriads are provided with spiritual 
food. Beneath his loving care men of every race find peace and protection, safety and 
life immortal. — ^T. 

Ver. 24, — The sovereignty of the Almighty Biiler. The Bible abounds in paradox ; 
and this for the simple reason that God does not judge and act as men judge and act, 
Man looketh upon the outward appearance, whereas God looks npon the heart. In 
many instances in Scripture history we find the younger preferred to the elder, the 
insignificant to the imposing. And God deals thus, not only with individuals, but 
with nations. He raiseth up one, and layeth low another. In the text this principle 
I is apparent in his treatment of Israel. The captives should be restored. Earthly 
sovereignty might pass away from the house of David, but the Lord and King of men 
was intended to spring, and did spring, ^m a stock which seemed dry and dead. The 
great nations of the East, once so splendid and powerful, have, with their monarchies, 
passed away. But from Judah sprang the Son of man, who is appointed to reign over 
the race which he redeemed from sin unto God. 

I. Divine providekob is to be recognized in the elevation and depression of the 
NATIONS. The changes which interest, amaze, and perplex the student of human 
history are not accidental ; they are wrought by laws imposed by the Divine Creator 
and Euler of all the earth. 

II. Divine pbovidenoe is esfeoially obbebvable in the disappointment of 
HUMAN expectations AND THB ovEBTURNiNO OF HUMAN PLANS. It is indeed a common 
proverb, " Nothing is certain but the unexpected." The fortunes of nations are beyond 
our prediction. Men admire the high tree ; and it is brought low. They despise the 
low tree ; and it is exalted. They predict and expect great things of the green tree ; 
and it is dried up. They account the dry tree as fit only for burning; and lo! it 
flourishes. 

III. Divine providence is bt no means directed by unreasonino oapeioe. The 
purposes of God may be hidden from us; but we may be assured that they are all 
inspired and controlled by infinite reason and flawless righteousness. Nothing occurs 
among the nations which the Omnipotent does not foresee and permit, which he will 
not overrule for his glory. 

IV. Divine providence so obdebb the chanqeb ahonq the nations that honous 



OH. xvn. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 313 

MAT BE TAKEN IBOH HAS ASD HAT BB ATTRIBUTED TO GOD HIMBELF. He will be 

glorified by the work of his own hands ; and will not give his hononr to another. 
Umyersal history, when complete, shall be a full and manifest witness to the wisdom 
and to the benevolence of God. — T. 

Vers. 1 — ^21. — The parable of the vine. Sin of every sort has a baneful power of 
blinding the mind of the transgressor. The thief does not perceive the criminality of 
his act. He complains only of the law which is so severe. The drunkard does not 
perceive the culpability of his course. May he not order his life as he pleases? So is 
it in every case — even in the case of secret sin. The moral sense is blinded, infatuated, 
indurated. In all such instances some ingenious method is required to convince the 
judgment of its wrong-doing. This can often be done by means of a parable. The 
persons addressed perceive the incongruity or the folly set forth in the picture, before 
they perceive that it applies to themselves — condemn their own conduct. This is 
Ezekiel's purpose in this chapter.. 

I. The YOXTsa bboot flakted. In this chapter we have both parable and interpre- 
tation ; hence there is no scope for conjecture touching the meaning. The tender twig 
is said to have been plucked from a cedar in Lebanon. For what Lebanon was to 
Palestine in natural fertility and glory, Jerusalem was in political eminence. What 
the cedar is among trees, royal princes are among the population. The most promising 
young men of the royal house had been transplanted to Babylon (see Dan. i. 1, 2). 
Every endeavour was made to train them for usefulness and eminence. 

II. A FERTILE SITUATION. It was planted in "a fruitful field" — ^placed "by great 
waters." All that could minister to the growth of the tree was provided. The out- 
ward advantages conferred upon Israel were exceptionally favourable. God had dealt 
with them as he had not dealt with any other nation. Even when the wave of 
invasion swept over them, he did not allow it at the first to overthrow them com- 
pletely. The conqueror still made terms with them, which, if honourably maintained 
on their part, might have led to a recovery of independence and honour. The God of 
heaven was still their Friend, and it was in his heart to show them every possible 
favour. No enemy was so formidable as their own selves. 

III. Robust qbowth. " It grew and became s spreading vine.'' " It brought forth 
branches, and shot forth sprigs." It had within itself abundance of life. Interpreted 
politically, this must mean that Israel had statesmen and warriors competent for the 
administration of her national affairs. She had men of intellectual gifts — far-sighted 
prophets — ^young men of courage and energy. As a nation, Israel had not sunk into 
the weakness and decrepitude of old age. It was not from any process of natural 
decay that calamity had overtaken her. The secret of her downfall must be sought 
in her moral delinquencies — in her want of loyalty to God. 

IV. Hbb njDBBTBDNESs. For this fresh trial of her integrity and fruitfulness, the 
King of Israel was under obligation to the King of Babylon, here symbolized by the 
first eagle. Israel had acknowledged this obligation. It had become a matter of 
international treaty and compact. That Israel's nationality and existence had not, at 
once, been terminated by the Eastern conqueror was due solely to his clemency. The 
defeated kingdom had allotted to it another lease of existence, another chance o£ 
meriting renown. " It was planted in a good soil, by great waters," and the enjoyment 
of this privilege was a pure favour. Hence arose a new and distinct obligation — ^an 
obligation admitted and defined. 

V. Flagbamt tkbaohebt. It is not consistent with the rules of literary oonposition 
to speak of a vine as guilty of treachery. But a teacher of religion is more concerned 
with the substance of his communication than with the form. If only Ezekiel could 
bring home to Israel's conscience the greatness of her sin he would easily forgive 
himself mere literary blemish. Earthly metaphors were incompetent to express all the 
truth. The violation of a positive covenant was a flagrant offence. We can conceive 
of none greater, especially as it was a covenant made in the name of God. And it was 
as foolish as it was flagrant. Did he suppose that Nebuchadnezzar would not resent 
the insult and avenge his outraged honour ? Wrong-doing is always bad policy, as 
inexpedient as immoral. If man cannot trust the oath and compact of a fellow-man, 
all the bands of society would be loosed, and this globe would be a perpetual scene of 



314 THE BOOK Of THEPEOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvu. 1— 24 

anarchy, war, and misery. Mere might would always reign, and Tiolence would tw the 
only sceptre. 

YI. HiYJSB iHDiaiiAnoH. God himself appears upon the scene, and arms himself 
against the offender. Since the King of Israel had sworn, in God's name, to observe 
the covenant, the honour of God was involved. Therefore he will vindicate his own 
majesty. " As I live, saith the Lord God, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and 
my covenant that he hath broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head." 
As the interests of a nation are greater than those of a private person, so the violation 
of a national compact is a sin of blackest hue. It was not simply his own pleasure 
and advantage Zedekiah was imperilling, but the interests and the lives of all his 
subjects. Therefore God himself was constrained to leave his secret habitation, and 
appear as the Avenger of crime. 

YIl. Complete debtbuotion. " All his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the 
sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds." A series of lesser 
chastisements had been employed, but had proved unavailing to subdue the pride of 
Israel. Loss, defeat, public humiliation, dismemberment of empire, had in succes- 
sion been tried. But the medicine had not taken effect. A more drastic measure must 
DOW be employed. The kindness, patience, and long-suifering of God are signally dis- 
played ; and it ought to impress our hearts most deeply to observe with what reluctance 
he unsheaths the avenging sword. But Justice must have her due. Our God cannot 
be trifled with, for be is Judge of all. — ^D. 

Vers. 22 — 24. — Spring-time after vHnter, After a storm comes a calm. It is a joy 
for Qoi to turn from " his strange work " of vengeance to his ordinary path of benevo- 
lence. Although he is compelled to cut down the barren tree, he allows life to sprins; 
again from . the root. His course of destruction is only temporary, and beyond it 
purposes of kindness bud and blossom. The cloud that hides his permanent design 
shall presently pass, and his Name shall be cnblazoned in universal renown. As a 
word from him started into being the material globes, so a word tcom him shall " create 
new heavens and a new earth." The promiseil good is imaged in a prosperous tree. 

I. A TENDER SHOOT PLANTED. " I wiU take the highest branch of the high cedar, 
and will set it." This is but a variation of Isaiah's prediction that a rod should spring 
out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch spring from his root. As the cedar was the 
most renowned among their trees, so the dynasty of David was the most illustrious of 
their princely families. Of this ancestral tree should the Messiah spring. Commence- 
ments are always full of interest. They are pregnant with hope. The appearance of ft 
new child awakens the imagination ; much more the opening of a new epoch, the found* 
ing of a new kingdom. In this case the interest is immeasurably enhanced because 
God himself is the immediate Actor. " I, saith Jehovah, I will do it" 

II. The garden-plot ohosen. " In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant 
it." Mountains are not the best localities in which to plant trees. They flourish 
better if rooted in shady valleys or on alluvial plains. But, inasmuch as the reference 
here is to the cedars of Lebanon, it is seemly that a mountain locality should be chosen. 
Still more is this appropriate when we consider that the language is metaphorical, and 
carries a spiritual meaning. The mountain here points to Zion — ^the cradle of the 
Messianic kingdom. " Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord 
from Jerusalem." We are not to separate between this predicted king and his match- 
less kingdom. The Church " is his body, the fulness of him that fiUeth all in all." 
In Jerusalem this new empire was founded ; from the literal Mount Zion the first 
heralds and ambassadors went forth. And the Church is a moral elevation. It stands 
above the common level of human life. It holds a conspicuous place in the earth. 
Still is it true that " the Lord is King in Zion." 

in. Its orowth and beauty. " It shall bring forth boughs . . . and be a goodly 
cedar." Prom a small beginning it shall steadily develop and increase. Nature is 
prolific in growth, especially in favoured places ; but this growth shall transcend nature 
—it shall awaken on all sides surprise and admiration. The fulfilment has been equal 
to the promise. Prom a feeble and despised beginning it has become already a splendid 
empire. It has sent its boughs into every land ; and, like the drooping branches of the 
banyan tree, these have taken root and commenced a new life. It has sent ita plastie 



oa. XTn. 1— 24.] THX! BOOK OF THB PBOPHirr KZElCTWr* Si 5 

influence into every department and province of human life. It b t^ymmetrical in its 
proportions, graceful in outline, replete with beanty — " a goodly cedar." 

IV. Its fbuitfuuiebs. It shall " bear fruit." It is said of the tree of life, seen in 
the Apocalyptic vision, that it hore twelve manner of " fruits, and yielded her fruit 
each month." Of this goodly tree it may with truth be said that it yields an infinite 
variety of fruits. It would be difficult to enumerate them. Knowledge, wisdom, 
pardon, hope, joy, peace, gentleness, meekness, temperance, forbearance, strength, love, 
conquest over sin, victory over deatli, — these are a few of the fruits gathered from this 
generous tree. As years roll on, the productiveness of this tree, instead of diminishing, 
increases. There is no human want that cannot here find a suitable lupply. 

v. Its woeld-widb usefulness. " Under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing." 
This description is parallel to the language of our Lord himself, when he likened his 
kingdom to a grain of mustard seed, which, having sprung into a tree, all the fowls of 
the heavens lodge in the branches thereof. Under the sceptre of King Jesus every 
useful thing is sheltered— childhood is protected, womanhood is honoured, good 
legislation spreads, commerce prospers, art and science grow, every beneficent institu- 
tion is nurtured. Beneath the aegis of this gracious Monarch human life is enhanced in 
value, lands are recovered from desolation. Music learns to tune her lyre, international 
concord abounds. The world of man is gradually revolutionized and beautified. 

y I. The cebtaintt of the event. " I the Lord have spoken and have done it." 
Otoi'a word is equivalent to a deed; his promise is equal to a performance. With him 
a volition is omnipotent ; therefore he speaks of thmgs that are not as though they 
were. At the Creation a single word was sufficient. " He spake, and it was done ; " 
"By the breath of the Lord were the heavens made." So in the redemption of the 
world a word was enough. Heaven and earth may pass away, but his word— never ! 
When the Son of God walked our earth, a word from him si^ficed for every occasion. 
If he spake, the tempest slept, the fig tree withered, disease vanished, the grave gave 
up its dead, vice was conquered. He smiles, and men live. He frowns, and the earth 
quakes. If only God has spoken, we may wait with confidence and calmness for the 
performance. 

VII. The event shall bsino universal honoub to Jehovah. " All the tries of 
the field shall know that I the Lord " have done it. In other words, all kings and 
statesmen shall learn that I Jehovah am supreme — am King over all mankind. " By 
me kings rule ; " "He putteth down one, and setteth up another." And lias not this 
prophecy been fulfilled ? Has not faith in idols ceased among most of the civilized 
nations? Has not our God obtained for himself great renown? There is a more 
intell^ent belief in God to-day than ever there has been in the past ; and this admira- 
tion of God grows and strengthens. The number of real atheiiits is small ; they we 
the imits. Men of intelligence and culture confess that ther« Is, behind all the 
machinery of the visible world, an Unseen Power — the hand of the wonder-working 
God! Waves of scepticism may now and again pass over the surface of hnman 
thought; but these are soon spent; and when they are past, there is seen the solid 
rock of intelligent belief and reverent faith. His Name shall eventually shine resplendent 
as the noonday sun. — ^D. 

Vers. 1—21. — A paraMie letting forth of the relatione </ Judah to BdbyUm and 
Egypt. " And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Son of man, put forth a 
riddle, and speak a parable," etc. Let us notice — 

L The pabable and its interfbetation. It would be unwise to attempt to fix a 
definite meaning to every minute feature of the parable; and its chief features are 
interpreted for us by Ezekiel. The great eagle is intended to represent the King of 
Babylon, and, being a royal bird, it is fitly chosen for that purpose. Its " great wings 
and long pinions " indicate the wide extent of Nebuchadnezzar's dominions. And the 
fulness of its feathers and their divers colours denote the great number of his subjects 
and their various races and tongues. Lebanon sets forth Jerusalem, and is perhaps 
chosen for that purpose because it is the proper home of the cedar. The top, or lofty 
crown, of the cedar (ver. 4) represents the princes of the royal house (ver. 12); the 
topmost of the young twigs, Jehoiachin, the youthful and rightful King of Judah j 
and the "land of traffic" into which they were carried by Nebuchadnezzar was 



816 THE BOOK OF THE PBOFHET EZEEIEL. [oh. xvii. 1— 24 

Babylon. By "the leed of the land" (rer. 6) is meant Zedekiah, the uncle of 
Jehoiachin, whom the Chaldean monarch set upon the throne at Jerusalem, and who 
was to be, not ai a great and stately cedar, but as a vine needing support, ^et flourishing 
and fruitful But another eagle, great, yet inferior to the former one, is introduced, 
and this represents Egypt wtbylon is the great eagle, Egypt is only a great eagle. 
Now, Zedekiah had taken an oath of fealty to Nebuchadnezzar, but notwithstanding 
that, he turned to Egypt, seeking an alliance in order that he might become independent 
of the Babylonian power. Sudh an alliance was actually formed; and by reason 
thereof Zedekiah was to be brought to ruin as a vine plucked up by the root*. 

II. Teb: lessons which it aodbgbsgd to thb Jews of the pbofhet's dat. 1. The 
folly of entering into alliance with Egypt. The great aim of this prophecy was to keep 
the Jews from forming such an alliance. It was communicated between the sixth 
month of the sixth year (oh. viii. 1) and the fifth month of the seventh year (ch. xx. 1) 
of Jehoiachin's captivity, or of Zedekiah's reign. The alliance with Egypt was not 
actually formed until the close of the eighth or the beginning of the ninth year of his 
reign (Josephus, ' Ant.,' x. 7. 3). To prevent the formation of that alliance, Ezekiel 
exhibits the folly thereof. Nebuchadnezzar had not treated the conquered Jews with 
rigour or severity. He had rather dealt with them with marked moderation. He did 
not attempt to destroy their nationality, but simply to keep them a subject kingdom 
(ver. 14). They might have grown and prospered in the conditions and circumstances 
in which they were placed (vers. 6, 6, 8). Prudence would have dictated the main- 
tenance of their fealty to the Chaldean monarch. " Jerusalem might have remained the 
head of the Babylonian province of Judah, and the temple o( Jehovah continued 
standing, had Zedekiah possessed wisdom and firmness enough to remain true to bis 
allegiance to Babylon." And no insigniScant measure of strength and prosperity might 
have been theirs. But what real benefit could they reasonably hope for by an alliance 
with Egypt, which would bring down upon them the hostility of the Chaldeans ? 
2. 77ie tin of entering into allianee with Egypt. It involved base treachery towards 
Nebuchadnezzar. The prophet speaks of it as despising the oath and breaking the 
covenant which Zedekiah had made with that monarch. Speaking in the spirit of 
that alliance as an accomplished thing, he says, " He hath despised the oath by breaking 
the covenant; and behold, he had given his hand, and yet hath done all these things." 
Covenant-breaking is classed by St. Paul amongst the very worst of sins (Bom. i. 31) ; 
while one of the features in the inspired portrait of a saint is that ** he sweareth to his 
own hurt, and changeth not" (Ps. xv. 4). How base, then, would be the treachery of 
Zedekiah, who had sworn to his own advantage, if he should violate that covenant I 
Moreover, an alliance with Egypt would involve profane disregard of God, in whose 
Name the oath had been made. " Nebuchadnezzar had made him swear by God " 
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 13) ; and to break that oath would be to despise the Divine Being. 
" It is not only that every oath," as Scbr5der says, " and hence also this oath, is of a 
religious character, and that the despising of it necessarily compromised the Gh)d of 
Israel in the eyes of the heathen; but still further, considering the clemency of 
Nebuchadnezzar in making such a covenant, as Jehovah's instrument, Jehovah's 
goodness was turned into lasci viousness." 3. JJie ruinoutne»$ ef entering into alliance 
with Egypt. As a consequence, the kingdom should be destroyed as a vine plucked up 
by the roots (vers. 9, 10). Zedekiah himself should die in the midst of Babylon 
(ver. 16). Egypt would prove powerless to help them in the time of their sore distress 
(ver. 17). And (Jod himself would go forth against them to avenge his oath that 
Zedekiah had despised, and his covenant that he had broken (vers. 19 — 21). Yet, 
notwithstanding these earnest remonstrances and solemn warnings, and those of the 
Propihet Jeremiah also, Zedekiah entered into the forbidden alliance with Egypt, and 
despised the sacred oath which he had sworn unto Nebuchadnezzar. And yet 
" Zedekiah," to quote the words of Mr. Aldis Wright, " was a man not so much bad at 
heart as weak in wilL He was one of those unfortunate characters, frequent in history, 
like our own Charles I. and Louis XVI. of Prance, who find themselves at the head 
of affairs during a great crisis, without having the strength of character to enable them 
to do what they know to be right, and whose infirmity becomes moral guilt. The 

Srinces of his courts as he himself pathetically admits in his interview with Jeremiah, 
escribed in oh. xxxviiL, had him completely under their influtmcB. 'Against them ' 



«H. xTn. 1— 24.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 317 

be complains, 'it is not the king that can do anything'" (Dr. Smith's 'Bible 
Dictionary,' art. " Zedekiah "). So he violated his oath of allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar, 
and entered into league with Egypt. And the dread consequences of such conduct 
announced in our text were terribly accomplished (cf. 2 Kings xxv. 1 — 21 ; Jer. 
lii. 4— 30). 

III. The mnvEBSAL ahb permanent teacbinq of the histobt. 1. The instability 
of earthly pomp and power, greatness, and grandeur. Mighty kings have often passed 
from the throne into exile or the duns;eon. And kingdoms once strong and stately as 
a cedar of Lebanon have been completely rooted up or out down. Such was the case 
with the kingdom of Judah. Abounding in vigour and prosperity in the days of David 
and of Solomon, it was much weakened by different causes and on various occasions, 
•nd at this time was fast hastening to its complete overthrow. 

" Xhns changing empires wane and wax. 
Are founded, flourish, and decay." 

2. The chief came of the decline and fall of kings and kingdomt it moral. Sin had 
already made an end of the kingdom of Israel, and sent her people into exile. Sin had 
deprived the kingdom of Judah of most of its ancient prestige and power. And it and 
its king were ruined through the base treachery of that king towards Nebuchadnezzar, 
to which treachery he was incited by the princes of the court. " It is an abomination 
to kings to commit wickedness : for the throne is established by righteousness ; " " Take 
away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteous- 
ness ; " " Righteousness exalteth a nation : but sin is a reproach to any people." The 
luxurious self-indulgence of the rich, the cruel oppression of the poor, the greed of 
territory, the delight in war, the prevalence of vice, — these are the causes of the over- 
throw of nations. 3. The heinousness of the tin of disregcvrding solemn oaths and 
covenants. This is frequently done in international relations, as though it were quite 
justifiable. " Princes and politicians are apt to trifle with solemn oaths and treaties," 
says Scott, " and to devise specious pretences for violating them : but the Lord will not 
hold them guiltless who thus take his Name in vain ; and few of them will be able to 
plead more plausibly for perfidy and prying than Zedekiah might have done, against 
whom these awful threatenings were denounced for breaking bis covenant with the 
King of Babylon, and despising the oath sworn to him." " Think not to whom, but 
remember by whom, thou hast sworn an oath." 4. The mutations in the kingdoms of 
this world are aU tubordinated in the providence of God for the promotion of the pro- 
gress of the kingdom of Jesus Christ. As soon as Jehovah by his prophet has announced 
the overthrow of Zedekiah and the destruction of the kingdom of Judah, he at once 
proceeds to announce the establishment of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus (vers. 23 — 24). 
Before the setting up of that kingdom in our world all events were made to contribute 
to its inauguration. And since then all human Mstory has been controlled by God for 
its growth and increase. And it is destined to advance and extend until it universally 
prevails. " The kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of 
his Christ : and he shall reign for ever and ever." 

"His Name shall endnre for ever ; 
His Name shall be con tinned as long as the nui: 
And men shall be blessed in him ; 
AU nations shall call him blessed." 

W.J. 

Vers. 6^10. — Diicontent and its disastroui development. " He took also of the seed 
of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field," etc. Explain the parable as far as ii 
necessary to make application of the text clear. 

I. The condition allotted to us in the Divine providence is good for us, and 
ueuALLT AFF0ED8 SCOPE FOB PR0OBES8. " He took also of the seed of the land, and 
planted it in a fruitful field," etc. (vers. 5, 8). Zedekiah King of Judah is meant by 
" the seed of the land." He was set upon the throne by Nebuchadnezzar King ol 
Babylon, and took an oath of fealty to him. In so doing Nebuchadnezzar was the 
nnconscioui agent of Divine providence. And the condition in which Zedekiah wai 
placed was • good one, and favourable to progress. But is there for every one • condi- 



318 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xvii. 1—24. 

tion allotted by God ? Has he appointed the station and place even of the obscure 
and feeble? We argue that such ia the case, because: 1. The providence of God is 
unlTersal, including in its vast operations the great and the small, the high and the low. 
Every person and every event is comprehended in the great plan of the Supreme Buler, 
Without a plan such as thla his providential government could not possibly succeed. 
And it is both unscriptural and unphilosophical to look upon that government as deal- 
ing only with great things. It is unscriptural, as we see from Matt. vi. 26 — 30 ; 
X. 29 — 31. And it is unphilosophical. " Must not the smallest links be as necessary 
for maintaining the continuity as the greatest ? Great and little belong to our little- 
ness ; but there is no great and little to God." 2. The sacred Scriptures reveal the 
care of God for every person — not only for the great and noble, but for the obscure and 
lowly. He distributes to some men one talent, to others five ; and he looks for the 
right employment of the one as well as of the five. In fact, the Most High manifests 
special interest in the weak and the poor and the unregarded (cf. 1 Cor. i. 26 — 29 ; 
Jas. iL 6). 3. This truth is confirmed by the material creation of God. That creation 
is one grand whole, to the completeness of which every portion is essential. The system 
of the universe is, " in fact, so perfect," says Bushnell, " that the loss or displacement 
of any member would fatally derange the general order. If there were any smallest 
star in heaven that had no place to fill, that oversight would beget a disturbance which 
no Leverrier could compute ; because it would be a real and eternal, and not merely casual 
or apparent disorder. One grain more or less of sand would disturb or even fatally 
disorder the whole scheme of the heavenly motions. So nicely balanced, and so care- 
fully hung, are the worlds, that even the grains of their dust are counted, and their 
places adjusted to a corresponding nicety. There is nothing included in the gross, or 
total sum, that could be dispensed with. The same is true in regard to forces that are 
apparently irregular. Every particle of air is moved by laws of as great precision as 
the laws of the heavenly bodies, or, indeed, by the same laws; keeping its appointed 
place, and serving its appointed use. . . . What now shall we say of man ? Noblest 
of all creatures, and closest to God, as he certainly is, are we to say that his Creator 
has no definite thoughts concerning him, no place prepared for him to fill, no use 
for him to serve, which is the reason of his existence?" For these reasons we con- 
clude that God has allotted a place and duty for each of us ; and that place is best 
for us. It is that which infinite wisdom and kindness have appointed ; and is there- 
fore best suited to the end which God designs in us and for us. And our condi- 
tion usually, like that of Zedekiah, admits of progress. From the smallest hamlet 
there is a way to the great metropolis. And the obscurest and meanest lot affords 
scope for fidelity and diligence and advancement. 

U. Man is fbone not to be content wtth the position allotted to him bt 
Divine pbotidence. Zedekiah was not content. The kingdom had actually made 
some progress under him. " It grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature," etc. 
(▼er. 6). Further progress was possible to him. At the very least, " he might have 
kept the fragments of the kingdom of Jndah together, and maintained for some genera- 
tions longer the worship of Jehovah." But he and the princes of his court were not 
content with this. Judah had formerly been an independent and prosperous and power- 
ful kingdom: why should it now be subject to Babylon? Why should they not 
discover or devise means for recovering their national independence ? Thus we are kpt 
to fail as regards contentment. We look at the bright side of our neighbour's lot in 
life, and at the dark side of our own, and become dissatisfied and restless. We long for 
the gifts, the advantages, and the circumstances of others, and in so doing we depreciate 
the good which we actually possess. We crave freedom from some hindrance or 
infirmity; we are eager for larger prosperity or speedier progress ; we chafe under our 
restraints, and are impatient for the realization of our wishes, and are heartily discon- 
tented with our present circumstances and condition. But, it may be asked, is man to 
sink into ignoble content, never wishing to increase his attainments, to advance in his 
character, or to improve his circumstances ? Certainly not. Such a state of mind cui 
hardly be called contentment. It is more akin to indolence and slothfulness ; and it 
leads to stagnation and ruin. The true contentment of man is the contentment of a 
being created for progress. But such progress should not be based upon discontent 
with our present conoition, and unfaithfulness iq our present duties. That man only 



on. xvu. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 319 

is fit for a greater position who makes the beat use of his present position. "A 
man proves himself fit to go higher who shows that he is faithful where he is. A 
man that will not do well in his present place, because he longs to be higher, is 
fit neither to be where he is nor yet above it; he is already too high, aDd should 
be put lower." "Hence it was," as Bushnell says, "that an apostle required his con- 
verts to abide each one in that calling wherein he was called; to fill his place till he 
opens a way, by filling it, to some other ; the bondman to fill his house of bondage 
with love and duty, the labourer to labour, the woman to be a woman, the men to show 
themselves men, all to acknowledge God's hand in their lot, and seek to co-operate 
with that good design which he most assuredly cherishes for them." 

III. When man is not oontent with the condition allotted to him bt 
Divine pbovidenoe, he is fbone to use unlawful measubes to alter teat 
OOMDITION, Thus did Zedekiab in seeking an alliance with Egypt. " There was also 
another great eagle with great wings and many feathers," etc. (ver. 7). He had 
solemnly sworn fealty to Nebuchadnezzar for himself and the people under him. If 
there was anything in his circumstances or condition which )ie wished to he altered, he 
should have applied to Nebuchadnezzar, not to Pharaoh. Yet in his discontent, and 
incited by his princes, he sought an alliance with the King of Egypt, violated the sacred 
oath which he had sworn unto the King of Babylon, and rebelled against him. Sup- 
posing that rebellion had been successful, instead of the ruinous failure that it was, it 
would still have been a great wrong, because it would have been achieved by dishonour- 
able and sinful means. Should discontent ever prompt us to use ways and instruments 
that are not upright and honourable for the altering of our condition, we may be quite 
Bure that that discontent is wicked . When discontent becomes strong and active, we 
grow impatient of the evolution of the Divine purposes concerning us, and are tempted 
to break from our submission to the guidance and control of Clod's providence, and to 
take the ordering of our life into our own hands. And if we will take the helm of our 
life out of Qod's hands into our own, he will not compel us to yield to his guidance. 
Moreover, if we will employ questionable means to accomplish our desires when we 
cannot realize those desires otherwise, we may do so ; but it will be to our own injury. 

IV. The use of unlawful measubes to altbe oub condition will onlt bbndbb 
that condition wobsb". So it was with Zedekiah. " Thus saith the Lord God ; 
Shall it prosper?" etc. (vers. 9, 10). Zedekiah entered into alliance with Egypt, 
rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, who came and besieged Jerusalem, and after 
the people had suffered unutterable miseries by famine and pestilence, the city was 
taken, the temple was destroyed; Zedekiah, who attempted escape by flight, was 
captured and brought before the King of Babylon at Biblah, where his sons were 
■lain before his eyes ; then his eyes were put out, he was carried captive into Baby- 
lon, and died in prison in that land (Jer. lii. 1 — 11). Such was the disastrous 
development of his discontent. And still, if unchecked, discontent leads to ruinous 
issues, robbing the life of peace and progress, and conducting it to darkness and 
failure. If we will take the management of our life out of God's hands into our 
own, we shall certainly come into difBculties and trials, and perhaps even into ruin. 
We have neither knowledge nor wisdom enough to order our lives aright. "The 
way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps;" 
" Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and not upon thine own understanding : in all 
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths." " Be not ambitious to do 
the highest work, the grandest work, but the worlt God gives you to do— be it the 
meanest service, be it what others call drudgery. You may make it beautiful by the 
spirit in which you perform it. Strive not after the 'many things,' but after the ' one 
thing needful;' and remember, every part assi^jned you by (Jod is a good part— be it 
the servant's part or the mistress's, the teacher's part or the scholar's, the wife's part 
or the maid's, — the part of action or of suffering, of toil or of tears, of speech or of 
silence." " And be content with such things as ye have : for himself hath said, I will 
in no wise fail thee, neither will I in any wise forsake thee." — W. J. 

Vers. 22—24. — The planting andprogiess of the kingdom of Christ, "Thus saith 
the Lord God ; I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar," etc. Intro- 
^Mcfion. The delightful tranaition from stern tbreateninga to gracious promiaea; from 



320 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEEIEU [oa. rra. l-~24. 

the destruction of the enfeebled and subject kingdom of Zedekiali to the eatAblishmeiit 
of the mighty and majestio kingdom of the Messiah. 

I. The PLANTiNa of the kinodou or Chbist. " Thus aaith the Lord Ctoi ; I will also 
take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it," etc. (ver. 22). Notice: 
1. The Person by whom thig kingdom was planted. The Lord Jehovah declares that 
he himself will plant the tender shoot out of which the new kingdom is to grow. 
He comes forward "as the rival of the King of Babylon," or in complete contrast 
tu that monarch. (1) Nebuchadnezzar cut off the top shoot of the ceHar when he 
dethi oned Jeboiachin ; Jehovah will plant the top shoot in the Person of Jesus Christ. 
(2) Nebuchadnezzar carried his top shoot into Babylon ; Jehovah will plant his " in 
the mountain of the height of Israel" (3) When Nebuchadnezzar planted Zedekiah a 
king, it was only as a vine, and with the design of keeping it low ; when Jehovah plant) 
the Messiah a King it is as a cedar, that it may grow into might and majesty. "1 will 
alsu take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and will set it," etc. " This /is of 
powerful import, as the Speaker is no other than the Lord Jehovah, the Almighty, 
the purely absolute Being, whom no created thing can resist." 2. The Person in whom 
this kingdom was planted. The tender twig from the top of the cedar denotes the Lord 
Jesus, and the cedar denotes (as in ver. 3) the house or fomily of David. The pro- 
))hecy looks back to Isa. zi. 1, " There shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of 
Jesse, and a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit." There is, perhaps, a reference also 
to Isa. liii. 2, " He grew up before him as a tender plant, and as a toot out of a dry 
ground." " It is Messiah as an individual," says Fairbaiin, " that is here indicated ; 
first, as a tender scion of the house of David, in the direct and proper line, then grown 
into a stately tree ; and, finally, risen to the highest place of honour and power and 
glory. But the Messiah, who was to appear on earth only for the sake of the Divine 
kingdom, could not be regarded as apart from the kingdom itself; its fortunes mast 
stand inseparably bound up with his history, and partake along with it of evil or of 
good." This kingdom cannot exist apart from its glorious King. Christianity is 
inseparable firom Christ. 3. The place in which this kingdom was planted. " I will 
plant it upon an high mountain and eminent : in the mountain of the height of Israel 
will I plant it." The mountain thus described is Mount Zion, as will be seen by a 
comparison of this place with ch. xz. 40. Yet not because of its natural height is it 
thus spoken of, but because of its spiritual pre-eminence. So also in Ps. xlviii. 2, 
" Beautiful for elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion," etc. And in 
Isa. ii. 3, " Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusa- 
lem." Mount Zion signifies the seat of the throne of the Divine King. " I have set 
my King upon my holy hill of Zion " (Ps. ii. 6). And from Jerusalem the extension 
of this kingdom began. 

II. The pbogeess of the einqdom of Chbist. " And it shall bring forth boughs, and 
bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar," etc. 1. Its progress wiU le productive of benefit 
to men. It will bring forth boughs and leaves for the shelter of men. "In the shadow 
of the branches thereof shall they dwell." The idea of finding shelter and safety in 
the Lord is frequently and variously expressed in the Scriptures. " How precious is 
thy loving-kindness, God 1 And the children of men take refuge under the shadow 
of thy wings ; " " Thou hast been a Stronghold to the poor, a Stronghold to the needy in 
his distress, a Refuge from the storm," etc. (Isa. xxv. 4) ; " And a man shall be as an 
hiding-place from the wind," etc. (Isa. xxxii. 2). There is assured safety under the 
government of this gracious ami almighty King. " My people shall abide in a peace- 
able habitation, and in sure dwelUngs, and in quiet resting-places." But this tree 
" shall bear fruit " also. The fruit is the saving power and grace which proceed from 
Christ. The subjects of his kingdom find sustenance as well as shelter in their King. 
He is made unto them " Wisdom from God, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and 
Redemption." He gives the living water, which springs up unto eternal life within 
those who receive him as their Saviour and King (John iv. 13, 14). And he is the 

Bread of life, whereof if any man eat he shall live for ever (John vi. 32 51). The 

provisions of Christianity are rich and abundant and free (cf. Isa. Iv, 1, 2 ; Matt. xxii. 
1—10; Luke xiv. 15—24). 2. Its progress wiU be productive of benefit to aU men. 
"Under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing." Men shall flock from all lands into this 
kingdom. Inspired poet and prophet predicted this in exultant song and thrilling 



OH. xTiii. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. 



821 



eloquence (of. Pa, Ixxii. 8—17 ; Isa. Ix. 1—14). And the New Testament suppliea 
most abundant and convincing evidence that the blessings of Christianity are for all. 
peoples. They are adequate for all, suited to all, offered to all, and free for alL 
Jesus Christ is the S.iviour and King of the entire human race. 3. Itt progress wiU 
produce the conviction of its Divine origin in all men. " And M the trees of the field 
shall know that 1 the Lord have brought down the high tree," etc. •* The trees of the 
field" are the princes and potentates of this world. Exi)ositors have endeavoured to 
fix a definite and special meaning to " the high tree, . . . the low tree, . . . the green 
tree, and . . . the dry tree." But it seems to us that the truth here stated is a general 
one. In the rise and fall of kings and kingdoms God himself works for the establish- 
ment and progress and universal triumph of the kingdom of his Divine Son. " Ha 
bringeth princes to nothing ; he maketh the Judges of the earth as vanity." 

** For neither from the east, nor &om the west, 
Kor yet from the south, oometh lifting up. 
But God is the Judge; 
He putteth down one, and lifteth np another." 

And through all changes he is advancing the interests, and promoting the glories and 
oniversal supremacy of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. And men wiU come 
to see tbit ^ iiaaj ^^] know that the Lord Jehovah has been the great Worker in all 
the changes and revolutions by which the triumph of the kingdom of the Messiah has 
been brought about. And all this is guaranteed by God. "I the Lord have spoken 
and have done it." It is weU said by Hengstenberg, in his ' Ohristology,' " These last 
words point out that what may seem to the outward senses a mere dream, yea, the 
wildest of dreams, becomes, by virtue of him who promises it, the greatest reality. It is 
God who gives the promise ; it is God who fulfils it." And Matthew Henry : " With men 
laying and doing are two things, but they are not so with God. What he has spoken 
We may be sure that he will do, nor shall one iota or tittle of his Word fall to the 
ground, for he is not a man, that he should lie, or the son of man, that he should 
re|)ent either of his threatenings or of his promises." Thus gloriously certain is the 
universal prevalence of his kingdom. And it is perpetual also. " He shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end;" "His king- 
dom ia an everlasting kingdom, and all dominiona shall serve and obey him." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



OHAPTEB XVm 



Vera. 1, 2. — Wha* mean ye, that ye nse 
this proverb, etc.? Another and entirely 
different section opens, and we see at once 
from wliat it started. Ezekiel had heiird 
from the lips of his countrymen, and had 
seen its working in their hearts, the proverb 
(already familiar to him, it may be, 
through Jer. xxxi. 29) with which they 
blunted their sense of personal responsi- 
bility. They had to bear the punishment of 
sins which they had not committed. The 
sins of the fathers were visited, as in 
Exod. XX. 5; xxxiv. 7; Lev. xxvi. 39, 40; 
Numb, xi V. 18 ; Deut v. 9, upon the third and 
fourth generations. Manasaeh and his people 
had sinner], and Josiah and his descendants 
and tlieir contemporaries had to suffer for it. 
The thought was familiar enough, and the 
general law of the passages above referred 
to was afterwards applied, as with authority, 
to what was then passing (2 Kings xxiii. 26 ; 
xxiv. 3). Even Jeremiah recognized it in 
Lam. V. 7 and Jer. xv. 4, and waa oontent to 

£ZEKIEL. 



look, for a reversal of the proverb, to the 
distant Me ssianic time of the new covenant 
(Jer. xxxi. 29—81). The plea with which 
Ezekiel had to deal was therefore one which 
seemed to rest on the basis of a Divine 
authority. And that authority was con- 
firmed by the induction of a wide experi- 
ence. Every preacher of righteousness in 
every age has to warn the evil-doer that he 
is working evil for generations yet unborn, 
to whom he transmits his own tendencies, 
the evil of his own influence and example. 
It is well that he can balance that thought 
with the belief that good also may work 
in the future with a yet wider range and 
mightier power (Exod. xx. 5). Authority 
and experience alike might seem to favour 
the plea that the fathers had eaten sour 
grapes, and the children's teeth were set on 
edge, Ezekiel was led, however, to feel 
that there was a latent &lsehood in the 
plea. In the depth of his conseiousnesa 
there was the witness that every man waa 
personally responsible for the things that 
he did, that Uie eternal righteousness of 



THE BOOK OP THE PRuPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xvm. 1—32. 



God would not ultimately punUh the in- 
nocent for tlie guilty. He had to work ont, 
according to the light given him, bis vindi- 
eation of the ways of God to man, to sketch 
at least the outlines of a theodicy. Did 
he, in doing this, come forward as a pro- 
phet, correcting and setting aside the 
teaching of the Law? At first, and on a 
surface view, he might seem to do so. 
But it was with him as it was afterwards 
with St. Paul. He " established the Law " 
in the very teaching which seemed to con- 
tradict it. He does not deny (it would 
have been idle to do so) that the Bins of 
the fathers are visited upon the children, 
i.e. affect those children for evil. What he 
does is to define the limits of that law. 
And he may have found his starting-point 
in that very book which, for him and his 
generation, was the great embodiment of the 
Law as a whole. & men were forbidden, 
as in Deut. zxiv. 16, to put the children to 
death for the sins of the fathers ; if ttiat 
was to be the rule of human justice, — tlie 
jOBtiee of Ood could not be less equitable 
than the rule which he prescribed for his 
creatures. It is not without interest to 
note the parallelism between Ezekiel and 
the Oreek poet who was likest to him, as in 
his genini, so also in the courage with 
whicii he faced the problems of the uni- 
verse. .^Echylus also recognizes (' Agam.,' 
727 — ^7S6) that there is a righteous order in 
the seeming anomalies of history. Men 
might say, in their proverbs, that prosperity 
as such provoked the wrath of the gods, 
and brought on the downfall of ft "woe 
insatiable: " and then he adds — 

"But I, apart from all. 
Hold this my creed alone," 

And that creed is that pnniehment comes 
only when the children reproduce the im- 
pious recklessness of their fathers. " Justice 
■hiaes brightly in the dwellings of those 
who love the right, and rule thet life' by 
law." Into the deeper problem raieeil by 
the modern thought of inherited tendencies 
developed by the environment, which itself 
originates in the past, it was not given to 
Ezekiel or .iSschylus to enter. 

Ver. 8.— Stress is laid on the fact that the 
proverb which implied unrighteouanees in 
Qod is no longer to be used in Israel. 
Ther^ among the people in wliom he was 
manifesting his righteousness for the edu- 
cation of mankind, it should be seen to 
have no force whatever. The thought was 
an essentially heathen thought— a half- 
trnth distorted into a &lsehood. 

Ter. 4.— Behold, all miiIb are mine, eto. 
The words imply, not only creation, owner- 
ship, absolute authority, on the part of God, 
but, w oyer Cslvln conJd recof^ni^e (»n too.), 



"• paternal affection towards the whole 
human race which he created and formed." 
Ezekiel anticipates here, and yet more fully 
in ver. 32, the teaching of St Paul, that 
" God willeth that all men shonld be saved " 
(1 Tim. ii. 4). The soul that sinnetb, it 
shall die. The sentence, though taken 
from the Law, wliich ordered capital 
punishment for the offences named, cannot 
be limited to that punishment. "Death" 
and " life " are both used in their highest 
and widest meaning — " life " as including all 
that makes it wortli living, "death" for the 
loss of that only true life which is found 
in knowing Qod (John xvii. 3). 

Vers. 5—9. — The verses tiiat follow are 
noticeable as forming one of the most com- 
plete pictures of a righteons life presented 
in the Old Testament. It was oharaoteristio 
of Ezekiel that he starts from the avoidance 
of sins against the first table of the com- 
mandments. To eat npon the mountains 
was to take part in the sacrificial feasts on 
the places, of which he had already spoken 
(ch. xvi. 16; oomp. xxii. 9; Dent. xii. 2). 
The words, lifted up his eyes, as in Deut. iv. 
19 and Ps. cxxi. 1, implied every form of 
idolatrous adoration. The two sins that 
follow seem to us, as compared with each 
other, to stand on a very different footing. To 
Ezekiel, however, they both appeared aa 
mala prohtbita, to each of which the Law 
assigned the punishment of deatli (Lev. 
xviii. 19; xx. 10, 18; Dent. xxii. 22 j, each 
involving the dominance of animal passions, 
in the one case, over the sacred rights or 
others; in the other, over a law of self- 
restraint which rested partly on physical 
grounds, the act condemned frustrating the 
final canse of the union of tl le sexes ; partly, 
also, on its ethical significance. The pro- 
minence given to it implies that the sin 
was common, and that it brought with it 
an infinite degradation of the holiest ties. 

Ver. 7. — Hath restored to the debtor his 
pledge. The law.found in Exod. xxii. 25 and 
Deut. xxiv. 6, 13, was a striking instance of 
the oonsiderateness of the Mosaic Law. The 
garment which the debtor had pledged as • 
security vras to be restored to him nt night. 
Buoh a law implied, of course, the return 
of the pledge in the morning. It was pro- 
bably often used by the debtor for his 
own fraudulent advantage, and it was a 
natural consequence that the creditor should 
be tempted to evade compliance with it. 
The excellence of the man whom Ezekiel 
describes was that he resisted tiie tempta- 
tion. Hath spoiled none by violence. Comp. 
Lev. vi. 1—5, which Ezekiel probably had 
specially in view. The sin, common enough 
at all times (1 Sam. xii. 3), wonld seem to 
have been specially ohuacteristic of tlie 
time in which Ezekiel lived, from the king 



OH. xvm. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 



823 



t 



downwards (Jer. xxiL 13). Ai contrasted 
with the ain, there was the virtue of 
generous almsgiving (Isa. Iviii 5 — T). 

Ver. 8. — He that hath not given forth his 
money upon usury. The word "usury," 
we must remember, is used, not, as with us, 
for exorbitant interest above the market 
rate, but for interest of any kind. This 
was allowed in commercial dealings with 
foreigners (Deut. xxiii. 20), but was alto- 
fiether forbidden in the ease of loans to 
Israelite 8 (ExoJ. xxii. 25 ; Lev. XXT. 85, 37 ; 
Deut. xxiii. I'J ; lea. xxiv. 2). The principle 
implied in this distinction was that, altliough 
it was, on strict principles of justice, allowable 
to charge for the use of money, aa for the use 
of lands or the hire of cattle, Israel, as a 
leople, was under the higher law of brother- 
lood. If money was to be lent at all, it was 
to be lent as to a brother in want (Matt. v. 
42; Luke >i. 35), for the relief of his 
necessities, and not to make profit. A 
brother who would not help a brother by 
a loan without interest was tliought un- 
worthy of the name. The ideal of the 
social polity of Israel was that it was to 
consist of a population of small freeholders, 
bound together by ties ot mutual help — a 
national friendly society, rather than of 
traders and manufacturers ; and hence the 
whole drift of its legislation tended to re- 
press the money-making spirit which after- 
wards became specially characteristic of its 
people, and ate like a canker into its life. 
The distinction between the two words seems 
to be that " usury " represents any interest 
on money; and " increase," any profit on the 
sale of goods beyond the cost of production, 
as measured by the maintenance of the worker 
and his family. To buy in the cheapest 
market and sell in the dearest was not to be 
the rule in a nation of brothers, and it was 
wiser to forbid it altogether rather than to 
sanction what we call a "reasonable rate" 
of interest or profit. Hath executed tme 
judgment. The last special feature in the 
description of the righteous man is that 
he is free &om the judicial corruption which 
has always been the ineradicE^ble evil of 
Eastern social life (1 Sam. viii. 3 ; xii 3 ; 
Amos V. 12 ; Isa. xxxiii. IS). 

Ver. 10. — A robber. The Hebrew implies 
robbery with violence, perhaps, as in the 
Authorized Version margin, me offence of 
the housebreaker. That doeth the like to 
any of these things. The margin of the 
Hevised Version, following the Chaldee 
paraphrase, gives, who doeth to a hrother 
any of these things. Others (Keil and Fiirst) 
render, "who doeth only one of these 
things," a» if recognizing the principle of 
Jas. ii 10. On the whole, there seems 
sufficient reason for keeping to the text. 
Ver. 11.— The word " duties " is not in 



the Hebrew, bat is legitimately introduced 
as expressing Ezekiel's meaning, where the 
mere pronoun by itself would liave been 
ambiguous. In English we might say, " He 
does these things ; he does not do those ; " 
but this does not fall in with the Hebrew 
idiom. 

Ver. 12. — The word abomination probably 
covers the specific sin named in ver. 6, but 
not here. 

Ver. 13. — One notes the special emphasis, 
first of the question, and then of the direct 
negative, as though that, in the judgment 
alike of God and man, was the only answer 
that could be given to it in the very worda 
of the Law (Lev. xx. 9, 11, 13). 

Vers. 14— 17.— Now, lo ! etc. The law of 
personal responsibility had been pressed on 
its darker side. It is now asserted in its 
brighter, and that vrith the special emphasis 
indicated in its opening words. The pro- 
verb of the " sour grapes " receives a direct 
contradiction. The son of the evil-doer may 
take warning by his father's example, and 
repent, as Ezekiel exhorted those among 
whom he lived to do. In that case he need 
fear no inherited or transmitted curse. He 
shall surely live; Hebrew, living he shall 
live. That truth came to Ezekiel as with 
the force of a new apocalypse, and it is ob- 
viously "exceeding broad," with far-reach- 
ing consequences both in ethics and theology. 

Ver. 18.— The reappearance of the father, 
with the same emphatic "lol" seems to 
imply that Ezekiel thought of the two 
phenomena as possibly contemporaneous. 
Men might see before them, at the same 
time, the fatherdying in his sins, and the son 
turning from them and gaining the true life. 

Ver. 19.- Why! doth not the son, etc.? 
The words are better taken, with the LXX., 
Vulgate, Bevised Version, and most critics, 
as a single question. Why doth not the son 
bear, etc. ? What is the explanation of a fact 
which seemingly contradicts the teaching 
of the Law? The answer to the question 
seems at first only an iteration of what had 
been stated before. The son repents, and 
therefore does not bear his father's iniquity. 
A man is responsible for his own sins, and 
for those only. To think otherwise if to 
think of God as less righteous than man. 

Vers. 21, 22.— But if the wicked will turn, 
etc. Here, however, there is a distinct 
advance. The question is carried further 
into the relations between the past and the 
present ot the same man, between his old 
and his new self. And in answering that 
question also Ezekiel becomes the preacher 
of a gospel. The judgment of Gud deals 
with each man according to his present 
state, not his past. Bepentance and con- 
version and obedience shall cancel, as it 
were, the very memory of bis former sins 



324 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. xtih. 1—32. 



(EzekiePs language ii uecesaarily that of a 
bold anthropopathy), and his tranggressiona 
shall not be mentioned unto him (comp. oh. 
zxziii. 16; Isa. xliii. 25; Ixlv. 9; Jor. zxxi. 
81). Assuming the later date of Isa. xl. — 
IxTi., the last tliree utterances hare the in- 
terest of being those of nearly contemporary 
prophets to whom the same truth had been 
revealed. 

Yer. 23.— Have I any pleasure, etc. 7 Eze- 
kiel's anticipations of the gospel of Christ 
take a yet wider range, and we come at last 
to what had been throughout the suppressed 
premise of the argument. To him, as after- 
wards to St. Paul (1 Tim. ii. 4) and St. Peter 
(2 Pet. iii. 9), the mind of God wag pre- 
sented as being at once absolutely righteons 
and absolutely loving. The death of the 
wicked, the loss, I'.e., of true life, for a time, 
or even for ever, might be the necessary 
consequence of laws that were righteous in 
themselves, and were working out the well- 
being of the universe ; but that death was 
not to be thought of as the regult of a Divine 
decree, or contemplated by the Divine mind 
with any satisfaction. If it were not given 
to Ezekiel to see, as clearly as Isaiah seems 
to have seen it, how the Divine philanthropy 
was to manifest itself, he nt least gauged that 
philanthropy itself, and found it fathomless. 

Ver. 24. — In the previous argument (vcr. 
21) the truth that the individual character 
may change had been stated aa a ground of 
hope. Here it appears as a ground for fear 
and watchfulness. The "grey-haired saint 
may fail at last," the apostle may become a 
castaway (1 Cor. ix. 27), and the righteous- 
ness of a life may be cancelled by the sing 
of a year or of a day. Whether there was an 
opening for repentance, even after that fall, 
the prophet does not say, but the law that a 
man is in spiritual life or death according 
to what he is at any given moment of his 
course, snems to require the extension of the 
hope, unless we assume that the nature of 
the fall in the ca^^e supposed fetters the 
freedom of the will, and makes repentance 
impossible (Heb. tL 4—7; 2 Pet ii. 20). 



Ver. 25.— An not my ways aqnalt Th« 
primary meaning of the Hebrew adjective 
is that of something ordered, Bymmetrically 
arranged. Men wonld find in the ways of 
God precisely that in which their own ways 
were wanting, and which they denied to 
him — the workings of a congiderate equity, 
adjugting all things according to their true 
weight and measure. 

Veni. 26— 29.— The equity of the Divine 
judgments is asserted, as before, by fresh 
iteration rather than by new arguments. In 
a discourse delivered, as this probably was, 
orally, it was aecessary, so to speak, to 
hammer in the truth upon men's mindi 
so that it might to driven home and do its 
woik. 

Vers. 30, 31. — That work was to piodnoe 
repentance, hope, and fear. The goodnesi 
and severity of God alike led np to that. 
For a man to remain in his sin will be fatal, 
but it is not the will of God that he should 
so remain. What he needs is the new heart 
and tlie new spirit, which are primarily, as 
in ch. xi. 19, God'g gift to men, but which 
men must make their own by seeking and 
receiving them. So iniqnity shall not he yooi 
ruin ; better, with the margin of the Revised 
Version, eo ihdB, they not be a ituvMing- 
bloek (same word as in oh. iii. 20; vii 19; 
xiv. 3) of iniquity unto you. Repented sins 
shall be no more an occasion of offence. Men 
may rise on them to " higher things," as on 
" stepping-stones of their dead selves." 

Ver. 82. — Turn yourselves, etc. As in 
ch. xiv. 6, but there ig no ^und for the 
rendering of "turn otherg," guggested in 
the margin of the Authorised Version. 

So we close what we may rightly speak of 
as among the noblest of Ezekiel's utterances, 
that which makes him take his place side 
by side with the greatest of the prophets as 
a preacher of repentance and forgiveness. 
In the next chapter he returns to his para- 
bles of history after the fashion of Uiose of 
oh. xvii 



H0MILETIC8. 

Vers. 2, S. — An old proverb discarded. The proverb of the sour grapes wag but an 
expression of a prevalent belief of the Jews, viz. that guilt is hereditary. Whatever 
element of truth there may have been in this proverb was overlaid and lost in a 
monstrous notion, which destroyed both the .sense of personal responsibility and the 
conception of Divine justice, substituting doctrines of unavoidable fate and unreasonable 
vengeance on the innocent. 

L The tbutms bihind the proverb. This saying and the doctrine which it 
embodied were based upon dark, mysterious, but still true, facts of experience. 1, 
Children, share in the sufferings produced by the sins of their parents. Sins of the 
fathers are visitetl uu the children. This dread fact was recognized in the ten 
commandmci.ts (Exod. xx. 5). We see it conlirmed by our daily observation of th» 



OH. XVIII. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 826 

world. The vices of the father and mother bring poverty, disgrace, and disease on the 
children. When the thief is sent to prison liis children are left without bread. Fearful 
diseases appear in the constitution of innocent children following their parents' pro- 
fligacy. 2. Children inherit the appetites and habits of their parents. The child of 
the drunkard is predisposed to inebriety. This physical inheritance in brain and nerve 
is confirmed by the ceaseless, powerful, unanswerable lessons of example. Where the 
head of the family leads a loose life the children are brought up under evil influences. 

II. The falsity of the pboveeb. 1. God does not inflict real punishment vn 
innocent children. They suffer, but they are not punished ; for there is no element of 
Divine anger towards them in what they endure. God permits the suffering, and he 
uses it, as he uses other troubles of his children, for discipline. But he cannot look upon 
the poor victims of the vices of others with any disfavour. It is a piece of hypocritical 
Pharisaism on the part of society to treat the children who come of i-inful parentage as 
though they were disgraced by their birth. The effect of sour grnpes is purely jihysicaL 
When we transfer the physical fact to the moral world we fall into a mistake. 2. 
ActiuH sin is not hereditary. If it were, men would be doomed to sin apart from their 
own choice. But the essence of sin is a self-willed rebellion against God. When 
freedom of choice is taken out of it the evil thing ceases to be sin ; it becomes a moral 
disease. So long as we have individuality and personal wills we can choose for our- 
selves. No one is utterly the slave of moral disease, or, if such a person exists, he is 
a moial lunatic, and not responsible for his action. Therefore he should be put under 
look and key. Moreover, responsibility is measured by opportunity, and moral conduct 
is seen in the amount of resistance offered to the terrible slavery of an inherited tendency 
to evil habits. The proverb of the sour grapes was not only a discouragement to 
children ; it was an excuse for impenitence among grown-up men. 

III. The exposure and rejection of the proverb. 1. A familiar saying may ht 
false. It may be a venerable lie, or, if true in its first utterance, it may have been 
exaggerated and so presented as to be false in its present application. 2. It is the duty of 
the teacher of religion to correct popular notions. This is the second occasion on which 
Ezekiel has exposed and repudiated a popular fallacy enshrined in the form of a proverb 
(ch. xii. 22). Christ fought prevalent delusions (e.g. Luke xiii. 1 — 5) ; so did St. Paul 
(Horn. ii. 25). 3. There is an advance in revelation. The proverb of the sour grapei 
was never given with the authority of a Divine truth. But in the earlier^ stages oi 
revelation there was not enough light to Uberate men from the illusion on which it was 
founded. As revelation advances it dissolves moral difficulties and clarifies our vision 
of Divine righteousness. 

Ver. 4. The death-penalty. L The penalty op bin is death. This is taken for 

granted in the present passage. The prophet is not now describing the kind of punish- 
ment that follows sin ; he is indicating the persons on whom that punishment shall 
fall. When asked who is to die, he answers — The sinner ; not his child, but the sinner 
himself. But the very fact that the nature of the death-penalty is taken for granted 
makes it the more apparent that the prophet had no doubt about it. Now, we cannot ' 
say that Ezekiel's languajje about the dying of the soul had any reference to a second 
death in Hades in which the conscious personality is annihilated. We should be missing 
the historical perspeqtive if we supposed that any such idea would occur to a Hebrew 
prophet of the Old Testament. The Old Testament religion was concerned with this 
present life, and its sanctions were secular. The penalty of transgressions of the Law 
was to be " cut off" from among the people, i.e. to be killed— stoned or stabbed. The 
soul is the life, and to the ancient Hebrew for the soul to die is just for the man to 
have his earthly death. Still, there is in this no hope of a glorious resurrection for the 
sinner. His doom is final as far as man can follow it. Moreover, dying, not merely 
suffering, is the penalty of the impenitent, while wholesome pain is the chastisement 
of the penitent (Heb. xii. 6). Sin destroys body, character, faculty, affection. It is 
a killing influence in all respects (Eom. vi. 23). 

II. The death-penalty op bin falls only on the binneb. Other consequences 
of sin reach the innocent ; but not this. Herein lies the solution of the terrible enigma 
preuented by the spectacle of children sufl'ering for the sins of their fathers— or rather, 
• partial solution of it. The real punishment of the aiii does not fall upon thtr 



«2fi THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIEL, [oh. xviii. 1— 32. 

When the guilty father is drowned in his own wickedness, he sprinkles some of the loul 
q>ray on his children, and it hums them like spots of fire ; but he does not drag them 
down with him to his dismal doom unless they freely choose to follow his bad example. 
Now, for the guilty man there is this dark prospect — he cannot shirk his responsibility 
»nd cast his punishment upon another. There is an awful loneliness in guilt. Every 
one must hear tlie load of his own sin. 

III. This just arrangement ib beocred by God's ownership op souls. All belono 
to God; therefore he will not permit final injustice. The discarded proverb (ver. 2) 
rested on a sense of fatalism. The idea it contained was not just, but it seemed to be 
inevitable. The tragedies of ^sohylus and Sophncles exhibit the ojioration of a Nemesis 
pursuing the descendants of a guilty man until the original crime of their ancestor is 
expiated. Physically, something of the kind does often occur ; but in the higher moral 
and spiritual realm it is impossible, so long as a personal God takes personal interest 
in individual souls. The modem Nemesis is physical law. We can only escape from 
■ome form of unjust fatalism by a belief in a personal God and his direct dealings with 
■ouls. 

IV. Christ dibs fob the sins of others. 1. Here i» a grand exception to the 
order of punishment. The soul that does not sin dies for the souls that do sin. But 
with this fact we are in a new order. Christ's death is not a consequence of moral law. 
(1) He comes in grace. (2) His act is voluntary. 2. Here is the hope of our deliver- 
ance from death. We have all sinned. Therefore we all deserve death, for there is 
no exception to the law, "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." But not only has 
Christ died for us ; he dies in us, we are crucified in him, and dying to sin through his 
grace we are spared the fearful dying /or sin. 

Ver. 14. — The breach of heredity. It Is possible for the son of the sinner not to tread 
in his father's evil footsteps. Here we have the door of escape from the odious proverb 
of the sour grapes (ver. 2). 

I. A father's bin is a shameful sight fob hib son. The verse before us presents 
a distressing picture, though one with bright features in it. The father should be an 
example to his children, and they should be able to look up to him with reverence. 
Indeed, very little children naturally regard those who have charge of them as good. 
When first a child discovers that one who has directed his conduct is doing wrong, the 
revelation comes upon him with a painful shook of surprise. How sad that this should 
become a familiar sight 1 The very centre of authority in the home is then degraded. 
The child may stiU obey from a sense of fear, from a feeling of duty, or from mere force 
of habit. But all reverence is gone, and contempt is beginning to take its place. There 
must be Bomething sadly wrong when a right-minded child is forced to despise his 
father or his mother. Surely such a prospect should be a warning to parents when 
personal considerations fail to influence them. 

II. A SON MATT BE BAVED FROM SHARING HIS FATHER'b SIN BY ITS VERY 8HAMEFUL- 

NESS. There is an influence which is just the contrary of heredity in sin. Uncon- 
sciously, by force of physical constitution, and by the influence of example no doubt, a 
child is drawn towards his father's sin. But when ho reflects upon it and exercises 
his own judgment, he has miserable opportunities for witnessing its shamefulness which 
are not accorded to the happily guarded children of purer homes. The child of the 
drunkard knows the evil of strong drink only too well. Thus if he •' considerelh " he 
has an ever-present warning. Do we not see children who have turned with loathing 
from the habits of disgraceful parents, shunning the first approaches to the evil which 
has wrought such havoc in their homes, when other children who have not been to so 
painful a school toy with it in the confidence of ignorance ? 

III. It is THE DUTY OF CHRISTIANS TO BESOUB THE CHILDREN OF WICKED PARENTS 

The problem furnished by the wreck of broken-down character among the degraded 
creatures who haunt the slums of great cities is well-nigh insoluble, because so many nf 
those hopeless beings refuse to be reclaimed. If they are removed to decent dwellings and 
■upplied with the means of conducting respectable lives, they sink back to their old state 
of degradation. Emigration alone will not cure this disease of dissoluteness. We could 
only burden America and our colonies with useless paupers by sending its victims across 
the sea. They have neither the moral nor the physical strength to begin a new fife. 



OS. Ttm. 1—82.] THB BOOK OP TfiE PBOPHfiT EZEKTllL. 82t 

It would aoem that the best thing wo could do for them would he to shut them up In 
a hospital for incurables, where at least they miglit be prevented from spreading moral 
contagion. They have reached moral imbecility. But we can save their children. It 
is with the children that the hope of recovery is most encouraging. Gkwd work already 
done in rescuing the little waifs of the streets points to a much more extensive effort 
in that direction. For the price of an iron-clad we nught save the ciiiMren of the 
ilnnu of a whole city I It is here that the solution of our great social piwblem will 
begin. 

Ver. 23. — Bow Ood views the death of t\e wicked. L Hb has no fleasube ni it. 
1. It might appear that he had. (1) Men traruferred to Ood their own low notions of 
vengeance. "Revenge is sweet" among men ; therefore it was supposed that God must 
take some pleasure in avenging himself on those who have offended him. (2) ZUe 
rigour of the Law of Ood appeared to favour this notion. If God had no pleasure in 
the death of the wicked, why did God let him die ? Such a question goes on the 
assumption that t>je only motive of action is the personal pleasure of the agent. 2. But 
on the other hand, it is certain that the fate of the sinner is no plectsv/re to Ood, (1) 
Ood is righteous. The pleasures of vengeance are sinfuL It cannot be good to feel 
anything but distress at the ruin of a soul. There might be a certain pleasure in the 
infliction of useiul chastisement, because of its happy end; but the death of a soul is 
wholly dark. (2) Ood is merciful. God does not hate his enemies. "He hateth 
nothing that he hath made." God loves the souls that perish. His long-suffering and 
delay of punishment, his readiness to forgive the penitent, and, above all, the gift of his 
Son to redeem the world from death, are proofs that he has no pleasure in the death of 
the wicked. 

II. StiIiL God permits it. 1. Ood has given freedom to his children. It can 
scarcely be said that God kills a wicked man. The sinner is bis own executioner; his 
sin is its own sword of vengeance. Sin itself slays. The sinner is practically a suicide. 
God has no pleasure in the ruin which the foolish man brings on his own head. But 
there would be no moral nature left for him, and therefore no possibility of goodness, 
if God did not leave him the use of that freedom which he abuses in slaying his own 
souL 2. Ood is just, though justice may he painful. It may be said that we cannot 
throw the whole burden of his death on the sinner, because God has made him and has 
made the laws which connect death with sin. No doubt, therefore, there is a certain 
Divine retribution in the punishment of sin. But then God is just, and does not regard 
his own pleasure. It is only an epicurean deity who would refuse to punish sin because 
he took no pleasure in the death of the sinner. 3. There can he no escape for the 
impenitent. If it were merely a question of God's pleasure, we might appeal from that 
to his mercy. But he already denies himself to permit the punishment. It is therefore 
the more sure. 

ni. God pbbfbes the utb of his children. If he has no pleasure in their death, 
he will welcome any avenue of escape. Nay, he will provide all possible means of 
deliverance. Hence the gospel of Christ. 1. There is a possibility of escape through 
amendment. It can come no other way, or justice would be outraged ; for it is better 
that the soul should die than that it should continue for ever in sin. The life of sin 
is a curse to the sinner and a blight on God's world. But a return to the better way 
is open to all of us through Christ (2 Cor. v. 20). 2. This escape gives life. God loves 
life, or he would not have created a world teeming with living beings. He loves to 
gives us a new life in Christ (1 John v. 12). Let no one despair. God does not desba 
our death ; God wills our life. 

Ver. 25. — God accused of man's injustice. The Jews were asserting that the ways 
of God were not equal, when the fact was that their ways, not his, were unequal. 

I. God is accused of injustice. " Ye say. The way of the Lord is not equal." It 
is felt that the rule of the supreme God should be very different from that of earthly 
judges, some of whom take bribes, and all of whom are fallible. " Shall not the Judge 
of all the earth do right ? " exclaims Abraham, when venturing to exiwstulate with Qoid 
on what appears to him a threatened injustice (Gen. xviii. 25). Yet the facts of life are 
often discouraging, and suggest to doubting, impatient souls a notion that God is not 



82» THE BOOK OK THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xvui. 1— 3a. 

actiDg justly. The wicked prosper, and the good meet with misfortune. Childreu 
Buffer from the misdeeds of their parents. Persons equal in character are unequal in 
fortune. To one the way of life is far more smooth than to another, although we can 
detect no good reason for the distinction. At one time a wild and mindless Chance 
seems to play with the world, at another a blind, stern Fate appears to hold it in an 
iron grip. We cannot discover the hand of justice behind the drifting cloud of circum- 
stances. But : 1. Justice does not involve equality, but treatment according to desert. 
2. We only see a small part of OocPs ways, and theiefore cannot judge of the whole. 
The fly on the wheel cannot understand the machine. He might think the action of 
the "eccentric" deranged because it was unequal, and yet it is essential to the right 
working of the whole engine. 3. We are too limited in natwre to judge, even if we 
■aw all the facts. 

n. This acccsation besults fbom man's injustice. We impute to God what is 
in ourselves. We judge him by our own hearts and conduct. We know what would 
be our motives if we did certain things which we discover in the Divine action, and 
therefore we ascribe those same motives to God. We colour what we see with the hues 
that are in our own eyes. To the railway traveller the hedgerows and trees appear to 
be turning about invisible pivots, now flying to him and then swiftly whirling away ; 
yet the motion is with the observer. 1. We are unjust in attempting to judge Qod. 
Here on the thresliold the fault is seen to be ours. Even if God were unjust, since we 
are not capable of understanding his actions, we should be unjust also in venturing to 
give a verdict on his deeds. 2. We are unjust in our general conduct. There is a lack 
of integrity of heart in us even when our external behaviour is straight. We walk in 
crooked paths, and our conscience itself is perverted, so that the very rule by which we 
measure is warped. It is not surprising that God seems to be unjust when our standard 
of measurement does not agree with his action; but then the fault is with the standard. 
Until our own hearts and lives are right, it is not possible for, us to form right views of 
God, 3. We are unjust in ascribing our own injustice to God. The inequalities of 
society are charged against God. They come from " man's inhumanity to man." 

Vers. 26 — ^28. — Reversals (^character. We have here an instance of man's misjudg- 
ment of God, and wrongful accusation of injustice against him. People who have borne 
good characters are punished by God, and others who have earned themselves odious 
reputations are spared. This is the stumbling-block. But our text supplies the expla- 
nation of the apparent inconsistency. The good men have fallen into sin, and the bad 
men have repented and mended their lives. Therefore it is not unjust in God to treat 
them no longer according to their old characters. 

L God judges AcconDiNo to present character. Human judgment is stiff and 
blunt. Having formed our estimate of a man, we hold it after all justification for it has 
vanished. We are blind to those traits in his character which do not agree with our 
theory ; or, if we are forced to recognize them, our first impulse is to twist them into 
harmony with the theory. Thus men's characters in the world outlive the facts on 
which they are founded. They are not all equal in this respect. A good character is 
more easily lost than a bad character. If a man has once earned an evil name, it is 
almost impossible for him to divest himself of it. People will not believe in his 
thorough conversion. This suspicion is partly due to ignorance of the hearts of men, 
and to a consequent danger of being imposed upon by hypocrisy. But God knows 
hearts. He is not bound by names and reputations. He sees present facts, and he 
judges men as they are. Then he judges according to present condition. He does not 
spare the fallen man on account of past goodness, and he does not rake np old charges 
against the penitent. We must not suppose, however, that God judges by a man's 
latest act. 'This would throw in an element of chance. A man is not condemned 
because he happens to be doing wrong at the moment of death, or saved because death 
finds him on his kuees in prayer. But when the whole life is turned round, God judges 
by its present character, and not by its former state. 

IL Ketersals of ohabaoteb ABE POSSIBLE. We are not arguing on hypothetical 
cases. The ways of God to men are to be justified in part by the knowledge that such 
cases exist. 1. The good man may fall atoay into tin. When this happens, the world 
lifts up its hands in horror at whkt it supposes to be a revelation of monstrous an' I 



nH. xvni. 1— 32.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIEL. 329 

loug-continued hypocrisy; but there may he no hypocrisy in the caae. The fallen 
maa may have been sincere in his earlier life of goodness. But he has turned aside 
from it. Here is a terrible warning. No character is crystalline ; all characters are 
more or less mobile. The best man may fall. Then all his former goodness will not 
save him. We have reason for watchfulness, diffidence, and prayer for God's protection. 
2. The had man may he recovered. The stern and changeless judgment of the world 
dooms one who has fallen to lifelong ignominy. This is cruel and murderous. If we 
lend a helping hand, the fallen may be lifted up. By the grace of Christ the most 
hardened sinner may be softened to penitence and turned into the ways of guodness. 
Then his former sin will not hang like a millstone about his neck to keep him for ever 
down. God forgives it, and never mentions it again. It is the elder son, not the 
father, who refers to the former sins of the returned prodigal (Luke xv.30). 

Ver. 30. — The cdtematives of judgment. L The judgment. 1. It, is to he bg God, 
" I will judge you." The all-searching and almighty Lord will be the Judge. None can 
elude his inquiry ; none can resist his sentence. 2. It is a matter of the future. There- 
fore we cannot wisely make light of it by comparison with present experience. The 
future will be different from the present in this respect. Now is the time of probation ; 
evil has therefore a liberty which will not continue. There will be a change of dispen- 
sations, that of judgment superseding the dispensation of grace. 3. It will certainly 
come. It is not conditional on possible circumstances. There is nothing hypothetictJ 
in_ the prophet's words. God does not say, " Jjf I judge," but " I wiH judge you." 4. /( 
will come home to OocP$ own people, Gtod will judge the " house of Israel." Israel 
delighted in the prospect of the day of the Lord, when her oppressors, the neighbouring 
heathen nations, should be judged. But she herself will also be judged. God will judge 
Christendom ; he will judge his Church. The Master calls his own servants to account 
(Matt. XXV. 14). S. It win be individual. God will not judge the house of Israel as 
a whole, but " every one of you." Each will be judged separately. None will be over- 
looked. 6. It will he according to the conduct of life. " According to his ways." (1) 
According to conduct — not according to creed, feelings, aspirations, but deeds. (2) 
According to normal conduct. His ways, %.e. his habits, his general course of conduct, 
not exceptional acts of virtue, nor occasional lapses below the usual manner of living. 
God judges on the conduct of the whole life. 

II. The AI.TEBNATIVE8. 1. Amendment. This involves two changes, an internal 
and an external. (1^ Hie internal diange. Bepentance. The first step towards amend- 
ment is that turn of mind which consists in grief and loathing for the past, together 
with a hearty desire for a better future. (2) The external change. " Turn yourselves 
from all your trangressions." It is useless to weep over the deeds which we do not 
forsake. Bepentance of heart must be proved and confirmed by change of conduct. 
The drunkard must not only weep over his last night's debauch ; he must give up the 
drink. The thief must cease to steal, the liar to lie, the blasphemer to swear. This 
is not to be fully accomplished without a change of heart (ver. 31). But while God 
only can truly regenerate us, we must voluntarily turn from the evil way and seek the 
new life. 2. Ruin. Ezekiel urges his readers to repent with the mingled warning and 
encouragement. " So iniquity shall not be your ruin." (1) The consequences of con- 
demnation are ruin. When God sits in judgment over an evil life, terrible issues are at 
stake. No mere temporary sufiTering will satisfy the just demands of law. The broad 
road leads to " destruction " (Matt. vii. 13). The end of sin is an utter undoing, a 
shipwreck of life, a confounding of the soul, death I (2) This ruin flows directly from 
«tn. God does not send an angel of judgment to punish the sinner. His own iniquity 
will be his ruin. Sin works directly on the soul as a deadly poison. Therefore alj that 
the judgment of God can be required to do is to make it apparent that the ruin is justly 
earned, and to show that nothing can be justly done to avert it. 

Ver. 31. — " Why wUl ye diet" I. God earnestly dksieeb to bavb his ohildbbn. 
He repeatedly repudiates the notion that he has any pleasure in their death (e.g. vers. 
23 and 32). He does not regard that terrible fate with indifference, as though it were 
no concern of hii, after the manner of an epicurean divinity. He might say that, as 
men have fooUshly and sinfully earned their own ruin, he would regard their doom with 



JSO THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [<«• ^^^n- 1— *2. 



complacency. But instead of doing so, he manifests the utmost concern, urgently 
expostulating with the self-willed sinners, and entreating them to save themc>el ves. 
Kay, has he not gone further, in sending his Son to save the world before his guilty 
children began to repent and to call for deliverance ? In like manner, Christ, lamenting 
the coming rain of Jerusalem, exclaimed, " Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killett 
the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered 
thy children together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would 
not 1 " (Matt, xxiii. 37). 

II. Thb death of BINNBB8 IS IN THEIB oww BANDS. " Why wiU yc die ? " It 
is not written by God, It is not fated by destiny. It does not fall out by cliaace. It 
is not a consequence of circumstances. Secondary and external events may appear to 
be traceable to one or other of these causes. But utter soul-ruin depends on the soul 
itself^ If the soul dies it is because it will die. The reasons for this position are two. 
1. We have frte-wUl. If we sin, therefore, we do it of our own accord. We cannot lay 
the blame on our tempters. There is always a way of escape from temptation (1 Cor. 
X. 13). The deed that is done under compulsion is no longer a sin. Every sin is the 
soul's firee act. 2. The death of the soul comes directly from lin. It is not an extraneous 
event; it is just the natural fruit of the soul's own evil-doiug. Therefore we cannot 
accuse God, or Satan, or nature, or circumstances. The blame rests with ourselves. 

ILL The seasons which lead sinnebs to ooubt death should be consioebed, 
" Why will ye die?" 1. Because of indifference. Many are heedless. They do not 
will to die, but they will the way to death. But he who chooses the path chooses its 
end. 2. Because of obstinacy. The appeal of the text is made against a stubborn 
siiirit of self-will. God brings up the battering-rams of grace against the thick walls 
oi the town of Man-soul. Pride makes men hold to their own ways. But pride will 
be humbled in the day of ruin. There is no pride in death. 3. Because of the love of 
sin. This love blinds men. They see the attractive wickedness ; they should learn to 
see also the snake that lurks among the flowers. 4. Because of mAelUf. This is not 
merely a wrong intellectual conclusion. There is a dangerous unbelief that comes from 
closing the eyes to unpleasant facts. Yet they are not the less true. 5. Because of 
the rejection of grace. If we will not to have Christ, we do in fact will to die. 

IV. The WAT of escape fbom death is open to all. 1. By easting out sin. 
Sm is the viper in the bosom, whose bite is mortal. Any cherished sin brings death. 
The first step must be not merely to grieve over sin, but to tear it away and fling it 
off. 2. By receiving a new heart. We need to have a better nature. Nothing less 
tlian a new heart will suffice. Only God can give that (Ps. IL 10). Only the Holy 
Spirit can regenerata (John iii. fy Bat tha change dep^oda on our seekins and 
accepting it. » «■ -* 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers, i—i.— Heredity and individuality. The proverb here quoted embodied a 
popular sentiment. Those who suffered from the troubles and calamities of the lime 
were not wiling to admit that their sufferings were only their deserts ; they endea- 
voured to thrust the blame upon others than themselves; and accordingly they com- 
plained that they had to endure the consequences of the evil deeds of their ancestors 
Une generation— so they put it-*to the sour grapes, and escaped the consequences: 
a succeedinji generation endured these consequences, their teeth were set on edne. There 
was a half-truth m such representations ; for society is linked together by bonds of suc- 
cession and mhentance which constitute solidarity and unity; vet at the same time, so 
lar as responsibility is concerned, God deals with men as individuals. 
u i:J,^v^'^^''^^^-^' HBREDiTT UPON CHABACTER. Physically, the power of heredity 
, J ii-*- '? wd»«dua , we are told by men of science, is the product of parents, with 
the addition of such peculiarity as they attribute to the other principle, viz. variation. 
A mans birth breeding, and training count for very much ; they determine the locality 
i ». fu '^■' .**'^ climate, the political and social circumstances, the i«lieiou« 
fducatlon, the associations, of childhood and of youth. The bodily oonstitntion includinir 
the nervous organliation, the temperament and the inclinations springing from itlw 



on. xvui. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZBKIlL. 881 



to a very large extent hereditary. The environment is largely the effect of birth, and 
the ^rly influences involved in it. Those who adopt the '• naturalistic " system of 
morals, to whom man appears the effect of definite causes— the « determinists," as they 
arecaiiedm philosophy— consider that ciroumBtances, and such character as is itself the 
proauct of circumstances, determine what the man mil be and must be. Whilst even 
tnose who advocate spiritual ethics, and who believe in human liberty, are qiiite willing 
to admit that all men owe to hereditary causes and influences very much which makes 
them what they are. 

II. The limits to this lUFLUENCit. 1. Heredity does not interfere with man's 
moral nature. The will, the freedom, of man are as real as the motives upon which he 
acts, with which he identifies himself. There is a distinction absolute and ineffaceable 
between the material and animal on the one side, and the spiritual upon the other. 2. 
^or with man 8 responsibility. Tf man were not free, he would not be responsible. We 
do not speak of the sun as responsible for shining, or a bird as responsible for flying. But 
we cannot avoid speaking and thinking of men as responsible for all their purposes, 
endeavours, and habits. The wicked are blamable because, when good and evil were 
^forethem, and they were free to choose the good, they chose the evil 3. Nor with 
God B justice and grace. Ezekiel makes a great point of vindicating the ways of God 
with men, of showing that every individual will certainly be dealt with, not upon 
capricious or unjust principles, but with omniscient wisdom, inflexible righteousness, 
and considerate mercy. Thus, in the sight of God, all circumstanceB are apparent, 
and in the judgment of God all circumstances are taken into account, which justly 
affect an individual's guilt. Heredity may be among such circumstanceB, and allow- 
ance is doubtless made for tendencies inherited, for early neglect, for unfavourable 
influences of whatever kind. Where little is given, little is required. But all this 
does not affect the great fact that every individual is held responsible for his own moral 
position and conduct. None can escape judgment and censure by pleading the iniqmties 
of liis progenitors, as if those Iniquities were an excuse for yielding to temptation. Every 
one sliall bear his own burden. All souls are God's, to rule, to weigh, to recompense. 
Prom whomsoever sprung, the just shall live, and the soul that unneth, it shall die. — T. 

Vers. 5 — 18. — The moral alternative. With a legal minuteness, and with » directness 
and plainness becoming to the teacher of practical morality, the prophet presents the 
altornative and antithesis of human life. If not in every particular, still in almost 
every particular, the picture of the good and of the bad man painted in this passage 
would be ailmitted by moralists of every school to be faithful and fair. 

I. The description of the good and of the bad uan. As the classes mre excludve, 
each negativing the other, it is sufficient to name the characteristics of the good man, 
with the understanding that the bad man is he in whom these characteristicB are wanting. 
1. The good man is characterized by justice in dealing with his fellow-men. 2. He 
refrains from idolatry of every kind. 3. He avoids adultery and every form of impurity, 
4. He refrains from oppressing those who, for any reason, are within his power. 6. Ha 
abstains from violence in the treatment of others. 6. He is charitable to the poor and 
needy. 7. He forbears taking advantage of those who, by misfortune and poverty, are 
within his power. 8. He scrupulously and cheerfully obeys the Divine laws. 

II. The becumpense or the good and of the bad man. 1. To the good is 
promii^ed life, which is to be understood, not in the narrow and physical signification of 
the wui'd, but in its large and scriptural sense. 2. Against the wicked is threatened 
death, which is to be interpreted as including the effects of God's righteous anger — a 
■ioom the most awful which can be pronounced and executed. 

Application. The minister of religion may from this solemn passage learn the 
imperative duty of teaching morality. There must indeed be a foundation laid for such 
[ireacliing in spiritual and evangelical doctrine; but the superstructure must not be 
neglected. The wise teacher, before entering into detail as to human character and 
conduct, will consider his audience, and the time and occasion ; for all subjects are not 
to be treated before persons of every class, of every age, of both sexes. But he will find 
opportunities for stating and enforcing the precepts of the Law in the spirit and with 
the motives of the gospeL And the faithful minister will not shrink from depicting, 
though for the Btoat part in careful and scriptural language, the penalties followinig upon 



332 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. [on. xvm. 1—32, 

disobedience to Ood'g laws, as well as the rewards assured to the loyal and the good. 
It is true that those who are saved are saved by grace ; but it is also true that all men, 
without exception, are judged by their works, and that Gk)d will bring every work 
into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good or bad. — ^T. 

Vers. 19—22. — Personal responstbility. We can only account for the Prophet 
^zekiel laying such special stress upon the principle of individuality in religion by sup- 
posing that, in his time and among those with wliom he associated, there was a prevalent 
disposition and habit lesiding to the denial of what seems tons an unquestionable truth. 
Indeed, in some form or other, men do incline to shift responsibility from themselves 
to their parents, their early teachers, their ccmpanions, the society in which their lot 
is cast. 

I. ThB VADT AHD DECEPnVB CONTENTION THAT THE HOBAL QUAUTT • OF ONE 

OENEBATioN IB IMPUTED TO ANOTHER. This Contention may take either of two forms. 
1. The son of a good father is apt to rely upon his father's goodness. There is no doubt 
that such a one may inherit much that is advantageous, e.g. a good constitution, a 
happy temperament, a good introduction to life, the favourable regard of many helpful 
friends. And it is sometimes forgotten that all this does not interfere with responsibility ; 
in fact, he who is so highly favoured is tliereby raised to a higher level of account- 
ability. Much is given, and much will be required. 2. The son of a bad father is apt to 
excuse his faults by casting the blame for them upon the transmission of evil influences 
by heredity, or upon circumstances traceable to family relationships. It is the case 
that such a person starts heavily weighted upon the race of life ; his temptations to 
error and sin are many and urgent, and restraining influences are weakened. Allow- 
ances are made by men, and no doubt by God also, for such disadvantages ; but they 
do not destroy the moral responsibility of the free agent. 

IL The witness of the oonscienoe to individual and inalienable bebpomsi- 
BiLiTT. Reference has been made to the attempts too often made by sinners to cast 
their responsibility upon others. But it may unhesitatingly be asserted that those 
who put forward such excuses are never themselves convinced by them. In their hearts 
they are well aware that there is no sincerity in such excuses, that they are mere subter- 
fuges. The conscience within, which accuses and excuses, gives no uncertain sound. 
The religious teacher, the Christian preacher, who seeks to convince men of sin has the 
assurance that the inner monitor of his hearers supports his endeavour, that he neither 
upbraid^< nor pleads alone. When the Lord Qod exclaims by the voice of his prophet, 
" Hear now, house of Israel ; Is not my way equal ? are not your ways unequal ? " 
every man, convicted by his conscience, is reduced to silence ; for there is no reply to 
be made. When conscience is awakened, its witness is plain and unmistakable. 

III. The bxpbbsb and authobitativb statement of God's own Wobd ab to 
man'b individual accountability. Thelanguageof this chapter is peculiarly explicit 
upon this matter. " The soul that sinueth, it shall die; . . . the righteous shall surely 
live, he shall not die." And these statements are in harmony witb the whole tenor of 
Scripture teaching. The Bible magnifies man's personality, and never represents man 
as a machine, an organism. Each living soul stands in its own relation to the Father 
of spirits, liefore whom every moral and free nature must appear to render an account 
for itself, and not for another. The teaching of our Lord and of his apostles is as 
definite and decided upon this point as the teaching of the Lawgiver and the prophets of 
the earlier dispensation. We are throughout Scripture consistently taught that ther« 
is DO evading the great account. — T. 

Ver. 23. — Divine benevolence. No such conception of Deity can be found elsewhere 
as in the Holy Scriptures. Where can the sentiment of this verse be matched in other 
sacred literatures? Thousands of years have elapsed since these words were penned; 
and the world has not produced or heard language in itself more morally elevating and 
beautiful, more honouring to the Supreme Ruler, more consolatory and inspiring to the 
sinful sons of men. 

I. Men havb ohkbishbd bubpioion of the Divink malevolence. No one who is 
acquainted with the religions which have obtained among the nations of mankind will 
question this. The deities of the Gentiles have reflected the moral qualitiei of the 



OH. xvin. 1— 32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 833 

human race, and accordingly attribates morally reprehensible as well as attributes 
morally commendable have been assigned to the deities whom men have worshipped. 
Indeed, worship has to no small extent consisted in methods supposed cflficaciuus 
to appease the wrath of the cruel and malicious powers from whose ill will humanity, 
it has been thought, had much to dread. And it is not to be questioned that even 
Jewish and Christian worship have not been free from some measure of this same 
error. It has been customary to refer the governmental and judicial infliction of 
punishment to a disposition to take pleasure in human sufferings and torture. The 
student of Scripture is aware that there is no authority, no justification for such a view ; 
but the student of human nature is not surprised that such a view should have been 
taken. 

II. God's repudiation of MALEVOLBNaB IN PLAIN AUTHOBiTATivB woBDs. " Have 
I any pleasure in the death of the wicked ? saith the Lord God." It is indeed con- 
descension in the Supreme Buler thus to remove the misunderstandings and difiiculties 
which men create for themselves by their own ignorance and sin. Again and again 
he represents himself as merciful and delighting in mercy, but nowhere does he give 
the least ground for a suspicion that he delights in, or even is indifferent to, the 
Buiferino;s of the children of men. Since all his words are faithful and true, we can but 
rest and rejoice in such an assurance as that of the text. 

III. God's proof in his deeds of the benevolence op his natdbb. Israel, as a 
nation, had abundant evidence of the loving-kindness and long-suffering of him who 
chose the people as his own, trained them for his service, instructed them in his Law, 
bore with their frequent disobedience and rebellion, and ever addressed to them 
promises of compassion and of help. But all proofs of the Divine benevolence palu 
before that glorious exhibition of God's love and kindness which we Christians have 
received in him who is the unspeakable Gift of Heaven. Had the Almighty felt any 
pleasuie in the death of the wicked, he would not h^ve jiiven his own Son, while we 
were yet sinners, to die for us. He took pleasure, not in the condemnation and death, 
but in the salvation of men. In Christ his love and kmdness appeared; for Christ 
came, not to condemn the world, but that the world through him mij^ht be saved. 

IV. The bncoubaqembnt thus afpobdbd to penitent sinnebs to hope fob 
ACCEPTANCB AND LIFE. The pleasure of God is that the wicked " should return from 
his way, and should live." Thus there is coincidence between the good pleasure of the 
Omnipotent upon the one hand, and the best desires and truest interests of penitent 
sinners on the other. He who repents of his evil deed, who looks upwards for forgive- 
ness, and who resolves upon a new and better life, has not to encounter Divine 
displeasure or ill \\\il; on the contrary, he is assured of a gracious reception, of 
immediate pardon, of kindest consideration, and of help ami guidance in the carrying 
out of holier purpose and endeavour. The demeanour and the language of God are 
those of the compassionate Father, who welcomes the returning prodigal, accords him 
a benign reception, and proffers him all those blessings, now and hereafter, which 
alone can answer to the glorious and comprehensive gift of Divine love — eternal 
life!— T. 

Ver. 3L — Divine remonstrance. There is something very impressive in the form of 
this remonstrance. If the question were taken in its literal sense, and published 
among men upon Divine authority; if men were invited to accept immunity from 
bodily dissolution; — in how many cases would the appeal meet, not only with earnest 
attention, but with eager response! The death which is here referred to must be that 
which consists in Divine displeasure, or, at all events, that death in which such 
displeasure forms the most distressing ingredient. The appeal may be enforced by 
several obvious but weighty considerations. 

I. Why WILL YE DIB, WHEN DEATH IS THE W0B8T OF DOOMS? If the death of the 
body is in itself aud in its circumstances and consequences of a repulsive nature, all the 
more fitly may it serve to set forth and to suggest the evils denoted in Scripture as 
Bpiritui death. Insensibility and dissolution may be taken as figures of that spiritual 
state in which interest in Divine truth and righteousness and love has departed, in 
which there is no occupation in the service of God. The soul that has any just sense 
of its own good must needs shrink from such a condition. 



8»4 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xviii. 1—32, 

n. Why will te die, when life is the gbbatest of blessings ? The life of the 
body, if accompanied by health and favourable circumstances, is desirable and delight- 
ful. No wonder that in Scripture the highest blessings of which the nature of man ii 
capable are designated by the suggestive and comprehensive term " life." The spirit 
that truly lives is open to all heavenly appeals and influences, finds in the just exercise 
of its powers the fullest satisfaction, experiences the blessedness of fellowship with the 
ever-living God. Our Lord Christ himself came to this world, and wrought and 
suffered as he did, in order tliat "we might have life, and might have it mor« 
abundantly." The appeal of the text calls upon us to accept this priceless boon. 

III. Why will ye die, seeing that the means or life aee within youe reach ? 
There would be mockery in the appeal of the text were this not so. But he who alone 
can provide both the means and the end compassionately addresses those who have 
forfeited life and have deserved death, and urges upon them the remonstrance, " Why 
will ye die?" It is a remonstrnnoe which comes home with tenfold force to those who 
listen to the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, "the true God and the Eternal Life." 
Knowledge and faith, the Holy Spirit of Goii himself, and the truth which he reveals and 
applies to the nature of man ; — here are the means, here is the living agency, by which 
men may rise "from the death of sin unto the life of righteousness." When such 
means and such agency are provided, the guilt and folly are manifest of those who 
choose death rather than life. 

IV. Why will ye die, when God himself wishes foe youb life bathee than 
death ? The benevolence of the Divine nature finds expression in the virtual entreaty 
of the text. It is as though a kind of infatuated wilfulness were presumed to exist in 
the breasts of sinful men ; as if, while their Maker and Judge wishes to be their Saviour, 
they were indisposed to accept the boon offered by his pity and loving-kindness. It is 
as though the eternal Lord himself, against whom sinners have offended, urged his own 
compassion upon those who have no pity upon themselves. 

V. Why will ye die, when Christ has died foe you ? He gave his life a ransom 
for many. The Saviour's death is represented as the redemption, the purchase price, 
securing the exemption from death of those who accept the provision of Divine mercy 
and love. The appeal is powerful which is made to sinful men not to refuse the boon 
60 graciously offerM, and secured at a price so costly. Christ died that we might live. — T. 

Vers. 1 — t. — The Divine equity. The unbounded compassion of God is seen in his 
patience under human provocation, and in his repeated messages to rebellious men. 
There is "line upon line, precept upon precept." Every style of expostulation ii 
adopted ; every complaint silenced ; for his " love is stronger than death," mightier 
than sin. 

I. God has supeeme peopeietobbhip in men. " AU souls are mine." This state- 
ment is prefaced by a "Behold I" for this was a fact overlooked by querulous men. 
As undisputed and irresponsible Proprietor of souls, God need give no account of his 
doings. Every lip of complaint oui;ht to be dumb. And this truth has also an 
•ncouraging aspect ; for as God accounts a human soul his precious property, he will 
provide for its security. Nowhere can we be so safe as in the hands of this Proprietor. 

II. God's solemn attestation of eighteousness. God's glory is his righteousness, 
ind ho deigns to make that righteousness understood and acknowledged by men. He 
loves to dwell in the esteem and admiration of his creatures ; therefore he condescends 
io speak after the manner of men. He conies down to our level ; and as in judicial 
cases we accept the testimony of men, given under the sanction of an oath, God 
Attempts to scatter our doubts by speaking in a similar manner. That he is immacu- 
lately righteous, all the unsinning hobts of heaven affirm ; and this shall all mankind 
iltimately confess. 

III. Sinning men always attempt self-justification. These murmurers in 
Ohaldea felt the severity of their chastisement, but did not feel the gravity of their sin. 
Thsy imagined that it must have been their fathers' sins which were being avenged in 
them. This state of mind has always been a characteristic of the sinner. "My 
punishment," he argues, " is in excess of my sin." Now, a part of the penalty of sin is 
the blinding of the mind, the perversion of the judcing faculty. The man fastens his 
stteniion on his suffering— loses sight of his secret sin. 



CM. ivm. 1— 32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET KZEKIEL. 835 

IV. ViOK IB EMTAILBD FBOM FATHER TO BON J GUILT IB NOT ENTAILED. It haS for 

ages been a knotty problem among thoughtful men, whether children suffered for the 
sins of their parents. Undoubtedly they suffer — they suffer in privation, in health, 
in reputation, in the tone of moral feeling, in the loss of high example and holy 
stimulus. But properly speaking, this is not guilt, this is not punishment. A man's 
vices are entailed to his posterity. A child follows in its father's steps at first, until 
it learns to reflect ; jhen often it turns awny in disgust. But guilt means sin in the 
light of law, and a man does not contract guilt until he understands the law and can 
distinguish between right and wrong. At this point, sin, if persisted in, becomes 
guilt, and suffering then becomes punishment. 

V. The last penalty of law is always the effect of peebonal ouilt. "The 
soul that sitmeth, it shall die" — it, and not another in its stead. Other suffering — such 
as poverty, ill repute, a sickly body, an ill-furnished mind — all this is di^ciplinary ; all 
this can be made the means of higher good. This is not penalty, though it is suffering. 
But the culminating stroke of punisliment, viz. death, falls alone on him who is 
personally guilty. No guilty man shall escape. No innocent man shall suffer final 
destruction. This is God's equity. — ^D. 

Vers. 6 — 24. — OocPs remonstrance with man's reason. It is an act of singular kind- 
ness that God should stoop to reason with the perverted mind of man. It had been 
a pleasure to instruct the uncorrupted mind ; but now that the instrument is injured, 
it requires infinitely more patience and skill to deal with it. Yet God deigns to explain 
his principles of rule, and will eventually vindicate, as supremely just, every secret 
act. But sinful men are self-blinded. 

L We abb eemindbd of man's eebpqnsibility. God deals with men as creatures 
capable of discerning between riglit and wrong. Man's morality is, in God's sight, 
everything. To be righteous is his glory. The final inquiry will be not — Is he rich 
or poor ? learned or unlearned? but this only— Is he righteous or unrighteous ? Every 
man is undergoing moral triaL He must give au account of himself before God. 

II. Idolatry is a root of various immorality. It is not merely a creed, nor 
yet only a form of worship. It indicates a state of heart, a departure from the soul's 
anchorage. The living God is the Source of human purity, human greatness, and to 
wander from him is to drift into darkness and vice and ruin. Wherever idolatry has 
prevailed, tJiere has prevailed also uncbastity, licentiousness, violence, and cruelty. 

III. Pabgn^al influence is potent, yet not fatal, a father's opinions and 
beliefs will, in the first instance, he conveyed to his child ; yet soon the child will 
gather opinions and teaching from other sources, and often modifies or reverses the 
beliefs of its parent. 'The evil example of a parent moulds, more or less, the character 
of a child. Am a parent is the channel of natural life to the child, so too he may 
become the channel of moral and spiritual life. As a fact, the results of parental 
influence are conspicuously seen. Yet a son is not doomed to copy the character of 
his parent, nor fated to imitate his vices. He has the power to consider, to ponder, to 
choose, to resist. Strong influence is not f^te. 

IV. Repentance, at any stage or human probation, is possible. It is recognized, 
throughout the Bible, that a man may turn from evil ways. If, at any point short of 
death, a man is disposed to turn from a vicious course, all the resources of God's skill 
and power are on his side. There is no hindrance to a man's reformation and restora- 
tion save his own unwillingness. Incessantly, God is inviting such repentance. 

V. Repentance leads to complete and perfect bighteousness. Repentance is 
not merely a negation ; it is a positive good. It is the first link in a golden chain 
that shall bind the soul in sweet allegiance to God. It is the first drop in a precious 
shower of blessing. It is the foundation-stone of a new character. It is the seed of 
a magnificent harvest. Prom true repentance every virtue, every excellence, every 
noble quality, shall spring. Give it time, and it shall bear upon its branches all the 
flowers and fruits of goodness. It is the first ray of heaven struggling to find 
entrance into man's heart. 

VI. Righteousness is inoiment life. " In his righteousness that he hath done, 
he .shall live." Only that man who is righteous truly lives. The life of a man must 
Wilude the life of conscience— the life of the soul. To eat, drink, sleep, is the life ol 



336 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. x.vui. 1—32, 



an animal, not the life of an inunortal. The first activities of conscience are the move- 
ments and signs of life. Therefore penitence is nascent life. Reformation is life. 
Reconciliation with God is life— the budding of the heavenly life. The life of grace on 
earth is the dawn of an eternal day. Such righteousness brings peace, rest, joy, into 
the heart— heaven begun below. These are the first fruits of the coming harvest. " The 
just shall live by his laith." — D. 

Vers. 25 — 32.— The path to life. Sin has a blinding effect upon man's intellect and 
reason. It leads to most erroneous conclusions. It produces deep-seated and suicidal 
prejudice. It puts " darkness for light, and light for darkness." The most perfect 
equality it brands "inequality." It would make heaven into hell. 

I. The first step hbavenwabd is THOuojiTFtn. choice. The chief folly of men ii 
their thoughtlessness. They sink into mental and moral indolence. They will not 
investigate truth, Lor ponder the demands of duty, nor forecast the future. But when 
«' he comes to himself," he begins to reflect. " Because he considereth " (ver. 28), he 
turns over a new leaf. The man allows intelligence and wisdom and reason to prevail. 
He resolves to seek his real good. He chooses the best course, and determines to 
pursue it. 

II. Wise decision leads to new action. Having made an intelligent resolve, the 
man " turns away from his transgressions." He begins with known sins. He abandons 
these. That is only a sham decision which does not lead to action. The will may be 
a slave to feeling and appetite ; in that case no real decision has been made. The soul 
is divided. There is strife and war within ! But if the man has decided upon a line 
of conduct, new action will at once follow. 

III. Actions eeact upon the affections. It is a known £wst that necesary work 
which was at first repulsive ceases to be repulsive. We. grow to love actions which 
are oft repeated. Especially if such actions are right in themselves, if they have a 
moral loveliness, if others approve them, if they produce good effects, we learn to 
love them. Our actions develop and strengthen our affections. The heart is benefited. 
The tone and temper of our spirit are improved. True, it is God that renews and 
purifies the heart ; but he works through our own activity. He gives Divine efficacy 
to the means employed. 

lY. Tub affections or a man fashion his ohabacteb. As a man's sentiments 
and affections are, so is he. "A new heart and a right spirit" go together. The 
character follows the affections. The man that loves purity will become pure. The 
man that loves God will become God-like. So long as man is on earth, he never ii, 
he is always becoming, good or bad, great or mean. Character here is in a state of 
fusion. 

v. Man's supreme good is identical with God's fleasube. God has no pleasure 
in the death of a sinner ; he has pleasure from his ransomed life. If my heart and life 
are right, I afford pleasure to God, I add to his joy. On the other hand, my sin 
diminishes his joy. For his own sake, therefore, he will hear my prayer ; he will help 
me in my struggles against sin. Why, then, should we die? It is unreasonable. 
Every argument, every motive, is against it. To continue in sin is folly, madness, 
suicide. — ^D. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — JVie misapplied proverb of sour grapes. " The word of the Lord came 
unto me again, saying, What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of 
Israel ?" etc. In the ' Speaker's Commentary' a connection between this and the pre- 
ceding chapter is pointed out. " The last verse of the preceding chapter declares that 
God is wont to abase the lofty and to exalt those of low estate. This gives occasion , 
for a declaration of the principle upon which these providential dispensations proceed, 
viz. that every individual shall be equitably dealt with — a principle that precludes tha 
children from either presuming on the fathers* merits or despairing on account of the 
fathers' guilt" 

L The solemn truth expressed in this pbovebb. Regarding this proverb apart 
from the spirit in which it was used by the Jews, it sets forth the truth that there la 
a transmission of certain qualities and tendencies, advantages and disadvantages, from 
parents to their children ; that children inherit good or evil, or both, from their parents ; 



CH. xvra. 1— 32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIBL, 837 

that Kme of the consoquencei of parental character and conduct extend to their 
children. 1. Thii truth it stated in the sacred Scriptures. We find it in Ezod. xx. 6, 
6 ; 2 Sam. xxi. 1 ; Jer. zt. 4 ; Lam. t, 7 ; Luke xi. 60, 51. 2. This truth may be 
distinctly traced in human life. It is apparent physically. It is exemplified in the 
sound constitutions of the children of healthy and virtuous parents ; in the debilitated 
frame and depraved appetite of the children of drunkards ; and in the transmission of 
certain diseases of the body from generation to generation. The operation of this 
principle is clearly seen in the secular circumstances of persons. Prudent and thrifty 
parents often bequeath to their children material comforts and riches, while the reckless 
and thriftless squander their possessions and leave to their children encumbered estates 
or no estate at alL This principle is exhibited socially in the respect which is accorded 
to the offspring of honourable parents, and in the infamy of vicious or criminal parents 
which damages the reputation of their unfortunate children. It is apparent mentally. 
The children of educated and thoughtful parents generally manifest inclination and 
aptitude for learning and intellectual pursuits. The reverse is usually the case with 
the children of unthinking and ignorant parents. It is traceable even in moral 
character and tendency. The prolivities to sin in the offspring of depraved and 
vicious parents are far more active and powerful than in the children of the godly. To 
live virtuous and Christian lives is much less difficult for the latter than for the 
former. Moral tendencies are transmissible. We may trace the presence and working 
of this principle in communities. Much of the good and also much of the evil which 
we have in our life and circumstances to-day we inherit from the generations which 
have preceded us — ^from the governments, the Churches, the authors, of earlier ages. 
The connection of the generations necessitates the fact upon which we are dwelling. 

II. The hkjustifiable use or this fbovebb. It was in common and frequent 
use amongst the Jews in Babylon and also in Jerusalem (Jer. xxxi. 29). It was used 
wrongly by them. They used it : 1. 8o at to ignore their own sins. They were 
suffering because of the sins of their ancestors, especially of Manasseh (Jer. xv, 4) ; and 
they repeated this proverb as though they had done nothing to merit the afflictions 
under which they laboured, and were being unrighteously dealt with. Whereas we 
have seen already in these prophecies of Ezekiel how widely they had departed from 
Giod, and how deeply they were implicated in the worst of sins (cf. ch. v. 5 — H ; vi. 
1 — 7 ; vii. 1 — 9 ; viii. 6 — 18 ; xvi. 15 — 34). They were suffering not one iota more than 
they deserved for their own sins. 2. So as to ignore the heneficial action of the essential 
piincipleof this proverb. (1) By the operation of this principle good is transmitted 
from parents to children as well as evil. They overlooked aU the good which they 
had inherited from such ancestors as Abraham, Moses, Samuel, David, Solomon, and 
others. We inherit many and precious blessings through the lives and labours, the 
Bufferings and sacrifices, of those who have preceded us on this planet. (2) The 
operation of this principle is calculated to exert a powerful influence in restraining from 
•in and inciting to virtue. The love of parents for their children is one of the purest 
and strongest affections of the human heart. That love, combined with a recognition 
of this principle, would constrain parents to live wisely and purely, lest otherwise they 
should injure their beloved offspring. But in using this proverb the Jews took no 
account of the beneficial operation of this principle. They quoted it as though it were 
productive only of evil. 3. So as by implication to challenge the justice of Qod in his 
providentiid dealings with them. They repeated this proverb complainingly, as if they 
were suffering wrongfully, and were not receiving righteous treatment at the hand of 
the Lord. They had themselves eaten sour grapes, and their teeth were set on edge ; 
but they spake only of their fathers having eaten the sour grapes, and the children 
suffering the consequences. Thus tacitly they aspersed the righteousness of the 
government of the Lord Jehovah in relation to them. 

III. The cessation of the use of this pboverb. '* As I live, saith the Lord God, 
ye shall not any more use this proverb in Israel. Behold, all souls are mine," etc. Ezekiel 
does not explicitly say by what means the use of this proverb should be brought to an 
end. But we suggest: l.By the manifestation <^t?ie personal loickedness of those w7u> used 
it. God would so bring their sin to light that it should be evident that their punish- 
ment did not exceed their guilt. Calvin clearly expresses the idea : "It was just as if 
lie had said, I will drive out of you this boasting, by laying bare your iniquity, in such 

■ZBKIEL. * 



S38 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZBKIBL. [oh. xTm. 1—32. 

% mannei' tluit the whole world shall perceive you to suffer the punishment you your- 
seWeg deserve, and you shall not be able, as you have been hitherto endoavourinir, to 
cast the burden on your fathers." 2. Because of the relationship which God bea/rs to all 
touh in cmnmon. " Behold, all souls are mine ; as the soul of the father, so also the 
soul of the son is mice." He is "the Ood of the spirits of all flesh." He is "the 
Father of spirits." In this relationship we have a guarantee that he will not deal 
unjustly with any one. All souls are his ; and therefore he will not manifest partiality 
in his dealings with any. " The soul of one man was as much regarded by him ai 
that of another. He had the soul of the father as absolutely at his disposal as that of 
the son ; and he could have no motive for letting the one escape with impunity in 
order to punish the other in his stead" (Scott). 3. Because the real punishment of sin 
eon only hefaU the actual sinner. " The xoul that sioneth, it shall die." This death is 
" the end of a process, the separation ol' the soul from its life-source, the Spirit of Gtod " 
(Dent. zxx. 16 ; Prov. xi. 19 ; Jer. xxi. 8). Only in union with God can the soul liva 
When through Christ the soul reposes its utmost confidence in God, sets its supreme 
affection upon him, and renders its loyal obedience to him, it lives. Sin is the very 
opposite of this; it is disobedience, disaffection, distrust. It sunders the soul from 
God, and that is death to the soul. " Your iniquities have separated between you and 
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you." That separation is death, and 
that Is the real punishment of sin. And it can come only upon the actual sinner, 
because it grows out of the sin. Sin and punishment are related as seed and fruit. 
" Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap ; " " Sin when it is full-grown, 
bringetfa forth derith." Men may and do suffer by reason of the sins of others, but that 
suffering is uot their punishment, but their misfortune, (jpiritual death, which is the 
tine penalty of An, can only come upon the sinner himsell " The wages of sin is 
death ; " " The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 

CoNOLnsiON. Our subject shows : 1. The fallacy of the notion that sin is an injury 
only to the sinner himidf. The essential penalty falls upon him alone. But others 
are ill-affected by his pernicious example, and feel some of the sad consequences of his 
evil character and conduct. " For none of us liveth to himself." 2. The solemn obliga- 
tions of parents to live upright and worthy lives. All men are under such obligations. 
But parents are specially so bound by reason of their relation to their children. They 
ought so to live that their lives shall entail nothing but good to their offspring, in every 
lesiject — ^physically, etc 3. Tht temerity and sin of challenging the justice of the 
Divint dealings uiith man. " The Lord is righteous in all his works ; " " Clouds and 
darkness are round about him : righteousness and judgment are the foundation of hii 
throne." If we cannot always discern the righteousness of his ways and acts, it is 
not because that righteousness does not exist, but because of the imperfection of our 
perceptions. These are not wide or clear enough to survey the vast extent or penetrate 
the profound depth of his designs and doings. Or our perceptions may be dulled or 
perverted by our sins. But his ways and works are ever not only just, but infinitely 
holy. " Righteous and true are thy ways, thou King of the nations." — W. J. 

Vers. 6 — ^9. — I%e just man delineated. "But if a man be jnst, and do that which 
ii lawful and right," etc. 

L_ The chabacteb mentionbd. " If a man be just," or righteons. This justness 
or righteousness is not merely a state of correct opinion ; or of becoming feeling on 
moral questions ; or of religious profession (Matt. vii. 21). It is a condition of character. 
The just man " is marked by this, that his settled principles, his customary desire, is 
to do, not what is pleasant, not what is advantageous to self, but what is right." 
" Little children, let no man lead you astray : he that doeth righteousness is 
righteous." 

IL Thb ooNDnoT EXHiBiTBD. The just man " does that which is lawfiil and ri^ht." 
Certain features of his conduct are here plainly set forth. 1. Complete abstinencefrom 
idolatrous practices. " Hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his 
eyes to the idols of the house of Israel." The eating upon the mountuns refers to the 
sacrificial feasts in connection with the worship of idols (of. 1 Cor. Tiii. 4 — 10 ; x, 7). 
Idolatry had become so prevalent and popular that certain idols were regarded aa 
belonging to the people of ^rael, the chosen people of the Lord Jehovah. But to thew 



OH. xvin. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL 639 



the just man pays no deference : he neither seeks their favour nor dreads their displea- 
sure; but he worships God alone. Our idols to-day are pursuits, possessions, persons, 
to whom we are inordinately attached. Anything which we allow as a riviJ to God 
for the affection of our heart or the devotion of our life is an idol to us. 2. Bcrvpuhiu 
maintenance of chastity. " Neither hath defiled his neighbour's wife, neither hath come 
near to a munstruous woman." The just man controls his carnal appetites by his reason 
and conscieace. 3. Careful avoidance of oppression of amy kind or degree. (1) Rob- 
bery by violence. " Hath spoiled none by violence." (2) Injustice by peaceful means. 
" And hath not oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his pledge." The pledge 
referred to is some of the necessaries of life, as in Exod. xxii. 26, " If thou at all take 
thy neighbour's garment to pledge, thou shalt restore it unto him by that the sun goeth 
down : for tliat is his only covering, it is "his garment for his skin : wherein shall he 
*'|5P ' " (3) Injustice by making a man's poverty the occasion of personal profit, 
" He hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase." " Usvry," 
says the 'Speaker's Commentary, "is the profit exacted for the loan of money, 
increase that which is taken for goods ; both are alike forbidden (Lev. xxv. 36 ; Dent, 
xxiii. 19). The placing out of capital at interest for commercial purposes is not taken 
into consiileration at all. The case is that of money lent to a brother in distress, in 
which no advantage is to be taken, nor profit required." 4. Exercise of practical 
philanthropy. " Hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with 
a garment." The just man as delineated by the prophet not only refrains from injuring 
any one, but also endeavours to help those who need his aid. In the Bible a high 
estimate is placed upon the exhibition of practical kindness to the poor and needy 
(cf. Job xxxi. 16—22 ; Isa. Iviii. 7 ; Matt. xxv. 35, 36, 40). Our Lord reckons and 
will reward such actions as done unto him. 5. Sighteous dtalings with men. " Th»t 
hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment Ijetween man 
and man." The last clause, perhaps, refers to the duties of a judge. But in every 
capacity and in all his conduct the truly just man endeavours to do what is right and 
true, and to promote the doing of the same by others. And as Matthew Henry 
expounds, " If at any time he has been drawn in through inadvertency to that 
which afterwards has appeared to him to be a wrong thing, he does not persist in it 
because he has begun it, but withdraws his hand from that which he now perceives 
to be iniquity." 6. Faithful obedience to God. " Hath walked in my statutes, and 
hath kept my judgments, to deal truly." The just man renders positive and active 
compliance with the holy will of God. That will is his rule of action; and he 
endeavours to be true to it and true to the Author of it. The man whose conduct ii 
thus sketched by the prophet is pronounced a just man, a righteous man. "He is 
just," not only in profession, but in fact; not only before man, but before God. 

III. The desttny asserted. "He shall surely live, saith the Lord God" — "live 
in the fullest and deepest sense of the word." This life is the antithesis of the death 
predicated of the sinner : " The soul that sinneth, it shall die." The " just shall 
surely live ; " " The just shall live by his faith." The life of truth and righteousness, 
of kindness towards man and reverence towards God, ia already his. And its con- 
tinuance is promised by God. "He siiall surely live," spiritually, progressively, 
eternally. — W. J. 

Verg. 10 — 20. — Personal character and destiny. " If he beget a son that is a robber, 
a shedder of blood," etc.. Most of the features of character mentioned in these verses 
came under our notice in our preceding homily. And other parts of these verses (e.g. 
" the soul that sinneth, it shall die ") have already engaged our attention. Bat the 
paragraph suggests the following observations. 

I. That pbbsonal chabaoteb ib not hereditabt. We have pointed out (on 
vera. 1—4) that moral tendencies are frequently hereditary ; a child may inherit a 
itrong bias towards good or towards evil from his parents. But a person's real 
character is not the product of the law of heredity. A just man may " beget a son 
that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that doeth any one of these things," etc. (vers. 
10 — 14). The character thus portrayed is the very opposite of the just man (vers. 
6 — 9), yet it is suggested that this character may belong to the son of the just man. 
PersoDU principles and piety cannot be transmitted from father to son as property is 



S40 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZKKIEL. [oh. xviu. 1— 32. 

transmitted. The son of a good man may repudiate his father's God, and refuse to 
tread in his father's footsteps. Eli was a good man, but his sons vere " sons of BeliaL" 
David was a great-souled and godly man, but he begat an Absalom. And Solomon 
begat a Rehoboam. " Grace does not run in the blood, nor always attend the means 
of grace." On the other hand, a wicked parent may beget a son who shall shun 
his father's sins, and live a righteous and religious life. The son does not inherit either 
the righteousness or the wickedness of his father as he inherits the paternal possessions. 

II. That the holy character of a parent will not avail foe the salvation 
or HI8 CHILDREN. The just man by his holiness does not save his vricked son. That 
son "shall not live: he hath dpne all these abominations: he shall surely die; his 
blood shall be upon him." The children of the godly have great religious advantages. 
In the instructions, examples, and prayejs of their parents they have most valuable aids 
to personal piety. Moreover, they probably inherit from them tendencies and aptitudes 
to the true and the good. Still, the parental character will only avail for the salvation 
of the parents. The children of the godly can only realize the salvation by realizing 
a character like unto their parents. David's godliness, though joined with intense love 
for his son, did not save Absalom from ruin. Hezekiah was a good man, but his son 
Manasseh was terribly wicked. Josiah was eminently pious and patriotic, but his 
children were notoriously depraved. True religion is an intensely personal thing ; it is 
an individual life and experience and practice. All its important experiences and acts 
are essentially personal and solitary. Only the sinner himself can repent of his sins. 
No one can believe on Jesus Christ for us. If faith is to benefit us it must be our own 
willing and cordial act and exercise. We cannot work out our salvation by proxy. 
Every man must " work out his own salvation with fear and trembling." The Jews 
prided themselves on their descent from Abraham, as though by that their salTation 
was secured ; but John the Baptist declared to them the worthlessness of their hope 
(Matt. iii. 7 — 11), and our Lord exhibited its utter delusiveness (John viiL 33 — 44). 
True religion is not ours in virtue of any human connection or relationship. It ia a 
thing not of flesh and blood, but of spirit and principle ; not of human generation, but 
of Divine regeneration. 

III. That the wicked obabacter of a pabent does not necessitate thb 
WICKEDNESS AND DEATH OF HIS CHILDREN. " Now, lo, if he " (t.e. the wicked son of 
just father) " beget a son, that seeth all his father's sins which he hath done, and 
considereth, and doeth not such like," etc. (rers. 14 — 17). Great are the disadvantages 
of the children of wicked parents. Parental example and influence are decidedly 
inimical to their highest and best interests. If they become true and good it will be 
notwithstanding their parents, not because of them. Yet such children may grow up 
righteous and religious, useful and godly. The son may behold his father's sins, not as 
an example, but as a warning, and may form quite a different character and lead quite 
a different life. The prophet mentions certain steps in this process which we may 
glance at with advantage. 1. Parental sins seen. " A son, that seeth all his father's 
sins which he hath done." Sons are close observers of their fathers' acts and ways. 
This should lead fathers to act wisely and to follow the ways that are good. It is a 
sad thing for a son to see follies and sins in his own father. 2. Parental sins considered. 
" And considereth." Observation is of little benefit without reflection. By reflection 
we are enabled to realize the true significance and bearings of facts and circumstances. 
By reflection facts become forces unto us. Inconsideration often leads to sin. At a 
time when Israel was " laden with iniquity " one of the grave charges laid against 
them was, " My people doth not consider." 3. Parental sins ihimned. " Considereth, 
and doeth not such like." A due consideration of the wayg and works of the wicked, 
their real cliaracter and certain tendencies, would lead us to regard them as solemn 
lessons to be earnestly shunned. Thus, according to our text, the son of a sinful 
parent may avoid that parent's sins, and practise the opposite virtues. Examples of 
this are happily numerous. The excellent Hezcluah was the son of the wicked Abac 
Good Josiati was the son of the notoriously depraved Amon, and the grandson of the 
still more notoriously wicked Manasseh. 

lY. Individual destiny is detebuined by individual ohabaotkb. "Yet say 
y^, Whereioje doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath 
■i. oe that which ui lawiul aud right, and hath kept all my statutes, and huth done 



OH. xviii. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZEKIBL. 841 

them, lie shall surely llvfl. The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear 
the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son: the 
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked 
shall be upon him." No statement could be more explicit and decisive than this. 
And it is corroborated by other declarations of Holy Writ. " If thou art wise, thou art 
wise for thyself; and if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it ; " " Each one of us 
shall give account of himself to God ; " " Each man shall bear his own burden." 
Individual destiny grows out of individual character. " As righteousness teudeth to 
life : so ho that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death." — W. J. 

Vers. 21 — ^29. — Moral transformations and their consequences. " But if the wicked 
will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep alt my statutes," etc. In 
this paragraph the vindication of the moral government of G^d is advanced another 
stage. Already it has been shown that the son does not die for liis father's sins, or live 
for his father's righteousness. Only the soul that sinneth shall die ; only the soul that 
is righteous shall live. Now the prophet proceeds to show that " so far from the sins 
of his fathers excluding from salvation, not even his own do this, if they be penitently 
forsaken." Or, as Matthew Henry expresses it, " The former showed that Ood will 
reward or punish according to the change made in the family or succession, lor the 
better or for the worse ; here he shows that he will reward or punish according to the 
chauge made in the person himself, whether for the better or the worse." 

I. A DESIRABLE M0BA.L TRANBFOBUATION. 1. Its nature. Several stages of it which 
are here specified will make this clear. (1) Serious consideration. "He" (i.e. the 
wicked man) " considereth " (ver. 28). Keflection is an indispensable step towards 
repentance. Thinking must precede turning. Thus it was with the psalmist : " I 
thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies," etc. (Isa. cxix. 59, 60). 
So also with the prodigal son : " when he came to himself," and thought upon his 
father's house, and his own wretched condition, it was not long before he arose and 
penitently went to his father (Luke xv. 17 — 20). Consideration leads to conversion. 
(2) Resolute forsaking of sin. " If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath 
committed" (ver. 21); "Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his trans- 
gressions that he hath committed " (ver. 28). There is no tme turning or repentance 
apart from the renunciation of sin ; and where repentnnce is lioth true and thorough 
there is a renunciation of " all his sins ; " the sinner " turneth away from all his trans- 
gressions." He makes no reservation ; he does not long or plead for the retention of 
any because they are small or comparatively uninjurious. He loathes sin, and endeavours 
to eschew it altogether. (3) Hearty following after righteousness. " And keep all my 
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right." Getting rid of the evil is not enough ; 
we must needs get possession of the good. Ceasing to do evil must be followed by 
learning to do well. Not only are we not to be overcome of evil ; we are to go on to 
overcome evil with good. " He that would love life ... let him turn away from evil 
and do good." If the evil spirit be expelled from our heart, and the Holy Spirit be not 
welcomed therein, the evil spirit will return with other spirits worse than himself, and 
they will take possession of our heart and dwell there (Matt. xii. 43 — 45). The desirable 
moral transformation includes hearty abandonment of sin and hearty cultivation of 
goodness. 2. Its consequences. (1) Forgiveness of his sins, " All his transgressions 
that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him ; " Revised Version, 
" None of his transgressions that he hath committed shall be remembered against him." 
They shall be so completely pardoned that there shall be no reproach because of them, 
no recall of them, no recollection of them. How fully and absolutely God forgives 1 " I 
will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more ; " " I, even I, am he 
that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake ; and I will not remember thy 
sins ; " "As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions 
from us ; " " Thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back ; " " He delighteth in mercy. 
He will turn again and have compassion upon us; he wUl tread our iniquities under 
foot; and thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea." (2) Bestowment of 
spiritual life. " He shall surely live, he shall not die. ... In his righteousness that he 
hath done he shall live. ... He shall save his soul alive." In the favour and fellow- 
ship of God is the scul's life. " In his favour is life." And that favour ia granted to 



342 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xviu. 1— 32. 

the soul that penitently turns from sin unto God. (For additional suorgestinna concern- 
ing this life, see our notes on ver. 9.) 3. Its great encouragement. " Have I any 
pleasure in the death of the wicked ? saith the Lord God : and not rather that he should 
return from his way, and live ? " God delights in the conversion, not in the condem- 
nation, oi the sinner ; in the inspiration of life, not in the infliction of death. " The 
God of the Old Testament," says Havernich, " has a heart : himself the essence of all 
blessedness, and mirroring himself in the blessedness of the creature, he has a heart for 
every being who has fallen away from him, and who is exposed to death. The funda- 
mental feature of his character is holy love : he delighteth in the return of the sinner 
from death to life." " He delighteth in mercy." This is the great encouragement for 
the sinner to turn in penitence imto him. 

II. A DEPLOEABLB MORAL TBANSFORUATION. 1. Its tiatitrt. " When the rfghteous 
tumeth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and doeth according to 
all the abominations that the wicked man doeth." Here is the transformation of a 
righteous man into a wicked man ; of a doer of righteousness into a worker of iniquity. 
The prophet does not set forth an occasional or temporary aberration from the right and 
the true ; but the habitual and persistent practice of wickedness. Moieover, in the case 
supposed, the sinner "dueth according to all the abominations" of the wicked, and con- 
tinues therein to the end of bis earthly existence : he " committeth iniquity, and dieth 
therein " (ver. 26). That such a turning from righteousness to wickedness is possible 
is evident from the moral constitution of man. He is free to obey or to disobey God ; 
to do that which is right or to commit iniquity. 2. Its consequences. (1) He forfeits 
the benefit of his former righteousness. " All his righteousness that he hath done shall 
not be mentioned ; " Revised Version, " None of his righteous deeds that he hath done 
shall be remembered." This is the antithesis to that which was declared of him who 
turns fi'om sin unto righteousness : " None of his transgressions that he hath committed 
shall be remembered against him." " Unless we persevere we lose what we Ijave gained." 
" Look to yourselves, that ye lose not the things which we have wrought, but that ye 
receive a full reward." (2) He incurs the penalty of his persistent wickedness. "In 
his trespass that he hath trespassed, and iu his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall 
he die ; . . . for his iniquity that he hath done shall he die." (On this death, see our 
remarks on ver. 4, " The soul that sinneth, it shall die ;" and on ver. 31.) 

IIL The equity of the Divine dealings with men in each of these kobal 
TBAN8F0BMATI0N8. (Vers. 25, 29.) 1. Men sometimes challenge the rectitude of God's 
dealings with them. " Ye say. The way of the Lord is not equal . . . Saith the house 
of Israel, The way of the Lord is not equal." The righteousness of the Divine way is 
thus denied, or at least questioned, sometimes even by the godly. Thus did Job 
(x. 2, 3). Thus also did Asaph (Ps. Ixxiii. 11—14). If sore afHiction or protracted trial 
befall us, we are prone to doubt and challenge the kindness, perhaps even the justice, of 
God's treatment of us. Yet " wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the 
punishment of his sins ? " 2. Those who thtis challenge the rectitude of Qod!s dealings 
are generally unrighteous themselves. " Hear now, house of Israel . . . Are not your 
ways unequal?" The wickedness of the house of Israel had long been exceedingly 
great, and was still so ; yet they were . forward to charge God with unfairness in his 
dealings with them. The greatest sinners are the readiest to daringly call in question 
the holiness of the character and the righteousness of the doings of God. The more 
excellent a man is the f>reater will bo his confidence in the holiness of the Divine will 
and ways, the more hearty his acquiescence in that will, and the more devoted his love 
to its great Author. 3. J/" Ood should deign to reply to such a challenge, he will most 
omp^y vindicate the character of his dealings with men. He does so in this chapter. 
■Wnen the evolution of his purposes in relation to our race is more complete, it will be 
unmistakably clear that in the salvation of the penitent sinner and in the condemnation 
of the persistently wicked he has acted in complete harmony with the infinite perfections 
of his being. " His work is perfect; for ail his ways are judgment : a God of faithful- 
ness and without iniquity, just and right is he ; " " Clouds and darkness are round 
•bout him : righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne ; " " The Lord 
is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works ; " " Great and marvellous are 
thy works, O Lord God, th« Almighty : righteous and true are thy wayi. thou Kinjt of 
the ages."— W. J. ^ '-» • 



OH. xvm. 1— 32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 848 

Ver. 31. — A tolemn and startling inquiry. "Why will ye die?" The prophet has 
Just exhorfeil the house of Urael to repent, to turn away from all sin, to turn unto God, 
BO that iniquity should not prove their ruin. And now he addresses to them the brief 
and awakening interrogation, " Why will ye die ? " This inquiry, interpreted in 
harmony with its context, implies, what has been already stated more than once in this 
chapter, that persistence in sin leads to tlie death of the soul. The prophet has also 
repeatedly stated that turning from sin to righteousness leads to life. And now, having 
completed the vindication of the Divine government against the charge implied in the 
popular proverh, " The lathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set 
on edge," he earnestly appeals to them to turn from their transgressions to God, and 
thus to turn from death to life. And in this appeal he utters the solemn and staitling 
inquiry, " Why will ye die, house of Israel ? " Wherefore will ye not repent, and 
live? Why will ye persist in sin, and die? 

I. The ruinousness op persistence in bin. It leads to death. "Why will ye 
dief" Man can live spiritually only in union with God. "In hie favour is life." Out 
our world adrift from the sun with his light and heat, and ere long it would be one 
region of invariable and total death. All life of every kind would perish from the earth. 
The soul cut off from God dies ; for he is its Life and Light. Apart from the grace of 
God, and the influences of tlie Holy Spirit, all men iire dead through their trespasses and 
sins. Every genuine Christian is said to have passed from death unto life, " He that 
heareth my word, and believeth him that sent me, hath eternal life, and cometh not 
into judgment, but hath passed out of death into life ; " " We know that we have 
passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren." Absence of sensibility is 
the great characteristic of death. In a dead body the eyes are there, but they see not ; 
the ears are there, but they hear not ; the nose, bat it smells not ; the organs of speech, 
but they speak not ; the nerves, but they feel not. Sensibility has departed. And 
they who live in sin lack spiritual sensibility ; they do not perceive the beauties of 
truth and holiness ; they do not hear the voice of God speaking through their conscience 
or through his Woid ; they do not realize the joys of religion : tliey are spiritually dead. 
But from this state they may be quickened into life by tbe Word and the Spirit of God ; 
they may be renewed in heart and in life. But persistence in sin, resistance of the 
influence of Divine grace and of tiie Holy Spirit, diminish the possibility of the soul's 
renewal, and tend to render its death perrnai.ent. Redemptive facts and forces, even 
when applied by the Holy Spirit, affect the soul less and less unless they he yielded to. 
And conscience, even when quickened by the Holy Spirit, speaks ever with decreasing 
authority unless its authority be practically recognized. And so the moral condition 
proceeds from bad to worse. Persistence in sin leads to a deeper, darker death ; or, 
speaking more accurately, to a more fiiUy developed death. " Sin, when it. is full- 
grown, brin;.;eth forth death." Who shall express the dread significance of this death ? 
It has been spoken of thus : " The words of pardon, the language of love, will fall 
unheeded. The glorious redemption of man's soul by Christ, and Christ alone, will 
have no power. That power has di^paited. Kvery day it grew less. Sin has deadened 
aU the senses ; and no longer can he see the radiant form of the Son of heaven. . . . 
Every good shall die. Every ray of hope shall die. Every offer of mercy shall die. 
Every idea of future blessedness shall die. Every resolve of hallowed obedience, every 
repentant feeling, every sorrowful emotion, shall die. , . . The sinner left to himself; 
the sinner left alone ; the sinner bereaved of good, bereaved of holiness, bereaved of 
God ; the sinner left alone to die ; — this were hell, at which the stoniest heart would 
quail, and the stoutest soul recoil ! " (J. W. Lester). This death, which is the full 
development of sin, is, we think, unutterably and inconceivably dreadful Persistence . 
in sin is ruinous. 

II. The wilfulness of persistence in bin. "Why wiU ye die?" The inquiry 
implies that man's ruin is of himself. The whole drift of this chapter has been to the 
same conclusion. 1. Man does not die hecatise of any umoillingnest^ on Hhe part of Ood 
to nave him. " I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord God ; " 
" He delighteth in mercy ; " " The Lord thy God is in the midst of thee, a Mighty One 
who will save : he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he wUl joy 
over thee with singing." He finds infinite satisfaction and joy in delivering souls fitom 
death, and in granting to them life and light. He has proved his willingness to mtc 



344 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZBKIEL. [oh. xix. 1—14 

men by the infinite cost at which he provided salvation for them. " He spared not his 
own Son, but delivered him up for us all." 2. Man does not die because of any deficiency 
in the Divine provisions for his salvation. The purposes and provisions of Divine gratse 
for human salvation are inexhaustible and infinite. Spiritual forces are not limited and 
exhaustible as material forces are. The reconciling or atoning power which is adequate 
for one sinful soul is adequate for a million, or any number of millions, of such souls. 
" Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom for all ; " " He died for all." 3. Man does not 
perish because of his inability to appropriate the salvation provided for him by Ood. 
It is offered gratuitously on condition of repentance for sin and faith in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. "Repent ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions," etc, (yer. 30); 
" Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house ; " Who- 
soever believeth on him should not perish, but have eternal life." Man is summoned 
by God to repent and believe the Saviour, and God never summons man to any duty, 
but man either has the power to obey the summons, or God waits to bestow that power 
upon him. In the latter case man has but to be willing to receive the power and it 
will be given unto him in ample sufiBciency for his needs. Man is prone to believe. lu 
many things he believes too readily. And in Jesus Christ there is everything to awaken 
and attract the heart's truest, tenderest, and most reverent trust. Salvation is offered 
on such terms that every man may avail himself of the offer if he will do so. It is in 
the human will that the mischief lies. "Because I have called, and ye refused," etc. 
(Prov. i. 24, 25) ; " How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a 
hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not I " "Ye will not come to 
me, that ye may have life ; " " This is the judgment, that the light is come into the 
world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light ; for their works were eviL" 

III. The uhrbasonablbness of persistence in bin. " Why will ye die?" Man is 
so constituted that he should act from reason. He has instincts and other impulses 
which lead to action ; but these should be guided and governed by his reason. His 
instincts and passions should be ruled by his reason, which is the glory of his nature, 
ftnd raises him above the inferior creatures in this world. When reason holds its proper 
place and exercises its proper power, then the lower impulses of our nature contribute t ' 
our true development and progress. 

** When Reason, like the skilful oharioteer. 

Can break the fiery passions with the bit, 

And, spite of their licentious sallies, keep 

The radiant track of glory ; passions then 

Are aids and ornaments. Triumphant BeawNi, 

Firm in her seat and swift in her career. 

Enjoys their violence, and, smiling, thanks 

Their formidable flame for high renown." 

(Young.) 
The Most High appeals to man's reason. " Come now, and let us reason together, saith 
the Lord,'' etc. (Isa. i. 18) ; " Produce your cause, saith the Lord ; bring forth your 
strong reasons," etc. (Isa. xli. 21); "Why will ye die?" This inquiry implies that 
man should have some reason for persistence in the way that leads to deMth. It also 
implies that he has not a satisfactory reason. It is, perhaps, designed to bring man to 
pause, and lead hun to consider his ways, and to ask himself why he pursues the way of 
death. There is no satisfactory reason why men will die. Persistence in sin is utter 
and suicidal folly. " Why will ye die ? For I have no pleasure in the death of him 
that dieth, saith the Lord Gk)d : wherefore turn yourselves, and live." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION, 
CHAPTER XIX. 



Ver. 1. — The two aeotions of this chapter 
— vers. 1 — 9, 10 — 14— are respectively two 
parables of the same type as that of eh. xvii., 
tlie former telling nearly the same story 



under a different imagery, the latter a re- 
production of the same imagery, with a 
slightly different application. Lamentation. 
The same word a* that used in oh. ii. 10. 
The whole chapter finds a parallel in Jere- 
miah's review of Josiah's successors (xxii. 



OH. XIX. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL, 



S45 



10—30). It is noticeable that the princes 
are described as being of Israel. The 
LXX. gives the singular, "the prince," 
and Hitzig and Ewald adopt this reading, 
applying it to Zedekiali. 

Ver. 2. — VHiat is thy mother ! etc. ; better, 
with the Vulgate, LXX., and Keil, Why. 
did thy mother, a lioness, lie down among 
lionessesf The image may have been sug- 
gested by Gen. xlix. 9 and Numb, xxiii. 24, 
or perhaps also by Nah. ii. II, 12. Tlie 
lioness is Israel, the Isingdom idealized and 
personified. The lionesses among whom 
she had lain down are the heathen king- 
doms. The question ashs why she had 
become as one of them and adopted their 
oraelty and ferocity. 

Ver. 3. — The wlielp, as ver. 4 shows, is 
Jehoahaz, also known as Shallura (jer. 
xxii 11), who "did evil" in the sight of 
the Lord (2 Kiugs xxiii. 32), the words 
that follow pointing to cruelty and oppres- 
sion like that of Zedekiah. The passage 
fiuds a somewhat striking parallel in 
iEschylus, * Agam.,' 695—715. 

Ver. 4. — The nations also heard of him, etc. 
The fact that lies under the parable is that 
Egypt and its allies began to be alarmed as 
they watched the aggressive policy of Jeho- 
ahaz, as men are alarmed when they hear 
that a young lion is in the neighbourhood, 
and proceed to lay snares for him. In 
chains, etc.; literally, nose-ringi, such as 
were put into the nostrils of brutes or men 
(ch. xxxviii. 4 ; 2 Kings xix. 28 ; Isa. zxxvii. 
29). The mention of Egypt points to the 
deportation of Jehoahaz by Pharaoh-Necho 
(2 Kings xxiii. 84 ; Jer. xxii. II). 

Ver. 5. — The second lion-whelp is identi- 
fied by ver. 9 with Jehoiachin. For some 
reason or other, probably because he, as 
having "slept with his fathers," was not so 
conspicuous an instance of retribution, Eze- 
kiel passes over Jehoiakim (B.o. 607 — 599). 

Ver. 7. — He knew their desolate palaces ; 
literally, teidowi; but the word is used 
figuratively in Isa. xiii. 22, in the sense of 
" desolate houses " (comp. Isa. xlvii. 8). So 
the Vulgate gives didicit viduat faeere; 
and Keil adopts that meaning here, "he 
knew, i.e. outraged, the widows of Israel." 
The Revised Version admits it in the mar- 
gin. The two words for "widows" and 



"palaces" differ in a single letter only, and 
there may have been an error in transcrip- 
tion. On the whole, I adhere to tlie Autho- 
rized Version and Revised Version (text). 
Ourrey explains, "Ho knew (i.e. eyed with 
satisfaction) his palace?," from which he 
had ejected their former owners, as his 
father Jehoiakim had done (Jer. xxii. IS, 16). 
Ewald follows the Targum in a various 
reading of the verb, and gets the meaning, 
" he destroyed its palaces," Interpreting the 
parable, we have Jehoiachin described as 
alarming Kehuohadnezzar and the neigh- 
bouring nations by his activity, and thure- 
fore carried off to Babylon as Jehoahaz had 
been to Egypt. The young lion was to roar 
in chains, not on the " mountains of Israel." 

Ver. 10. — Another parable comes close 
upon the heels of the first. Thy mother; 
80. Judah'Or Jerosalem, as the mother of 
Jehoiachin, who is still in Ezekiel's thoughts, 
and is addressed by him. In thy blood. 
(For the comparison of the vine, see ch. 
xvii. 6.) No satisfactory meaning can be 
got out of the words, the nearest being " in 
thy life, thy freshness," the sap of the vine 
being thought of as its blood; and cjitics 
have been driven to conjectural readings or 
renderings. The Jewisli interprelers, Tar- 
gum, Bashi, Kimchi, and margin of Revised 
Version, give, "in thy likeness," so. "like 
thee ; " Keil, " in thy repose," so. in the pe- 
riod of quiet prosperity. Hitzig boldly ado pts 
a reading which gives, "a vine climbing 
on the pomegranate ; " but (?). The many 
waters reproduce the imagery of ch. xvii. 5. 

Ver. 11. — ^The verse describes generally 
the apparent strength of the kingly line of 
David. The word for thick branches, which 
occurs again in ch. xxxi. 3, 10, 14, is taken 
by Keil and FUrst as meaning " thick clouds," 
as describing the height to which the tree 
grew. So the Revised Version (margin). 

Ver. 12.— The parable, like that of oh. 
xvii. 10, describes the sudden downfall of 
Jerusalem and the kingly house. The " dry 
ground" is Babylon, and the new "planting" 
indicates the deportation of Jehoiachin and 
the chief men of Juilah. 

Ver. 14. — ^Fire is gone out. The words 
are an echo of Judg. ix. 15. Zedekiah's 
reign was to work destruction for his people, 
as that of Abimeleoh had dona. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Ver. 1.— "-4 lamentation for the princes of Iirad." Ezekiel follows up Ws predic- 
tions of approaching judgment and his exhortations to repentance with an elegy on the 
distresses ofthe princes of Israel. . • • .. 

L Thb fate of the prinoes stirred dbbp FBELfNGB. It became the mspiration 
of »n ode. True poetry has its fountains in deep emotion. Thus a liring religion 
naturally finds expression in song, and the spiritual experience of men is uttered in 



346 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. xix. 1— 14. 

psalms. That religion which is satisfied with the cold statements of intellectual pr> 
posiiiaiis has not yet touched the heart, and is no living experience. There is a fire 
of passicn ia true devotion. On the other hand, when religion has been neglected or 
outraged, a new range of emotions is called into play, and the fate of sinners stira 
feelings of profound grief in all who understand its dire distress and have brotherly 
hearts to sympathize with others. The Book of Lamentations may be taken as the 
reverse of the Book of Psalms. Psalmists celebrate the emotions of true religion; the 
"Lamentations" is a dirge sung over those who have been unfaithful to their religioiu 
In any case, man's relation to religion is so intimate and vital that it should rouse 
deep feelings in the heart of every one. 

II. The fate of the pmnoeb contained peccliab elements of distress, 1. Tha 
princes enjoyed high rank. When they fell, their humiliation and suffering were all 
the greater. Men envy high stations ; but such positions are liable to peculiar 
calamities, from w hich the lowly do not suffer. (1) High positions attract attention. 
Princes are aimed at when peasants are neglected. The leading families were torn 
from their homes and carried off to Babylon, while the obscure sons of the soil were 
left to till their fields. (2) High rank is no sure protection. A body-gnard surrounds 
princes. Bat no gnard can ward off the judgment of Heaven. God will judge the great 
as surely as the Inw. 2. The princes came of a divinely favoured line. They belonged 
to the house of David — a hnuse whicli had long enjoyed peculiar marks of God's 
favour, and which wns tl ought to be sheltered by promises of everlasting prosperity 
(e.g. Ps. Ixix.). But no favouritism of Heaven will protect against the consequences of 
sin. God's promises of giace are conditioned by man's fidelity. 3. The ruin ^ th4 
princes was in itself most lamentable. They did not suffer from some temporary reverse 
of fortune. One nfter another they were flung down from the throne and degraded to a 
miserable fate. The consequences of sin are heavy and disastrous. No soul can face 
them with eqnanin lity. 4. The fate of the princes involved the sufferings of their people. 
The princes, being leaders in sin, were first in punishment. Their primacy of guilt was 
followed by a primacy of doom. But others suffered also in various d^rees, and the 
nation was involved in calamities. Thus the responsibility of those in b^h stations is 
enlarged by the £ict that they bring trouble upon many by their misdeeds. 

Vers. 1—9. — Tlie parable of the lion's whelps. I. The lion-like ohabaotbb of 
Israel. This character was especially given to the tribe of Judah, from which the 
royal family came (Gen. xliz. 9). There should be something of the better nature of 
the lion in the people of God. 1. Strength. With one blow of his paw the lion can 
break the neck of a bull. The nation of Israel was strong. The Church of Qoi it 
strong with the might of God. God does not only save his children as weak creatures 
needing his shelter; he inspires them with strength. 2. Freedom. The lion is not a 
domestic animal, trained to wear the yoke like the patient ox. When he is caught 
and cagid his proud spirit is broken. In a state of nature he roams at large oyer the 
desert. God gives libiarty to his people. They are not his slaves ; they are his free 
men. 3. Bule. The lion is regarded as the king of the forest. Israel in her greatness 
ruled over her neizhbours politically ; but spiritually she has since extended that rxile 
over the civilized world. There is power and a ruling influence over minds in the 
Church of Christ. 4. Majesty. The lion looks more brave than he is. His lordly 
mane and noble bearing, and the thunder of his roar that echoes through the woods at 
night, imiress men with a sense of awe. God has called his people to a position of 
greatness and honour. 

11. The fate of the two whelps. 1. Ttte disastrous fate of the first whdp. 
Jehoahaz behaves ill, and is carried in chains to Egypt (2 Kings xxiii. 32—34). (I) 
His great sin is that he worked destruction. " It devoured men." Sin is hurtful to 
others as well as to the sinner. When a man is in a position of power and influence 
this is especially the case. But "no man liveth unto himself." We are responsible 
for the harm done by our sin. (2) His punishment is loss of liberty and banishment. 
The lion is taken in a pit, shackled with chains, and carried off to Kgypt, Power to 
work ill will not last for ever. The liberty that is abused in sin will be taken away. 
They who are unfaithful to God will be banished from God's inheritance. 2. lit* 
limilarfate »f the second whdp. Jehoahaz is followed by Jehoiakim and Jehoiaehin, 



iw. XIX. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 847 

not only on the throne, hut in evil conduct and in consequent punishment. (1) There 
'b a succession in sin. This is not by natural inheritance nor by inevitable fate, but by 
» gathering together of various common influences, especially that of example. Tfet 
the fate of former sinners should he a warning to their successors. Men are too ready to 
copy the misdeeds of predecessors, without waiting to consider the consequences of those 
misdeeds. (2) There will be a succession in punishment. The resources of judgment are 
not exhausted. The hand that smote Israel is strong to smite a faithless Christendom. 
The form of the punishment may vary, but the essence of it will be unchanged. 
Jehoahaz was sent to Egypt, Jehoiachin to Babylon; but the doom of the two was 
essentially the same. Moreover, in both cases, as the villagers assemble in a circle to 
tatch a destructive lion, the neighbouring nations joined in the work of Egypt and 
Babylon. Sinners make many enemies. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — The parahle of the destruction of the vine. The Jews have often 
been compared to a vine well cared for by God, and the same comparison, on our Lord's 
authority, may be applied to Christians. In the present case we have a description first 
of the prosperity of the vine, and then of the devastating ruin of it. 

I. The prosperity of the vine. 1. It was planted by the watert. Thus it was well 
■nourished and refreshed. God cares for his children, and supplies their wants. The 
river of the water of life is for their refreshment. They cannot, charge their sin to any 
failing in God's grace. 2. // was fruitful. The early history of Israel shows that the 
people of God could give some return- in service and holy living. God's people have 
borne fruit in works of zeal and charity. This frultfulness is what is most looked for 
in the vine (John xv. 5). 3. It was well developed. " Full of branches." Israel grow 
in population. The Church has grown in numbers. External prosperity has been seen 
in the visible enlargment of Christendom. 4. It was influential. Its branches were 
BO great that they became -strong rods for sceptres. Israel exerted royal influence. 
The Church has been high in power. Weakness and limitation of influence cannot be 
pleaded as excuses for the neglect of her mission. 5. It was honoured. " Her stature 
was exalted among the thick branches." The vine grew in height as well as in the 
breadth of her extending branches. Israel stood high. The Church has received her 
full mead of honour. 

III. The huin of the vike. All this former excellence did not prevent a furious 
vengeance from falling upnn the vine. Israel's glorious history did not save her from 
the doom of her sins. The past of the Church will be no shield from the judgment 
which must fall on her present or future faithlessness. The vine was grievously hurt. 
1. It was plucked up. Israel was driven into exile. The sinner will lose his old privi- 
leges. 2. It was cast to the grownd. In place of the previous exaltation of its lordly 
branches, there is to be a shameful humiliation as they are torn down and strewn over 
the ground. 3. Its fruit was dried up. Old good deeds are forgotten in later sin. 
When ihe soul is down in shame and mire, there is no longer power or opportunity to 
perform the old useful service. 4. Its sceptre-like rods were destroyed — broken, withered, 
and consumed by fire. Power departs with the loss of the old position and prosperit}*. 
The fallen Church loses influence. 5. It is planted in the ivilderness. The poor plant 
is left there to languish fur luck of water and nouiishing soil. The doom of sin is to 
shrivel up and fade away in a spiritual wilderness. 6. The worst fate comes from the 
vine upon itself. The fire proceeds from a rod of her own branches. The royal family 
of Israel brought down destruction on the nation. The sins of the Church produce its 
desolation. The fire of judgment that consumes each sinner springs from his own evil 
heart. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — TTie downfall of the princes. For the interpretation of this figurative 
and poetical portion of Ezekiel's prophecies, reference must be made to the close of the 
Second Books of Kings and of Chronicles, where the obscure and humiliating history of 
the last days of the monarchy of Judah is briefly recorded. Ezekiel's liirue concerns 

Cartly what had already taken place, and partly what was immediately about to 
appcn. The lessons to be learnt from the history and the lamentation are of a general 



348 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xix. 1— 14. 

iLaracter. The fate of tlie kings — if so they may be called — Jehoahaz and Jehoiachin, 
is certainly instructive. But it would not be just to separate between the rulers and 
the ruled, both of whom alike " did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord." 

I. The royai, origin and dignity of the pbincbs. They are compared to lions, 
nourished by the lioness their dam, among the whelps. Sprung from the royal stock, 
and acknowledged as being in the succession, they occupied in due time the throne of 
their fathers. This arrangement was in fulfilment of the promise made by Jehovah 
to David, that there should not fail a man to sit upon the throne of the royal bard. 

IL The misuse by the princes op their powers. It is natural that the young 
liou should catch its prey and even devour men. But when the princes are compared 
to such bloodthirsty and carnivorous beasts, it is implied that they were in the habit 
cf oppressing and rubbing their subjects, and treating them with violence and cruelty. 
As a matter of fact, the two princes referred to did conduct themselves in a tyrannical 
and unjust manner. 

III. The fate which the princes prepared for themselves. The nations are 
described by the poet-prophet as hearing of the ravening of the lions, and as setting 
themselves agninst them, spreading a net, digging a pit, and, by the use of customary 
devices, taking the noxiuus marauder. The first-mentioned prince was taken captive 
into Egypt, the second to Babylon. They are depicted as led in chains, as put in 
war J, and of the second it is poetically observed that "his voice was no more heard 
upon the mountains of Israel." As far as history enables us to judge, these princes met 
with the reward due to their ungodliness, violence, rapacity, and treachery. 

IV. The neglect of one op the princes to learn and take WARNma by thb 
fate of the othisr. Whether if Jehoiachin had been wise, and had learned the 
lesson publicly pronounced by the doom of Jehoahaz, he might have escaped ruin, 
we cannot tell. But by disregarding that lesson he sealed his fate. How often it 
happens in human affairs that the most obvious and powerful lesson, enforced by 
striking actual examples, makes no impression upon the mind of the young, self-willed 
and irreligious I 

V. A practical and important lesson IB thus conveyed to all who are called 
BY Peovxdbncb to oovbbn their fellow-men. 1. Princes should not rely upon their 
high descent, their birth, their ancestral claims to respect. 2. Princes should not use 
their power and the influence of their station for their own personal emoluments or 
pleasures. 3. Princes should be wise, and order their doings by the precepts of Divine 
righteousness. 4. Princes should remember the instability of thrones and the uncer- 
tainty of life and prosperity, and accordingly should be diligent iu their endeavours for 
the public good. — T. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — 2%e downfall of the city. The transition is a bold one, from the 
figure of the lioness's whelps to that of the vine with its pride of growth and its 
clusters of fruit, and anon as withered and scorched and ready to perish. Little is 
there of tenderness or of sympathy in the prophet's view of the degenerate scions of 
the royal house of Judah. But when he comes to speak of Jerusalem, a sweeter 
similitude rises before his vision; it is the vine that grew and flourished on the sunny 
slopes of Judah, in all its fairness and fruitfulness, now, alas I to be plucked up, cast 
down, broken, withered, and consumed with fire. 

_ I. Jbbusalem in her glory. 1. The city was well placed upon her hills ; as the 
vine by the waters that nourish and cheer the noble plant in the heat and drought 
of summer. 2. The city was noble of aspect ; even as the vine of exalted stature, as 
she appears in her height with the multitude of her branches. 3. The city was strong 
in her sway ; as the vine with her vigorous and pliant rods " for the sceptres of them 
that bear rule." 4. The city was fruitful in great men and great thinkers and great 
deeds ; even as the vine that bears abundant clusters of rich grapes. There is fondness 
and pride in these references to the sacred and beloved metropolis. 

II. Jerusalem in ebb desolation. It would seem that Ezekiel, foreseeing what 
is about to come to pass, speaks of the ruin of the city as if already accomplished. 
The vine in its wealth of foliage and of fruit is the picture of the memory ; the vine 
in its destruction is the sad vision of the immediate future, and the foreboding seems 
a fact 1. The city itself is besieged, taken, and dismantled. 2. The chief inhabitautd 



OH. XIX. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIEL. 349 



»re rither alain or led away into banishment. 3. The princes are deprived at theb 
power. 4. The city's prosperity and pride, wealth aid prowess, are all at an end, 

IIL Jeeusalbm lamented. The spectacle of a famous metropolis, the seat of 
historic government and of a consecrated temple, reduced to helplessness and disgrace, 
is a spectacle not to be beheld without emotion. We are reminded of the language in 
which an English poet represents the Eoman conqueror, centuries afterwards, lamenting 
the sad but inevitable fate of Jerusalem : — 

" It mores me, Bomans ; 
Confounds the counsel of my firm philosophy. 
That Ruin's merciless plongbshare should pass o'er 
And barren salt be sown on you proud city I " 

Applioatioh. 1. The transitoriness and mutability of earthly greatness are very 
impressively brought before us in this passage. Sic transit gloria mundi. 2. Emi- 
nence and privilege are no security against the operation of righteous law. 3. Repent- 
ance and obedience are the only means by which it may be hoped that advantages will 
be retained, and fui ther opportunities of useful service afforded. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Kingly power abused. Without doubt, the main cause of Israel's fall 
was the way wardness and vice of her kings. With few exceptions, they gave them- 
selves up to evil ways. Corruption at the fountain-head became corruption in all 
the streams of national and domestic life. Idolatry was the root; and tyranny, 
anarchy, violence, and cruelty were the branches. This soon became intolerable to ths 
surrounding nations. 

I. EmoLY POWEB WAS IKTENDED AS A BENEFIT. What the shepherd is to his 
flock, the king should be to his people. He is intended to live and think and plan for 
their good. Wisdom, not self-will, ought to be his supreme counsellor. As an army 
cannot succeed without a commander ; as a ship cannot voyage prosperously without a 
pilot ; as a family cannot do well without a parent ; so a kingdom must have a ruler. 
The administration of justice and of defence must have a living head. The appoint- 
ment of a king, whether he be human or Divine, is a necessity for a nation's prosperity ; 
and that king will be either a blessing or a curse. 

II. Kingly poweb may become selfish. The man who is exalted to the highest 
place of honour is so exalted that he may serve the nation. But, in a measure, he 
holds an irresponsible office. There is no higher power which can control or restrain 
him. Hence there is a great temptation for the abuse of office. The man may use his 
power to aggrandize himself, to increase his pleasures or his magnificence. Setting 
aside prudence, wisdom, benevolent regard for others, he may become arrogant, self- 
willed, tyrannical. The lower appetites of his nature may rule him, and the effect will 
be as if a beast ruled the people. Though a lion is chief among wild animals, he is but 
a beast still ; and the worst features of the untamed lion were manifest in the kings of 
Israel and of Judah. 

m. Kingly powbb, if selfish, becomes destructive. This young lion learnt 
"to catch prey, it devoured men." He who was set over the people to preserve life, 
to afford protection to their interests, perverted his high office, destroyed those he was 
appointed to save. The king is set in the stead of God, to reward obedience, and to 
punish transgression ; by the abuse of his office he becomes an ApoUyon, an ally of 
Satan. He destroys his people's peace, destroys their fortunes, destroys their lives. His 
misrule encourages violence on the highways, private murder, civil war, foreign invasion. 
An evil king is a fount of death — the nation's executioner. 

IV. Kingly power, when abused, must be fettered. " The nations set against 
him on every side . . . and spread their net over him : he was taken in their pit." He 
who is unjust and violent in dealing with his own people will be unjust and insolent 
in dealing with surrounding nations. But neighbouring kings are more free to resent 
and punish royal insolence than are the subjects of the monarch. Hence it often 
happens that retribution comes from the mutual consent of foreigners. There is One 
who rules among the nations, higher that the highest king, and he can employ a 
thousand methods to restrain and chastise a tyrant. At times God employs the subjects 
of the realm ; sometimes he employs death ; sometimes he employs a foreign army — 
a foreign league. Ii is a jxiiilouB thing to tauipor with righteousness. — D. 



860 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xix. 1— 14. 



Vers. 10—14.—^ nation'* rise and /all. If the emblem chosen to represent the 
Hebrew kings was a lion, " the lion of the tribe of Judah," the emblem of the nation 
was a vine. The vine was indigenous in the land ; the whole territory was a vineyard. 
As the vine is chief among trees for fruitfulness, so Israel, on account of superior 
advantage, was expected to be chief among the nations for spiritual productiveness. 
The fruits of piety and righteousness ought to have abounded on every branch. 

I. Hbb fame. 1. It was a vine of the noblest quality. Her sap was rich ; like 
blood. She was of the choicest sort. Abraham was the parent-stock, and Abraham 
was the highest kind of man — " the friend of God." 2. ITiis vine was well situated. 
Of all lands God had chosen Canaan for the abode of his people. It had been chosen 
by unerring Wisdom, and prepared by omnipotent power. It lay central among the 
nations; it had natural excellence; it was the glory of all lands. Sharon and Cannel 
iind Lebanon are still the synonyms for splendid fertility. 3. This vine actually 
flourished. " Her stature was exalted." " She had strong rods." Prosperity was not 
only possible ; it was matter of fact. The vine bare prolifioally. During the reigns of 
David and Solomon the people enjoyed an enviable prosperity. Wealth increased. 
Knowledge spread. Eeligion flourished. The people thronged to offer sacrifices. The 
Babbath was a delight. A magnificent temple was erected. The Jewish empire 
grew. Surrounding nations honoured the people that God had so signally blessed. 
Peace abounded in the land. There was contentment, order, plenty, national fame. 
Such rapid progress had never been known. What had been thus gained could have 
been maintained. The vine that has so nobly borne fruit can bear fruit still. 

II. Heb follt. The fault of Israel is here rather implied than expressed. Her sin 
was unfruitfulnesg. Instead of pruning the rank branches of this vine, the husbandmen 
allowed them to grow ; and soon all the strength of the tree ran out in branch and leaf. 
Instead of caring for clusters of holy fruit, " she had strong rods for the sceptres of them 
that bare rule." The nation was bent rather upon display, showy magnificence, 
military glory, than upon the works of righteousness and religion. The rank and 
luxuriant growths of idolatry took the place of fruitful piety. There was a fever of 
self-exaltation. The people imagined they could live upon their past fame. The kings 
became incarnations of selfishness, and the people, like a flock of sheep, eagerly 
followed the base example. Unfruitfulaess was her folly and her curse. A vine is 
worse than useless unless it bears fruit ; and Israel was worse than useless in the world 
when she threw aside her loyalty to God. 

III. Heb fall. " She was plucked up in fury." A storm swept over her, which 
rooted her out of the ground. Here is depicted : 1. The vine's prostrate state. It was 
laid low. This is a graphic description of Israel's defeat in war. In David's day, no 
neighbouring king dared to whisper any defiance to Israel ; now every surrounding army 
had made raids upon her territory and despoiled her possessions. The capitals, 
Jerusalem ahd Samaria, had been besieged and captured. 2. Demolition of the strong 
branches. The royal sceptre was broken. At this moment the king was a vassal, imder 
tribute to the King of Babylon. Kingly rule was only a shadow and a pretence. Every 
strong arm in Jud^a was withered. 3. 2^ element of destruction had issued out of 
ilielf. " A fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit." 
This language implies that it was the sin of her kings that brought about this terrible 
downfall. Had it not been for internal vice and folly, no foreign foe could have done 
Israel harm. For the arm of Jehovah was round about her. Sin has always the seed 
of punishment within itself. The fire came from within. 4. Yet there is a circum- 
stance of hope. 1'he vine is not left prostrate — unrooted. The Divine Husbandman 
has intentions of future kindness. The vine shall again be planted in the land of 
Israel ; meanwhile " it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty ground." 
This precludes despair. This preservation of the vine nourishes hope. But compared 
with former favours and privileges, this captivity is a barren wilderness. Bare preser- 
vation of life is all that can there be expected. Such disaster is fitting theme for 
human lamentation. What material for sorrow is supplied by wanton guilt 1 ^D. 

Vers. 1 — ^9. — A lamentation for fallen primxs. " Moreover, take thou up a lamenta- 
tion for the princes of Israel, and say, What was thy mother ? " etc. Here are three 
{:feiiminary inquiries. 1. Who is addressed by the prophet t Or, whom are we i. 



OK XIX. 1— U.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 851 

understand by the pronoun "thy"? "What was thy mother?" "Jehoiachin ii 
•d dressed," says the 'Speaker's Commentary.' Hengstenlierg eays, "The address ii 
to the man Judah, the people of the present." And Schroder, " The address is directed 
to the people." But, as we shall see, the people are probably represented by the 
lioness ; and if such be the case, it is hardly congruous to say that they are addressed 
in the pronoun " thy ; " for that would rejiresent them at once as the " mother " and the 
offspring. 2. Who is represented hy " thy mother, a lioness " t According to Schroder, 
" the mother of the people is Jerusalem " (cf. Gal. iv. 25, seg. ; Lam. i. 1). The general 
opinioa is that the mother represents the people of Judah or of the whole Israel. 
Hengstenberg, "The mother it the people in itself." Matthew Henry, "He must 
compare the kingdom of Judah to a lioness." Scott, " The Jewish Church and nation 
is represented under the image of a lioness." ' Speaker's Commentary,' " The people 
represented by Judah." 3. Who wre repretented hy the two whelps t (Vers. 3, 6.) 
It is generally agreed that by them are set forth the two princes for whom this lamenta- 
tion is made, and that by the first whelp which "became a young lion " is signified 
Jehoahaz (2 Kings xxiii. 30). But opinion is divided as to whether the other whelp 
which was " made a young lion" represents Jehoiakim or Jehoiachin. Hengstenberg, 
Schriider, and the ' Speaker's Commentary ' say that it was Jehoiachin, for this amongst 
other reasons, that he " was not appointed by a foreign prince out of order, like 
his father Jehoiakim, but sucoeerled regularly with the consent of the people 
(2 Kings xxiv. 6)." But it is diffioalt to see how vers. 6 and 7 can be applied to him, 
seeing that he reigned only three months and ten days (2 Chron. xxxvi. 9). On the 
other hand, if we take vers. 5 — 9 as applying to Jehoiakim, then the ninth verse 
presents this difiBculty, that it represents the prince as being carried into Babylon as a 
prisoner, and there brought into strongholds, and his voice never more heard upon the 
mountains of Israel ; whereas it is said in 2 Kings xxiv. 6 that "Jehoiakim slept with 
his fathers ; " and in Jer. xxii. 19, " He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, 
drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem." But, as Dr. Milman remarks, 
"There is much difficulty about the death of Jehoiakim; " for in addiiion to the state- 
ments just quoted from 2 Kings and Jeremiah, in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6 it is said that 
Nehuchadnezsiar " bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon." Whether we con- 
clude that Jehoiakim or Jehoiachin is referred to in vers. 5 — 9, difficulties meet us 
which perhaps at present cannot be completely cleared away. On the three questions 
at which we have glanced, the following remarks of Greenhill are deserving of quota- 
tion : " It is said ' thy mother ' in referenct to each prince. Jehoahaz, ' what is thy 
mother?' Jehoiakim, ' what is thy mother?' By 'mother' here is meant Jerusalem 
and the kingdom of Judah. Great cities and kingdoms are in a metaphorical .sense 
mothers ; they brina forth kings ; they elect, crown, and set them up to rule." Bnt 
leaving questions of disputed interpretation, let us look at those aspects or illustrations 
of historical and moral truths which this lamentation sets forth. We discover here— 

L Royal position and power symbolized. "What was thy mother? Alioness: 
she couched among lions, in the mid^t of the young lions she nourished her whelps." 
" The people appears as a lioness," says Hengstenberg, " on the ground of Gen. xlix. 9, 
to which passage the couching in particular refers (cf. Numb, xxiii. 24 ; xxiv. 9 ; Isa. 
xxix. 1), because it was a royal people, of equal birth with other independent and 
powerful nations, as this royal nature was historically displayed, especiallv in the 
times of David and Scilomon. . . . The wlielps of the mother are the sons of the King 
of IsiaeL The bringing up of these among lions points to the fact that the kingdom of 
Israel was of equal birth with the mighty kingdoms of the heathen world." And 
SchrodiT says excellently, " 'I'hat she ' lay down ' among the neighbouring royal states 
betokens majestic repose and copscious security — the fearless one exciting fear liy 
imposing power." The power and prosperity thus indicated were especially reahzed 
during the later years of the reign of David and the greater portion of that of Solomon. 
Of this we have evidence in 1 Chron. xiv. 17 ; xxiv. 26 — 28 ; 2 Chron. ix. 

II. BoTAL POSITION AND POWER ABUSRD. "And she brought up one of her whelps; 
he became a young lion : and he learned to catch the prey, he devoured men." The 
young lion is intended to represent Jehoahaz, who was raised to the throne by the 
people (2 Kings xxiii. 30). "He was an impious man," said Josephns, "and impure 
ijl his ci'ifrse of life." "Arid he did th^t which was evil in the sight of the Lurd> 



852 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [ch. iix. 1—14. 



according to all that his fathers had done " (2 Kings xxiii. 32). And, according to our 
text, during his brief reign he abused his kingly power by oppressing his subjects. 
Then we have the abuse of kingly power in another sovereign (vers. 5 — 7). If we take 
this as referring to Jehoiakim, it is difiHcult to see how it can be appropriately said that 
" she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion," seeing that he was 
raised to the throne by Pharaoh-Necho (2 Kings xxiii. 34). But in otiier respects the 
description here given suits him well (cf. vers. 6, 7 with 2 Kings xxiii. 35—37). 
Josephus says that "he was of a wicked disposition, and ready to do mischief: nor was 
he either religious towaids God or good-natured towards men"('Ant.,' x. 6. 2). Again, 
if we translate ver. 7 as in the 'Speaker's Commentary,' "he knew his palaces" (both 
Hengstenberg and SchrSder translate " his " in this clanse, and not " their " as in the 
Authorized Version), the reference to Jehoiakim becomes yet more clear ; for he had a 
passion for building splendid edifices, and he gratified it by injustice and op{>res3ion 
(Jer. xxii. 13—19). By both these princes their position and power were wickedly 
ftbused. Bank and might should be used in accordance with the will of God and for 
the good of man. Kings should employ their power for the protection and prosperity 
of their subjects. 

" Since by your greatness you 

Are nearer Ijeaven in place, be nearer it 

In goodness. Bich men should transcend the poor. 

As clouds the earth ; raised by the comfort of 

The sun, to water dry and barren grounds." 

(Tourneive.) 

But these princes used their power for the oppression an 1 impoverishment of their 
subjects. 

" When those whom Heaven distinguishes o'er millions, 

Profusely gives them honour, riches, power, 

AV hate'er the expanded heart can wish ; when they. 

Accepting the reward, neglect the duty, 

Or worse, pervert those gifts to deeds of ruin. 

Is there a wretch they rule so mean as they, — 

Guilty at once of sacrilege to Heaven, 

And of perfidious robbery to men ? " 

(Mallet.) 

in. RoTAL POSITION A»D POWBB TAKEN AWAY. " The nations alio heard of him; 
he was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt " 
(cf. 2 Kings xxiii. 31 — 34). There is here " an allusion to the custom, when the news 
arrives that a lion or other savage beast is committing mischief, of assembling on all 
sides to seize and slay it " (0. B. Michaelis). The " chains," " hooks," or " rings," by 
which Jehoahaz is said to have been brought into Egypt, refer to the custom of putting 
a ring "through the nose of animals that require to be restrained, to attach to it the 
bridle by which they are led, by which also their power of breathing can be lessened " 
(cf. 2 Kings xix. 28). Jehoiakim also was stripped of the power which lie had abused. 
" The nations set against him on every side from the provinces ; and they spread their 
net over him," etc. (vers. 8, 9). The historical explanation is given in 2 Kings xxiv. 
1, 2 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 5, 6. Or, if vers. 8 and 9 be applied to Jehoiachin, we have 
their explanation in 2 Kings xxiv. 10 — 16. When kings and princes abuse their 
power, in the providence of God it is taken away from them. Many examples of this 
might be cited; as Saul (1 Sam. xxxi.), Zimri (1 Kings xvi. 8 — 20), Jehoram (2 
Chron. xxi.), Manasseh (2 Chron. xxxiii. 1 — 11). And, as Greenhill says, " Tiberius 
was poisoned or smothered by his own nephew; Caligula slain by his own guard; 
Vitrellius was overthrown in battle, taken prisoner, and drawn with a halter about his 
neck along the streets, half naked, and after many outrages done unto him, he was 
killed and cast into the Tiber. Leander, tyrant of Cyrena, was taken alive, and being 
sewed into a leathern hag, was cast into the sea. Thirty tyrants were slain in one 
day at Athens, by Theramenes, Thrasibulus, and Archippus, who did it with seventy 
men." The measure they had meted unto others was measured also unto them. As 
they had done, so God requited them. These things call for lamentation on the part 
of the patriotic and the pious. When splendid opportunities are worse than ueglecltd, 



•K.XIX.1— 14] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 353 

and exalted position and power are grieyously abused, and princes oppress their people, 
the wise and good do mourn. National sins and calamities should awaken the sorrow 
of all lovers of their God and country. — ^W. J. 

Vers. 10 — 14. — National prosperity omd national ruin. " Thy mother is like a vine 
in thy blood, planted by the waters," etc. This paragraph completes the lamentation 
• for the princes of Israel. The figure is changed from the lioness and the young lions 
to the vine and its branches and fruit. This similitude is frequently used in the sacred 
Scriptures to represent the people of Israel (ch. xv. ; xviL 5 — 10 ; Ps. Ixxx. 8 — 16 ; laa. 
T. 1 — 1 i Jer. ii. 21). The parable before us presents two pictures. 

I. A PIOTUEB OP NATIONAL PROSPERITY. (Vers. 10, 11.) 1. Some features of 
national prosperity. (1) Favourable circumstances. " A vine planted by the waters." 
Palestine, the land of the chosen people, was very favourably situated in many respects. 
It was almost completely surrounded by natural fortifications. On their northern 
frontier were the ranges of Lebanon; from their southern frontier "stretched that 
' great and terrible wilderness,' which rolled like a sea between the valley of the Nile 
and the valley of the Jordan." On the east they were guarded by the eastern desert 
and by " the vast fissure of the Jordan valley ; " and on the west by the Mediterranean, 
which, " when Israel first settled in Palestine, was not yet the thoroughfare — ^it was 
rather the bonndary and the terror of the Eastern nations." And to the Western world 
the coast of Palestine opposed an inhospitable front.^ Moreover, the land in which 
this vine was planted was remarkable for its fertility (cf. Numb. xiii. 27 ; Deut. viii. 
7 — ^9). Palestine, says Dean Stanley, " not merely by its situation, but by its com- 
parative fertility, might well be considered the prize of the Eastern world, the possession 
of which was the mark of God's peculiar favour ; the spot for which the nations would 
contend; aion a smaller scale the Bedouin tribes for some 'diamond of the desert,' 
some ' palm-grove islanded amid the waste.' And a land of which the blessings were 
80 evidently the gift of God, not as in Egypt of man's labour ; which also, by reason 
of its narrow extent, was so constantly within reach and sight of the neighbouring 
desert, was eminently calculated to raise the thoughts of the nation to the Supreme 
Giver of all these blessings, and to bind it by the dearest ties to the land which he had 
80 manifestly favoured." (2) Efficient rulers. " She had strong rods for the sceptre 
of them that bare rule." " There grew up in Jerusalem-Judah strong shoots of David, 
able to rule (Gen. xlix. 10)." All her kings were not eminent either for capability or 
character ; bat some of them certainly were ; e.g. David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, 
Uzziah, Hezekiah, Josiah. (3) Manifest progress. "She was fruitful and tall of 
branches by reason of many waters. . , . Her stature was exalted among the thick 
branches, and she appeared in her height with the multitude of her branches." In the 
time of David and Solomon great was the prosperity of the nation (cf. 1 Ghron. xiv. 
17 ; xxix. 26 — 28 ; 2 Ghron. ix.). Even under Zedekiah (as we pointed out on ch. 
xvii. 6, 6) an encouraging measure of progress and prosperity might have been attained 
if he had remained faithful to his engagements with the King of Babylon. 2. 7%e 
great source of national prosperity. " She was fruitful and full of branches by reason 
of many waters." " The many waters," says Hengstenberg, " signify the Divine 
blessing which ruled over Israel, the rich influx of grace." The Israelites in a special 
sense owed their national existence and power and prosperity to Jehovah their God. 
And in all times and places true and lasting national prosperity can only be attained 
by compliance with the Law of God and realization of his blessing. " Righteousness 
exalteth a nation," etc. ; " The throne is established by righteousness ; " " The God 
of Israel, he giveth strength and power onto his people." He also " bringeth princes 
to nothing ; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity." 

II. A PiOTDBB OF NATIONAL BOiN. (Vers. 12 — 14.) Schroder calls attention to 
the sudden transition from the description of the prosperity of this vine to the declara- 
tion of its destruction. " Without the intervention of anything further, there followi 
its splendid growth, like a lightning-flash from the clear heavens, the complete over- 
throw of the vine, i.e. of Jerusalem-Judah, the birthplace of kinjjs, and therewith the 
Davidio kingdom." 1. Some features of this ruin. (1) Favourable circumstances are 
exchanged for adverse ones. Formerly shn was " planted by the waters ; '' and now ih« 

■ Dr. Stanley's 'Sinai and Palestine,' ch. iL 
BEIZIXL. S 4 



354 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xx. 1—49, 



li " planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land." The expression is figurative, 
setting forth their exile as a condition opposed to their growth and prosperity. " Such 
a wilderness may even he in the midst of a cultivated land." _ In some respects, 
" Babylon was as a wilderness to those of the people that were carried captive thither." 
They had lost their national life, their ancestral estates, many of their religious 
privileges, etc. (2) Efficient rulers are no more. " Her strong rods were broken and 
withered; the fire consumed them. . . . She hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to 
rule." The words, perhaps, refer to Zedekiah and his miserable overthrow (2 Kings 
XXV. 4 — 7). And there was no one to retrieve their fallen fortunes, or to reign 
efficiently over the remnant of them that was left in the land (cf. Isa. iii. 6 — 8). (3) 
ManiTest progress is exchanged for desolation and ruin. " She was plucked up in fury, 
she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit. . . . And fire 
is gone out of a rod of her branches, which bath devoured her fruit." The commentary 
on these clauses we have in 2 Kings xxv. 8 — 26; 2 Ohron. xxxvL 17—20; Jer. UL 
12 — 30; and in Lamentations. 2. The instrument of this ruin. " The east wind dried 
up her fruit" (cf. cb. xvii. 10; Hos. xiiL 16). The east wind points to the Chaldeans 
as the instrument of the Divine judgment. The figure is appropriate, both because the 
Chaldeans dwelt in the east, and because the east wind is often injurious to vegetable 
life. 3. The cause of thi$ ruin. "Fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath 
devoured her fruit. " The fire goes out from the chief stem of the branches : it does 
not take its rise from the Chaldees, but proceeds from the royal family itself, which by 
its crimes called down the Divine vengeance." It was Zedekiah, by his base treachery 
towards Nebuchadnezzar, that at last brought on the ruin (ch. xvii. 15 — 21). " The 
desolation of kingdoms," says Greenhill, " usually have been by their own kings and 
rilers, by those they have brought forth and set up ; their follies, cruelties, treacheries, 
have fired and consumed their kingdoms." 

Conclusion. I. Prosperity, loth individual cmdnaiUmal, is of God. 2. Suin,hoth 
individual and national, is self-caused, " The fire of one's own unrighteousness kindles 
the wruibful judgment of God," " Men first become parched, then the fire consumes 
them." "0 Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself 1" 3. Sin invariably leads to sorrow. 
It first causes lamentation to the good, and then leads to general lamentation. Sin 
may be committed amidst mirth and music, but it will speedily lead to mourning 
and woe. " This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation." — W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XX. 



Yei. 1. — A new date is given, and Inolndes 
what follows to cb. xxiii. 49. The last 
note of time was in eh. viii. I, and eleven 
months and five days had passed, during 
which the prophecies of the intervening 
chapters had been written or spoken. We 
may note further that it was two years one 
month and five days after the prophet's call 
to his work (eh. i.), and two years and five 
months before the Chaldeans besieged 
Jerusalem (ch. xxiv. 1). The immediate oc- 
casion here, as in oh. viii. 1, was that some of 
the elders of Israel had come to the prophet 
to inquire what message of the Lord he bad 
to give them in the present crisis. Whether 
any stress is to be laid on the fact that here 
Ihe elders are said to be "of Israel," and in 
ch. viiL 1 "of Judah," is doubtful (see note on 
eh. xiv. I). Ezekiel seems to use the two 
words as interchangeable. Here, however, it 
is stated more definitely tliat they came to 
Inquire, jirobably In the liope that he would 



tell them, as other prophets were doing, that 
the time of their deliverance, and of that of 
Jerusalem, was at hand. Passing into the 
prophetic state, Ezekiel delivers the dis- 
course that follows. 

Ver. 3.— As I live, saith the £ord God, 
etc. The inquirers are answered, but not as 
they expected. Instead of hearing of the 
" times and seasons " of the events that were 
in the near future, the prophet at once 
enters on his stem work as a preacher. 
The general principle that deterujines the 
refusal to answer has been given in 
oh. xiv. 3. 

Vcr. 4 —Wilt thou judge them, etc. ? The 
doubled question lias the force of a strong 
impcralive. The prophet is directed, as it 
were, to assume the office of a judge, and as 
such to press home upon his liearers, and 
through them upon others, their own sins 
and those of their fathers. He is led, in 
doing BO, to yet another survey of the nation's 
history ; not now, as in oh. xvi., in figurative 
lauguage, but diieotly. 



OH. XX, 1-49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEU 



f)66 



Yen. 5, 6.— In the day that I lifted up 
mine hand. The attitude was that of one 
who takes an oath (Exod. vL 8), and implies 
the confirmation of the covenant made with 
Abraham. The land flowing with milk and 
honey appears first in Exod. ill. 8, and be- 
came proverbial. The glory of all lauds 
is peculiar to Ezekiel. Isaiah (xiii. 19) 
•pplies the word to Babylon. 

Vera. 7 — 10. — No special mention of the 
idols of Egypt occurs in the Pentateuch, but it 
lies, in the nature of the case, that this was 
the form of idolatry implied in the second 
commandment, and the history of the"gol(ien 
calf" (Exod. xxxii. 4) shows that they had 
caught the infection of the Mnevis or Apis 
worship while they sojourned in Egypt. 
Here apparently the prophet speaks of that 
sojourn prior to the mission of Moses. In 
bold anthropomorphic speech he represents 
Jehovah as half purposing to make an end 
of the people there and then, and afterwarda 
repenting. He wrought for his Name's sake, 
that the deliverance of the Exodus might 
manifest his righteousness and might, the 
attributes specially implied in that Name, to 
Egypt and the surrounding nations. They 
should not have it in their power to say 
that he had abandoned the people whom he 
had chosen. 

Ver. 11. — ^I gave them my statutes, etc. 
Ezekiel recognizes, almost in the very lan- 
guage of Deut. XXX. 16—20, as fally as the 
writers of Ps. xix. and cxix. recognized, the 
excellence of the Law. A man who kept that 
Law in its fulness would have life in its 
fullest and highest sense. He was beginning, 
however, to recognize, as Jeremiah bad 
done (Jer. xxxi. 31), the powerlessjiess of 
the Law to give that life without the aid of 
■omething higher. The " new covenant " 
was already dawning on the mind of the 
scholar as on that of the master. 

Yer. 12. — I gave them my sabbaths, etc. 
As in Exod. xxxi. 12 — 17, the sabbath is 
treated as the central sign (we might aluiust 
say sacrament) of the Jewish Church, not 
only as a mark differencing them from other 
nations, bat as between Jehovah and them, 
a witness of their ideal relation to each other, 
a means of making that ideal relation a 
reality. 

Yer. 18. — It is hardly necessary to count 
up the several instances of rebellion, from 
the sin of the golden calf onward, Of 
direct violation of the sabbath we have but 
two recorded instances (Exod. xvi. 27; 
Numb. XV. 32)i but the prophet looked below 
the surface, and would count a mere formal 
observance, that did not sanctify the sab- 
bath, as a pollution of the holy day. (For 
fiarallel teaching in the prophets, see Isa. 
vi. 2—4; Iviii. 13; Jer. xvii. 21—27; and 
later on in the history, probably as the 



result of their teaohing, Neh. x. 31—33; 
xiii. 15— 22.) Then I said. The history of 
Numb. xiv. 26 and xxvi. 65 was probably in 
Ezekiel's thoughts. 

Ver. 16, — ^Iheir heart went after their 
idols. The words may point generally to 
the fact that the idolatrous tendencies of the 
people, though suppressed, were not really 
eradicated. The history of Baal-peor (Numb. 
XXV. 3 — 9) shows how ready tliey were to 
pass into act, and Amos v. 25, 26 implies a 
tradition of other like acts during the whole 
period of the wanderings in the wilderness. 

Ver. 18. — I said unto their children, etc. 
The words can refer to nothing but the great 
utterance of the Book of Deuteronomy as 
addressed to the children of those who had 
perished in the wilderness. That utterance 
also, it is implied, as indeed the Baal-peor 
history at the close of the forty years 
showed, fell on deaf ears. Then also there 
was, once again, in the inevitable anthropo- 
morphic language, a change of purpose, 
from that of a rigorous judgment to the 
mercy which prevailed against it. 

Yer. 23. — That I would scatter them among 
the heathen. The words seem to refer to 
the generation that had grown up in the 
wilderness, and, so taken, do not correspond 
with the history of the conquest of Canaan. 
What Ezekiel contemplates, however, as the 
resolve of Jehovah, is the commutation of 
the sentence of destruction for that of the 
dispersion of the people, leaving the time 
and manner of that (Aspersion to be deter- 
mined by his own will. Pussibly even in 
the time of the judges, with its many con- 
quests and long periods of oppression, 
there were instances of such dispersion, and 
these, with others that would naturally 
accompany an invasion like that of Shishak 
(2 Chrou. xii. 2 — 9), not to speak of frequent 
attacks from Moabites, Ammonites, Philis- 
tines, Edomites, and Syrians, may have 
seemed to the prophet the working out, step 
by step, of the dispersion which culminated 
in the deportation of the ten tribes by Shal- 
maneser, and of Judah and Benjamin by 
Nebuchadnezzar. Traces of such disper- 
sions before Ezekiel's time meet us in Pa. 
Ixxviii. 59 — 64 ; Isa. xi. 11, 12 ; Zeph. ill. 
10, 20. 

Yer. 25. — I gave them also statutes that 
were not good, etc. The words have some- 
times been understood as though Ezekiel 
applied these terms to the Law itself either 
as speaking of what St. Paul calls its " weak 
and beggarly elements " (6aL iv, 9), or as 
unuble to work out the righteousness which 
it commanded (Bom. iii. 20), and the lan- 
guage of Heb. vii. 19 and x. X has been urged 
in support of this view. One who has 
studied Ezekiel with any care will not need 
many words to show that such a oondusioa 



856 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [ch. xx. 1—49. 



was not in hie thonghto at all. For him 
the Law was " holy and just and good," and 
its statutes such that a man who should 
keep them should even live in them (vers. 
13, 21). He is speaking of the time that 
fnllowed on the second publication of that 
Law, and wliat he says is that the people 
who rebelled against it were left, as it 
were, to a law of another kind. The baser, 
darker forms of idolatry are described by 
him, with a grave ironjr, as statutes and 
judgments of another kind, working, not 
life, but death. Sin became, by God's 
appointment, the punishment of sin, that it 
might be manifeM as exceeding sinful. So 
Stephen says of Israel that _" God turned, 
and gave them up to worship the host of 
heaven" (Acta vii. 42). So St. Paul paints 
the corruptions of the heathen world as the 
result of God's giving them up to "vile 
affections" (Bom. i. 24, 25). So in God's 
future dealings with an apostate form of 
Christianity, the same apostle declares that 
" God shall send them strong delusions that 
they ehould believe a Ue" (2 Thess. ii. 11). 
Pa. Ixxxi. 12 may have been in Ezekiel's 
thoughts as asserting the same general law. 

Yer. 26. — I polluted them through their 
own gifts. The noun includes all forms of 
blessing bestowed on Israel— its com tmd 
wine and oil (see ch. xvi. 19, 20), even 
its sons and daughters, the &uit of the 
womb, as well as the increase of the earth. 
(For the prevsdenoe of Moloch-worship, and 
for the phrase, " pass through," see notes on 
ch. xvi. 21.) The sins were to bring deso- 
lation as their punishment, and then men 
would learn to know Jehovah as indeed 
he is, 

Ver. 28. — It was a special aggravation of 
the sin that it was committed in the very 
land into which they liad been brought by 
the oath (the " hand lifted up ") of Jehovah, 
that it might be a holy land, a witness of 
the Divine righteousness to the nations 
round about. The forms of worship include 
that of the high places, and the thick trees 
(Isa. Ivii. 5; Jer. IL 20; iii. 6) which 
witnessed the cultus of the Asherah or of 
Ashtaroth. 

Yer. 29.— What b the Ugh place, etc.? 
Bamah, in the plural Bamoth, was the 
Hebrew for " high place." At first it was 
applied to the hill on which some local 
sanctuary stood (1 Sam. ix. 12; 1 Kings 
iii. 4), but was gradually extended, after the 
building of the temple as the one appointed 
sanctuary, to other places which were looked 
upon as sacred, and which became the scenes 
of an idolatrous and forbidden worship. 
Ezekiel emphasizes his scorn by a conjeo- 
tnral derivation of the word, as if derived 
from the two words ba (" go ") and mah 
(•'whitlier"); or, perhaps. What emnail 



(oomp. Exod. xvi. 15 for a parallel deriva- 
tion of the word marone$). Taking the 
words in their ordinary sense^ they seem 
to express only a slight degree of contempt. 
"What, then, is the place to which you 
go?" — what is the " whither" to which it 
teada? But I incline (with Ewald and 
Smend) to see in the word " go into " tlie 
meaning which it has in Gen. xvi. 2 and 
zix. 81, and elsewhere, as a euphemism for 
sexual union. So later the word "Bamah" 
becomes a witness that those who worship 
in the high place go there (as in ver. 30) to 
commit whoredom literally and spiritually. 
Its name showed that it was what I have 
called "a chapel of prostitution" (oh. xvi 
24, 25). 

Yer. 30. — Say ye unto the house of Israel, 
etc. The words are addressed primarily 
to the elders who had come to consult the 
prophet (ver. 1), but through them to all 
their contemporaries and fellow-countrymeiL 
They still in heart and even in deed (cnmp. 
Isa. Ivii. 4 — 6, 11, and Ixv. 3, as showing 
the habits of the exiles) clung to the old 
idolatries. The question for them was 
whether they would oontinup, to walk in the 
ways of their fathers. If so, it was true of 
them, as of the eldem, that the Lord to 
whom they came would not be inquired of 
by them. 

Yer. 32. — That whioh eometh into your 
mind, etc. The prophet reads the secret 
thoughts of the inquirers. If the temple 
were destroyed, they thought, then the one 
restraint on the idolatries they loved would 
be removed. They would be no longer a 
separate people, and would be free to adopt 
the cultus of the heathen among whom they 
lived. If that was not Jehovah's purpose 
for them, then there must be no destruction 
of the temple, no dispersion among the 
nations. They come to Ezekiel to know 
which of the two alternatives he, as the 
prophet of Jehovah, has in store, and his 
answer is that he is bound to neither. 
They could not abdicate their high position, 
and would remain under the burden of its 
responsibilities. Scattered though they 
might be among the heathen, yet even there 
the "mighty hand and the stretched-out 
arm " (we note the phrases as &om Deut. iv. 
34; V. 15) would hunt them down, and 
punish them for their iniquities. 

Yers. 34, 35. — The prophet's words seem 
to look beyond the horizon of any fulfilment 
as yet seen in history, of which the return 
of tne exiles under Zerubbabel was but the 
pledge and earnest. He contemplates not 
a return straight from Babylon to Jerusalem, 
but a gatliering from all the countries in 
which they had been scattered ([Isa. xi. 11). 
When gathered, the whole nation is to bis 
brought into the wilderness of the peoples, 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



367 



bordered by many nations. ThU may pro- 
bably point to the great Syro- Arabian desert 
lying between Babylon and Palestine. This 
was to be to them what the wilderness of 
Sinai had been in tlie time of the Exodus. 
There Jehovah would plead with them face 
to face, in the first instance as an accuser. 
(For face to face, as expressing the direct 
revelation of Jehovah, see Exod. xxxiii 11 ; 
Dent. v. 4 ; xxxiv. 10, and elsewhere.) 

Ver. 37. — I will cause you to pass under 
the rod. The " rod " (same word as in Ps. 
xxiiL 4) is primarily that of chastisement, 
but it is also that of the shepherd who 
gathers in his flock (oh. ixxiv. 11; Lev. 
xxvii. 32; Micah vii. 14). Into the bond 
of the coTenant. The word for "bond" 
(only found here in the Old Testament) ii 
probably cognate with that for "fetter" or 
"bond" (Isa. lii 2; Jer. t. 6; xxvii. 2). 
The chastisement was, for those who ac- 
cepted it, to do Its work by restoring the 
blessings of the covenant which apostasy 
had forfeited. '*> 

Ver. 38.— The thought of the shepherd 
■nggests, as in Matt. xxv. 33, tiie separation 
of the sheep firom the goats. The land of 
the restored Israel was to be a land of 
righteousness, and the rebels were not to 
enter into it. Was EzeMel thinking of those 
who were thus to die in the "wilderness of 
the peoples " as a counterpart of those who 
perished in the forty yean of the wandering, 
and did not enter Canaan? Ter. 36 seems to 
imply that he was looking for a repetition 
of that history. The solemn fast kept by 
Ezra by the river of Ahava (Ezra viii. 
21 — 23) may be noted as corresponding, on 
• small ssale, to Ezekiel's expectotions. 

Ver. 39. — Go ye, serve every man his 
idols, etc. The command comes as with a 
grave irony. " Be at least consistent. Sin 
on, if it is your will to sin ; but do not make 
the sin worse by the hypocrisy of an unreal 
worship, and mix up the name of Jehovah 
with the ritual of Moloch" (comp. Josh. 
zxiv. 19, 20). The margin of the Bevised 
Version, with not a few critics (Eeil), gives, 
" but hereafter surely ye shall hearken unto 
me " (" if not " equivalent to " ye shall," as in 
the familiar idiom of Ps. xov. 11, where 
" if" is equivalent to " shall not"). So taken, 
the verse looks forward to what follows. 

Ver. 40. — From the earlier stage of the 
restoration the prophet passes on to its com- 
pletion. The people have come to the 
mountain of the height of Israel (Micah 
iv. 1, 2 ; isa. ii. 2, 3). Ezekiel sees an Israel 
that shall at last be worthy of its name, the 
worship of false gods rooted out for ever. 
The all of them points to the breaking down 
of the old division between Israel and Judah 
(Isa. xi. 13). Jehovah would accept the " heave 
offerio*:.'' (same word as in Bbm Oiv. 27 ; 



Lev. viL 14, et al.) and other oblations. The 
fact that Israel itself is said to he the 
" sweet savour " (Bevised Version) which 
Jeliovah accepts (oomp. 2 Cor. ii. 15 ; Eph. 
V. 2 ; Phil. iv. 18) suggests a like epiritual 
interpretation of the other offerings, though 
the literal meaning was probably dominant 
in the prophet's own thoughts. The nearest 
approach to a parallelism in a later age is 
that presented by Bom. ix. — xi ; but it is 
noticeable how there St. Paul avoids any 
words that imply the perpetuation of the 
temple and its ritual, and confines himself 
to the spiritual restoration of his brethren 
according to the flesh. It was given to him 
to see, what the prophets did not see, that 
that perpetuation would frustrate the pur- 
pose of the restoration ; that the temple and 
its ritual took their places among the things 
that " were decaying and waxing old," aud 
were ready to vanish away (Heb. viii 13). 

Ver. 41. — I will be sanctified in you, etc 
God is sanctified when he is manifested and 
recognized as holy (Lev. z. 3; Numb. xx. 
13). That recognition would be the conse- 
quence of the restoration of Israel, for then 
it would be seen, even by the heathen, that 
the God of Israel had been holy and just 
and true in his judgments, and that he seeks 
to make men partakers of his holiness. 

Ver. 43. — ^And there shall ye remember, 
etc. The words stretch far and wide, and 
throw light on many of the problems that 
connect themselves with the conversion of 
the sinner and the eschatology of the Divine 
government. The whole evil past is still 
remembered after repentance and forgive- 
ness. There is no water of Lethe, such as 
the Greeks fabled, such as Danto dreamt of 
as the condition of entering Paradise (' Purg.,' 
xxxi 94—105). The self-loathing and hu- 
mility which grow out of that memory, the 
acceptance of all the pimishment of the past 
as less than had been deserved, — these are the 
conditions and safeguards of the new blessed- 
ness. Ezekiel teaches us, t.e., that it is 
possible to oonceive<^ an eternal punishment, 
the punishment of memoty, shame, self- 
loathing, as compatible with eternal Ufa. 
So (in ver. 44) the prophet ends what is 
perhaps, the profoundest and the noblest of 
his discourses, his " vindication of the wayi 
of Gk>d to man." 

Ver. 45. — In the Hebrew the verses that 
follow form the opening of the next «hapter. 
The Authorized Versiou follows ^^e T.XX , 
the Vulgate, and Luther. The section has 
clearly no connection with what has preceded, 
and, though fragmentary in its charactor, 
seems by the words, " set thy face," to oon- 
nect itself with ch. xxi 2, and to lead up to 
it. The words of ver, 45 imply, as always, an 
interval of silence and repoiew '^ 

Ver. 46.— Drop tky w«cd. The verb u 



358 



THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 



nsed specially of prophetic utteranceB(ch. zxL 
2; Amos vli. 6; Micah ii. 6, 11), and stands, 
therefore, in the Hebrew without an object. 
Toward the sonth. Three distinct words are 
used in the Hebrew for the thrice-repeated 
" south " of the Authorized Version. (1) One 
which primarily means " the region on the 
right hand," to. as a man looks to the east, 
^hich Ezekiel also uses in ch. xlvii. 19; 
xlviii 28); (2) the "shining land," used 
repeatedly in ch. xl., xlii. (Deut. xxxiii. 23 ; 
Job xxxvii. 17; Eccles. 1. 6; xi. 3); and 
(3) the N^geb, the "dry" or "parched" 
land, the South (always in Eevised Version 
with a capital letter), of Josh. xt. 21, and 
the historical books generally, the region 
lying to the south of Judah. The use of 
the three words where one might have suf- 
ficed ia, perhaps, characteristic of Ezekiel's 
affluence of diction. The LXX. treats all 
three as proper names, and transliterates tbeiu 
as Thaiman, Darom, and N'ageb. Aguiust 
this region and its inhabitants (they, of 
course, are the " trees ") Ezekiel is diiected 
to utter his words of judgment. The 

Earenthesls in the last sentence gives the 
ey to the prophet's cypher-writing. From 
Ezekiel's standpoint on the Chebar, the 
whole of Judah is as the forest of the south. 
The "green tree," as in Ps. i. 1, 2, is the 
man who is relatively righteous ; the " dry 
tree " is the sinner whose true life is 
withered; the"fire"the devastation wrought 
by the Chaldean invaders, as executing the 
Divine judgment. In our Lord's words in 



Luke xxiil. 31 we may probably find an 
echo of Ezekiel's imagery. 

Ver. 47. — All faces from the south to the 
north, etc. The phrase seems, at first, to 
pass from the figure to the reality. Possibly, 
however, face may stand for "the outward 
appearance," the leaves and branches, of the 
trees. " From the south QNegeV) to the north " 
takes the place of the older " from Dan to 
Beersheba" (Judg. xx. 1; 1 Sam. iii. 20). 
Of that " fire " of judgment, it is said, as in 
our Lord's use of a like imagery, that it shall 
not be quenched (Mark ix. 43). It shall 
do its dread work till that work is accom- 
plished. 

Vrr. 49. — Both he not speak parables I 
We can scarcely wonder that Ezekiel's enig- 
matic words here, as in ch. xv.,xvi., and xvlL, 
should have called forth some such expression 
from his hearers ; but he obviously records 
the whisper which be thus heard, in a tone 
of sorrow and indignation. It was to him a 
proof, as a like question was to the Christ 
(Matt. XV. 16; xvi. 9; Mark viii. 21) a 
proof that those hearers were yet without 
understanding. The question was, for those 
who asked it, an excuse for hardening their 
hearts against remonstrances which needed 
no explanation. The indignation wai 
followed by another interval of silence, 
during which he brooded over their stubborn- 
ness, and at last, in ch. xxi. 1, the word of 
the Lord comes to him, and he speaks " no 
more in proverbs," but interprets the latest 
parable even in its details. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — Z%« tdent oracle. An embassy of elders is sent to Ezekiel to make an 
inquiry of the Lord through the prophet as to what is to be expected at a new juncture 
of national affairs, and Ezekiel is Instructed to tell them that Gk>d will vouchsafe no 
auswer. 

I. Those who refuse to hear what (Jod desires to teaoh thsu are anxious 
roR LIGHT on less IMPORTANT QUESTIONS. This was the peculiar, the anomalous, 
position of Israel. God had not been keeping silence. On the contrary, he had been 
sending repeated messages to his people, and the Prophet Ezekiel had been busy in 
teaching what God had revealed to him. This was not a time, like that of Samuel, 
when the word of the Lord was rare. But the people had not cared to receive the 
Divine messages. Here was Ezekiel's trouble. He had to preach to deaf ears and 
to exhibit his prophetic signs to blind eyes (ch. xii. 2). The perversity of his audience 
had driven him to novel and startling symbolical representations of truth in a last, 
despairiug endeavour to arrest attention. And yet even these efforts seemed to have 
been all in vain. Then there came to him an embassy, innocently ignoring all these 
neglected oracles, and blandly requesting a Divine answer to certain inquiries of their 
own. Was there ever a more insolent appro ich to God? Now, we have a full and 
rich Divine revelation in the Bible, and especially in the gospel of Christ. Here we 
may see God's message to man and God's answer to the most momentous inquiries ot 
the souL Yet there are men who set aside these voices of God, and then plead piteously 
lor light No doubt these elders of Israel did not wish to be troubled about their sins; 
they were anxious for light on their fate. They were like those people who discus* 
liu problem of future punishment, and with keen interest, but who are indifferent to 



OB. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHBT EZEKIEL. 359 

the ▼oice of conscience and the Divine call to repentance. Yet there is a pathetk aide 
to this sabject. Those who reject Gfod still feel driven to him for refuge in trouble. 

n. Gk>D WILL OIYB NO ABSWEB TO THE NSW QtrESTIONB Or THOSE WHO REFOSB TO 

siVB SEED TO HIS woBD ALBBADT BECBivi£i>. We Cannot be surprised that Ezekiel's 
oracle was silenced. Such insolence as that of the elders of Israd could meet with no 
more gracious reception. \. Jf wt rrfvse to hear Bod's Word, uw must ea^pect to 6« leji 
in darkness. Before we cry for more light, let us use the light we have. We may 
indeed pray for Grod's Spirit to help our interpretation of the Bible, and having read the 
written Word we may crave more light still. But first to reject the Divine revelation 
and then to seek for new light is not the way to receive more truth. 2. Ood toiU not 
give light to those who harden themselves in impenitence. The Jews had been charged 
with sin and called to repentance. They had refused to admit the charge and had 
declined to repent. Thus they had shut the door against further Divine communications. 
The spiritual vision is best purged by the tears of penitence. A hard heart is deaf to 
God's Word. 3. /( is useless to le informed about the future unless we listen to the 
spiritual teachings of God. Men resorted to oracles to 8.itisfy idle curiosity or to seek 
mere worldly guidance. God does not speak for such comparativelj' worthless ends. We 
most need spiritual instruction for the guidance of our souls into the way of life. Till 
we have received and obeyed that instruction any other form of revelation must be 
irrelevant, distracting, and therefore positively injurious. 

Vers. 5 — 7. — 2%« elect Israel. The elect Israel is a type of the people of God, the 
spiritual IsraeL Consider the peculiarities of the one as indications of the special marks 
of the other. 

I. The WAV in which Isbael was made an elect nation. 1. Chosen by God. 
This is the root-idea of election. God chooses his people before they choose him — 
chooses them out of the multitude, and so constitutes them a separate nation. The 
grounds of the choice rest with him and need not be divulged. But we may be sure 
there are grounds, and that these are not capricious. History has revealed one great 
end of the election of IsraeL The nation was chosen in order that it might become the 
channel of blessing to all nations. So the ChuTch is chosen to be God's means of bring- 
ing the gospel to the whole world. 2. Chosen in a state of degradation. The Jews 
were chosen in Egypt. Though promises had been made to the patriarchs centuries 
earlier, the fulfilment of those promises commenced with Gk)d'8 deliverance from the 
bondage of Pharaoh. When the people seemed to be most lost they were found by 
Goil. When they appeared to be of least value he chose them for himself. The Lord 
married the castaway child (ch. xvi. 8). Thus God now takes his people in their low 
estate. 3. Chosen Iry deeds of might. God proved his choice by bringing his people 
out of bondage. He "lifted up" his "baud unto the seed of the house of Jacob." 
With God to will is to do. The mighty deeds of God in the plagues and the passage of 
the Bed Sea are outdone by his great work in Christ. In Christ God does not only 
choose us, he lifts up his hand to save. 4. Chosen through the revelation of Ood. 
God made known his Name to Israel through Moses (Exod. iii. 16). We must know 
God to hear his voice. The revelation of Christ goes with the election of God. The 
chosen are called by means of the gospel. 

II. The pueposes for which Israel was elected. 1. High privileges. (1) 
Deliverance. The Jews were chosen to be delivered from Egypt. God chooses bis 
people, in the first place, in order to save them from their evil concUtion. Salvation is the 
first result of election. (2) The possession of Canaan. This " land flowing with milk 
and honey, which is the glory of all lands," was given to Israel by God, not inherited 
by right, nor won by the sword apart from God's interference. God gives his people 
the kingdom of heaven here, and the heavenly Canaan hereafter. It is a glorious 
privilege to be counted among the true people of God ; for the fruits of the gospel are 
sweeter and more satisfying to the soul than the best crops of Palestine to the body. 
2. Holy living. There was a condition of the Divine election, or rather, a condition on 
which the continuiition of its privileges depended. The Jews were tp cast away their 
idols, as God could endure no rivals. The people had been chosen in their idolatry ; 
but they were required to renounce it. Gud chooses his people now while they are yet 
smners. But his choice means that they must give up their sins, and if they still 



deo THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. [oh. xx 1—49 

cleave to them the election will he rendered null and void. The great mercy of God 
in choosing souls before the souls have turned to him should be sufficient ground to 
induce all who accept the privileges of the gospel to live up to the standard it sets 
forth. After Q-od has chosen us to be his people the least we can do is to choose him 
to be OUT Portion (Ps. Ixxiii. 26). 

Ver. 11. — Lwm and life. I. The Law was given as a MnnsTBB of lifb. God 
vouchsafed his statutes in order that the Jews might live by means of them. Without 
those ordinances they were in danger of death, for they were sinners, and the fruit of 
sin is death. Thus we see that the Law was given in mercy. It came as a blessing. 
It was in its aim a gospel. Nothing can be further from the truth than the notion that 
it was a rod of chastisement, or even, as some have regarded it, an evil thing, a sort of 
curse upon sinners. It was not so regarded by the Old Testament saints, who sang 
bymns in praise of it, and hailed it with language of affection and rapture {e.g. Ps. xL 
ind cxix). 1. Truth leads to life. The Law was a revelation of Gud's eternal verities, 
without which the soul would perish in the night of its own ignorance. 2. Bighteousnesi 
would make for life. The Law declared the nature of righteousness, and pointed out the 
path on which it could be pursued. Thus it was an aid to conscience. Further, by its 
sanctions of menace and promise it urged the careless to walk in that path. 3. Grace 
leads to life. The Law did not exclude all grace. On the contrary, it was given in 
mercy, and it contained saving provisions in various forms of condescension to human 
weakness and in the great institution of sacrifices for sin. 

n. The Law pboved to be a mebsengeb of death. (See ver. 25). We have come 
to regard the Law with aversion under the influence of the arguments of St. PauL Yet 
he distinctly teaches that the Law was good, but that the perversion of it led to ruin 
(Bom. vii, 12). 1. ITie Law condemns sin. Before we have sinned it is a Mend to 
warn us against doing wrong, but by sinning we have turned it into an enemy. The 
warning beacon has thus become an ominous meteor, the sign-post a gallows-tree. 
That which by its guidance protects the innocent from death, by its judgments con- 
demns the guilty to death (Rom. vii. 10). 2. 2%e Law is powerless to save from sin, 
(1) Its commandments cannnt save. They are standards of measurement, not direct 
powers. Though they urge through conscience, fear, and hope, they only appeal to our 
nature in its present state. They do not create a new heart. They may drive us to 
flee from the wrath to come ; but they do not provide any refuge. (2) Its sacrifices 
cannot save. Ceremonial sacrifices could only save from ceremonial sins. In regard 
to moral guilt these sacrifices could only typify cleansing;, not reallv accomplish it 
(Ps.U.16; Heb.x.4). 

ni. The gospel of Cheist is the onlt effectual way op life. The Law was 
" weak," though not on account of its own imperfection, but " through the flesh," i.e. 
on accountof man's human degradation, so that man did not respond to it. Therefore 
QoA sent his Son to bring the salvation which the Law was powerless to produce (Rom. 
viii. 3). 1. In Christ we have the gift of life. (1 John v. 12). Nothing less than death 
is due under the Law ; nothing less than life is given by Christ. This we receive by 
active regenerating grace, not by the erection of a new standard of morals — the Sermon 
on the Mount substituted for the Ten Commandments — but by the presence and work 
of a living Saviour. 2. This life in Christ does not destroy the glory of the Law. QL) 
Christ satisfies the Law in his own Person. (2) He destroys in us the sin which makes 
the Law our enemy and earns the death-penalty. (3) He gives us his new law of love, 
his eternal statutes, " which, if a man do, he shall even live in them " (Matt. vii. 24 — 27 ; 
John XV. 10). ■ 

Ver. 20. — The sanctity of the sabbath. The sabbath was given to Israel as a day of 
rest for man and beast (Exod. xx. 8—11). But it also had a deeper mystical signifi- 
cance which gave it a peculiar sanctity. It was the sign of Israel, the note by which 
the chosen people might be marked, the seal of the covenant of Sinai, as circumcision 
was the seal of the earlier covenant with Abraham. In this | articular, of course, the 
sabb,nth belonged only to the Jews under the Law, and our neglect of the seventh day and 
observance of the "Lord's day " are signs that we have pa-std under a new covenant 
i\ ilh a new sanction, seal, and token, viz. that of the communion (Luke xxiL 20), 



flH.xx. 1— 49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 861 



which therefore takes a place with ns corresponding to the sahbath in the Law and 
circumcision among the patriarchs. Nevertheless, the grounds on which the sabbath 
was selected as the symbol of the covenant of the Law are wider than the dominion 
of Israel, and deserve to he inquired into with a view to ascertaining their perpetual 
significance. 

I. Thb banotitt of the sabbath was associated with nature. God rested from 
creation (Gen. ii. 2). This fact is stated in primitive language. But the latest science 
shows that the course of nature is not a mechanical revolution, but a sort of vital 
pulsation. Its movement is rhythmic. It goes by shock and pause. It has its work 
and its rest. Summer activity and winter sleep, day and night, storm and cahn, are 
natmre's alternate week-days and sabbaths. We are part of nature, and must observe 
its methods. 

n. The sanctity of the sabbath was associated with the needs of man. 
" The sabbath was made for man." Therefore man needed the sabbath. 1. He needed 
the reit. Ceaseless toil wears and frets the very fibre of life. Masters and slaves, as well 
as the heast of burden, were benefited hy the Jewbh sabbath. We are not under the 
same formal regulations as those by which Israel was governed. But the conditions o( 
business life in the modem world are so much more exacting than any that can be 
imagined to belong to the simple pastoral and agricultural life of the ancient Jews, that 
the requirement of some equivalent to their sabbath must be much stronger with us. 
2. Se needed the opportunity for remembering Ood. The sabbath was sacred to the 
covenant. Sunday is sacred to the resurrection of Christ. The congenial thoughts and 
holy occupations of such a day are helpful. 

" The Stmdaies of man's life, 
Thredded together on time's string. 
Hake bracelets to adorn the wife 
Of the eternal, glorious King. 
On Sunday heaven's gates stand ope; 
Blessings are plentiful and rife. 
More plentiful than hope." 

(Geo. Herbert.) 

m. The banotitt of the sabbath was associated with God. God ordained 
the sabbath ; it was typical of his resting ; and it was the seal of his covenant with 
Israel. Thus it was in a threefold sense God's day. Christ has warned us against the 
formal abuse of its sanctity, and St. Paul has dared to assert a large Christian liberty in 
regard to it. Anything that makes its use formal savours of the Law, is Judaistic, is 
anti-Christian. Anything that makes it a day of gloom and repression is even 
contrary to its old Jewish observance as a festival. But, on the other hand, God has 
claims of worship. If Sunday is given up to amusement or toil those claims are 
ignored. It is our duty to give them all possible range in this age of driving seoalar 
interests. Thus are we led on to 

<* The sabbaths of eternity. 
One sabbath, deep and wide." 

(Tennyson, ' St. Agnes.*) 

Ver. 36, — A human wilderness. L What it ib. Israel is to be brought " into the 
V. ilderness of the peoples." The wanderings of their fathers was in "a waste howling 
vv ildemess " (Deut. xxxii. 10), among the wild beasts and far from the cities and homes 
, .f men ; but the exile of the nation in Ezekiel's day was a transportation into the midst 
,,f the settled populous country of Babylon. Chaldea was no Siberia. Banishment 
from Canaan did not lead to a return to the freedom and the hardships of a nomadio 
I ife. The captive Jews were planted among otlier nations. Although a strange blight 
'iKS Bince fallen upon the scene of the exUe, and the ruins of the great cities of the 
Euphrates have now become a veritable wilderness, haunted by lions and hyenas, those 
■ities were at the height of their prosperity ami splendour when the prophet lived and 
.\ rote. How, then, could he speak of them as a wilderness ? 1. 4 great cUjf it a 
human toilderness. The greater the city, the more desolate is the wilderness. Th' 
social life of small cities like Jerusalem and Athens must have been strong and pleasa< 



362 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 



But this life is swamped in the myriads of unknown faces that one sees in a vast city. 
Great Babylon, Eome, and London— the modem Babylon — have the character of a wilder- 
ness. 2. ITiere it no banishment so terrible as that of being lost in a human wilderness. 
People who could be tracked over Dartmoor and among the fells of Yorkshire may b« 
utterly lost in London. Every year there are many broken lives that go down in the 
awful misery that floods the lower parts of a great city, and no one misses them. 
Their individuality has been drowned in a sea of humanity. ITie most heart-rending 
loneliness is that of a friendless man in a crowd — so many fellow-beings, and not a 
spark of fellow-feeling I 

IL How IT IS nsED. The city-wilderness is used for the punishment of the Jews ; 
but not for that only. 1. Ood meets his people in the wilderness. Success blinds us to 
the presence of God. Society makes us deaf to his voice. Adversity and solitude pre- 
pare us to rememlier him and to hearken to his Word. We need not flee to the wilder- 
ness of a John the Baptist — to the seclusion of a hermitage amoni the silent rocks — in 
order to meet with God. He will visit us in the crowded city. Wlien the heart sinks, 
sad and faint at its own loneliness amid the din of a crowded life in which the lost 
wanderer has no share, God is ready to whisper words of comfort. He can find his poor 
Buffering child in the crowd, and draw near to him there as well as in the field, the 
chamber, or the temple. God comes into most intimate relations with his people in 
their hour of desolation. He meets them " face to face." In the old wilderness of 
Sinai the Jews shrank from such near contact with God, so that it was reserved for 
Moses alone (Exod. xxxiii. 11). Now it is to be for all Israel. Thus deep distress has 
its privileges. 2. Ood pleads with his people. He desires to save; he urges repentance. 
"Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord" (Isa. i. 18). When men are 
most cold and repellant, perhaps our heart may be open to the sympathy of God. Then 
we can gee that he seeks us in a great, undying love. 

Note, it is a shame to Christendom that there should be a human wilderness among 
us. Heathen cities were cruel. But brotherhood is essential to Christianity. May we 
not say that, after pleading with us for our own sakes, God also pleads with us that we 
may save our lost brothers and sisters ? 

Ver. 40. — God's holy jnountain. I. The bite. God's holy mountain is the site 
of the temple at Jerusalem. God promises his people that the exile will cease, that they 
shall return and worship him once more at the old sacred spot. Note the characteristics 
of it. 1. Jt is exalted. A mountain. Jerusalem is two thousand feet above the level 
of the Mediterranean Sea. The rock where the altar of burnt offering stood — ^now 
covered by what is called the " Mosque of Omar " — is the highest part of Mount 
Moriah. We look up to heaven in worship. 2. It is conspicuous. A city that is set 
on a hill cannot be hid. Private worship should be unostentatious an.l secret (Matt. vi. 
6); but public worship should be <ipen to all, and well known, that others may be 
invited, and that God may be glorified. Churches should be built in conspicuous 
places. 3. It is consecrated by old memories. There the fathers worshipped, and there 
also God came down and blessed his people in the olden time. Faith is strengthened, 
and worship stimulated by such memories. 

II. The service. 1. T%e people are to serve. They will not be rescued only to be 
left to enjoy themselves in idleness. The restored exiles are redeemed for high service. 
Christians are not saved from ruin that they may slumber in listless indifference. 
Indeed, part of Christ's salvation is deliverance from idleness, and the redemption of 
our powers that they may be turned to higher uses, i.e. to the service of God. 2. Ood 
is to be the one Lord served. In tlie old days of sin the people had attempted a divided 
allegiance. But this must now cease. The redeemed must live to the Lord. " Ye 
cannot serve God and mammon" (Matt. vi. 24). 

HI. The acceptance. This is the heart of the whole promise, from which the glow 
and joy of it spring. God had rejected his people and their sacrifices, casting the men 
into exile and permitting the sacrifices to cease. Before that disaster, he had refused 
to accept the offerings of those who practised wickedness (Isa. i. 13). But now on their 
return to their old home as purged penitents, God will accept both the people and their 
gifts. All our labour is in vain unless it be accepted by him to whom it should be 
offered. God accepts his repentant and returning people (1) on the ground of their 



UH XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 363 

repentance ; (2) in Christ, and on account of bis merits ; (3) fundamentally, because of 
his own forgiving love. 

IV. The saoeifices. The people, while they render service, do this especially by meani 
of the offerings that they bring. 1. They express gratitude. Sacrifices for sin are 
excluded from this passage. Doubtless they will be required, for unhappily the people 
will sin again. But so sad a prospect is not to be contemplated as yet. The offerings 
now thought of are those of thanksgiving. They suggest the thought that God will 
give bountiful harvests. Here is a picture of joy in worship. 2. They were required by 
God. One would have thought that gratitude would have made the commandaient 
superfluous. But Malachi shows that, as a matter of fact, the people were backward 
with their gifts (Mai. iii. 8). " Where are the nine ? " (Luke xvii. 17). Christ is our 
one Sacrifice for sin. Yet God still requires us to offer our bodies as living sacrifices for 
thank-offerings and self-dedication (Som. xii, 1). 

Ver. 44. — " For my Name's sake." The grounds of the Divine action are not man's 
deserts, but considerations in regard to Gnd himself. This is the secret of our hope, 
"He hath not dealt with us after our siMs"(Ps. ciiL 10). He hath dealt with us 
after his Name. God's Name stands for what is known of him — his revelation of himself ; 
it also represents his fame, and then his honour — as we should say, his " good name." 
No duubt the latter is the meaning of God's Name in the present instance, although this 
rests upon the former meaning, and in a measure includes it. Our word " character " 
has this twofold meaning — what is known to be in aperson and the reputation he bears — 
the subjective and the objective characters. We may say that God saves us for the 
sake of his own character in both senses. 

i. His I'DBLic CHABACTEB. 1. Ood ts honoured by his fidelity. His name is 
pledged to his word. His promise involves his Name. When a man has put his name 
to a deed, he is bound to fulfil its conrlitions. If he fails, his name is dishonoured. 
Promoters make great efforts to secure for their enterprises names that will inspire con- 
fidence. God will keep his word for the sake of his credit — for this at least, though we 
know also for deeper reasons. 2. Ood is honoured hy his success. The name of the 
artist goes with his work. If he sends out a bad piece of work, his name suffers. Now, 
Israel was God's rescued people. All the world gazed in wonder and admiration when 
the poor helpless slaves were wrested by Divine power from the iron grip of Pharaoh. 
They were seen to be a nation made by God, his workmanship. If they came to ruin 
after this, God would seem to have failed. Moses used this argument (Exod. zxxii. 12). 
3. Ood is honoured by his mercy. Cruel earthly monarchs of the old heathen type 
were proud to record on their tablets the number of kings they had slain, and the 
number of cities they had sacked. We have learnt to see a greater royal dignity in the 
saying of William III. concerning a certain nonjuror, " The man has determined to be 
a martyr, but I have determined to prevent him." God is more honoured by saving the 
world than he would be by damning it, 

IL His PEBSOSAL CHAEACTBR. 1. God acts from regard to truth. After all, it is 
hut as an accommodation to human views that God can be said to keep his promises for 
the sake of his reputation, that his Name may not be dishonoured. He is essentially 
true anil eternally constant. Though men may provoke him to change, he is firm and 
holds on to his purpose. Thus Christ persisted in his saving work, even when those 
whom he came to bless rejected him. He had a great purpose, and no action of man 
would turn him from it. 2. God acts from regard to righteousness. He desires to 
establish righteousness, and to extend its domain. For this purpose it wiU not be well 
that sin should be left to run its own fatal course unchecked, nor will it be best simply 
to visit the sin with vengeance, and to cut down the evil tree root and branch, sweeping 
the sinner with his sin into utter destruction. A silent desolation, in which every enemy 
lies low, smitten to death, is not the noblest victory. The conquest of the foe by 
his conversion to friendship is far higher. This is God's method. His righteousness is 
most honoured by the regeneration of sinners. 3. Ood acts from regard to love. His 
name is love. When we penetrate to the heart of God, love is what we see there. If, 
then, his Name expresses his inmost character, when God acts for his Name's sake he 
acts in love. Therefore, though he might smite, extirpate, and destroy them, he redeems, 
saves, and restores his unworthy children. 



364 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 

Ver. 49. — The obscurity of revdation. I. The teaohino of Divine revel atiok is 
SOMETIMES OBSCURED. It was a fact that Bzekiel had been speakiTig in parables. No 
other prophet indulged so freely in Bymbolical language. His writings are a garden of 
luxuriant metaphors, which often blossom into elaborate allegories. This style is 
characteristic of Oriental literature, and it is a feature of the Bible teaching generally, 
though in Ezekiel it is carried out more fully tl-ian elsewhere. There is an analogy 
between the seen and the unseen. Unattentive hearers may.be arrested by what strikes 
them on the plain of their own earthly living. It is not enough that we receive a bold 
abstract statement of truth into our understandings, for this may never fructify. An 
imaginative grasp of truth, even when it is less clearly defined, may be more vital and 
fruirful. 

II. When TBAOHiNa is obsccbb, the teacher is blamed. The unwilling hearers 
of Ezekiel laid the charge of failure to the account of the prophet. His language had 
been so enigmatical that they could not understand him. It is only reasonable that the 
Christian preacher should be open to criticism. On some accounts he should welcome 
it, for it shows that the minds of his hearers are not entirely asleep. Anything is better 
than blank indifference. Moreover, no one can be so certain that in many things the 
preacher fails sadly as he is himself, if he truly understands his high vocation. Never- 
theless, the most hard criticism comes from unsympathetic hearers, who care only to be 
taught, and seek only to be amused, or who are too indolent to think, and therefore 
complain of any appeal to their intellects, and blame the preacher for making difSculties 
which must stand in the way of unthinking minds. The earnest inquirer after truth 
may pick up some crumbs from the most obscure and dull sermon. 

III. The cause of the obscubitt of revelation hay bb in the hearer. Like 
Moses, Ezekiel complains to God of the unjust judgment of Israel. His contemporaries 
were like the men of our Lord's generation, whom Christ compared to children in the 
market-place, unwilling to respond to any call from their companions (Matt. zi. 17). 
Ezekiel had tried plain speech ; and his audience had turned deaf ears to his teaching. 
'J hen in a despairing effort to arrest attention, he had resorted to more novel and 
startling methods ; but the only response he had received was an accusation of 
using enigmatical language. Neither method had proved succest^ful. No method can 
succeed with unwilling hearers. The best seed fails when it falls by the wayside. 

IV. The remedy fob this obscurity may be found in some bousing experi- 
ence. What is wanted is not to scatter fresh seed, but to " break up your fallow 
ground " (Jer. iv. 3). Therefore the rejection of the truth recorded in ch. xx. is followed 
by the sword of judgment described in ch. xxi. After that, the people will hear, for 
then the soil will be prepared to receive the Word of God, whether it come in direct 
speech or in symbolical suggestions. Trouble breaks through the conventional crust of 
life, and leaves the bruised soul susceptible to spiritual influences. At least, this is 
the design of it. Unhappy indeed is the case of those who are hardened even against 
the last appeal 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 4j — A refected application. It is evident that Ezekiel held a position of 
honour and of some kind of moral authority among his fellow-captives. Although he 
was not given to prophesying smooth things, his countrymen still resorted to him, 
evincing a certain confidence in his mission. On the occasion here described, an appli- 
cation made to the prophet was upon Divine authority rejected — ^with reason given. 
So unusual an incident leads to further consideration. 

I. Man's need of a Divine obaolb. The elders of Israel may be taken as repre- 
sentatives of mankind generally. They approached the prophet in order to inquire of 
the Lord. And in this they were right. 1. For human ignorance needs Divine 
enlightenment and teaching. 2. Human uncertainty and perplexity need Divine 
guidance, wise and authoritative. 3. Human sinfulness, clouding, as it does, the 
spiritual vision, needs authoritative precept as to the path of duty. 4. Human fear 
and foreboding need the consolation of Divine kindness and the promise of Divine 
pu|iport. 



OH. XX. 1-49.] THB BOOK OP THE PEOPHBT EZBKIEL. 866 

n. God's wiLUNaNEsa to beflt fitllt and obaoiouslt to thb afplioation of 
EARNEST iNQuiBEBB. If there IS one lesson more than another inculcated with frequency 
and constancy in the pages of Scripture, it is this — that the eternal Father is accessible 
to his childreo, that there is no need which they can bring unto him which he is not 
ready to supply from his infinite fulness and according to his infinite compassion. 
Kevelation itself is a proof of this. The commission given to prophets and apostles was 
with a view to a suitable and sufi^cient response to the inquiries of men. The supreme 
Gift of God, his own Son, is just a provision intended to meet the wants, the deep 
spiritual cravings, of the human heart; he is "God with us." To question God's 
willingness to receive those who inquire of him is to cast a doubt upon the genuine- 
ness of the economies alike of the Law and of the gospel. 

III. The mobal conditions indispensably neoessabt nr obdeb to beceivino a 
BESPONBE FBOM THE OBAOLE OF GoD. Two such Conditions may especially be mentioned. 
1. Teachableness and humility ; the disposition of the little child, without which none 
can enter the kingdom of heaven ; the new birth, which is the entrance upon the new 
life. 2. Repentance. Whilst living in sin and loving sin men cannot receive the 
righteousness, the blessing, which the heavenly Father waits to bestow. "Your 
iniquities have separated between you and your God." Sin is as a cloud which hides 
the sunlight from shining upon the soul ; it is like certain conditions of atmosphere, it 
hinders the sound of Gud'a voice from reaching the spiritual ear. This is the action, 
not of arbitrary will, but of moral law. 

lY. Tee pbaotioal lessons to be leabnt bt afplioants. 1. Here, many, in 
the same position as that occupied by the elders of Israel who came to Ezekiel, may 
learn the reason of their rejection. " As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be 
inquired of by you]'" 2. Here all suppliants may learn a lesson of encouragement. 
It is not in God's ill will that the obstacle to our reception is to be sought ; for there 
is no ill will in him. " Wash you, make you clean ! " Draw near with a sense of 
need, with confessions of unworthiness, with requests based upon the revealed loving- 
kindness of the heavenly Father; draw near in the name of him who has himself 
shown the vastness of the obstacle of sin, and who has himself removed that obstacle ; 
and be assured of a gracious reception and a free and sufficient response. In Christ, 
the Eternal addresses the sons of men, saying, " Seek ye my face 1 " and in Christ the 
lowly and penitent may approach the throne of grace with the exclamation, " Thy face. 
Lord, will I seek 1 "— T. 

Vers. 6—9. — 3%e memory of the great deliverance. The oontiniuty of the national 
life seems to have been as constantly present to the mind of Ezekiel as was the fact 
of individual responsibility. He distinguished between national and personal character ; 
but both were in his apprehension real. It is certainly remarkable that, in answering as 
he was directed to do, the application of the elders, he should proceed to epitomize the 
history of the nation. His aim seems to have been to show that the irreligion and 
rebellion of which he complained in the epoch of the Captivity had existed throughout 
the several periods of Israelitish history. In a few brief paragraphs the prophet, in a 
most graphic way, exhibits the conduct of the chosen people in several successive eras. 
As was customary and natural, the first period dealt with was that of the momentous 
deliverance from the bondage of Egypt. 

L Ebvelation. God made himself known unto Israel in the land of Egypt. In 
this revelation were included : 1. Choice. 2. Covenant, confirmed by oath. 3. Promise 
of deliverance from bondage ; fitrther promise of a land flowing with milk and honey, 
the glory of all lands. 

II. Command. One great duty Jehovah laid upon his chosen and covenant people— 
the duty of abandoning the idolatry, whose evil effects they had witnessed among the 
Egyptians. They could not consistently receive the Divine revelation, and at the same 
time be guilty of idolatry, which in all its forms was a contradiction of the worship 
and service of the one living and true God. Idolatry was not only dishonouring to 
Jehovah ; it was a defilement of all who took part in its practices. 

III. Rebellion. Notwithstanding the grace displayed in the revelation, notwith- 
standing the authority accompanying the command, the chosen and favoured nation 
rebelled The circumstances of the case, when considered, render this all the mwe 



866 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 



marrellous. Although the superior power of the (Jod of their fathers had heen so con- 
spicuously displayed, " they did not forsake the idols of Egypt." Such conduct was 
both treason and rebellion in one. 

IV. Thbbatbnino. The truly human manner in which the prophet, in this and 
similar places, speaks of the Eternal leads some readers to charge him with anthro- 
pomorphism. The language used of a man might imply vindictiveness ; and, taken 
in connection with what follows, might even imply mutability and fickleness. The 
Divine " fury " and " anger " may not be free from emotion, but such language is mainly 
intended to convey the impression that the law of righteousness exists, and that it 
cannot be violated and defied with impunity, either by nations or by individuals. 

V. Relenting and salvation. The ground upon which Jehovah bore with his 
sinful people is remarkable ; it was " for his own Name's sake, that it should not be 
polluted before the heathen." For this reason he brought them forth out of the land 
of Kgypt. Their emancipation was owing, not to any daring of their own, not to any 
heroism of their leaders, not to any fortunate conjunction of circumstances, but to the 
interposition of Almiglity power. — T. 

Vers. 10 — 17. — The memory of the wildernesB of Sinai. The circumstances employed 
by the Most High to make Israel a nation were of the most marvellous and romantic 
kinds. Psalmists and prophets, nay, even Christian apostles and deacons, looking back 
upon the events of early Israelitish history, felt the fascination of the ancient story, of 
the emancipation from Egypt, and of the lengthened discipline of the wilderness, by 
which the tribes were welded into a nation and fitted for the possession of the land of 
promise. 

I. The gift of the Law. Men, especially in their corporate capacity, need some- 
thing more than exhortation, dissuasion, sentiment. They need law. And this necessity 
was met, when Israel was led into the wilderness, by the giving of the Law at Sinai. 
In this gift must be included the ten commandments, the precepts for family and 
personal life, the institution of the ceremonial, sacerdotal, and sacrificial dispensation, 
the confirmation and sanctific:^tion of the sabbath, by their observance of which the 
Jews were so well known by their neighbours. This last-named institution was, how- 
ever, regarded by the God of Israel in a higher light — as " a sign between himself and 
them." The people were by these means placed under authority. Sanctions were 
attached to the Law, and life was assured to the obedient. 

II. The bebelliok of the subjects. 1. The season and scene of this rebellion 
should be noticed ; it took place, as the prophet reminds the elders, and as the record 
itself informs us, in the wilderness, i.e. immediately after the great deliverance and the 
promulgation of the Law, and whilst the people were still dependent in an especial 
manner upon the bounty and the protection of the Most High. 2. The offensive form 
of this rebellion is noted : " They walked not according to my statutes, and despised 
my judgments" — a course which showed their failure to appreciate the privileges 
bestowed upon them, and the dishonour which they dared to offer to their Deliverer 
and King. 3. Their inexcusable neglect of the provision made in the weekly sabbath 
for their true well-being. 4. Their treachery. " Their heart went after idols." 

III. The judgment and the mercy of the King and Lawqivbb. 1. The immediate 
punishment inflicted upon the lebellious generation was the refusal to permit them to 
enter upon the land of promise. 2. The forbearance and mercy of God were displayed 
in that he did not make an end in the wilderness of those who had rebelled against 
him and defied him. — T. 

Vers. 18 — 26. — The memory of the wilderness of the wanderings. At this point 
the transition is made from the generation who received the Law at Sinai to the 
generation which followed, an' I to whom another probation was afi'orded. 

I. The Divine Law wab bepublished. 

II. The bebellion and idolatry of the people were benewed. 

III. The most flagbant forms of idolatbous pbaotioe were added to what 
had preceded. In ver. 26 mention is made of the causing the firstborn to pass 
through the fire in the service of Moloch. 

lY. Additional and severer threats were uttebed. In ver, 23 threats of 



OH.XX. 1— 49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 367 

Bcatteriag and dispersion among the heathen were added to the more general 
denunciations. 

V. Statutes asd jxtdghents webb tubned to thb condemnation of the 

BEBELLIOUB. 

VI. Sfabinq hebot was AOAur exbbcised to preserve thb nation fbom 

DE8TBO0TI0N. 

Application. The lesson is very impressively taught in this passage that repentance 
and amendment by no means follow as a matter of course upon either punishment or 
forbearance. The discipline through which Israel passed partook of both characters ; 
yet it left the people, as a peojile, still disposed to rebellion against God, and to contempt 
of his Law. It is the spirit in which God's dealings with us are received which determines 
whether or not they sljall issue in our highest good. — T. 

Vers. 27 — 31. — The memory of offences in the land of promite. Notwithstanding 
the variety of incident and circumstance in the history of the chosen people, there wag 
much sameness in their experience, in their discipline, in their errors and faults. This 
may account for the brevity with which the later epochs of national history are treated 
by the prophet in this passage. Tet there is a consciousness on his part of the aggra- 
vation of Israel's guilt which is apparent in the tone of this portion of this remarkable 
chapter. 

I. ISBAEL'S BEBELLION and IDOLATBT were AOaBAVATED BT THE FACT THAT 
THEY WEBE PEBSISTED IN NOTWITHSTANDING PAST ADMONITION AND CORRECTION. 

II. IsBAEL's BEBELLION AND IDOLATBT WEBE AGOBAVATED WHEN THEY OCCURRED 
IN THE LAND OF PROMISE. 

IIL Israel's bebellion and idolatry webe aggbavated by their coexistence 

WITH THE SANCTUABY OF JeHOVAH. 

IV. IsBAEL's BEBELLION AND IDOLATBY WERE AGGRAVATED BY THEIB JUXTAPOSITION 
WITH THB PURE SERVICES AND FESTIVALS OF THE TRUE RELIGION. 

V. Israel's rebellion and idolatry were aggravated by the fact that 

THE chosen people ADOPTED THB BELIOION AND THE PBACTIOBS OF MORALLY INFERIOR 
BACES. 

VI. IsBAEL'B aggbavated BEBELLION AND IDOLATBT PBEVENTED THEIB BEPBE- 
gENTATIVEB FBOM KNJOYINO THB FAVOUB AND BECEIVINa THB BE8F0NSB OF THE 
LOBD.— T. 

Vers. 32—38. — The purpose of ItraeTs electfon. The prophecy at this point turns 
from the story of the past to the prediction and prospect of the future. 

I. God's pubposes cannot be fulfilled by the absorption of Israel among the 
HEATHEN. Exile and dispersion were appointed as chastisement and discipline. 
And there were those among the Hebrews who thought that, as a nation, they might 
amalgamate with the heathen, and might " serve wood and stone." To human appre- 
hension, this might seem the natural consequence of their experience. But the reverse 
was what happened — captivity and exile served to restore the chosen people to their 
fidelity to Jehovah. 

II. God's bule oveb his people will be manifestly and effectively main- 
tained EVEN IN distant AND HEATHEN LANDS. Lest it should be imagined that, 
when tlie children of Israel are scattered among the nations, the God of Israel will 
cease to exercise over them his vigilant sway and righteous retribution, the strongest 
language is used to express the unceasing control which, wherever his people are 
found, will be maintained over them. " With a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm 
will I rule over you. ... I will be King over you." 

III. God will plead with the scattered Israelites with a view to secure 
THEiB SUBMISSION AND ALLEGIANCE. The expression implies personal interest and 
personal intercourse. It implies the free agency of the human beings with whom 
the Lord dei>;ns to plead. It implies earnest desire for the welfare of individual 
Israelites — welfare which can only be secured through the conviction, the faith, the 
voluntary subjection, the loyalty, of these who have been in rebellion. 

IV. God will purge out rebels and tbansobessobs, and so pubift the tbos 

ISBABL rBO¥ THOSE WHO ABB ISBABUTEB HJ NAME OKLT AND NOT IN SPIRIT AND 



368 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xz. l>-49. 



anAiATY. Forbearance may and will be exercised, but dlBcrimination must take 
place. The dross must be consumed in order that the pure, fine gold may be 
brought out. 

V. God will oathbb the tbuk sheep into the fold, ahb be-establish ris 
COVENANT WITH HIS PEOPLE. TMs is the real aim of the Divine government. Other 
steps are the means; this is the end. Sooner or later this glorious and blessed 
result shall be brought to pass. " There shall be one flock, and one Shepherd." The 
bond of ihe covenant shall be again cemented. The purposes of Divine compassion shall 
be com|jletely fulfilled. The scattered wanderers shall be led home, for he that scattered 
shall gather them. He shall make a way whereby his banished ones shall return. In 
the land of promise, the better country, the true citizens shall assemble, and shall offer 
sacrifices of perpetual obedience, and songs of endless praise, to their Deliverer and their 
Lord.— T. 

Yers. 40—44. — Hie gloriotu regtoratioa. It is difScolt to believe that this language 
can refer to a local and temporal restoration and union. In this, as in other passages 
of his prophecy, Ezekiel seems to point on to the new, the Christian dispensation, into 
whose spiritual glory he seems to gain some glimpses neither dim nor uncertain. 

I. The boene of the restoration. God's holy mountain, the mountain of the height 
of Israel, is the symbol of the Church of the Son of God. 

IL The pabticipatobs in the ebstoeation. Those concerning whom the promise 
is spoken are those who have been scattered abroad, but are now brought home, and 
who constitute "the house of Israel," i.e. the true Israel, the Israel of God. 

III. The services of the ebbtoration. By the services, the offerings, the first- 
firuits, the ublatitms, must be understood the spiritual sacrifices, especially of obedience 
and of praise, which the accepted of God delight to lay upon his altar. 

IV. The memories op the restoration. These are of two kinds. The restored 
have to recollect, and to recollect with loathing, their wanderings, their evil doings, their 
defilements. But they have also to remember the work which GtoA has wrought for 
them, the way by which God has led them, and the mercy and loving-kindness which 
Qoi has shown to them.— T. 

Vers. 1 — 32. — Unacceptnhle prayer. The exact date is given as a Toucher for truth- 
fulness. The prophet committed to writing at once what had occurred. The people 
are yet divided by distance — part dwell in Judna and part in Chaldea. In a spirit 
of vain curiosity the elders of the exiled part approach the prophet to inquire after 
the destined fortunes and fate of their nation. Had they sought for guidance or help 
to amend their lives, their prayer had been successfuL Gud does not pander to a 
spirit of curiosity. 

I. Distress vsitallt drives men to seek Gk>D. The bulk of men are self-con- 
fident. They will not seek God until they discover their insuflSciency to meet 
misfortune or death. As the sailor does not seek harbour until driven by tempest, so 
men avoid God. Yet, in the hour of peril or pain, an inborn instinct leads them to 
rest on an arm mightier than theirs. Sorrow is God's home-calL 

II. Pbateb leads to the BEsnBBECTioN OF OUR SINS. It IB Impossible to do 
good to a man so long as he stifles the voice of conscience ; and the first duty of a true 
prophet is to bring sin to our remembrance. Unrepented sin is man's chief foe, and 
to dislodge this foe from the heart's citadel is God's prime endeavour. The barrier 
that shuts out the light of heaven is the siiutter of our own impenitence. The 
obdurate man destroys his own hope. He bars heaven's door against himself; he 
writes his own failure. It is kindness on God's part to show us our sins, for his hope 
is that we may loathe them and abandon them. 

III. The history op ocr fathers' sins often becomes the hibtobt of oub ow» 
SINS. He who hears of his father's sin and does not hate it soon adopts it as his 
own child. The history of the past is compressed into our own experience. The Fall 
in Eden is repeated in our own history. All the history and deveh>pment of a tree is 
condensed into each fruit-kernel ; so the moral history is incorporated in us. We may 
use it for our profit or for our injury. If we continue the same line of conduct as our 
guilty forefathers, we re-enact their sins, we endorse their gui'ty deeds. The entail- 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. J... 

ment of moral qualities is a pregnant truth. On this ground it was that all the 
martyrs' blood, from Abel downward, accumulated upon the men in our Lord's age. 

IV. Neglect of Divine admonition is fresh sin. The knowledge of past 
admonition adds to our responsibility. Warnings addressed to our ancestors are 
warnings addressed to us. Every item in the revelation of God's will is intended for 
our profit ; for revelations of the eternal God have an abiding force. If we are not 
moved or awed by judgments passed upon our ancestors, ours is the greater sin. As our 
light is greater than was our forefathers', so is our sin, unless we repudiate it by repentance. 

V. God's permissions abb often chastisements. " Wherefore I gave them also 
statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live." The self- 
blindness and obduracy of men is such that oftentimes God cannot give them the best 
laws : such would be above their comprehension — above their appreciation. Good law 
can never be much in advance of a people's moral condition. God allowed Lot to 
retire to Zoar, but the permission became a curse. God yielded to the Jews' demand 
for a king, but their kings led them to civic strife and idolatry. Jesus Christ yielded to 
the demand of the Gadarenes to leave their province, but their loss was great. How 
much need have we to merge our wills in God's will ! 

VI. God's memory of odb misdeeds neveb fails. We may forget, or regard as 
trivial, some deed of the past; yet it lives, in complete reality, in the memory of God. 
Likely enough these elders were astounded with this long reeital of their evil deeds. 
This, however, is a sample of God's treatment of all men. The reappearance of our 
old sins — the reappearance before the public gaze — will be one element in our punish- 
ment. The future publicity of our follies will form a great ingredient in our shame. 
The world already knows the aggravated sins of the Hebrews. 

VII. God'b will 0VERBEACHE8 AND OVERMASTERS MAN's WILL. " And that which 

Cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say. We will be as the heathen I " 
Man resolves ; God overrules. Mi£;hty as man's will is, it is feeble in comparison with 
God's will. It may be as iron, but even iron is treated as a plaything by the electric 
force. Even wickedness shall be restrained of God. Satan shall be bound with chains. 
Many men are guiltier than the measure of their deeds. There are murderers that 
never slew a man, felons that never stole. The intention is as guilty as the act. 
Man's intended wickedness shall be held in check. 

VIII. God's reoabo fob his Name is coincident with man's best welfare. 
" I wrought for my Name's sake." One great purpose our God has in view, in all his 
government among men, is to reveal himself — to unfold the qualities of his character. 
This is essential to the highest good of his creature man. He will be patient and 
tender, or judicial and severe, in order to bring into view all the excellences of his 
majestic character. The more his saints see of his personal characteristics, the more 
they admire him, the more they become like him. No une will conclude that the 
human family has yet seen all the aspects of God's character or all the perfections of 
his nature. Without doubt, eternity will be spent in spelling out the meaning of that 
great Name, — D. 

Vers. 33 — 44. — Jvdicial discrimination. As among men, when matters of serious 
importance have to be determined, there is the employment of a religious oath, in other 
words, a solemn appeal that God should witness the truthfulness of the parties ; so, 
when God discloses his intentions respecting the destiny of men, he speaks with a 
view to produce the deepest impression. He stakes his own existence upon the 
certainty of the event. 

I. God's bulb is directed solely for man's purity. Such is his own holiness 
of nature, that he cannot tolerate impurity of any kind in his kingdom. Or, if he does 
tolerate it for a season, it is only for the purpose of more effectually purifying his saints. 
To distribute his own happiness, he created men ; but that happiness can only reach 
perfection when it is rooted in purity. Purity or perdition is the only alternative 
under the sceptre of Jehovah. 

II. The place appointed for the test. " I will bring yon into the wilderness 
of the peoples, and there will I plead with you face to face." Already this had been 
done in the wilderness of Sinai, and now it shall be done again. This wilderness is not 
Babylon, nor the desert between Babylon and Judaea. It denotes the isolated condi- 

EZEKIBIi. 2 B 



370 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xi. 1—49. 

tion of the people, vrhen they should be scattered among all the nations. A desert is the 
outward emblem of man's desolation through sin. Iniquity has made a desert in his 
heart, in his home, in the nation — a desert in all his surroundings. There, under a 
sense of his folly and misfortune, God condescends to plead with men. 

III. A wDiNowiNO PROCESS 18 TO BE PURSUED. " I will purge Out from among you 
the rebels, and them that transgress against me." If the nation, following its lower 
passions and following foolish kings, refuse God's salvation, God will deal with them 
individually. Asa nation they shall be dehuoyed; but an election shall be saved. 
Gud will appear as a Thresher, and will purg.' his floor, and separate the chaff from the 
wheat. Would that the entire nation had yielded to his righteous rule ! Yet, if the 
majority reject his grace, a minority will accept it. Not a single penitent shall be 
swept away with the rebellious. Divine wisdom can and will discriminate. 

IV. The obdurate shall be abandoned. " Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, 
and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken unto me." Lightly as men may esteem the 
severity of such a sentence, it is the most crushing doom that can befall them — to be 
given over to the indulgence of their rices. For God to withdraw the restraints of his 
grace, and allow them the liberty they crave, would be the heaviest scourge, the 
beginning of perdition. Said God of Ephraim, "He is joined to his idols: let him 
alone I " Of some it is declared by Jesus the Christ, " He is guilty of eternal sin." 

V. The penitent shall rise to eminent piety. (See vers. 40 and 41.) They 
shall worship again in the consecrated mount. Their offerings shall be spontaneous 
and abundant. Th'^ ir gifts and sacrifices shall send a sweet savour Godward. Best of 
all, they shall find acceptance with God. The Most High will be honoured in their 
midst. His presence will be felt as a purifying power. " I will be sanctified in you." 
The remembrance of their past ways and past experiences shall open their eyes to the 
foulness and loathsomeness of sin. Their inmost tastes and affections shall be refined. 
Self-condenmatiou is an essential element in repentance. 

VI. The result will bb larger acquaintance with God. " Ye shall know that 
I am the Lord." The manirestation of God's patience, condescension, and tender lore 
will enlarge their conception of God. He will gain a larger place in their esteem and 
confidence. His true glory will come forth. In this way even human sin will con- 
tribute to human elevation ; man's guilt will promote God's glory. ' In the widest sense, 
" all things shall work together for good." The darkest disaster will serve as a Betting 
for the jewels of God's goodness. — D. 

Vers. 46 — 49. — The forest inflame. In a nation, men's minds are in every stage of 
development; a hundred phases of feeling prevail. Hence God, in his kindness, sent 
his instructions in every possible form, and adapted his reproofs to every state of mind 
—to children as well as to men of riper years. 

I. The parable implieb a resemblance between men and pobest trees. Amid 
many differences, there are some resemblances, and it is on one of these resemblances 
that this admonition fastens. In the earlier stages of their life, trees grow better in 
clusters. They serve as a support to each other, and also as a protection against 
storms. But soon the roots rob nourishment, each from the other. The boughs shut 
out the light and air. They prevent the growth and hardening of the wood. They 
become mutually injurious. Sap diminishes. The branches dry and decay. So it is 
with men in society. Casting off the fear of God, they corrupt each other. They 
become one another's tempters. Healthy growth ceases. Shutting out, each ftom the 
other, the light and sunshine from heaven, their proper life shrivels, dries up, and 
decays. They become combustible — tit for burning. 

II. Resemblance between God's righteous anger and material fire. On these 
two resemblances the parable depends. As fire naturally lays hold of and destroys 
forest trees, so does God's anger naturally lay hold of and destroy wicked men. There 
is a fixed and unalterable correspondence. "Be sure your sin will find you out!" You 
may as well swallow poison, and hope to live; you may as well set fire to gunpowder, 
and expect it not to explode ; you may as well touch a galvanic current, and think to 
avoid any nervous sensation, — as to sin, and not suffer penalty. Each is alike an eternal 
decree of the living God. As each plant has in it the potency to produce anotbei 
plant, so every sin has in it the germ of destruction. 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 371 

m. Pboztuitt to etil uen conbtitdteb a dahoeb. All the trees in a forest are 
not equally dessicated. Yet such becomes the fierceness of the flame, fed by the drier 
trees, that those less dessicated are reduced to ashes. Men may be less guilty than 
their neighbours; they may flatter themselves that they are not so corrupt as others; 
nevertheless, if they do not separate themselves, or labour to improve their neighbours, 
they may be consumed in the general conflagration. The green trees were threatened 
with destruction along with the dry. Evil company is perilous. Each one has sin 
enough to draw down Divine anger. 

IV. Mental blindness is a sisastbous effect of sin. " Doth he not speak i 
parables? " The bulk of men say, " It is a pretty story. It has much literary beaut \ . 
The preacher was eloquent, imaginative, interesting." Yet they see not the moral 
significance, do not feel the points of application. The sermon well suited some absent 
person ; it did not touch them. The eyes of conscience are put out. As it was in the 
day when Jesus spake his parables, so is it always. " Men see, but do not perceive ; 
they hear, but do not understand." To-day a thousand self-blinded men say, " The 
doom of the wicked is not so terrible as it seems; for the alarming language of Jesus 
Christ was only a parable." Yet a parable contains hidden truth, sometimes the most 
arousing. — D. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — On inquiring of the Lord. " And it came to pass in the seventh year, 
in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came 
to inquire of the Lord," etc. We here enter upon a new division of this book, which 
extends to the close of ch. zxiii. The prophecies of this section were occasioned by a 
visit of the elders of Israel to the prophet, to inquire of the Lord through him. The 
paragraph now before us, which may be compared with ch. xiv. 1 — 5, suggests — 

I. That it is bioht and laudable to inqui&e of the Lobd. These elders of 
Israel who came to inquire of the Lord, and sat before the prophet, were of the exiles. 
Like Ezekiel, they bad been carried away from their own land to Babylon. Neither 
the occasion which gave rise to their inquiry, nor the inquiry itself, is stated. Eeng- 
stenberg conjectures that " the embassy had probably a special occasion in the circum- 
stances of the time, in a favourable turn which the affairs of the coalition had taken. 
They wish to obtain confirmation of their joyful hopes from the mouth of the prophet." 
Or they wanted to ascertain from him if there was a prospect of the deliverance of 
Zedekiah from the Chaldean power (cf. Jer. ixi. 1, 2). It seems clear from the answer 
which they received that their inquiry was political, not moral ; that it related to the 
state of their country in relation to other nations, not to their personal relations to God. 
But our present point is that it is right and commendable to inquire of the Lord. We 
may inquire of him by searching the Scriptures in an earnest and devout spirit, by 
prayer for the illumination and direction of the Holy Spirit, and by engaging in public 
worship and attending the ministration of his Word. Thus David desired " to inquire 
in his temple." This is often profitable to those who wait upon him in a true spirit. 
Asaph found it so (Ps. Ixxiii. 16, 17). And so did Hezekiah King of Judah (2 Kings 
xix. 14 — 37). And so have millions besides. 

IL That men sometimes inqotbe of the Lobd in a weonq spibit. These elders 
did so (cf. ch. xiv. 1 — 3). Their outward act was right ; their inward motive was 
wrong. Moreover, while it was right to inquire of the Lord, that which they wanted 
to know was not commendable. They wanted the satisfaction of their political 
curiosity, not direction in the way of duty. So far were they from desiring to conform 
to the will of God, that they were in their heart proposing to themselves an opposite 
course of conduct (cf. ver. 32). " They did here," says Oreenhill, " like many that an 
bent upon marriage, who will go to two or three to inquire and have counsel, but are 
resolved to go on whatever is said unto them ; so whatever counsel they should have had 
given them from the Lord, they meant to go on in their wicked ways ; and this wm 
profound hypocrisy, whose wont it is to veil the foulest things with the fairest 
pretences." And in these days men may inquire of the Lord perversely. They may 
consult him by means of his Word in a wrong spirit. They may examine that 
Word with strong prejudices ; or not to learn his mind and will, but to obtain sanctioni 
ind supports for their own opinions ; or from curiosity rather than piety. Men may 
ittend church, not " to inquire in his temple," but from very different and very infnioi 



372 THE BOOK OF THE FBOPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. zx. 1—49. 

motives. They may even seek him in prayer in a wrong spirit — ^in an unbelieving, 
unsubmissive, selfish, worldly spirit. If we would draw near to him acceptably and 
profitably, we "must believe that he is, and that he is a Be warder of them that seek 
after him;" we must be humble and reverent; we must bow loyally to his supreme 
authority, and we must sincerely desire to do his will. " If any man willeth to do his 
will, he shall know of the teaching," etc. (John vii. 17). By earnestly desiring and 
endeavouring to do the will of God, as far as it is known unto you, you are qualifying 
yourself to receive further revelations from him. 

III. That the Lobd observes the spibit in which men iNQmsB of him. He 
knew the real feelings and motives of these elders of Israel, and spake to them 
accurdingly through his servant Ezekiel. And he was fully cognizant of the idols in 
the hearts of the elders who waited upon the prophet on a former occasion (ch. xiv. 3). 
The most plausible words and the most specious forms cannot impose upon liim. 
" Man looketh on the outward appearance, but God looketh on the heart ; " " The 
Lord searcheth all hearts ; " "I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart ; " " The 
righteous God trieth the hearts and reins ; " "0 Lord, thou hast searched me and 
known me. Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising; thou understandest 
my thought afar off," etc. (Ps. czxxix. 1 — 5). " He knows," says Greenhill, " upon 
what grounds, with what purpose, intentions, resolutions, men come to hear his Word, 
to ask counsel of his servants. Look to yourselves, spirits, «nd all your ways ; God 
seeth and knoweth all, and if you be not sincere, without guile and hypocrisy, he will 
find you out and detect you" (cf. John iv. 23, 24). 

IV. That the Lobd wili. not answbb the inquiries of those who approach imt 
IN A WRONG SPIRIT. " TTius saith the Lord God ; Are ye come to inquire of me ? As 
I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be inquired of by you." Bishop Lowth states the 
truth clearly and forcibly : " You shall not receive such an answer as you expect, but 
such as your hypocrisy deserves." The Lord would not reply to their questionings. 
They were not in a condition to receive enlightening or edifying communications from 
God. Deeply insincere as they were, they could not receive revelations of Divine 
truth. The only message suited to them was a rebuke or warning because of their sin, 
or a summons to repentance. This principle is universally and abidingly true. " If 
I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me ; " " When ye spread forth 
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you," etc. (Isa. i. 15) ; " Then shall they cry 
nnto the Lord, but he will not answer them," etc. (Micah iii. 4) ; " We know that Gou 
heareth not sinners; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and do his will, him lie 
heareth." 

V. Though the Lord will not answer the inquiries of those who approach 

HTM IN A wrong SPIBIT, YET HE WILL ADDRESS TO THEM WORDS SUITED TO THEIR MORAL 

CONDITION. He did so on a former occasion (ch. xiv.). He does so here. 1. Here is 
their personal condemnation. " Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge 
them?" The prophet is thus summoned to "pronounce sentence upon them. The 
repetition of the phrase is expressive of a strong desire that the act should be begun, 
and thus gives the force of an imperative." God would not reply to them for the 
gratification of their curiosity, but he speaks to them for the salvation of their souls. 
This condemnation might awaken them to reflection and repentance. 2. Eere is the 
exhibition of their national sing. " Cause them to know the abominations of their 
fathers." By the declaration of these the Lord would vindicate the righteousness of 
his dealings with them as a people. He would also show theui " that the evil is deep- 
seated, and a radical cure is to be desired, which can only be effected by a judgment oi 
inflexible rigour " (Hengstenberg). 

Conclusion. Our subject forcibly impresses the necessity of true-heartedness as a 
condition of approaching Ood, so as to meet with liis acceptance and to obtain his 
blessing.— W. J. 

Vers. 6 — 9.— Ood, and Isnui in Egypt. " And say nnto them. Thus saith the Lord 
God; In the day when I chose Israel," et& This paragraph sets forth the dealings of 
Ood with his people in the land of Egypt. 

L The choice of the people bt God. "Thus saith the Lord; In the day when 
I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZBKIBL. 373 



myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, 
saying, I am the Lord your Grod." The day when God chose Israel and made himself 
known unto them as their God was the time when he interposed on their behalf by 
his servant Moses. He chose them ; they did not choose him. They did not seek to 
serve or worship him; but he sent Moses to demand their emancipation in order that 
they might worship and serve him. And he thus chose them neither for their great- 
ness nor their goodness, hut because of his own love for them and his fidelity to his 
promises made unto their fathers (of. Dent. vii. 7, 8). He chose them to receive 
special revelations of religious and redemptive truth, to be "a people for his own 
possession," his visible Church in the world, and his witnesses amongst men, testifying 
to his unity and supremacy, and observing and maintaining his worship (cf. Duut. x. 
15; xiv. 2). And still God of his grace calls men to hiinself. He begins with us, and 
not we with him. "God commendeth his own love toward us," etc. (Rom. v. 8); 
" Herein is love, not that we loved God," etc. (1 John iv. 10). If we have sought God, 
it was because he first sought us. " By the grace of God I am what I am." And the 
Lord made himself known to them as their God, both by declarations and by mighty 
deeds wrought on their behalf (Exod. iii. 14; vi. 1 — 8). He chose them to be his 
people ; he gave himself to them to be theu: God. " I am the Lord your God." " ' Your 
God.' This is a great word, and hath great mercy in it; an engaging word, tying God 
and all his attributes to them : your God to counsel you, your God to protect you, your 
God to deliver you, your God to comfort you, your God to plead for you, your God to 
teach you, your God to set up my Name and worship among you, your God to bless 
you with the dews of heaven and fulness of the earth, your God to hear your prayers 
and make you happy" (Greenhill). And he asserts this relationship in the most 
solemn manner. " I lifted up mine hand imto them," i.e. I sware unto them. 

II. The gracious purpose op God in relation to his people. (Ver. 6.) This 
purpose has two branches. 1. To deliver them from a miserable condition. " In that 
day I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt." 
He broke the power of their cruel oppressors, and by a mighty hand he set them freu from 
their burdens, and led them out of tlie land of their captivity. And when men believe 
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and respond to his call, he delivers them from the bondage 
of sin. He came into our world to "proclaim liberty to the captives," to save men 
from the power and pollution and punishment of sin. 2. To establish them in a 
desirable condition. " Into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and 
honey, which is the glory of all lands." (1) This land was selected for them by God. 
He summoned Abram to go forth unto the land that he would show him (Gen. xii. 1; 
and cf. Exod. iii. 8, 17). " He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of 
Jacob whom he loved." (2) This land was excellently situated and richly fertile. 
(We have noticed these points in treating of ch. xix. 10.) In its natural fortifications, 
its remarkable fertility, and its religious privileges, it was glorious as compared with 
other lands. And this land God gave unto them. And our Saviour Jesus Christ not 
only delivers from sin those who believe on him, but he introduces them into a 
condition of spiritual privilege and progress. " Ye received not the spirit of bondage 
again unto fear," etc. (Rom. viii. 16 — 17); "Beloved, now are we children of 
God," etc. (1 John iii. 2). 

III. The obligations of the people to God. " And I said unto them, Cast ye 
away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols 
of Egypt : I am the Lord your God." This obligation arises out of the relationship 
stated in ver. 5. Because they are his people and he is their God, they must he true 
to him as their God, having no connection with idols. The great basis of their obliga- 
tion to him is contained in the words, " I am Jehovah your God " (of. Exod. xx. 1, 2). 
In this prohibition of idolatry there are two points which cull for brief notice. 1. Sin 
entering by the eyes. "The abominations of his eyes" — an expression which denotes 
idols. The eyes look upon the idols, become familiar with them, and come to behold 
them with respect and reverence. The eyes are both inlets and outlets to the heajt. 
They convey to the heart the impression of the idol, and if the heart come to reverence 
the idol, they express that reverence in their gaze. The eyes are often an avenue 
through which temptation to sin enters the soul. 2. Sin defiling the heart. " Defile 
not yourselves with the idols of Egypt." Sin pollutes our moral life at iU very 



^74 THE BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZBKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 



npricgs. It proceeds from an impure heart, and it makes the heart still more impure, 
David was conscious of its defilement when he prayed, " Wash me throughly from 
mine iniquity," etc. (l*s. li. 2, 7, 10). The people of God are under the most binding 
obligations to shun everything that would lead to their moral contamination, and to be 
true to him both in heart and in life. 

IV. The ebbbllion of the people aoainst God. (Ver. 8.) 1. The nature of this 
rehellion. "But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me; they did 
not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the 
idols 01 Egypt." They rebelled against Jehovah by persisting in their idolatrous 
practices. The Mosaic history does not explicitly mention the idplatry of the Israelites 
in Egypt ; but it points to it by implication. The making and worship of the golden 
calf was probably an imitation of the Egyptian worship of the various sacred cows or 
of the sacred bulls. It appears from Lev. xvii. 7 (Revised Version), that in the desert 
the Israelites offered sacrifices to he-goats, and " the worship of a deity under the form 
of a he-goat was peculiar to Egypt " (Hengstenberg). That they worshipped idols in 
Egypt is evident also from Josh. xxiv. 14, " Put away the gods which your fathers 
served beyond the river, and in Egypt ; and serve ye the Lord." And from ch. xxiii. 3 
of our prophet, "They committed whoredoms in Egypt." This idolatry they did 
not abandon when summoned so to do. 2. The jyunishment of this rebellion. " Tlien 
1 said I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in 
the midst of the land of Egypt." Greenhill explains this clause, " He thought in his 
heart to destroy them in the midst of Egypt." Scott, "He justly might, and 
certainly would, have destroyed them with the Egyptians, if he had dealt with them 
according to their deserts." Schroder suggests that the increased oppression, and the 
persecution of the Israelites by the Egyptians (Exod. v. 5 — 23), were signs of the 
anger of the Lord against them. The Egyptians acted wickedly and cruelly in thus 
ill treating them ; for they had not wronged them. Yet they might have been the 
unconscious agents of punishing the Israelites for their unfaithfulness to the Lord 
their God. This is certain, that persistent sin invariably meets with deserved 
punishment. 

V. The fulfilment of the puhpose op God notwithstanding the ebbellion 
OF THE people. " But I wrought for my Name's sake, that it should not he profaned 
in the sight of the nations, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself 
known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt " (of. Numb. xiv. 
13 — 16). Had he not accomplished his purpose in delivering them out of Egypt, his 
Name or honour might have been contemneii by the Egyptians and others. They 
might have questioned or even denied : 1. His ability to execute his purposes and fulfil 
his promises, asserting that he did not do so because he could not (of. Numb. xiv. 15, 
16). 2. His fidelity to his purposes and promises, asserting that he does not abide 
by hia determinations, hut is changeable and therefore unreliable. 3. His kindness 
towards his people, asserting that he is not so deeply interested in them as to always 
fulfil his engagements with them. Therefore, for his Name's sake, he brought Israel in 
triumph out of Egypt. The sins of man cannot frustrate the purposes of God. By 
his sins man may exclude himself from any participation in their fulfilment, or any 
enjoyment thereof; but he cannot defeat their fulfilment (cf. Exod. xxxii. 9, 10; Niimb. 
xiv.'ll, 12; xxiii. 19; 2 Tim. ii. 13). 

Conclusion. Our subject presents: 1. Warnings against rebellion against Ood. 
2. Encouragements to trust and obey him. — W. J. 

Vers. 10 — 26. — Ood, and Israel in the wilderness. " Wherefore I caused them to 
go forth out of the land of Egypt," etc. The chief teachings of this section of the 
chapter may be developed under the following heads. 

I. The kindness of God in his dealings with his people. This ie brought intc 
our notice in four respects. 1. In the deeds which he wrought for them. " I caused 
them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness." 
Their emancipation from their oppressors was effected by the mighty hand of God, 
and of his unmerited grace to them. Our Lord Jesus is the great Deliverer from the 
serfdom of sin and Satan (cf. Isa. Ixi. 1 ; John viii. 36). 2. In the gifts which ?i» 
lestowed upon them, (1) His Law. " And I gave them my statutes, and showed them 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPnET EZEKIEL. 875 

my judgments, which, if a man do, he shall live in them." Statutes and judgments 
express the general idea of law. This God gave to them at Sinai, soon after their 
deliverance from Egypt. And this Law was given for life unto them (of. Exod. xx. 12; 
Matt. xix. 17; Eom. vii. 10, 12). "The precepts which God gave his people," says 
Hengstenberg, " bring life and salvation with them to him who does them. What 
grace in God, who gives such precepts! what a summons to true obedience 1 These 
precepts also imply before all things that they shall confess their sins and seek for- 
giveness in the blood of atonement. This is required by the laws concerning the sin 
offerings, which in the Mosaic Law form the root of all other offerings ; the Passover, 
which so strictly requires us to strive after the forgiveness of sins, and connects all 
salvation with it and the great Day of Atonement." (2) His sabbaths. " Moreover 
also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they mistht 
know that I am the Lord that sanctify them." The sabbath was instituted by God, 
and was peculiar to Israel. It was a mutual sign between him and them. By estab- 
lishing it amongst them the Lord sanctified them, separated them from the nations as 
a people chosen for himself; and by keeping it they manifested their allegiance to him 
and honoured him. By its institution he owned them as his people ; by its observance 
they owned him as their God. By so doing they also promoted their best interests. 
How rich and manifold are God's gifts to us ! Laws, ordinances, sabbaths, sanctuaries, 
religious ministries, his sacred Word, his beloved Son, his Holy Spirit 1 3. In the 
forbearance which he exercised towards them. " Then I said, I would pour out my fury 
npun them in the wilderness, to consume them. But I wrought for my Name's sake," 
etc. (vers. 13, 14, 17). Many and extreme were the provocations of the Israelites in 
the wilderness. " How oft did they rebel against him in the wUdemtss, and grieve 
him in the desert!" More than once it seemed as though he would have destroyed 
them utterly, as they certainly deserved. Yet in wrath he remembered mercy. " He 
being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed* them not," etc. (Ps. 
Ixxviii. 38, 39). How frequently and grievously have we sinned against himl We 
too have tried his patience, have provoked him by our unfaithfulness, our rebelliousness, 
our perversity. Great has been his long-suffering toward us (cf. Ps. ciii. 8 — 11; 
2 Pet. iii. 9). 4. In the appeals which he addressed to them. God did not stand by 
(as it were), paiiently bearing with them in their sin, yet making no effort to save them 
therelrom; but he appealed to them earnestly and repeatedly to keep his commands. 
"I said unto their children in the wilderness. Walk ye not in the statutes of your 
fathers," etc. (vers. 18 — 20). The reference in these verses is to the regiving of the 
Law in the plains of Moab, as recorded in the Book of Deuteronomy. That book is one 
great appeal, in many tones and by many arguments, to the younger generation to be 
true to the Lord their God. How graciously and powerfully God appeals to us in this 
Christian age 1 to our sense of duty and our sense of interest ; by authoritative com- 
mand and gracious persuasion ; by strong fears and thrilling hopes ; by his Divine Son 
and by his Holy Spirit. 

n. The peesistent wickedness of the people in theik relation to God. Three 
featvires of their wickedness are here exhibited. 1. Apostasy of heart. " Their heart 
went after their idols" (ver. 16); "Their heart was not right with him, neither were 
they faithful in his covenant " (Ps. Ixxviii. 37). Their sin was not merely on the surface 
of their lives, but deeplv rooted in their moral nature. "Out of the heart come forth 
evil thoughts, murders," etc. (Matt. xv. 19) ; " Keep thy heart with all diligence ; for 
out of it are the issues of life." 2. BebelUon of life. " 'i'he house of Israel rebelled 
against me in the wilderness," etc. (ver. 13); "They despised my judgmeuts," etc. 
(ver. 16). It is quite unnecessary to specify their rebellions, because they were so 
numerous. And the profanations of the sabbath must not be restricted to the attempt 
to gather manna on that day (Exod. xvi. 27 — 30), or to the case of the man who 
gathered sticks thereon (Numb. xv. 32—36). Gtod required them to sanctify the 
sabbath (Deut. v. 12) ; to " hallow " it (ver. 20) ; " to consecrate it in every respect to 
him and withdraw it wholly from the region of self-interest, of personal sinful inclina- 
tion'; " and as they failed to keep it thus, they profaned it. Failing to sanctify it by 
reverent worship and hearty service, they are charged with desecrating it And it 
behoves us earnestly to endeavour to preserve the Lord's day for the promotion of the 
best interests of man and the supreme honour of God. Its secularization would be an 



876 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZBKIfiL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 



irreparable loss and injury to man. 3. Successiveness in m/n. " The children rebelled 
against me," etc. (ver. 21). The younger generation were far from being so wicked as 
their fathers (Josh. xxiv. 31); they were also far from being true and faithful in their 
relation to the Lord theii- God. Scott says truly " that the generation that entered 
Canaan was the best which there ever was of that favoured nation." Yet they frequently 
rebelled against the Lord. What a lamentable successiveness in sin there has been in 
the generations of our race 1 Real advance certainly has been made ; but still sin, dark 
and prevalent, has characterized every generation of mankind. 

III. The Divine betbibdtion on account of the sins of the people. 1. Hie 
nature of this retribution. The elder generation was excluded from the promised land 
because of their unbelief and rebellion against God and against the leaders whom he had 
chosen. " I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I would not bring 
them into the land which I had given them." etc. (vers. 15, 16; and cf. Numb. xiv. 
26 — 35 ; Ps. cvi. 24 — 26). They disbelieved Gud's word ol promise, and they should 
not share in its fulfilment ; " they despised the pleasant land," and they were not 
allowed to enter therein ; they wished that they had died in the wilderness, and in the 
wilderness they died. And as to the younger generation, their retribution is thus 
described: " I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they 
should not live," etc. (vers. 25, 26). "The 'judgments whereby they should not live' 
are those spoken of in ver. 18, and are contrasted with the judgments in vers. 13, 21, 
laws other than Divine, to which God gives up those whom he afflicts with judicial 
blindness, because they have wilfully closed their eyes (Ps. Ixxxi. 12; Bom. i. 24)" 
(' Speaker's Commentary '). Hengstenberg says, " We may compare here Rom. i. 24, 
according to which God, in just retribution for their revolt, gave over the heathen to 
vile aflections ; Acts vii. 42, where it is traced back to God that the heathen served the 
hc«t of heaven ; and 2 Thess. ii. 11, where God sends the apostates strong delusions. 
God has so cunstituted'human nature that revolt from him must be followed by total 
darkness and disorder ; that no moderation in error and sin, no standing still at the 
middle point, is possible ; that the man, however willing he might be to stand still, 
must, against his will, sink Irom step to step. Revolt from God is the crime, excess in 
error and moral degradation the merited doom, from which all would willingly escape 
if this were in their power. By way of example, the custom of sacrificing children is 
mentioned in ver. 26. ' To cause to pass through 'the fire (ver. 31 ; cf. ch. xvi. 21 ; xxiii. 
37) is the current phrase for sacrificing children which were offered to Moloch, Into 
such a detestable custom did God in his righteous judgment permit them to fall, that 
the merited punishment might come upon them (' that I might lay them desolate*), 
by which they learn that their paternal God, whom they set at nought, is OtoA in the 
full sense, whom to (brsake is at once to fall into misery." 2. The design of this retri- 
bution. " To the end that they might know that I am the Lord." (See our notes on 
these words in ch. vi. 7, 10 ; vii. 4.) We must every one be brought to know him, 
either by the way of his grace or by the way of his judgments. — W. J. 

Vers. 27 — 29. — God, and Israel in Canaan. " Therefore, son of man, speak unto the 
house of Israel, and say unto them. Thus saith the Lord God," etc. We have here — 

I. Great kindness okaciouslt confbbebd. " I had brought them into the land, 
which I lifted up mine hand to give unto them." 1. The Lord gave Canaan unto them 
and brought them into it. " He gave them the lands of the nations ; ami they took the 
labour of tlie peoples in possession" (P.s. cv. 44); "And when he had destroyed seven 
nations in the land of Ciiuaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance " (Acts xiii. 
19). Look at the taking of Jericho as an illustration of this. It was not by human 
strategy or strength that they obtained the city, but by Divine interposition. And 

this land was a desirable possession (cf. Numb. xiii. 27; Deut. viii. 7 — 9; xi. 10 12; 

and see our notes on ch. xix. 10). 2. The Lord brought them into Canaan infvjilmmt 
■ of his promise. " The land which I lifted up mine hand to give unto them." The 
lifting up of the hand is the gesture of the oath, or solemn promise. Notwithstanding 
the rebellions of those to whom the promise was given, and the difBculties in the way 
of its fulfilment, he made his promise good. His faithfulness and his power guarantee 
the performance of his word. Here we have ground for confidnnce in him (cf. Numb 
ixiii. 19 ; Matt. xxiv. 35 ; 1 Pet. i. 25). 3. The Lord brought them into Canaan ^ 



OH.XX. 1— 49.] THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHBT EZEKIEL. 377 

his own tmmerited favour. Though not expressed, this is clearly implied here (cf. 
Deut. vii. 6 — 8; ix. 4 — 6). God's kindness to us has been great and undeserved. Who 
can count the multitude of his mercies, or estimate their precioosness ? " The Lord 
hath dealt bountifully with us." 

IL Gebat kindness basely EEQtriTED. 1. By voanhipping in prohibited places. 
" Then they saw every high hill, and all the thick trees, and they offered there their 
sacrifices," etc. (ver. 28). The margin of the Bevised Version presents a more strikiug 
signification and a darker guilt. " They looked out for every high hill," etc. Their 
conduct in this respect was a perversion of a Divine law. " When the Israelites first 
entered Canaan, they were to set up the tabernacle on a hiyh place, and upon this and 
upon no other they were to worship Jehovah. This was the high place (1 Sam. ix, 12, 
etc. ; 1 Kings iiL 4). But the Israelites followed the custom of the conntry, and set up 
idol-worship on every high hill, and the word ' high-place ' (bamah\ or in the plural 
' high-places ' (lamoth), became a byword (comp. hamoth Baal, Josh . xiiL 17) " (' Speaker's 
Commentary"). This was distinctly forbidden to the Israelites (Deut. xii. 1 — 14). 2. 
By toorshipping prohibited oijects. They offered sacrifices to idols. This fact is not 
explicitly stated in our text ; but it is implied in the charge of blasphemy preferred 
against them, and in the expression, " the provocation of their offering." (1) As to 
their blasphemy. The attempt " to combine God and idols in one's religion is blas- 
phemy." It involves a fearful disparagement, if not the despising, of the Lord Jehovah, 
(2) The expression, " the provocation of their offering," indicates the offerings made to 
idols whereby they provoked God to anger (cf. Deut. xxxii. 16, 17 ; 1 Kings xiv. 22). 
" It was an aggravation of their guilt that they not only were idolaters, but defiled with 
their idolatry the land which was given them for their glory." It was perverting the 
gracious gift of God to his deep dishonour (cf. Jer. ii. 7). How often have the good 
gifts of God been thus perverted ! Genius and power, rank and riches, have frequently 
been used for selfish and sinful purposes. And in this and other ways the kindness of 
God to man is often basely requited stilL 

III. A smFUi. PEOPLE DIVINELY iNTEBBOaATED. " Then I Said nnto them, What ia 
the high place whereunto ye go?" Revised Version, "What meaneth the high 
place ? " etc. This inquiry seems to be designed : 1. To awaken their serious reflec- 
tion. It was fitted for this. Perhaps it would lead the idolatrous people to ask them- 
selves, "What meaneth the high place wheretmto we go?" Earnest inteiTogation 
might lead to profitable consideration. 2. To lead to their recognition of their folly. 
Serious reflection could hardly fail to reveal to them the foolishness of idolatry. What 
benefit could they derive from it? What could their idols do for them? How 
unreasonable that reasonable beings should pay homage to things of wood and stone I 
3. To lead to their recognition of their sin. Their idolatry involved the breach of the 
most sacred and solemn obligations. It was a transgression of an oft-repeated command 
of God. Great was both the folly and the sin of the Israelites in this (cf. Jer. ii. 

11 13). This inquiry might lead them to perceive and to feel these things. The 

Most High frequently interrogates sinful men in order to lead them to reflection and 
reformation (cf. ch. xviii. 31; Jer. ii. 5; iv. 14). "Not wishing that any should 
perish, but that all should come to repentance." 

IV. A SINFTTL PEOPLE PERSISTING IN SIN NOTWITHSTANDING DlVINE INTERKOGATION. 

" And the name thereof is called Bamah imto this day." The name was continued, and 
the people persisted in the practice of idolatry despite the remonstrances of the Lord. 
Even under the most faithful and godly kings the high places were not taken away 
until Josiah entered upon his great reformation (2 Chron. xxxiv. 3). It is difficult to 
eradicate sins in the case of individuals, when the sins have had time to strike their 
roots deeply in the heart and life. " Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard 
his spots ? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil." It is even more 
difficult to eradicate the widespread, long-continued, deep-rooted sins of a community 
or a nation. 

" Fac'ilis descensus Avemi, 
Bed revocare gradum, superasque wadiru ad auiaa 
Hie labor, lioc opud est." 

(ViigU.) 

W.J. 



378 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xx. 1-49. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — Ood, and Israel in the then present. " Wherefore say unto the house 
of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God ; Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers?" 
etc. The Lord Jehovah through his prophet now addresses himself to the Israel of 
that day, and especially to the elders who had come to the prophet to Inquire of him. 
In these verses he declares their sins. Three chief points claim our attention. 

I. The sins of wicked ancestors practised bt theie successors. 1. The idolatry 
of the fathers continued by their children. " Say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith 
the Lord God ; Are ye polluted after the mannejr of your fathers ? and commit ye 
whoredom after their abominations ? " The whoredom spoken of is spiritual — unfaith- 
fulness to God, in the worship of idols. Even the exile in Babylon did not for sume 
time cure the people of this sin. As their fathers had done, so did they. Parental 
example is very powerful for several reasons. (1) It is the example of those who are 
most looked up to and imitated by the young. (2) It influences the young in the most 
impressionable season of their life. "As the twig is beat the tree inclines." (3) It is 
most continuous in its influence upon the young. " The characters of living parents are 
constantly presented for the imitation of their children. Their example is continually 
sending forth a silent power to mould yoimg hearts for good or ill ; not for a single 
month or year, but through the whole impressionable period of childhood and youth, 
the inflaence of parental example is thus felt. If it be constituted of the highest and 
purest elements, the results will be unspeakably precious. Sons and daughters will " 
almost certainly become patterns of propriety and goodness, because their parents are 
such. If, on the other hand, their example be evil, most injurious will be its effects 
upon their children. A solemn consideration is this for parents, and one that should 
be laid to heart by them. It is difficult, moreover, to break away from sins which have 
obtained a firm hold upon family life and practice. 2. Idolatry practised even in its 
most cruel rites. " For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass 
through the fire, ye pollute yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day "(see our 
notes on ch. xvi. 20, 21). 3. Hie practice of idolatry defiling the idolater. "Ye pollute 
yourselves with all your idols." Worship either elevates or degrades the worshipper, 
according to the character of the object thereof. Genuine adoration is transforming in 
its influence upon him who offers it, We become like unto the object or objects of our 
supreme love and reverence. Hence the worship of the true God purifies, exalts, 
enriches, ennobles, sanctifies, the worshipper ; while the worship of any idol or idols 
— e.g. riches, rank, popularity, power, pleasure — defiles, degrades, and impoverishes 
the worshipper. Moreover, sin of any kind pollutes the sinner; it stains and defiles 
his soul (see our notes on ver. 7). 

IL The inquiries of hypocrites rejected bt the Lord God. " Shall I be inquired 
of by you, O house of Israel ? As I live, saith the Lord God, I will not be inquired of 
by you." (We have already considered this topic in our homilies on vers. 1 — 4 and 
ch. xiv. 1—11.) 

ni. The dark designs of sinners defeated by the Lord God. 1. Bere is a 
deliberate design formed hy man to conform to idolatrous usages. " That which cometh 
into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say. We will be as the heathen, as the 
families of the countries, to serve wood and stone." Thus the house of Israel, the people 
of the only living and true God, inwardly resolved to conform to heathenish customs, 
hoping in some way to improve their condition by so doing. And in our day there are 
those who, while manifesting some respect for religion, yet conform to this world in its 
questionable and even sinful usages. And some " regard an irreligious condition as 
preferable to the struggles of a religious life." 2. Here is man's design to conform to 
idolatrous usages discovered hy the Lord Ood. It was in vain for these insincere 
inquirers of the Lord to think that they could conceal any design from him. And 
elders of Israel should have known this so well as to be in no danger of overlooking it. 
But the practice of sin misleads and deceives sinners, and had probably deceived them. 
God is perfectly acquainted with every thought of the mind of man (oh. xi. 5 ; Pb. 
cxxxix. 1—5 ; Matt. ix. i; John ii. 24, 25 ; Heb. iv. 13). 3. Eere is man's design to 
conform to idolatrous usages defeated by the Lord God. " That which cometh into 
your mind shall not be at all." Their inward purpose he would frustrate. They might 
attempt to carry it out, but it would not succeed. " That Israel should become like 
the heathen," says Schroder, " would be repugnant to the nature of God, espeoiAllr to 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 8TO 

his tiarae Jehovab. The very reverse would be much more in hannony with it, namely, 
that the heathen should become like Israel." The Church of God is not to be conformed 
to and lost in the world; but the world is to be conformed to the Church and to be 
included therein. The kingdoms of the world are to become the kingdoms of our 
Ix)rd and of his Christ (Rev. xi. 15). And so the Lord declares that the evil designs 
of his sinful people should fail He can utterly foil the deepest, subtlest schemes ot 
man ; and he will do so when those schemes are exposed to his holy will (cf. Job v. 
12—14 ; Ps. xxxiii. 10, 11 ; Prov. xxi. 30 ; Isa. viii. 10; Acts v. 38, 39).— W. J. 

Vers. 33 — 38. — The sovereignty of Ood in the punishment of sin. " As I live, saith 
the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched-out arm," etc. The 
connection of this paragraph with what has gone before, and especially with ver. 32^ 
is of the closest cbaracter ; it is, in fact, essential. Three leading points require 
attention. 

I. The sovBREiaNTT or God oveb men, notwithstandino thbie senb, asserted. 
(Ver. 33.) The Israelites had resolved to be as the heatiien, to conform to their usages, 
and to mingle themselves with them. But the Lord does not readily loose them from 
their allegiance to him. The sins of men do not invalidate the sovereignty of God over 
them. Men cannot by any means annul his right to rule over them. Moral obligations 
are eternaL The Lord here asserts : 1. Eis solemn determination to maintain hit 
sovereignty over Israel. " As I live, saith the Lord God, surely . . . will I rule over 
you." The oath indicates the settled and unchangeable purpose of the Lord Jehovah. 
He will not forego his kingly authority over his creatures. 2. Eig sufficient power to 
maintain his sovereignty over Israel. " Surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched- 
out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over you." There is a reference here to 
his great and terrible acts in the land of Egypt for the deliverance of his people there- 
from (cf. Exod. vi. 6 ; Deut. iv. 34). The Almighty is at no loss for means and instru- 
ments to maintain his authority. " The kings of the earth set themselves, and the 
rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying. Let us 
break their bands asunder," etc. (Ps. ii. 2 — 6). If men will not bow to the sceptre of 
his mercy, they will be made to feel the rod of his anger. " There is no shakmg off 
God's dominion," says M. Henry ; " rule he will, either with the golden sceptre or with 
the iron rod ; and those that will not yield to the power of his grace shall be made to 
sink under the power of his wrath." 

IL The sovEEBiaNiY of God oveb men manifested in the FnNiBHUBNT of theib 
SINS. (Vers, .34 — 36.) These verses, we think, should be regarded as figurative. The 
people of the house of Israel had said within themselves, " We will be as the heathen, 
as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone." The Lord by his prophet 
declares that they shall not be as the nations ; they shall not be lost amongst them ; 
for he will find them out with his judgments. " I will bring you out from the peoples, 
and will gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered," etc. There is nere 
a reference to their captivity in Babylon. The objection that they were in one land 
only, and amongst one people only, whereas the prophet speaks of "peoples" and 
" countries," is not of much weight, seeing that the Babylonian empire was so great as 
to be spoken of in the terms applied to it in Jer. xxvii. 1 — 7. " To those who fancied 
that with the removal into exile the judicial activity of God wts already closed, and 
the dawn of the day of grace was immediately approaching, he announces a new phase 
of this judicial activity, similar to that which first came over Israel in the wilderness. 
If they are really led out of the former state into the new one, in whinh they underlie 
a second judgment, /orj»(i% they are led into the wilderness, which here designates a 
state similar to that in which Israel was formerly in the wildemess. 'Jhe wilderness 
is designated as 'the wilderness of the peoples,' in contradistinction to the former 
wilderness, where was only the howling of wild beasts (Deut. xxxiL 10), lions, serpents, 
and the like (Deut. viii. 15 ; Isa. xxx. 6). The new wildemess is one in which Israel 
is in the midst of the peoples, and can therefore be no ordinary wildemess, for wildemess 




similar use L. — n. j i_ t 

ments thus indicated precisely were and when they were inflicted we know not, becauM 



880 THB BOOK OF THE PBOPHET EZEEIEL. [oh. zx. 1—49. 

of " the defect of historical notices concerning the state of the exiles," Some idea of 
them may, perhaps, be gathered from the words, " Like as I pleaded with your fatliers 
in tlie wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord God" 
(cf. Exod. xxxii. 25—29; Numb. xiv. 21—23; xvi. 31—35, 41—49; xxi. 4—6). It 
is well observed by Qxeenhill, " That God's punishments are his pleadings ; when he 
visits men for their sins he pleads with them. Every rod of his hath a voice, and 
pleads for God. Isa. Ixvi. 16, ' By fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all 
flesh.' His punishments are arguments he uses to convince or confound sinners." If 
men violate God's righteous laws, and set at nought his supreme authority, they must 
bear the inevitable penalties of their transgressions, and thus realize their subjection to 
his sovereignty. 
IIL The soveeeiunty of God ovbe men manifested in the punishment of theib 

SINS IK OEDBB TO LEAD THEM LOYALLY TO AOKNOWLIiDGB THAT SOVBEBIGNTT. (Vers. 

37, 38.) The Divine chastisement was designed to exercise a purifying influence upon 
the people of Israel, and to lead them back to hearty allegiance to the Lord their God. 
Two results are here represented as effected by means of it. 1. Divine discrimination 
of human characters. "And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring 
you into the bond of the covenant," The metaphor of passing under the rod is drawn 
from pastoral life, and the custom of the sheep passing under the staff of the shepherd 
to be numbered and examined (cf. Lev. xxvii. 32 ; Jer. xxxiii. 12, 13 ; Micah vii. 14). 
They who thus pass under the rod are the people of God purified by chastisements, 
known of him, restored to covenant relationship with him, enjoying the privileges and 
acknowledging the obligations of that covenant. " The Lord knoweth them that are 
his ; " and distijiguisheth them from those who are not his. 2. Divine separation of 
human persons. "And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and those that 
transgress against me," etc. (ver. 38). A separation of persons according to their 
respective characters is here set forth. The sheep will be divided from the goats, the 
loyal subjects from the hardened rebels. This verse perhaps points, as Scott suggests, 
" to the whole of the Lord's dealings with Israel, from the time when this prophecy was 
delivered, to the establishment of a small remnant of them in their own land, after the 
Oa|]tivity ; from among whom the idolaters and idolatry itself were completely destroyed, 
by their manifold desolations, and the terrible havoc made among them." This separa- 
tion foreshadows that great separation which will be effected at the close of the present 
economy (cf. Matt. xxv. 31 — 46 ; Rev. xxL 27). Blessed unspeakably will be the lot of 
those who shall then be found amongst the loyal subjects of the Lord Jehovah. And 
as for the rebels, they shall know by dread experience that he is the sovereign Lord 
of all- W. J. 

Vers. 39 — 44. — 2Vie graciont restoration of the people. " As for you, house of 
Israel, thus saith the Lord God ; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols," etc. It is here 
distinctly recognized that not at once would this reformauon and restoration be accom- 
plished. The house of Israel is told to " go, serve ye every one his idols." These words 
are spoken of as an " ironical conversion " (cf. 1 Kings xxii. 15 ; Amos iv. 4 ; Matt. 
xxiii. 32). They are also described as " the holy irony of him who knows that mercy 
is laid up for the future." It is important to bear in mind that the words were addressed 
to the dissimulating elders of Israel. They had come toEzekiel to inquire of the Lord 
through him, while in their heart they were resolved to " be as the heathen ... to 
serve wood and stone." They received such an answer as they were fitted for : " Go ye, 
serve ye every one his idols." Not quickly are men of such character separated from their 
sins. Not quickly are the stern lessons of chastisement truly and thoroughly learned 
by them. Moreover, this ironical concession of their idolatry would perhaps impress 
them more deeply with the evil thereof than a renewed prohibition or denunciation of 
it might have done. Then fuUuws the assured declaration of their restoration through 
the mercy of the Lord God. Of this restoration the more prominent features are 
these. 

I. Theib bbnunoiation of idolatby and oonseceation to the Lord Jehovah. 
1. The renunciation of their idolatry. (Ver. 39.) The rendering of the margin of the 
Bevised Version seems to us preferable : " Go ye, serve every one his idols, but here- 
after surely ye shall hearken unto me, and my holy Name shall ye no more profane 



OH. XX. 1—49.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 381 

with your gifts, and with your idols." Hengstenberg and the ' Speaker's Commentary ' 
take this view of the verse. " You have pretended," says Greenhill, " that by your idols 
set up iu my stead, and the gifts you have offered to them, or by them to me, that you 
have honoured ray Name, but by joining them and me together, you have polluted ray 
Name," And ho deuUires that this pollution sliall cease ; that they will abandon their 
idols. And since Uieir release from the Babylonian captivity, the Jews have never been 
guilty of idolatry like that mentioned in ver. 32 — the service of wood and stone ; they 
have never since then forsaken the Lord God for the idols of heathenism. 2. Their 
consecration to the Lord Jehovah. " For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of 
the height of Israel, saith the Lord God, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them 
in the land, serve me." Notice : (1) 'J"he scene of this service. " In mine holy mountain, 
in the mountain of the height of Israel." After the return from the exile the temple 
at Jerusalem was rebuilt by the Jews, and there they worshipped God. But in the 
largest and grandest fulfilment of this prophecy the holy mountain is to be understood 
Bpiritually (of. John iv. 20 — 24). " The spiritual worship of the New Testament," as 
Schroder observes, " can be well described in the phraseology of the Old Testament 
worship, by which it was symbolized and prefigured. We still speak of the heavenly 
Jerusalem" (cf. Isa. ii. 2, 3; Gal. iv. 24—26; Heb. xii. 22). (2) The universality of 
this service. This is very emphatically expressed here. " There shall all the house of 
Israel, all of them, serve me." Partially this was fulfilled on the return from the 
exile. " When the Jews had returned from Babylon under Zerubbabel and Ezra, along 
with those who adhered to them from all the tribes, they formed a unity, possessed a 
temple at Jerusalem, and became a single people under the same presidency " (CocclIus). 
But the prophecy yet awaits its complete fulfilment. " All the separation between 
Israel and Judah shall cease. This points to times yet future, when in Messiah's 
kingdom Jews and Gentiles alike shall be gathered into one kingdom — the kingdom 
of Christ (comp. Jer. xxxi. ; Mai. iii. 1, etc.; also Eom. xi. 25, 26; Eev. xi. 15). 
Jerusalem is the Church of Christ (Gal. iv. 26), into which the children of Israel shall 
at last be gathered, and so the prophecy shall be fulfilled (Eev. xxi. 2) " (• Speaker's 
Commentary'). (3) And as for the nature of this service; they shall worship the 
living and true God as the ouly worthy Object of adoration, and they shall obey him 
as their sovereign Lord. 

II. ThB acceptation of THEMSBLVEg AND THEIK WOBSHIP BY THE LOBD JeHOVAH. 

1. The acceptation of themselves. " There will I accept them. ... As a sweet savour 
will I accept you." This acceptation includes: (1) The full forgiveness of all their 
offences. That he receives the sinner is an evidence that he will remember his sins 
a^aiust him no more. (2) The gracious reception of themselves : that God would 
regard them with complacency, and enrich them with his favour. When God accepts 
man he does it heartily and with a glad welcome, even as the father received his 
prodigal son (Luke xv. 20 — 24). When we pray, " Take away all iniquity, and i eceive 
us graciously," he speedily answers, "I will heal their backsliding, I will love them 
freely : for mine anger is turned away from him." 2. The acceptation of their worship. 
" There will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with all 
your holy things." When the worshippers are themselves accepted, their worship will 
be accepted also. But when the worshippers are insincere and wicked, the Lord 
demands of them, "To what purpose, is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?" 
etc. (Isa. i. 11 — 15). It is the contriteand believing heart of the offerer that commends 
the offerings unto God. Where this state of heart is we may say, with David, " Then 
Shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness," etc. (Ps. li. 19). 

III. Gathering them fbom theib exile, and theib bestobation to their own 
LAND. 1. Gathering them from their exile. " When I bring you out from the peoples, 
and gather you out of the countries, wherein ye have been scattered." The Lord does 
not lose Bight of his people when they are scattered abroad. He does not cease to care 
for them or to protect them. Not one of them shall be lost through any failure on 
his part (cf. chT xxxiv. 11—16; John x. 28). 2. Restoring them to thmr own land. 
» When I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I lifted up 
mine hand to give unto your fathers." The Jews were restored to their own laud 
after the exile in Babylon. That restoration was a remarkable fulfilnaent of many 
prophecieB. There is perhaps in the text a reference to another and yet future restora- 



38a THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. [oh. xx. 1—49. 

tioQ thither. GcoA hj the gospel restores man to his forfeited inheritance. By sin man 
was exiled from Eden; by the grace of God in Christ Jesus he is introduced into 
a holier and more beautiful Paradise. " When Divine grace renews the heart of the 
fallen sinner, Paradise is regained, and much of its beauty restored to the soul." 

IV. ThBIK gracious BECOaNITION OF GOD, AND SINOBRB EBPENTANOE OF THEIB BINS. 

(The points which arise under this head we have already noticed in our homily on 
ch. vi. 8 — 10.) 1. Their gracious recognition of the Lord God. " And ye shall know 
that I am the Lord," etc. (vers. 42, 44). This knowledge does not spring from his 
judgments, but from the experience of his gracious dealings. It is a sympathetic and 
saving acquaintance with him. 2. Sincere repentance of their sins, (1) Here ia a 
jrerequisite to true repentance. "There shall ye remember your ways, and all your 
doings, wherein ye have been defiled." (2) Here is an essential characteristic of true 
repentance. " And ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that 
ye have committed." In genuine penitence the sinner reproaches himself becaiuse of 
his sins. 

V. And in all these features of this restoration we have an impresbive 

AND BEAUTIFUL ILLUSTRATION OF THE UNMERITED GRACE OF GoD. " To shaU knOW 

that I am the Lord, when I have wrought with you for my Name's sake, not according 
to your wicked ways, nor &ocording to your corrupt doings, ye house of Israel, saith 
the Lord God." All our blessings flow to us from the inexhaustible fountain of the 
grace of God. Mankind has merited no good from him. Our " evil ways and corrupt 
Soings " have deserved his unmixed wrath. But in his infinite mercy he has ^pared 
our guilty race, enriched us with many physical and mental blessings, and provided for 
us an eternal and glorious salvation through the gift of his beloved Son. And as this 
restoration of his people originated in his grace, it shall redound to his glory. " I will 
be sanctified in you in the sight of the nations " (ver. 41) ; " I have wrought with you 
for my Name's sake" (ver. 44); "In them as a holy people, anew consecrated to God, 
shall be exhibited to the heathen the holiness of Jehovah." And the redemption of 
man by Jesus Christ shall issue in the eternal glory of the God ol all grace (GaL i. 6 ; 
2 Tim. iv. 18; Heb. xiii. 20, 21 ; 1 Pet. v. 10, 11 ; Rev. viL 9—12). 

" Not unto us, O Lord, not unto na, 
But unto thy Name give glory. 
For thy mercy, and lor thy truth's sake." 

W.J. 

Vers. 45 — 49 and ch. xxi. 1—7. — A parable of Judgment, " >'oreover the word 
of the Lord came unto me, saying. Son of man, set thy face towards the south," etc. 
Another chapter should certainly have been commenced at the forty-fifth verse of the 
twentieth chapter, as indeed it is in the Hebrew, LXX., and Vulgate. The first seven 
verses of the twenty-first chapter in the Authorized Version are an explanation of the 
parable of the preceding five verses. 

I. The Author of this judgment. 1. Divinely declared. " Thus saith the Lord 
God ; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee " (ver. 47) ; " Thus saith the Lord, Behold, 
I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of its sheath, and will cut off from 
thee the righteous and the wicked" (ch. xxi. 3). The Divine authorship of the judgments 
coming upon Jerusalem has been asserted already by the prophet many times in ch. 
v., vi., vii., etc., in which places we have noticed the fact. The Chaldeans were the 
unconscious instruments in the hand of God for accomplishing this judgment. He was 
himself the Author ot it. 2. Generally recognized. " And all flesh shall see that I the 
Lord have kindled it : it shall not be quenched " (ver. 48); " That all flesh may know 
that I the Lord have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath : it shall not return any 
more " (ch. xxi. 5). The irresistibleness of the judgment woxild lead men to conclude that 
the Author of it was the Almighty. " If we see that all human plans and devices, even 
the most promising, come to nothing, we are led to the confession that we have to do 
with personal omnipotence and righteousness, against which the battle is unavailing." 
There are some disasters and distresses in which the thoughtful observer ia almost 
compelled to recognize the presence and the power of the Supreme. 

II. The subjects of this judgment. " Son of man, set thy face toward the south, 
and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy against til* forest «F ike south field; 



OH. XI. 1—49,] THE BOOK OP THB PROPHET EZEKIBLk 888 

and eay to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the Lord ; Thus saith the Lord 
God ; Behold I will kindle a fire in thee. . . . Bon of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, 
and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel; and 
say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the Lord ; Behold, I am against thee," etc. Ezekiel 
was now in Chaldea, of which the prophets generally spoke as the north country ; not 
because it was strictly north of Palestine, but because its armies entered Palestine from 
the north by way of Syria, and in returning they travelled by the same northern way. 
Hence the south denotes Jerusalem and the land of Israel. And the people are spoken 
of as " the forest of the south." It has been suggested that the figure of a forest ii 
employed in order to denote the density of the population. Others have suggested that 
it is used to indicate the fact that the people had degenerated from a noble vine or a 
fruitful field to an unproductive forest. Bat this at least is certain, that the judgment 
was about to be inflicted upon the Holy Land, the royal and sacred city, and the people 
chosen of God. Their former favours will not screen them from the righteous retribu- 
tion of their sins. Their privileges will rather aggravate their punishment. They had 
presumed upon those privileges ; they had abused God's great goodness to them ; and 
becaiasethey had done these things his judgment upon them will be all the more terrible. 
Here is solemn admonition to those who occupy eminent positions or possess exceptional 
privileges (cf. Matt. xi. 20—24). 

III. The nature of this judgment. 1. Hit destructive in its character, " Behold, 
I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry 
tree. . . . Behold, I am against thee, and will draw forth my sword out of its sheath, 
and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked." Fire and sword are employed 
to denote all the miseries and terrors which came upon the people in the siege and 
destruction of Jerusalem. Famine and pestilence, slaughter and captivity, then fell 
fiercely upon the people (cf. ch. v., vi., vii.). 2. It is general in its infliction. The fir« 
" shall devovu: every green tree in thee, and every dry tree, . . and all faces from the 
south to the north shall be burned therein. ... I will cut off from thee the rigliteous 
and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of its sheath against all flesh 
fi cm the south to the north." la national judgments the righteous suffer with the 
wicked, and the innocent with the guilty, so far as the outward calamities are concerned. 
But though the outward event be the same to all, its inward character is not. The 
righteous shall not be as the wicked. " God's graces and comforts make a great 
difference when his providence seems to make none." So that this general character of 
the judgment " is not in contradiction with ch. ii. 4, according to which the righteous 
amid the impending catastrophe are the object of the protecting and sustaining activity 
of God. For if two suffer the same, yet it is not the same. To those who love God 
must all things be for the best (Rom. viii. 28)" (Hengstenberg). 3. /* is irresistible 
in its might. " The flaming flame shall not be quenched. ... I the Lord have drawn 
forth my sword out of its sheath: it shall not return any more." The Jews in 
Jerusalem imagined that, with the aid of Egypt, they could safely bid defiance to the 
Chaldean forces ; but those forces utterly overwhelmed them. When God is against 
either a man or a nation, they are unable to stand before their enemies. " Hast thou 
an arm like God ? and canst thou thunder with a voice like him ? " " He is wise in 
heart, and mighty in strength : who hath hardened himself against him, and prospered?" 
" Thou, even°thou, art to be feared : and who may stand in thy sight when once thou 
art angry?" "Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way," etc. 
(Ps, ii. 12). 

IV. The disinclination of men to obedit the announcembnts of this judgment. 
" Thou said I, Ah Lord God 1 they say of me. Doth he not speak parables ? " Notice : 
1. The mean attempt to cast upon the prophet the blame which was due to themsdvea. 
They said of the prophet, " Is he not a speaker of parables ?" They did not want to 
understand his announcements to them. They could have understood them without 
difficulty had they been disposed to do so. The truths which he proclaimed were dis- 
pleasing to them, and they would not recognize them. Then they disingenuously 
complained of the form in which he expressed his message. '« Is he not a speaker of 
parables?" Their conduct in this respect finds its analogue in some hearers of the 
Christian ministry in our day. If the preacher's style is figurative, he is too obscure— 
"a speaker of parables; " if it be plain and unadorned, he is too simple and homely; 



384 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. m. 1—32. 



it it be logical, he is too dry; if it be ferrid, he is too enthusiastic. They blame the 
preacher when the fault is in themselves — they are out of sympathy with his message. 
2. The adequate resource of afaithfui servant of God when sulg'ect to discowagement. 
He can do as Ezekiel did, state his difficulties and trials to his Divine Master, and 
obtain from iiim consolation and inspiration. There are experiences in the lives of 
Christian ministers when nothing remains for them but to seek the aid of him from 
whom they received their commission. They shall never seek his aid in vain, or find 
it insufficient. 

"V. The gbaob of God in orvisa ebpbatbd aotj impbessivb ahnounckments of 
THIS juDaMENT. When the prophet complained to the Lord that the people spake of 
him as " a speaker of parables," he was not commanded to abandon them to their doom, 
but to deliver hLs message again and in another form. The merciful God was patient 
with the perverse people. 1. Here are repeated annotmcements of this jvdgment. Two 
are given in our text. Several have been already given by the prophet. And sub- 
sequently he delivered not a few. And in addition to these, Jeremiah was proclaiming 
in Jerusalem the approaching doom. God does not leave the wicked without many 
warnings of the consequences of their conduct. 2. Here are impressive announcements 
of this jitdgTnent. (1) The spoken parable (vers. 47, 48). This was fitted to awaken 
attention, stimulate inquiry, and thus produce a deeper and more lasting impression of 
the truth conveyed. (2) The acted sign. " Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the 
breaking of thy loins," etc. (ch. xxL 6, 7). This also was with the view of interesting the 
people, and leading them to ask, " Wherefore sighest thou ? " As Hengstenberg observes, 
" The endeavour is everywhere visible, to obtain by the clearness of the description 
a representation of the reality not yet existing, but already germinating, and in this 
way to withdraw the people ^om their delusions, and make penitence take the place ot 
politics." 

VI. The diskat of the j-bopus on the actuai, abbival of this judgmekt. 
" Every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and 
all knees shall be weak as water : behold, it cometh, and shall be brought to pass, saith 
the Lord God." " They shall be compelled to experience in themselves what they 
perceive in the prophet. In all, courage gives place to terror, activity to prostration, 
counsel to perplexity. No one holds out any Ioniser (c£ ch. vii. 17)" (Schroder). 
The wicked who have been most self-confident and boastfully secure in time of peace 
and prosperity, will be most prostrate and terror-stricken when confronted by stern 
calamity and distress. " The sound of a driven leaf shall chase them." Having 
forsaken God, and biing deprived of the strength and com-age of a calm and clear 
conscience, "terrors overtake them like waters," and utterly overwhelm them. If 
sinners persistently reject the mercy of God in Christ Jesus, the time will come when 
in abject dismay they will vainly seek to hide themselves "from tlie face of him that 
sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb" (Rev. vi. 15 — 17). Therefore 
" aeek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near," etc 
(Li3. Iv. 6, 7}.— W. J. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Vers. 2, 3. — The opening words, repro- 
«>aciiig those of ch. xx. 46, indiaite that the 
JLierpretation of that p;irable ie coming. So 
the three variants of " south " aie shown to 
mean respectively Jerusalem, the holy 
places, and the land of Israel. So, in ver. 
8, the i^hteons and the wiclied take the 
place of the " green " and the " dry " tn e, 
and the fire is explained as meaning the 
sword of tlie invader. The teaching of oh. 
xviii. had shown that Ezekiel had entered, 
a* regards the ultimate judgment of indi- 



vidual men, into the spirit of Abram's worda 
"That be far from thee to destioy the 
righteous with tlie wicked " (Gen. xviii. 25). 
But in regard to tempoi al j udgments there 
would bi', in this ca-e, as in the complaint of 
Job ix. 22, no distinction. The sword went 
forth "against all flesh." 

Ver. 6. — Sigh therefore, etc. As in other 
instances (ch. iv. 4; v. 1 — 4), the prophet 
dramatizes the coming calamity. He is to 
act the part of a mourner, whose sighs are 
so deep that they seem to " break his loins" 
(compare^ for tlie gesture, Nah. ii. 1, IC 
Isa. xxi 3; Jer. zxx. 6). The stiang* 



OH. rn. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PBOPHET EZBKIEL. 



386 



action was meant to lead to qneBtioiu. 
What did it mean? And tlien he is to 
answer that he doea it "for the tidings" 
which are to him as certain as if they had 
already come. He is bnt doing what all 
would do, when the messenger brought 
word, as in eh. xxxiii. 21, five yean later, 
that the city was at last smitten. 

Vers. 8, 9.— A sword, a sword, etc. The 
new section (vers. 9 — 17) rises out of the 
thought of the unsheathed sword in ver. S. 
More than most other portions of Ezekiel's 
writings, it assumes a distinctly lyrical 
character, and might be headed, " The Lay 
of the Sword of JehoTah." The opening 
words are probably an echo of Deut. zzxii. 
41. The dazzling brightness of the sword 
is added to its sharpness aa a ftesh element 
of terror. 

Yer. 10. — The soeptre of my son, etc. 
The clause is obscure, possibly corrupt, and 
has leceived many interpretations. (1) 
Taking the received text, the most pro- 
bable explanation is that given by KeU and 
Kliefoth: Shall we rejoiet (saying), Thi 
$eeplre of my ton deapiteth aU woodi. Here 
the "rod" is the "sceptre" of the tribe of 
Judah (Gen. xlix. 10), and the words are 
supposed to be spoken by those who hear 
of the destroying sword. They need not 
dread the sword, they say, because the 
sceptre of the house of David, whom Jeho- 
vah recognizes as his son, despises all wood, 
looks on every other rod that is the symbol 
of sovereignty, with scorn. It is urged, 
in favour of this interpretation, that ver. 27 
contains an unmistakable reference to the 
prophetic words of Gen. xlix. 10. (2) 
Ewald: It is no weak rod of my ion, ihie 
lofteU of aU icood ; i.e. the sword of Jehovah 
is no weak weapon such as might be used 
for the chastisement of a child (Frov. x. 13 ; 
xiii. 24). (3) Hengstenberg : Shall we re- 
joice over the rod of my son, deapiting every 
treel Tiiere is no cause for anything but 
the reverse of joy in the rod, the punish- 
ment which God appoints for Israel as his 
son, and which surpasses all others in its 
severity. (4) The Authorized Version and 
Revised Version (margin) make the "sword" 
the nominative, and the words are those of 
Jehovah: It eontemneth the rod (i.e. the 
sceptre) of my son, at it contemns every other 
tree (i.e. as in ch. xx. 4), every other national 
sovereignty. (5) The Revised Version and 
Authorized Version (margin): It (the sword) 
18 the rod of my son (appointed for his chas- 
tisement), and it deapiseth every tree, in 
same sense as in (4). (5) Comill, altering 
the text,' almost rewriting it, gets the 
meaning : It (the sword) i$ for men who 
murder and plunder, and regard not any 
ttrength. Neither the LXX. nor the Vul- 
gate help us, the former giving, " Slay, set 

EZEKIEL. 



at naught, reject every tree;" and the latter, 
"Thou who guidest uio sceptre of my sou, 
thou hast ont down." On the whole, (1) 
seems to rest on better ground than the 
others. 

Ver. 12. — Terrors by reason of the sword; 
better, as in the Revised Version and margin 
of the Authorized Version, They (the princes 
of Jndah, corresponding to the "rod" of 
ver. 10) are delivered over to the iword with 
my people. At this stage, in contemplating 
the destruction alike of princes and of 
people, the prophet is bidden to make his 
gestures of lamentation yet mere expressive, 
" crying, howling, smiting on his thigh " 
(Jer. xxxL 19). 

Ver. 13. — Because it is a trial, etc. The 
verse has received as many interpretations, 
and is just as obscure as ver. 10, with which 
it is obviously connected. I begin as before 
with that which seems most probable. (1) 
Keil : For the trial is made, and what if the 
despising sceptre shall not eome f The " de- 
spising sceptre " is the kingdom of Jndah, 
and the prophet asks, " What will happen, 
what extreme of misery is to be looked for, 
if that kingdom shall not appear, if Judah 
shall be left without a ruler? (2) Ewald : 
For it is tried — and uhatt Whether it is 
also a soft rod! That wiU not he. So. 
men will find on trial that the sword of 
Jehovah is not a soft rod, bnt the sharpest 
of all weapons. (3) Hengstenberg: And 
Tunel Shall the despising rod that outstript 
aU other punishments not be t i.e. shall the 
sword of Jehovah not do its work effectively? 
(4) Comill, in part following Hitzig, again 
rewrites the text, and gets the meaning: 
Bow slMvld I judge with favour 1 They 
have not turned themadves from their pol- 
lution. They ahatt find no pUuse. (5) The 
Authorized Version inserts the word "sword," 
apparently with the meaning that the "trial" 
will show that the sword of the Lord con- 
temns the rod, i.e. the sceptre of Judah, 
and that that rod shall be no more. (6) 
The Authorized Version (margin): When 
the trial hath been, what thent Shall not 
they alao belong to the despising rodi may 
have had a meaning for those who adopted 
it, but I fail to find it. (7) The Revised 
Version relegates the Authorized Version 
text into the margin, and substitutes, For 
there is a trial, and what if even tlie rod that 
contemned (i.e. the sceptre of Judah) shall 
be no more 1 (8) The LXX and Vulgate con- 
nect "because there is a trial" with the 
preceding clause, rendering it respectively, 
" for it has been justified (SeStKataTai)," and 
" because it has been tested (probatus)," 
and translate what follows — the LXX., 
"What if even a tribe be repulsed? It shall 
not be ; " and the Vulgate, " And this when 
it (the sword I) has overturned the kingdom, 

2 



THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xxl 1— 32. 



•nd it shall not be," eto. This will be a luffl- 
cient summaiy of the difficulties of the eze- 
getical pioblem. At the best, we must sa; 
that it remains unsolved. 

Ver. 14. — Smite thine hands together, eto. 
Another gesture follows, either of honor 
and lamentation, or perhaps, looking to ver. 
17, of imperative command. The sword is 
to do its thrice-redoubled work (the words 
emphnsize generally the intensity, and are 
scarcely to be taken numerically, of the 
repeated invasions of the Chaldeans) ; it is 
"the sword of the slain" (better, pierced 
onet, or, with Bevised Version, the deadly 
wounded). The next cUrnse should be 
taken, with the Bevised Yersion, in the 
singular — the sword of the great one that U 
deadly wounded; so. the sword should 
smite the king as well as the people. For 
entereth into their privy chambers, read, 
with the Bevised Version (margin), Kwald, 
and Eeil, it eompaueCh them about. 

Ver. 15. — For their ruins shall be multi- 
pUed, read, with the Bevised Version, that 
lAetr itumblingi; and for wrapped up, 
pointed, or sharpened. 

Ver. 16. — Go thee one way or another, etc. ; 
i.e. as in the following, to the right hand or 
the left — to the north or the south. Which- 
ever wi^ the prophet tamed (ch. xx. 17), he 
would see nothing but the sword and its 
work of slaughter. Jehovah had given 
that command with the gesture of supreme 
authority. He would not rest till he had 
appeased his wrath by letting it work 
itself out even to the end. With these 
words the " Lay of the Sword of Jehovah " 
ends, and there is again an interval of 
ailence. 

Vers. 17 — 19. — The new section opens in 
a different strain. Ezekiel sees, as in 
vision, Nebuchadnezzar and his army on 
their inarch. He is told to appoint (better, 
malte, or mark, as on a brick or tile, as in eh. 
iv. 1) a place where the road bifurcated. Both 
come horn one land, i.e. from Babylon ; but 
from that point onwards one road led to 
Babbath, the capital of the Ammonites 
(Deu't. iiL 11 ; 2 Sam. xi. 1), the other to 
Jerusalem. Apparently, the exiles and the 
people of Judah flattered themselves that 
the former was the object of the expedi- 
tion. The answer to that false hope is a 
vivid picture of what was passing in the 
council of war which Nebuchadnezzar was 
holding at that parting of the ways. The 
prophet sees, as it were, the sign-post point- 
ing, as with a hand, to eaob of the two 
cities. The king consults his soothsayers, 
and uses divinations. Of these Ezekiel 
enumerates three : (1) Be shahet tlie arrows 
to and fro (Bevised Version). This was 
known among the Greeks as the PeKoixav 
T(ia. The arrows were put into a quiver, 



with names (in this case pirobably Babbath 
and Jerusalem) written on them. One was 
then drawn, or thrown, out as by chance, and 
decided the direction of the campaign. (2) 
He consults the images (Hebrew, teraphim). 
The modus operandi in this case is not 
known, but Judg. xviii. 18 and Hos. iii. 4 
point to some such use of them. (3) There 
remains the sacriiice and the inspection of 
the liver, familiar alike in Greek, Etrurian, 
and Boman divination (Oicero, ' De Divin.,' 
vi. 13). 

Ver. 22. — ^At his right hand was, etc.; 
better, into his right lumd eame, etc.; sc. 
the arrow marked for Jerusalem was that 
which came into the king's hand as the 
quiver was shaken. To appoint captains; 
better, battering-rams, in both clauses. The 
same Hebrew word is used in both (see 
note on ch. iv. 2). The verse paints the 
engineering operations of the besiegers, 
following on the issue of the divination. 
(For the mount, comp. Isa. xxxvii. 33.) 

Ver. 23. — The whole verse is obscure, and 
has been very variously interpreted. I 
follow the translation of the Bevised Ver- 
sion, and explain it by inserting words 
which are needed to bring out its meaning : 
It (what Nebuchadnezzar has done) eAofl 
be as a vain divination in their sight (sc. in 
that of the men of Jerusalem), which hace 
sworn unto them (so. have taken oaths of 
fealty to the Chaldeans, and are :esdy to 
take them againX bui he (Nebueh&iiaezzar) 
brings iniquity to remembranee. The fact 
represented is that when the people of 
Jerusalem heard of the divination at th« 
parting of the ways, they still lulled them- 
selves in a false security. They and Zede- 
kiah had sworn obedience, and that oath 
would protect tliem. " Not so," rejoins the 
prophet; "the Chaldean king knows how 
those oaths have been kept." The LXX. 
omits all reference to " oaths." The Vul- 
gate, taking the word for " oath " in its other 
sense of " sabbath," gives the curious render- 
ing, Eritque quasi consulensfrustra oraculum 
in eorum oeulis, et tahbaiorum otium imitans. 
In spite of the reports that reached them, 
the men of Jerusalem thought themselves 
■8 safe as if the Chaldean king were keep- 
ing a sabbath day. Ewald partly follows 
the Vulgate, and renders. They believe they 
have weeks on weeks, i.e. will not believe 
that the danger is cluse at hand. Keil and 
Haverniok: Oaths of oaths are theirs; i.e. 
they count on the oath of Jehovah, on his 
promises of protection, but he (Jehovah) 
brings iniquity to remembrance. That they 
may be taken; i.e. be seized by the invader 
and either slain or made prisoners. 

Ver. 24. — The prophet adds words which 
in part explain those that precede. Tha 
iniquity of the people has forced, not tha 



OH. xxr. 1-32,] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 



367 



Chaldean king only, but Jehovah himself, 
to remember and to pnnish them. 

Ver. 25. — And then, profane wioked prince 
of Jndah, etc.; better, with the Revised 
Version, deadly woimded, etc., as in ver. 
29, where the same word is translated in 
the Authorized Version as "slain." The 
Authorised Version follows the LXX. and 
Vulgate, apparently in order to make the 
word fit in with the fact that Zedekiah was 
not slain, but carried into exile. The word 
"deadly wounded," or "sorely smitten," 
may rightly be applied to one who fell, as 
Zedekiah did, from his high estate. From 
the sins of the people the prophet turns 
to the special guilt of Zedekiah, who had 
proved unfaithful alike to Jehovah and to 
the Chaldean king, whom he had owned as 
his suzerain. His day had at last come, the 
time of the iniquity of the end of the last 
tranegression which was to bring down on 
him the final punishment. 

Ver._ 26.— Remove the diadem, etc. The 
noun is used throughout the Pentateuch 
(e.g. Exod. xxviii. 4 ; xxxvii. 39 ; Lev. viii. 
9; xvi. 4) for the "turban" or "mitre" of 
the high priest, and Keil so takes it here, as 
pointing to the punishment of the priest as 
weli as of the king. This shall not be the 
same ; literally, this ehall not he this; or, as 
the Bevised Version paraphrases, tAt« thaU 
be no more the tame; i.e. the mitre and the 
crown shall alike pass away— taken from 
their unworthy wearers. There was to be, 
as in the following words, a great upturning 
of all things; the high brought low, the 
lowly exalted. 

Ver. 27.— I will overthrow. The sen- 
tence of destruction is emphasized, after the 
Hebrew manner, by a threefold iteration 
(Isa. vi S; Jer. xxii. 29). It shall be no 
more. The pronoun in both clauses pro- 
bably refers to the established order of 
the kingdom and the priesthood. "That 
order," Ezekiel says, " shall he no more." 
Keil, however, takes the second "it" — 
the "this" of the Revised Version — as 
meaning the fact of the overthrow. That 
also was not final; all things were as in a 
state of flux till the Messianic kingdom 
hinted at in the next clause should restore 
the true order. ITntil he oome whose right 
it is. The words contain a singularly 
suggestive allusion to Qen. xlix. 10, where 
a probable interpretation of the word 
" Sbiloh " is " he to whom it belongs j " or, 
as the LXX. gives it, rh iroKetfteya airf. 



The passage is noticeable as being Ezekiel't 
first distinct utterance of the hope of a 
personal Messiah. Afterwards, in di. xxxiv. 
23, it is definite enough. 

Ver. 28.— Thus saith the Lord God con- 
cerning the Ammonites. Ezekiel has not 
forgotten that scene at the parting of the 
ways. The Ammonites, when they saw the 
issue of the divination, and the march of 
the Chaldean army to the west, thought them- 
selves safe. They took up their reproach 
against Jerusalem, and exulted in its fall. 
They are warned, as in another strophe of 
the_ " Lay of the Sword of Jehovah," that 
their confidence is vain (comp. Zeph. ii. 8 
for a like exultation at an earlier period). 

Ver. 29. — Whiles they see, etc The wo ids 
may possibly refer to Nebuchadnezzar's 
diviners in ver. 21, but more probably to 
those whom the Ammonites themselves 
consulted. The pronoun "thee" in both 
clauses refers to Ammon, The result of 
those who divined falsely was that the sword 
would be drawn against the necks of the 
Ammonites and throw them upon the heap 
of the slaughtered ones. For them, as in 
the words that end the verse, reproducing 
those of ver. 25, punishment is decreed, and 
that punishment will come, 

Ver. 30.— Shall I cause it, etc. 7 The 
question of the Authorized Version suggests 
a negative answer, as though the speaker 
were Jehovah, and the sheath that of his 
sword. The Revised Version, which trans- 
lates it, with Eeil, the LXX., and the 
Vulgate, as an imperative, deals with it as 
addressed to the Ammonites. They are 
told to sheath their sword ; it would be of 
no avail against the sharp, glittering weapon 
of Jehovah. Their judgment would soon 
come on them in their own land, not, as in 
the case of Judah, in the form of exile 
(comp. oh. XXV. 1 — 8 as an expansion of the 
prophet's thought). 

Ver. 81. — I will blow against, etc. The 
imagery of fire takes the place of that of the 
sword. The brutish men (same word as in 
Ps. xlix. 10 ; xciL 6) are the Chaldean con- 
querors. The fact that the adjective may 
also mean " those that bum " may, in part, 
have determined Ezekiel's choice of it. 

Ver. 32. — For Ammon there is no hope of 
a restoration like that which Ezekiel speaks 
of as possible for Jerusalem, and even for 
Sodom and Samaria. Its doom is written 
in the words, it shall be no more remem- 
bered (oomp. eh. zxt. 7). 



HOMILBTICa 

Ver, 4. — ITie common /ai$ of righteous and wicked. Both the righteous and tbe 
wicked are to be cut off. Though not equal in moral clutracter, they are to share is 
the same general calamities. 



888 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. ni. 1—32. 

I. It It A rAOT THAT THB BIOHTEOUB SUFFKB WITH THE WICKED. We BM thil 

fact in everyday experience, and it would be a falsehood to formulate a doctrine which 
Becmed to our short-sighted judgment more just, if it did interpret events. 1. Frtym 
human conduct. The bad policy of a king brings war and its attendant miseries on a 
whole nation. The crime of a father bequeaths poverty, shame, and misery to his whole 
family. 2. From natural calamities. An earthquake will shake down a church upon the 
heads of the most devout worshippers, with as terrible a slaughter as that which follows 
the overthrow of some theatre of sinful revelry. 

II. The common life of mankind necessitates this common fate. There is a 
certain solidarity of man. We are members one of another, so that if one member 
snfiTers, all the members suffer. This is one penalty we pay for the union with our 
fcllow-men which on the whole is immensely helpfuL Without such a union there 
would be no society, no organic connection between individuals. The rich, fall life 
that grows out of the mutual ministries of man would then be impossible. 

III. It IB AN AGQBAYATION of a calamity that THE biohteous bhabe tri 
pate of the wicked. The wicked could well be spared, and it might seem to be a 
good thing for the world that their places should be vacant ; but every good man has 
his good work which suffers when he is taken away. The guilt of those who bring 
disaster on the innocent is all the greater on this account. No worse thing can happen 
to a people than that its saving elements should be taken away. They are the salt of 
the land. 

IV. The biohteoub who buffeb with the wicked abe hot ultiuatelt injubed. 
The injustice is temporary. 1. The outward suffering is an inward bkssing. The 
physical nature of the suffering may be the same in both cases ; but its moral character 
differs entirely according as it is deserved or not. When it falls on innocent men it is 
not punishment ; there is no curse in it ; it comes as the fire that purges the silver. 2. 
TTie temporary suffering will he followed hy eternal blessedness. We may say of the 
righteous and the sinful who were victims of a common calamity, " In their death 
they were not divided." But after death there is a swift and searching separation. 
Then it is seen that the righteous were taken from the evil to come. 

y. The common fate of the bighteous and wicked mat be a means of 
BAVINQ both. It was BO in the Captivity. Good men like Daniel and " The Three 
Children " were taken to Babylon together with the corrupt courtiers of Jerusalem, and 
there they maintained the flame of ancient Hebrew piety, so as to prepare for a renewed 
people's restoration. Christ died the sinner's death that he might save the sinner, after 
he himself had been rused up from the dead in victory over sin. 

Ver. 9. — 2%« sword of war. I. The swobd of wab bbingb feaeful trouble. 
When the hoarded judgment bursts over the head of the guilty nation of Israel, it falls 
in the form of war. Those people who speak lightly of war as being " good for trade," 
as "opening careers for men," and as " developing manly virtues," etc., would do well 
to consider that the fearful monster is regarded.in the Bible as the worst of plagueB. 
David was a man of war, and he knew what its horrors meant. It was with no nervous 
fear like that of King James who shuddered at the sight of a sword, with no sentimental 
tremors of an effeminate nature, that the old warrior David chose the horrors of a 
pestilence in preference to thoBe of war. Note some of its evils. 1. Lestructiveneu. 
It must be a fallacy to regard it as " good for trade." Whatever temporary and artificial 
fillip commerce may receive during the actual campaign is paid for ten times over by 
the subsequent collapse. England was thrown back for generations by the Napoleonic 
wars. The soldiers are withdrawn from productive work; ordinary commerce is 
stopped ; and a vast amount of property is directly destroyed. 2. Suffering. Every one 
who has witnessed the scenes of a battle-field turns from the recollection of them 
with loathing and horror. War is not a pageant of drums and trumpets and flying 
banners ; it is a huge Inferno of groans and agonizing deaths. Thousands lie wounded 
on the field, some trampled on by charging steeds, some anguished for want of the 
drop of water which cannot be reached, sick with the blazing heat of the sun or chilled 
to the marrow in snow and frost. Thousands are cut off in the flower of their youth, 
sent prematurely to the grave before their real life-work is begun. And every death 
means a household of bitter mourning in the old home. 3. Wickedness. War leta loos* 



OH. XXL 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 889 



the lowest passions. Hatred and bloodthirsty vengeance are engendered, and men are 
brought down to the level of wild brutes. Too often savage lust follows, and the vilest 
outrages are committed. 

II. Thb bwokd of wab mat be used A8 a Divine chabtibemeht. 1. Sharpened 
by »in. National misconduct lays a people open to the ravages of war. The curse may 
be CMBed immediately by insolent and unrighteous dealings with other nations; or it 
may be brought less directly and not as we could anticipate. Yet the awful fact 
remams — National sin necessitates national judgment, and the most awful and yet the 
most common national judgment is war. 2. Directed by God. This was the case with 
tlie wars of judgment that visited Israel. Israel's sin sharpened the sword, but God's 
hand guided it. For the providence of God cannot be excluded, even from so lawless 
and monstrous a thing as war. (1) This adds to its terror. It is fearful to know that 
God wills us to suffer from so dire a calamity. Then there can be no escaping it. (2) 
J%M suggests hope of final rescue. Wherever God is, love is. The God of battles is the 
God of licthlehem. He who sends the war to scourge also sends the gospel to save. 

Ver. 17.— 2%e satis/action of God's fury. This is a most awfiil subjeot Gladly 
would we leave it alone. Oh for a fresh sight of God's eternal love, instead of this 
horror of great darkness, this vision of wrath and judgment unrestrained and fully 
satisfied ! Yet the fearful words are before us and they invite our earnest regard. 

I. God's fubt is fbabpullt pkovoked by sin. It is only against sinners that 
these dreadful words are written. The righteous may share the temporal calamities 
that smite the wicked (ver. 4), but they incur none of the wrath of God that lies behind 
those calamities. Nevertheless, as we are all sinners, there is little comfort in this 
thought. Consider how greatly sin provokes wrath. 1. // is committed in/ull daylight. 
The Jews possessed the land. We know Christ. We cannot plead ignorance. Even 
the heathen have accusing consciences. 2. It it committed against hve. We sin 
against our Father, to whom we owe everything, and who has been infinitely gracious 
to us. 3. It is committed in spite of warnings. Israel had her grand procession of 
minatory prophets from Elijah to Bzeklel. We have the warnings of the Bible. 4. It 
is committed tuithout necessity. There is a better way and a happier. Nothing but 
the most wilful perversity can make us choose the evil path. A saving hand has been 
held out to protect us. When we sin we reject that help. 6. It is committed after 
Ood's long-suffering has been tried. He has long rel'rained from punishing. Yet men 
have made his long-suffering an excuse for greater sin. Thus they have " treasured up 
wrath for the day of wrath." 

IL God's fury cannot bb besisted. 1. It cannot be opposed by man's powers. 
The sinner has to contend with the Almighty and the All-wise. The stoutest must fall 
in such a contest, and the most cunning must fail in the foolish attempt to outwit God. 
2. It cannot be opposed by anyexeuses. Unhappily, there is no doubt as to the guilt of 
the sinner. He had opportunities of return, and he rejected them. Conscience must 
paralyze resistance. 3. It cannot be opposed by Ood's love. There is no schism in the 
nature of God. Love itsel f must approve of wrath directed against hardened impenitence. 

III. God's fury will be satisfied. 1. It wUl not fail. Nothing that God 
attempts can fail. This we may infer as a conclusion from the observations under the 
previous head. 2. It will not endure for ever. When it has accomplished its work it 
will rest. It may be that some of the results of it will endure for ever. The slain man 
will not arise again on earth, but he is not being killed continuously. The rained city 
may never be rebuilt, and yet the earthquake that overthrew temples and palaces has 
long subsided, and all is now still and calm. 3. It will be satisfied when it has accom- 
plished its end. God's fiiry is not like his love. It does not spring unprovoked from his 
own heart. It is roused by sin, and when it has punished sin, it is satisfied. But this 
is the most awful satisfaction of it. There is another satisfaction, viz. : 4. It will 
be satisfied when it is propitiated. This is not stated in the verse before us. But it 
is the burden of the gospel. Christ our Advocate propitiates the wrath of God (1 John 
ii. 1, 2). Then if we have confessed our sin, and sought the saving help of Christ, we 
need fear the wrath of God no longer. It is satisfied. 

Yer. 24. — Transgrestiotu discovered. L Tbansobbbbionb abs diboovebed bt Gob 



390 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xil 1— «2, 

AB BOON AS THBT ABB COMMITTED. He 18 present when the deeds are done; his eyes 
are always open to observe the conduct of his creatures ; he is not negligent of sin. We 
start, therefore, with the position that there is no such thing as secret sin. The appear- 
ance of secrecy arises from the fact that the great Witness withholds his evidence for 
the present. Such a position leads to the inevitable conclusion that some day the most 
hidden evil may be made manifest. God holds the key, and he will unlock the door 
whenever he sees fit. 

II. TbANSGKESSIONS will be DI800VEBED TO THE UNIVERSE IN THE FUTUBB JUDO- 

MBNT. This must be what the judgment really means. We have been accustomed to 
the picture of a vast assize, as though God needed to go through the forms of a criminal 
trial with souls, every secret of whom has been perfectly known to him from the first. 
Such a trial would be an empty form, a mere theatrical display. But God will make the 
justice of his action apparent to all, and in doing so the secrets of all hearts will be 
revealed. 

nL TBANSaBEBSIONS ABE LIKELY TO BE DISOOVEnED OH EARTH. It IS Scarcely 

possible for a man to play the hypocrite successfully till his secret is sealed in death. 
At some moment of inadvertency he is almost certain to lift the mask, and then the dis- 
covery of his deceit, once made, will destroy for ever the reputation of years. Sin will 
work its fruits in the bad man's life. Though never confessed in words, it is expressed in 
tone and temper. The very features of the countenance set themselves to the character 
of the life within. Moreover, sudden surprises and unexpected turns of events will 
reveal a man to the world. The long-buried secret comes to light. Achan's Babylonish 
garment is brought to light (Josh, viL 18 — 20). Ananias and Sapphira cannot conceal 
their lie (Acts v. 9). Eugene Aram cannot hide the corpse of his victim. Dimsdale 
is driven to reveal the scarlet letter that burns in fire on his breast. 

IV. Tbansgbessions may BE HIDDEN BY FOEGivENESS. In the cxpressive Hebrew 
phrase, they are then said to be " covered." The only way to have our transgression 
thus buried out of sight is for us first to confess it to God. Thus we need to pray that 
he will search us and try us, and see if there be any wicked way in us (Ps. cxxxix. 23, 
24). Until our sins are brought home to our consciences, there is no hope that they 
will be permanently hidden. If we forget them, God will remember them. For God 
to forget them we must first remember them. When transgressions are thus owned 
to God, we are in the condition to receive his pardon, after which we may take the 
assurance, " Your sins and iniquities will I remember no more." The sins are then 
banished " as far as the east is from the west." They are " buried in the depth of tke 
sea." God does not goad his restored children with their old sins. 

Ver. 27. — Bevolution and restoration. I. Revolution. QtoA overturns Israel and 
its institutions by repeated acts in the successive invasions of Nebuchadnezzar. The 
ruin is utter. No city has sustained so many sieges as Jerusalem, or has been so often 
sacked and destroyed. Now, we are reminded that these terrible disasters are elements 
in a Divine judgment and discipline. It is Ood who overturns. There is, therefore, 
a providential purpose in the event. 1. £evolution must precede restoration. The 
Divine education of mankind is not a continuous, unbroken development. The earth- 
quake has its mission as truly as the April shower. Evil must be overthrown before 
good can be built up. This may mean a violent process. We are too mild in some of 
our methods of treating sin. Undoubtedly, God has not committed his sword of judg- 
ment to us, but he expects his servants to testify against sin, and so to puU down the 
strong walls of Satan. Aggressive work is absolutely necessary. While we preach the 
gospel of peace, we have also to fight against intemperance, commercial corruption, and 
all evil customs and institutions. 2. ITiis revolution mmt he universal. There is a 
sweeping comprehensiveness in our text. Political revolutions, indeed, may not be called 
for, for DOW we have_ to engage in spiritual work. But there must be revolution in 
every region of life. "(1) In the hea/rt. Old prejudices and habits must be thrown 
down— every mountain made low. (2) In the Ohwch. Christ cleansed the temple. 
The Reformation was a great overturning. Much in the Church now needs to he 
overturned ; e.g. worldly practices, human inventions, false ideas, Christless journalism, 
etc. (3) In society. The apostles were regarded as firebrand revolutionists, who 
"turned the world upside down." Social injustice must be overturned, not, perhaps, by 



en. xn. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 391 

" Red Republicanism," but by Christian brotherhood. We must not suppose that God 
will let the monstrous evils of Christendom go on for ever. He will overturn much 
before we can see the millennium. The new wine cannot be contained in the old 
bottles. 

II. Restoration. 1. The revolution preparet for a restoration. Mere destruction 
perfects nothing. It is necessary only as preliminary to something constructive. 
Blank nihilism is the most barren philosophy. The " everlasting no " is not a gospel 
for hungry humanity. After the revolution there must be a new order, and after 
repentance there must be a new life. 2. The restoration can only he accomplished hy 
ChriU. Until Christ came the Jews were never truly restored, though they had 
returned to their land. In Christ Israel had its long hoped-for redemption (Luke ii. 
29, 30), though, alas 1 most of the nation rejected it, and left it to others. It is easy 
to demolish an ancient effete system. The difBculties begin with building up a new 
and better one. We cannot establish a new social order, nor can we even stir up a 
better life in our own breasts. The weary world waits for the full coming of Christ 
to restore its overturned peace and order. 3. This restoration will he fully satisfactory. 
(1) Christ has a right to enjoy the headship over it ; " Whose right it is." He is not 
only the Son of David, and Heir to the old throne ; he is the Son of God, vested with 
Divine rights. (2) Christ receives his kingdom from his Father (Phil. ii. 9 — H) : " I 
will give it him." (3) This restoration will not be a return to the old position. If it. 
were so, the whole process would be a profitless cycle. But Christ's kingdom of hekven 
is infinitely better than David's kingdom of IsraeL 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 3 — 6. — Undiscriminating infliction. It is a pathetic spectacle, this of the 
prophet, in his exile away in the north-east, turning by Divine command his gaze^ 
sorrowful and sympathizing, towards Jerusalem, the holy places, the land of IsraeL 
The present is sad enough, but Ezekiel has to bear the oppressive anticipation of the 
future. He hears the assurance of the God whom his countrymen have ofl'ended by 
their infidelity that worse calamity, even disaster, and death are about to befall the 
remnant in Palestine. The sword is about to be drawn out of its sheath, and th« 
righteous and the wicked alike are about to feel the keenness of its edge. 

I. Pbovidenob eegakds a nation as having a corporate life. Israel was a 
unity, and the scattered tribes were regarded by the King of nations as one people. 
It is the same with other communities. Every nation has its own national life, it* 
own organic unity. Each subject or citizen is a member of the body, and his existence 
has meaning in this relation and all that it involves. 

II. Reotobal law accobdinolt deals with a nation as a whole. The inha- 
bitants of the earth are under moral government and control, are subject to law and to 
the Divine Lawgiver and Judge. God is the God of nations. So much is this the 
case that political authority is represented in Scripture as being a Divine institution: 
" 'J'he powers that be are ordained of Gud." As Providence designs that men should 
live in communities, so God determines the discipline, the moral education, through 
which nations must pass. God is in history; which is uninteresting and meaningless 
unless his hand is recognized, and the operation of his rule observed with admiring 
reverence. 

III. This pbinciplb involves that the wicked partioipatb in the fbospebitt, 

AND THE GOOD IN THE ADVER8ITT, WHICH COME UPON A NATION. Individuals are UOt 

always in sympathy with the community of which they form a part. There are other 
currents in a stream beside its main flow. Broadly speaking, the nation which publicly 
and flagrantly violates the moral law undermines its own life and prepares the way 
for its own dissolution. When the catastrophe comes, those who have protested 
against the nation's sins, and have endeavoured to stem the torrent of unbelief and 
ungodliness, are carried away in the general destruction. 

IV. Such betbibution does not, however, affect the individital moral rao- 
BATioN OF MEN. God deals with men upon general principles— according to broad, 
latelligible laws. We cannot see how it could be otherwise. Yet this seems to involn 



892 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch.xxlI-32. 

many cases of individual hardship, and even injustice. How can this he avoided? 
The Judge of all the earth will surely do right. How, then, can we eiplain the fact 
that — in the language of Ezekiel — the Etercal, with his sword, cuts off the righteou« 
and the wicked ? 

V. This abbanqemeni n explained by, and harmonizes with, the judoment 
AND KETRiBUTioN OF A FUTURE STATE. What We know not HOW We shall know 
hereafter. The anomalies of the present state of being are such as to suggest that this 
is only a probationary state, that we do not now and here see the iinfolding of the com- 
plete purposes of the Lord and Judge of all. The Scriptures reveal a state in which 
retribution and compensation shall be complete, as we know they are not here. The 
righteous and the wicked shall not always be confused in one common category, and 
consigned to one common doom. The discrimination which is not exercised now shall 
be exercised. hereafter. Prosperous sinners shall not for ever elude the righteous 
judgment of God. The suffering and patience of the virtuous and pious shall one 
day be rewarded, not only by the approbation of the Judge, but by an everlasting 
recompense. — T. 

Vers, 6, 7. — The sign of sighing. In the case of Ezekiel, perhaps more than in any 
other of the prophets, actions were adopted as prophetic signs, more effective than 
words. The tidings conveyed to the prophet, and through him to his fellow-country- 
men, were of so mournful an import that such indications of mental distress as sighing 
and weeping were natural expressions of the feelings which he could not but experience. 
It was appointed for him in this way to excite the curiosity of his people, and, in 
response to their inquiries, to inform them of coming evils. 

I. The cause of the pbophet's siohino, 1. The trouble which was about to 
come upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem and of the whole land of Israel, in the 
invasion of the country, the siege of the metropolis, and the violent death of many of 
the inhabitants. 2. The sinful rebelliousness of the people, by which they were bring- 
ing upon themselves these calamities and disasters. 3. Ezekiel's deep and sincere 
sympathy with sufferers, and his sorrow for their evil ways, so that he felt for his 
fellow-countrymen as he would have felt for himself^ 

IT. The sbvbbitt of the peophet'b sishino. It was "with bitterness," "with 
the breaking of the loins," i.e. sighing shaking the whole bodily frame, and evincing 
the pungent distress afSicting his spirit. 

Ill, The sionifioancb of the prophet's bighino. 1. It was an evidence of 
patriotism ; for Ezekiel himself was far from the scene of approaching retribution, and 
it did not affect him personally, but through his patriotic identification of himself 
with all that concerned his people. 2. It was an evidence of his faith in Divine 
assurances. There is no reason to suppose that mere political foresight enabled the 
prophet to anticipate the coming evil; yet he realized its certtdn approach with such 
intensity as to call forth the manifestation of feeling here described. 3. It was s 
warning to the careless and insensible. There were many for whom Ezekiel sighed 
who sighed not for themselves ; yet theirs was the sin, and theirs the punishment 
now imminent. 4. It was a summons to repentance. If the prophet cried and sighed 
for the abominations wrought among the people, how much more did it become those 
who by their sins had provoked the anger of the righteous God to consider their ways, 
to weep because of their guilty ingratitude and persistent disobedience, and to flee 
from the wrath to come ! how much more did it behove them to call upon the Lord 
that he might have mercy upon them, and upon their God who could abundantly 
pardon 1 — T. 

Vers. 8 — 17. — Tht tword. Among the great powers that have affected human 
history must be reckoned the sword. As the emblem of physical force, of the 
superiority of the great of the world, it has special significance for the student of 
human affairs. The vision of the sword revealed to Ezekiel the impending doom of 
the land of Israel, and particularly of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. When he saw in 
imagination the glittering blade and the keen edge, his mind anticipated the awful 
fate which was about to overtake his afflicted and sinful fellow-countrymen. 

L The sword is ths implbmeitt of human ambition and tenoeanok. 



OH. XXI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. 393 

IL ThB 8W0BD IB THE WEAPON OP DiVINE EETEIBUTION UPON THE NATIONS. 

Whilst it is unquestionable that wars and fightings come from human lusts, it is to the 
religious man, to the student of Scripture, equally plain that a Divine Providence over- 
rules all the conflicts of the nations to accomplish wise purposes, and even purposes of 
benevolence. The Assyrian power directed its forces against the land of Israel, under 
the influence, doubtless, of human passions and purposes by which those passions 
were suggested. But Assyria, Egypt, Persia, and Rome were powers which the God of 
Israel employed to bring about the ends fixed upon by his own wisdom and faithful- 
ness. _ As an instrument by which punishment was inflicted upon the idolatrous and 
rebellious, the sword was not only the sword of Nebuchadnezzar, but the sword of the 
Lord of hosts. 

nL The bwobd is a summons to humiliation and bepentancb. Ezekiel himself 
evidently regarded it in this light. He was directed to cry and howl, to smite upon his 
thigh, to smite his bands together, when he beheld in vision the weapon which was 
about to chastise his rebellious countrymen. There are minds which need to face the 
consequences of sin in order that they may admit the awfulness of sin itself. When 
the displeasure of the Almighty is revealed against the iniquities of men, they are some- 
times roused to reflection and inquiry, and so it may be to repentance. 

rV. The 8W0BD is the symbol op the power bt which sin is slain. The sons 
of Israel were not alone in the practice of sin, in ingratitude, and disobedience. Men 
in every age and in every place are found guilty of rebellion against the holy and 
righteous God. Well is it when they turn against their own sins the edge of the 
spiritual sword, when they attack their vices, their follies, their crimes, as the enemies 
of God, and, by slaying with the Divine weapon the rebellious forces, avoid the otherwise 
inevitable judgment and retribution which overtake the impenitent. — T. 

Vers. 18 — 32. — The impartiality of Divine Justice. Very picturesque and memorable 
is this portion of Ezekiel's prophecies. The prophet in his vision beholds the King of 
Babylon on his way to execute the purposes of God upon the rebellious and treacherous 
prince of Judah, and upon his partakers in sin. He sees him at some point of this 
expedition, standing on the north-east of Palestine, uncertain whether in the first 
instance to direct his arms against Rabbath, the capital of the Ammonites, or Jerusalem, 
the metropolis of Judah. He is at " the parting of the way," and calls to his tud, to 
help him to a decision, not only the counsel of the politician and the commander, but 
that also of the diviner. The bright arrows, on which the names of the two cities are 
inscribed, are drawn as in a lottery, the images are consulted, the liver is inspected by 
the augur. The prophet sees the resolve taken to proceed against Jerusalem ; yet at 
the same time, he predicts that the children of Ammon shall not escape the edge of the 
glittering sword of retribution and vengeance. 

I. Divine jrrsTXOB makes use of human agencies of retribution, often them- 
selves UNCONSCIOUS OF THE PURPOSES FOB WHICH THET ABE EMPLOYED. The King of 

Babylon was appointed as the minister of righteous avenging upon both Judah and 
Ammon. Unawares to himself, he, in his military operations, was carrying out the 
predictions of God's prophets, and the decree of God himself. Infinite wisdom b never 
at a loss for means by which to bring to pass its own counsels and resolves. 
IL Divine justice punishes the pkivilbqed who abb unfaithful to theib 

PRIVILEGES AS WELL AS THOSE WHOSE PBIVILBGES HAVE NOT BEEN EXCBPTIONAL. 

Although the descenJants of Abraham were selected from among the nations for a special 
purpose connected with God's plans for the moral government of the world, they were 
not thereby released from their righteous obligations, or from liability to punishment 
in case those obligations were repudiated. Israel's election did not secure exemption 
from the consequences of defection and rebellion. Rather was the guilt of the nation 
deemed to be aggravated by their neglect to use aright the many advantages with 
which they were favoured. On the other hand, the Ammonites were not secured 
against righteous retribution merely because they were less highly privileged than 
Israel. They had a measure of light, and they were responsible for walking in the 
light they enjoyed ; and if they loved darkness rather than light, they secured their owe 
condemnation. 

IIL Divine justice decides which guilty nation shall be oobbboted, and 



894 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [ch. rsi. 1— 82. 



VBICH SHALL BK DESTROTBD. Into the Bccret counsels of God it is not giren us to 
enter. Pacts are before us ; and we see that, according to this prophecy, Ammon was 
committed as fuel to the fire, and was no more remembered ; that the very name of the 
Ammonites vanished out of human history ; and we see that the Jewish people 
survived, and were brought forth from the furnace into which they were cast. We 
can only apply to these facts our faith in the Divine righteousness, and hold fast by 
our conviction that in this, as in all his dealings with men, the Eternal Ruler has acted 
upon principles of unquestionable equity. 

IV. DlVTNB JD8TICE SUMMONS SINFUL NATIONS TO EEPBNTANOB AND NEWNESS OT 

LITE. These predictions and their fulfilment in history have been recorded for our 
instruction. What we read in Scripture ii fitted to deepen within our nature the 
conviction that this world is under the righteous government of (Jod. And we shall 
be foolish indeed if we do not infer from this fact the necessity of repentance and of 
renewal ; if we are not led to welcome the assurance that for the penitent then u 
mercy, and for the lowly, life. — T. 

Vers. 26, 27. — 2%e Divine reversal. The judgments of God are not in Tain. Th« 
■word is not sheathed until the purposes of infinite righteousness are achieved. War 
leads to such an end, to such a place, as eternal wisdom approves. No good end would 
be answered by Divine interposition, did all things go on as before. A Divine reversal 
crowns the work. 

I. The eistobioal fact. The primary reference of the prophet is doubtless to tha 
downfall of the usurping, rebellious, treacherous, plotting prince of Judah, {.e. Zedekiah. 
His true policy lay in subjection to Nebuchadnezzar ; instead of adopting and holding 
fast by this policy, he was ever endeavouring to free himself from the yoke, in the vain 
hope of independence. It was foreseen and predicted by Ezekiel that this should lead 
to his destruction. 

II. The moral, governmental pkqiciplk suoaESTED by this fact. We learn 
that the Omnipotent Ruler is not indifferent to what happens among the nations, that 
he works in and through the ordinary laws of human action, and may sometimes work 
by extraordinary and exceptional means. Certain it is that his ways are not as men's 
ways. The groat are often overthrown, and the feeble exalted, by the operation of his 
wise and merciful providence. God confounds all human policy and defeats all human 
expectations, exalts the low, and at the same time abases the high. The mitre and 
the crown are taken from the forehend of the powerful, and are placed upon the lowliest 
brows. 

III. The typical and spiritual applications of this pbinoifle. There is a 
grandeur in this language which seems almost to compel its reference to greater events 
than those which happened in Jerusalem during the Eastern captivity. The kingdom 
of sin is mighty, and men have often felt how utterly vain it is to expect that kingdom 
to yield to any human attack. Ignorance and error, vice and crime, superstition and 
infidelity, have through millenniums of human history acquired over humanity a power 
which seems irresistible and invincible. But there is One "whose right it is" to reign, 
and he, the Son of God, has come in the flesh, and has come in the dispensation of 
the Holy Spirit. In his favour, and in order to secure his universal conquest, his 
everlasi ing dominion, the Most High is overturning, ever overturning. He is the High 
Pricht, the rightful King, of the humanity whose nature he assumed, and for whose 
salvation he died. The mitre and the crown are his of right, and to him they shall 
be given. Every usurper shall be defeated and disgraced ; and Christ, whose right it 
is to reign, shall receive the kingdom, and his dominion shall have no end. — T. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Irresistible slaughter. The subject-matter of this prophecy is sub- 
stantially the same as the foregoing. The parable is now put into plainest language. 
There is an advantage in using the parable method. It awakens attention. It leads 
men to examine and reflect. There is an excitement in discovering a riddle. Yet God 
will spenk also to men in language plain enough for the si ,.plest understanding. No 
lost man is able to cast any blame on our God. We have " line upon line, precept 
upon precept." 

L The scene or Divinb destruction. God's righteons anger is directed against 



OH. XXI. 1—82.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. 895 

the Holy Land, the holy places, the temple itself. Kings and priests alike are 
doomed. Traditional eminence and renowa are impotent as a defence against just 
retribution. God is no respecter of persons. Sin is equally detestable in an Israelite 
as in an Egyptian, and will be punished with equal severity. Out of regard for a good 
man, God may employ a different method — more patience, perhaps — ^in dealing with 
his son ; yet, in the end, there will not be the deviation of a hair's breadth from 
righteous principle. No man can cloak himself with privilege. 

II. God 8 VENOEAHOE IBBEBISTIBLE. " I havo Set the point of the sword against all 
their gates, that their heart may faint." As Samson lifted off the gates of Gaza from 
their hinges, much more can Samson's Creator pierce with his sword gates of brass and 
fortnsses of iron. Who can withstand his thunderbolts ? Who can raise a defence 
against his lightning ? " Every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble." Did 
the antediluvians stop the rising of the Deluge ? Gould the families of Egypt protect 
their firstborn against the angel of destruction? Had the dwellers in Pompeii any 
power to prevent the overthrow of their city? How vain and impotent are men in 
league against an avenging God I 

ni. God's vengeance is thokouqh in its action. " I will cut off from thee th« 
righteous and the wicked." Man's estimate of righteousness and God's estimate differ 
widely. In a nation every variety of character will be found, and sin will exist it 
every shade and gradation. In comparison with the blackest characters some wili 
appear righteous who are only less tainted with sin. These are the so-called righteous. 
In the very nature of things God will not and cannot treat alike the righteous and the 
wicked. The truth, then, set before us here is this — that the whole nation was corrupt, 
yea, ripe for slaughter. So few were the righteous, as to be left out in this graphic 
and impressive description. The scourge should sweep through the land, and penetrate 
every secret place. 

rV. God'b venoeanob, though appabentlt, not eeallt, indisgbiminath. Out- 
wardly the same calamity may befall the righteous and the wicked, while the real and 
inward effect differs widely. The same sentence of death will send the righteous to 
their heavenly rest, the wicked to their 6nal doom. The sun that hardens clay, melts 
wax. The storm that sends a leaky ship to the bottom, drives faster home the tight 
and gallant bark. The scourge that kills the wicked, only chastens the righteous. 
The furnace that destroys the alloy, refines the silver. To the few righteous this 
visitation of God " is a trial" (ver. 13). The rod had not been severe enough, there- 
fore the sword came. No ill can befidl the righteous. Death is cars. "To die is 
gain." 

v. DiviME AifD HUMAN co-OPEBATiON. This sword, which was_ sharpened to destroy, 
was no less QoA'b sword, though it was wielded by the captuns of Babylon. The 
prophet had his part to take. The king and statesmen of Babylon — yea, even the rank- 
and-file of the army — ^had their part to take, with God, in the execution of his just fury. 
The prophet is directed (ver. 14) "to smite his hands together" — a matter-of-feot 
prophecy of the coming event — ^the sign to summon the great army. And (in ver. 17) 
G<xi describes himself as about to do the same act : " I will also smite mine hands 
together." Men are often called to act in God's stead— as Gud's delegates. 

VL Divine admonitions, theough men, must be dbliveebd with deep bmotioh. 
•• Sigh therefore, son of man, with the breaking of thy loins; and with bitterness sigh 
before their eyes." If it be possible, on our part, to impress our fellow-men with the 
reality and severity of God's judgments, we must do our utmost to arouse earnest 
repentance, or we incur grave responsibility. God has constituted human nature so that 
strong emotion in the preacher, seemingly manifested, awakens strong emotion in the 
hearers. Men everywhere are susceptible of influence from a superior or a holier man. 
Nothing God allows us to omit which may serve to lead our fellows to repentance. 
We must make it clear that the events of coming retribution adequately impress our 
own minds; then, and then only, shall we arouse attention, promote inquiry, and lead 
to reflection, self-examination, and return to God. — D. 

Vers. 18—27. 2%e all-controlling providence of Ood. We have here • strikins; 

Instance of the superintending agency of God. From his invisible throne he controls 
•11 the plans, divinations, arts, and labours of kings and generals. All persons and all 



B96 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xn. 1—32. 

events are directed into the channel of his purpose, and aid in the final consummation 
of his righteous end. 

I. God uses even wicked hem to do his wobk. If he employed only righteous 
men, he would have to reject the service of the human species. There is a class ol 
services which men render consciously and intentionally, and for which thej[ obtain 
reward. They are blessed in their deeds. There is also a class of services which mea 
render unconsciously and without intention. These have no excellence, and bring the 
doer no advantage. With his infinite skill God can turn all streams to work his mill. 
Sin shall be overruled to bring about a greater good. The wicked are God's hand, 

II. Heathen divinations abb made to convey God's will. The choice and 
will of men have a certain sphere in which to move freely. Yet, after all, they are but 
parts, minor parts, of larger machinery. Proud and presumptuous men may choose 
to go either east or west: they think they have their own way; yet, in the final 
resist, it simply contributes to bring about God's way. The endi which some men 
seek, and which they often attain, are only means to an end in God's larger plan. The 
responses which foolish men imagine they obtain from heathen oracles or from human 
diviners are decrees and edicts from the unknown God, Nebuchadnezzar flattered 
himself that he had gained a splendid triumph in Judaea, while he was only doing 
servile work as a vassal of the King of kings. 

III. Alilt MILITABT inventions AND EXEBTIONS BEBVE THE CAUSE OF GoD, How 

instructive is it to perceive that all the martial preparations then about to be made by 
Nebuchadnezzar were all prearranged by God — all sketched in outline by his prophet I 
How this fact humiliates man I How it exalts God in our esteem I How small a thing, 
after all, is human ambition 1 Men who rail against God yet serve him. And if this 
fact is so transparently seen in the case of the King of Babylon, may we not conclude 
that this is a sample of every event in human life ? As every atom in the mountains 
occupies the place allotted to it by Gkid, so every event in human history fills a place 
according; to God's purpose. 

IV. Wicked hen, although euploted as instbuuentb fob OHABTisma othebs, 
BECOME yicTiMB OF God'b dibpleasubs, " Thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, thy 
day is come, when iniquity shall have an end." To tmrefiecting minds, the defeat of 
a king would seem a commonplace thing — a chance of war. Yet the band of God ia 
in the matter. " He setteth up one, and putteth down another." As a king has larger 
scope for evil or for good, so proportionately is his accountability. At the best, we see 
but a tiny fragment of God's method of nde ; if we could comprehend the whole, we 
should admire the skill and power and beneficence of his vast administration. 

v. SuBVEBBION of human BTSTEHB shall MAKK fob THB ESTABLISHMENT OF 

BiOHTEOUBNESS. "I wiil overtuTu, overturn, overturn it . . . until he come whose 
right it is ; and I will give it him." There is no questicn but that this (doming One ia 
" Jesus Christ the Bighteous." " Because he loveth righteousness and hateth wicked- 
ness," therefore his throne shall be for ever and ever. The only solid foundation for 
a throne is righteousness. The dynasty founded in might shall be demolished by a 
greater might. Mere power has an ephemeral tenure. The mightiest thing in heaven 
or earth is holiness. This is the thing that cannot be shaken : this shall remain. To- 
day the strongest kingdom upon the earth is the most righteous, " There shall be 
new heavens, and a new earth I " And what shall be their distinctive principle — their 
special ?1ory ? In them " dwelleth righteousness," The man of right is the man of 
might. — D. 

Vers, 8 — 17, — The sacred song of the sword, " Again the word of the Lord came unto 
me, saying. Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the Lord ; Say, A sword, • sword 
is sharpened," etc. The passage before us is written in the form of Hebrew poetry. 
The poem does not present any new truths or ideas, but is chiefly an amplification of 
the preceding twelve verses. There are in this song some words and phrases of con- 
siderable difBculty, in the interpretation of which a wide diversity of opinion exists. 
The chief features of the poem may be noticed homiletically in the following order. 

I. The fbgpabatiok of the bwobd fob blauohteb. 1. It was sharfened for 
slaughter, " A sword is sharpened, . . . it is sharpened to make a Bore Blaughter." In 
the providence of God, Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldean force* had become ready for 



OH. XXI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET BZEKIEL. 897 

their dread work at Jerusalem and among its inhabitants. 2. B was furbished for 
terror. " And also furbished, ... it is furbished that it may glitter." The sword 
was burnished, that by Its glittering it might dismay those against whom it was drawn 

icf. Deut. xxzii. 41). The truth thus taught seems to be that the actual attack of the 
/haldeans would strike terror into the hearts of the people of Jerusalem. Says 
Grcenhill, " When God is bringing judgments upon a iieople, he will fit instruments 
for accomplishing of the same, and that to purpose. He will make that which is blunt, 
sharp; that which is rusty, glittering; and those who are spiritless, full of spirit; he 
can make one to chase ten, ten a hundred, and a hundred a thousand. His works shall 
never fail for want of instruments." 

II. The presentation of the sword to the slayer. " He hath given it to be 
furbished, that it may be handled : this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give 
it into the hand of the slayer." The sword was not prepared for nought. It was, as 
it were, given by the Lord into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar to be used by him. That 
monarch could not have slain one of the sons of Israel unless permission had been given 
Mm by the Supreme ; and that permission would not have been given to him but for 
the heinous and long-continued sins of Israel. So also Pilate had no power against our 
Lord save what was given to him from above (John xix. 11). The mightiest sovereign 
or government can do nothing without the permission of the great God. 

HL The Tionita of the sword in SLAuaHTBR. 1. It was to wage war against 
the chosen people. "It is upon my people." (We have frequently noticed this point; 
e.^. on ch. zx. 46, and ver. 3.) 2. It was to wage war against the most eminent of the 
chosen people. " It shall be upon all the princes of Israel." These princes were strong 
advocates of the alliance with Egypt, and of resistance to the authority of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. They did this in defiance of the word of the Lord by Jeremiah and Ezekiel, 
and against the judgment of the weak-minderl King Zedekiah, when he was in his 
better moods (cf. Jer. xxxviL and xxxviii.). By this course of action they hastened 
the destruction of Jerusalem. It was fitting that, when the sword came, they should 
not escape its terrible strokes. And King Zedekiah is probably referred to by the 
prophet. " It is the sword of the great one that is deadly wounded, which entereth into 
their chambers" (ver. 14, Kevised Version) ; or, " that pierces into them" (Hengsten- 
berg) ; " that penetrates to them " (Schroder). His sons were slain before his eyes ; 
then his eyes were put out ; then, bound in fetters, he was carried to Babylon, and there 
in prison he died (Jer. lil. 8 — 11); svurely the glittering sword pierced him. This sharp 
Bword recognized no distinction of rank or riches, of place or power. 3. It was to 
destroy the national existence of the chosen people. " It contemneth the rod of my son, 
as every tree. . . . And what if the sword contemn even the rod? it shall be no more, 
saith the Lord God." The view of these difficult clauses which is taken by the 
•Speaker's Commentary' seems to us correct. "The rod is the sceptre of dominion 
assigned to Judah (Gen. xlix. 10). The destroying sword of Babylon despises the 
sceptre of Judah ; it despises every tree (comp. ch. xx. 47 ; xxi. 4 ; also xvii. 24)." And 
on ver, 13, " The Karlsruhe translator of the Bible gives the best explanation : 'What 
hoiTors will not arise when the sword shall cut down without regard the ruling sceptr* 
ofJudah?'" „ , ^. . ^. 

IV. The execution of the sword in slayino. Several tmngs m this poem are 
indicative of this. The thrice-doubled sword (ver. 14) points to the dread violence of 
the slaughter, or to " the earnestness and energy of the Divine punishment." The 
sword set against all their gates, and the multiplication of their stumblings (ver. 15, 
Revised Version), refer to the fierce conflicts by the gates of the city and the bodies 
of the slain there, over which the living would stumble. And two of the directions 
addressed to the sword in ver. 16 suggest the terrible work it was commissioned to 
accomplish. Revised Version, " Gather thee together ; " mavgm, " Make thyself 
one; " Hengstenberg, " Unite thyself." The allusion is « to the thrice-doubled sword 
In ver. 14. In reality, the terrible weight is designated with which the Divine judg- 
ment falls on him whom it is to strike." Very similar in its signification is the dhrectioi^ 
" Set thyself in array " (ver. 16, Revised Version). It denotes the determmation and 
■eal with which the Divine judgment would be executed. All these thines point to 
the terriblu sufferings and the fierce slaughter of the guilty people of Jerusalem by the 
Chaldean hosts. 



398 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET BZEKIBL. [ch. xxl 1—32. 

V. Thb feelings evoked by the slaughtbb of the swohd. 1. ITn sorrow of 
the prophet in anticipation of the slaughter. "Cry and howl, son of man: for it is 
upon my people, it is upon all the princes of Israel : terrors by reason of the sword 
shall he upon my people : smite therefore upon thy thigh." Smiting upon the thigh 
was a token of intense grief, corresponding to smiting upon the breast (of. Jer. zxxL 
19 ; Luke xxiii. 48). And the prophet was to do this, and to cry and howl, not simply 
to express his own grief, but to indicate the anguish which would wring the hearts of 
the people. 2. The dismay of the people because of the slaughter. " That their heart 
may faint," or " m«lt " (ver. 15 ; cf. ver. 7, and see our remarks thereon). 

Conclusion. This terrible judgment was the expression of the righteous anger of 
the Lord God, because of the persistent and ao;gi avated sins of the people. And when 
it was thus expressed, it rested. It was satisfied with the vindication of the holy Law, 
which had been so basely set at naught. 1. Let no man, let no community, presume vpon 
the patience and mercy of Ood. He is a Being of awful justice and of terrible wrath. 
2. Let no one persist in sin. Such a course must meet with the stem judgment of the 
Most High.— W. J. 

Vers. 18 — 27. — The (ypproaching fudgment. "The word of the Lord came unto me 
again, saying. Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways," etc. The following 
homilftic points are suggested by this para-iraph. 

I. The destination of the appeoaching judgment determined by God, though 

THE AGENTS THEREOF WERE UNCONSCIOUS OF HIS INFLUENCE. " SoU of man, appoint 

thee two ways, that the sword of the King of Babylon may come," etc. (vers. 18 — 22). 
The prophet is here sii mmoned to make upon a tablet, or parchment, or other material, a 
sketch in which two ways branch out of one principal way — the one leading to Eabbath, 
and the other to Jerusalem ; and at the head of one of the ways to make a hand, or 
finger-post, pointing to a city ; and at the head of the two ways the King of Babylon 
employing divination to ascertain whether he shall proceed first against Rabbath or 
Jerusalem, and being directed to go to Jerusalem and besiege it. Thus he was to 
represent symbolically the judgment that was approaching Jerusalem from Chaldea. 
Notice : 1. The use of superstitious means for obtaining direction in conduct. " The 
King of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use 
divination," etc. (ver. 21). " Divination " is a general term. Three different kinds thereof 
are here mentioned. (1) " He shook the arrows to and fro." The method referred to 
was probably this : Three arrows were taken, on one of them was written " Jerusalem," 
on another " Rabbath," while the third was without any inscription. These arrows were 
placed in a helmet or in some vessel, which was shaken until one came out ; if this 
one bore any name, to the place thus named the king must proceed; but if the arrow 
without an inscription first came out, they all had to be shaken again until one 
bearing a name came forth and indicated the course to be taken. (2) " He consulted 
the teraphim." " The teraphim were wooden images consulted as idols, from wliich the 
excited worshippers fancied that they received oracular responses" (cf. Gen. xxxi. 19, 
30, 32, 34; 1 Sam. xix. 13). The mode of consulting them is unknown. (3) " He 
looked in the liver." Of animals offered in sacrifice the liver was looked upon as the 
most important part ; and from an inspection of it, as to its size and condition, omens 
were drawn amongst several nncient nations. Nebuchadnezzar is represented by the 
prophet as feeling his need of direction as to whether he shall proceed first against 
Jerusalem or against Rabbath, and as using these modes of divination to obtain such 
direction. This need of our nature is recognized by God, and he has graciously provided 
for it (cf. Jer. x. 23 ; Prov. iii. 5, 6). 2. The use of superstitious means controlled by 
Ood for the accomplishment of his own purposes. Rabbath as well as Jerusalem had 
incurred the resentment of the King of Babylon, The antecedent probability was that 
he would first attack that place, seeing that it was somewhat nearer Chaldea than was 
Jerusalem. But God had determined otherwise, and accordingly the divination points 
Nebuchadnezzar to Jerusalem. " What a sublime proof," says Fairbaim, " of the 
overruling providence and controlling agency of Jehovah I The mightiest monarch of 
the world^ travelling at the head of almost unnumbered legions, and himself consciously 
owning no other direction than that furnished by the instruments of his own blind 
superstition, yet having his path marked out to him beforehand by this servant of tha 



OH. XXI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 899 

living Godl How strikingly did it show that the greatest potentates on earth, and 
even the spiritual wickedness in high places, have their hounds appointed to them hy 
the hand of God, and that, however majestically they may seem to conduct themselves, 
still they cannot overstep the prescribed limits, and must be kept in all their operations 
subservient to the higher purposes of Heaven 1 " " The lot is cast into the lap ; hut the 
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord." 

"There's a divinity doth shape our ends, 
Bough-hew them how we wilL" 

(Shakespeare.) 

II. The divinely coMMissroNED announcement of the approaching judoment 
TBEATED WITH CONTEMPT BY THE FAVOURED PEOPLE. " And it shall be unto them as 
a vain divination in their sight, which have sworn oaths unto them: but he bringfth 
iniquity to remembrance that they may be taken." The meaning of part of this verse 
is difficult to determine. Many and various are the interpretations of the " oaths " here 
mentioned. Two of these, each of which seems to us probably correct, we adduce. 
1, That they refer to the awful declarations of tho coming judgments which the prophet 
had made to them, which he generally introduced by the solemn formula, " As I live, 
saith the Lord Jehovah " (ch. v. 1 1 ; xiv. 16, 18, 20 ; xvi. 48 ; xvii. 16, 19 ; xx. 3, 33). 
Notwithstanding the solemnity of these assertions, they looked upon the"^ prophet's 
announcement of impending judgment " as a vain divination." 2. That they refer to 
the oaths of fealty which the Jews had sworn to Nebuchadnezzar (oh. xvii. 18, 19; 
2 Chron. xxxvi. 13), and which they had so shamefully broken. Because they were 
hit sworn vassals, they thought that he would not attack them. But he would call 
their iniquity to remembrance, and bring home to them their perjury by the stern 
punishment thereof. Whatever interpretation of the clause in question be adopted, it 
is clear that the Jews made light of the announcement of judgment by the prophet. 
While the Chaldeans accepted the directions of their divinations, and acted upon them, 
the favoured Jews treated the word of Divine inspiration " as a vain divination." And 
these same Jews eagerly accepted as true the messages of false prophets which assured 
them of peace and safety. They had so trifled with the truth of God that they had 
almost destroyed their moral capacity for recognizing it when it was proclaimed unto 
them. 

IIL The infliction of the approaching judgment vtndioated by the mani- 
fest ation OF thb sins of those upon whom it was coming. "Therefore thus saith 
the Lord God; Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered," etc. (vers. 
24 — 26). 1. Persistence in sin leads to the discovery of their sins. " Because ye have 
made your iniquity to be remembered, in tliat your transgressions are discovered, so 
that in all your doings your sins do appear." Their unbelief of the word of the Lord 
by Ezekiel, and their treacliery towards Nebuchadnezzar, which led to their dread 
pimishment, brought to light their other sins, showing the wickedness of their entire 
conduct. When thieves are "taken in some wicked acts," says Greenhill, "their 
former villanies come to light. As one sin begets another, so one sin discovers 
another." 2. Persistence in sin leads to the punishment of their tint. " Because that 
ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand. And thou, deadly 
wounded wicked one, the prince of Israel," etc. (vers. 25, 26). The people were to " be 
taken with the hand." God would deliver them into the hand of the Chaldeans, who 
would inflict upon them the dreadful judgments already predicted by the prophet — 
sword, famine, pestilence, captivity. The glory of the priesthood would be taken away ; 
for the Lord God would " remove the diadem," or " mitre." The king would be carried 
into A miserable captivity, after enduring the most terrible sufferings (2 Kings xxv. 4 — 7), 
and the kingdom would be destroyed ; for God would " take off the crown." Their 
most valued institutions would be overthrown. The then existing state of things 
would b« destroyed. " This shall be no more the same : exalt that which is low, and 
abase that which is high." All would be brought to one melancholy condition of 
misery. National ruin was to be the penalty of national sin. Persistence in sin must 
ever lead to its just punishment. 3. The manifestation of tin vindicates the pimish- 
ment thereof. It brings to light the jusiice of such punishment. That the Jews 
brought upon themselves the terrible sufferings which they endured at the hand of the 
Chaldeans was made unmistakably clear. And it was also shown that the terrible fate 



400 THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. [oh. xxi. 1— 32. 



of the king was but the harrest of which he himself had Bown the seed. In due Mason 
God himself will justify all his dealings with men. 

IV. BBVOLUTIONS in HUIIAN HISTOBT LBADINO TO THE ADVENT OF THK BIOHTFUL 

SovBBBiON OF MAN. " I wiU overtum, oyerturn, overturn it : this also shall he no more, 
until he come whose right it is ; and I will give it him." Three points are suggested by 
this verse. 1. ITie completeness of the national downfall. The repetition of this " over- 
tum " indicates the thoroughness of the destruction. No attempt to restore the kingdom 
to prosperity and power would fully succeed. 2. Uie duration of the national downfall. 
" This also shall be no more, until he come whose right it i*." The regal authority and 
the priestly dignity were not restored to the Jews. "As to the kingdom, Zerubbabel, 
the leader of the people after the exile, although of David's line, was no king on David's 
throne. But Herod, who becomes king over Israel, is of Edomite origin " (Schroder). 
There was a partial restoration of the Ainctions of the priesthood after the return from 
Babylon, but it never recovered its former dignity and glory. For, as Pairbaim observes, 
" there was no longer the distinctive prerogative of the Urim and Thummim, nor the ark 
of the covenant, nor the glory overshadowing the mercy-seat ; all was in a depressed 
and mutilated condition, and even that subject to many ioterferences from the encroach- 
ments of foreign powers. So much only was given, both in respect to the priesthood 
and the kingdom, as to show that the Lord had not forsaken his people, and to serve 
as pledge of the coming glory." 3. The advent of the rightful Sovereign. " Until he 
come whose right it is ; and I will give it him." Undoubtedly these words point to 
the Messiah. They probably contain a reference to Ps. Ixxii. 1, " Give the King thy 
judgments, God, and thy righteousness unto the King's Son." He is the great High 
Priest. He is the divinely anointed King. Previous to his coming into our world all 
revolutions in human history were overruled by God to lead on to that event And 
all subsequent revolutions, and all revolutions in the present, are being overruled by 
him for the establishment of his gracious rule over the hearts aod lives of men through- 
out the whole world. " Of his kingdom there shall be no end." Thus in the declaiation 
of dread judgments mercy was not forgotten by God. " Even now, when he is in a 
full career of overturning, he tells them of the coming of Christ, who should be their 
King, wear the crown, and raise up the kingdom again. This was a great mercy in the 
depth of misery ; if they lost an earthly kingdom, they should have a spiritual one ; 
if they lost a profane and temporal king, they should have a King of righteousness, an 
eternal King " (Greenbill). Even in wrath he remembers and exercises mercy.— W. J. 

Ver. 27. — Mundane revolutions. "I will overtum, overtum, overtum it; and it 
shall be no more," etc. 

I. The continuitt of mundane bevolutionb. " I will overtum, overtum, overtum 
it." The Lord thns declares his determination to overthrow again and again the 
government of the Jews, tmtil the coming of the Messiah, their rightful Sovereign. 
The words may also point, as Scott remarks, to "the repeated subversions of the 
Jewish nation by the Chaldeans, Macedonians, Bomans, and many others to t.he 
present day ; which will not come to any happy termination till they submit to their 
long-rejected Messiah. Kay, they seem to predict all the convulsions in states and 
kingdoms, which shall make way for the establishment of his kingdom throughout the 
earth." Bevolutions in governments, in society, in science, have always been. They 
are rife at present. While men continue ignorant, selfishly ambitious, and wicked, they 
will continue. These overtumings will not cease until human character is radically 
altered, until it is fashioned after the Divine model. It is not one overturning, aiid 
then settled order and progress. In our world change succeeds change as wave follows 
after wave on the face of old ocean. Unsettledness characterizes all things here. 

II. The Divine aoenot in mundane revolutions. " Thus saith the Lord doA . . . 
I will overtum, overturn, overtum it." These revolutions are not accidental ; they do 
not occur by chance. They are brought about under Divine arrangements. God being 
the great "Buler over the nations," ttiey cannot take place, to say the least, without 
his permission. Being Supreme, all things are either originated or allowed by him. 
The sacred Scriptures assert this. " Neither from the east, nor from the west, nor yet 
from the south, cometh lifting up. But God is the Judge. He putteth down one, and 
lifteth up another; " " He bringeth princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the 



OH, XXL 1—32.] THE BOOK OF THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 401 

earth m vantty; " "The Most High raleth in the kingdom of men, and glyeth it to 
whomBoever he will ;" " His kingdom ruleth over aU." He Nntoves the leader of a 
nation's affairs, and disorder, disturbance, and immense ehange follow. He sends the 
light of truth to oppressed peoples, and tiiey arise and claim their freedom. But what 
shall we say of dark and terrible changes? Let us take an example — the carrying of 
the Jews captive into Babylon. Whether we look at the sacred temple, or the 
celebrated city, or the fertile country, or the favoured people, how dark and sad it was ! 
But look again. It saved the people, of whom the Messiah was to come, from idolatry, 
and so from utter ruin. Yiewod in their Divine aspect, these revolutions are benevolent. 
Holy beings may advance calmly and evenly towards perfection. But disordered, sinful 
beings nera great changes and rude shocks to banish hoary superstitions, and abolish 
cruel despotisms, and prevent ruinous inaction. Wliile sin is here there must be unrest 
and change. 

in. Thb kitd of mundane bevoldtiokb. " This also shall be no more, until he 
come whose right it is ; and I will give it him." Until our Lord shall reign over the 
whole world, these revolutions will occur with greater or less frequency. But when he, 
the rightful Sovereign, shall take possession of the kingdoms of this world, these over- 
turnings will for ever cease. The reign of the Christ precludes revolution. The character 
of his reign shows this. Under it the sacredness of human life will be practically 
recognized, and thus war will be precluded. Under his reign the universal brotherhood 
of man will also be practically recognized ; and thus the cruel oppressions and base 
wrongs of man by man, which have often led to terrible revolutions, will be precluded. 
The reign of the " strong Son of Ood " is the sovereignty of his Spirit and principles 
in the hearts and lives of men ; and these are entirely opposed to the crimes and ills 
which generate revolutions. His perpetual and universal sovereignty is founded upon 
his mercifulness and kindness, his justice and love (cf Ps. IxxiL 11—17). Such a 
sovereignty is incompatible with revolution. Under it men will have neither cause nor 
occasion for anything of the kind. Animated and governed by his Spirit and prin- 
ciples, they will advance calmly and regularly towards perfection. 

Conclusion. 1. Ovi^ mhject sttpplies an argument for promulgating the gospel of 
Jesus Ohrist, International exhibitions, commercial interests, peace-treaties, jwlitical 
economics, can never bring aliout the abolition of revolution, because they are not able 
to curb and conquer the strong and stormy passions of evil men. The gospel of the 
Lord Jesus is the only power that can abolish revolution, and bring in a state of peace- 
ful and blessed progress. When it is heartily accepted it becomes a power in the heart, 
making man true and righteous, pure and loving, and so promotes peace on earth and 
good will toward men. 2. Our $ithfeet supplies encottragement for pronaAgatirug the 
gospel of Jesus Christ. We see that painful changes, wicked and cruel persecutions, 
and criminal and sanguinary strife, are lieing graciously overruled to bring in the world- 
wide empire of him " whose right it is." All changes, all overtumings, are bringing 
his glorious universal reign nearer. Be encouraged, then, in your efforts to promote it. 
" Men shall be blessed in Iiim ; all nations shall call him blessed ; " " His dominion is 
an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom from generation to generation."— W. J. 

Vers. 28 — 32. — The Judgment of Ammoa, "And thou, son of man, prophesy and 
say. Thus saith the Lord God concerning the children of Ammon," ete. The following 
points are presented to our notice. 

I. The cause or this jddohent. This was threefold. 1. They had provoked the 
anger of the Chaldeans hy joining the coalition against them. (C£ ver. 20 ; Jer. xxvii. 

2 10.) 2. They had cast Utter reproaches upon the Jews. " Thus saith the Lord 

God concerning the children of Ammon, and concerning their reproach." Reproach is 
injury by worck ; and it may be inflicted directly by reviling another, or indirectly by 
self-aggrandizement. The Ammonites reproached the Israelites : (1) By words. As 
Eitto remarks, thw " were particularly loud and offensive in their exultation at the 
downfall, first of the kingdom of Israel, and then of Judah, with the desolation of the 
land and the destruction of the temple" (cf. ch. xxv. 3, 6; Zeph. ii 8). It is pro- 
bable that when Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, the Ammonites upbraided the 
people of Judah that Jehovah their God had not protected them from his attack, while 
Moloch, which they worshipped as god, had not permitted the conquering monarch to 

EZBKIBIu 2 I> 



t02 THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIEL. [oh. xxi. 1—32. 

attack their city, Rabbath. Reproach is a bitter thing, and hard to bear. David found 
it 80, and said, " Reprpiach hath broken my heart." And it is a mean and cruel tiling 
to inflict reproaches, espeqifilly npon the weak, the unfortunate, or the suffering. The 
Ammonites reprpached the Israelite's : (2) By deeds. Kabbath, their capital city, was 
situated "in the country east of the Jordan, and east of the possessions of the 
Israelites on that sjde the river. David, ia his war with the Ammonites, took it 
from them, and annexed it to the territories of the tribe of Gad. . . . Qd the sepa,ra- 
tion of the realm into two kingdoms, this, with all the territory beyopd the Jordan, 
went to the kingdom of Israel ; and when that kingdom was dissolved by the Assyrians, 
or rather, probably, when tbe tribes beyond the Jordan were first of all led into 
•captivity, the Anm^onites quietly took possessipn of their ancient territories, and 
apparently of something more" (Kitto). This seizure of a portion of the territory of 
the Ibrmer kingdom of Israel is sternly denounced by the prophets (of. Jer. xlix. 1, 2 ; 
Amos i. 13 — 15 ; Zeph. ii. 8). It was a practical reproach of the vanquished ppople. 
3. They had trusted in their diviners. "Whiles they see vanity unto thee, wbjles 
they divine lies unto thee." The Ammonites preferred false divinations to true prophets, 
especially as their diviners buoyed them up with vain assurances of their saifcty. If 
men will believe a lie, the lie will prove disastrous to them. 

II. The natube of this judgment. 1. Terrible slaughter. "A sword, a sword 
is drawn : for the slaughter it is furbished, to cause it tu devour, that it may be as 
lightning." The seer beheld a sword drawn for execution, sharpened for slaughter, and 
glitteriijg so as to strike terror into those against whom it was drawn. The line, 
•' To cast thee upon the necks of them that are slain," is rendered in the ' Speaker's 
Oomnientary,' " To give thee over to the heaps of the slain," and is thus explained : 
" ' The necks of them that are sliun ' is simply a poetical expression for the slain, 
perhaps because the corpses were headless." It seems to indicate that the slaughter 
of the Amnionites would be so terrible that the slain would not lie apart, but in 
revolting heaps. The clause, "Thy blood shall be in the midst of the land," 
probably also points to the dreadful extent of the slaughter. 2. Complete overthrow. 
" Thou shalt be no more remembered." The ruin of the Ammonites was to 1>e irre- 
parable. Thus saith the Lord Qod to them, " I will cut thee off from the peoples, and 
I will cause thee to perish out of the countries" (ch. xxv. 7). Not until long after the 
time of Ezekiel was this part of the judgment executed, but in due season it was 
completely accomplished. " From the times of the Maccabees, the Ammonites and 
MoaUtes have qnite disappeared out of history " (Hengstenberg). 

III. The Authob of this judqmbnt. " I will judge thee, . . . and I will pour 
out mine indignation upon thee ; I will blow upon thee with the fire of my wrath, and 
1 will deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy." Gh>d himself was 
the Author of this judgment. The sword was his, though it was wielded by the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar. By their sins the Ammonites had aroused the indignation of the Lord ; 
and he would pour out that indignation upon them. 1. That this Judgment proceeded 
from him was a guarantee of its irresistiblentis. When he puts forth his hand to 
smite his obdurate fogs, he breaks them as " with a rod of iron," or dashes " them in 
pieces like a potter's vessel." To attempt to resist him is utterly useless, vain, and 
ruinous. " Hast thou an arm like God's ? " "He is wise in heart, and mighty in 
strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and prospered?" 2. That this 
judgment proceeded from him was a guarantee (/ its righteousness. " He loveth 
rigliteousness and judgment," 

" His work is peifeot ; 
Vot all his ways are judgment : 
A God of faithfulness and without Iniquity, 
Juat and right is he." 

IV. The INSTB0MENT8 OF THIS JUDQMENT. "I will deliver thee into the hand 
of brutish men, skilful to destroy ; " margin, " burning men." So also Hengsten- 
berg. Schriider, " consuming men." Thus the Chaldeans are designated. They are 
so called because they were to prepare " the fire," or because they were filled with 
glowing anger. They were the unconscious instruments accomplishing the purpose of 
tlie Lord Jehovah. Thus he made the wrath of man to praise him. He can never lack 



OH. XXI. 1—32.] THE BOOK OP THE PROPHET EZEKIBL. 403 

fitting instruments for the execution of his designs ; for he can employ whomsoever and 
whatsoever he will. 

V. The scene of his judouent. " In the place where thou wast created, in the 
land of thy birth, will I judge thee." They were not to be carried into captivity 
as the people of Israel and Judah were. In their own land they were to suffer the 
retribution of their evil doings. The scene of their sin was to be also the scene 
of their punishment. The Lord can find out the wicked anywhere; and no place 
can hide them from his judgments when the time for their infliction arrives. " Though 
they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them," etc. (Amos ix. 2, 3). 

VL The oebtaintt op this judoment. "I the Lord have spoken it." Th) 
Ammonites deemed themselves quite safe when Nebuchadnezzar turned away from 
Babbath, and went to besiege Jerusalem ; and in their triumph they reproached the 
suffering people of Judah. But they had to learn that the postponement of their 
judgment was not its revocation ; that their reprieve was not their pardon. Sentence 
against them here goes forth from Jehovah. Its fulfilment was rendered certain by 
both his power and his faithfulness. He is all-mighty. He " is not a man, that hu 
should lie," etc. (Numb, xxiii. 19). And, accormng to Josephus (' Ant.,' x. 9. 7), in 
the fifth year after the destruction of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar made war sgain8t 
the Ammonites, and subdued them. " Qod's words of mercy and of judgment are 
•lik« »un."—Yf. J. 



HOMILETIOAL INDEX 



w 



THE BOOK OF THE PEOPHET EZEKIEL. 



VOLUME L 



CHAPTEB I 



PAGB 

Visions of God ... ... ...7,13 

" The Likeness of a Man " ... ... 8 

Straightforwardness ... ... 9 

The Bright Fire 10 

Wheels of Providence ... ... 11 

The Bainbow ... ... ... 11 

Exile and Captivity ... ... 12 

The Lord's Word and the Lord's Hand 14 

The Glory of the Eternal 15 

He who is upon the Throne ... 17 

Beverence ... ... ... 18 

Introd action respecting the Person and 

Mission of the Prophet ... ... 18 

Early Symbols of Jehovah's Presence '20 
Unseen Forms of Intelligent Ministry 20 
Nature's Material Forces are the Ac- 
tive Servants of the Church ... 22 
The Vision of Qod is the Source of 
Frophetio Inspiration ... ... 23 

The Divine Summons to the Frophetio 

Mission ... ... ... 21 

The Providential GoTemmjnt of God 26 
The Overwhelming and the Beviving 

in Divine Bevelationa ... ... 28 

CHAPTEB n. 

God speaking and Man listening m. SI 

The Entrance of the Spirit ... ... 32 

An Embassy to Bebels ... ... 83 

' Dwelling among Scorpions ... 34 

Freaohing to Unwilling Hearers ... 3S 



THun rAoi 

Faithful among the Faithleas ... 35 

"Sou of Man" 36 

Bebellions Nations ... ... 37 

The Prophet's Commission... ... 38 

Frophetio Beceptiveness ... ... 39 

TheSoroU 40 

The Interlacing of Divine Command 

and Divine Strength ... ... 41 

An Arduous Embassage ... ... 41 

God's Ambassador a Warrior ... 42 

"The Bread of Heaven" 43 

The Commission to Prophetic Service 44 
The Vision of the Boll ; or, a View of 

the Frophetio Message ... ... 4S 



CHAPTEB IIL 

Eating a Book ... ... ... 50 

Colonial Missions ... ... ... 51 

Adamant ... ... ... 52 

The Start in Life ... ... ... 53 

Silence ... ... ... ... 54 

The Watchman ... ... ... 54 

Varieties of Judgment ... ... 54 

On the Plain and in the House ... 55 

A Flophet stricken Dumb ... ... 56 

Liberty of Hearing ... ... 57 

The Privileged and the Unprivileged 58 
The Fearlessness of the L<nd's Mes- 
senger... ... ... ... 59 

The Inpouring of Divine FnlneiS ... 59 

Celestial Voices ... ... ... 60 

Human Bitterness and Divine Strength 61 



INDEX. 



TBSKR rAGE 

The Watobman'B Office ... ... 62 

Dumbnesa and Speech ... ... 62 

Ambassadorghip ... ... ... 63 

Besponsibility ... ... ... 61 

The Silenced Prophet, a Calamity ... 65 
The Awful Consequences of Neglect- 
ing the Word of the Lord ... 66 
The Prophet a Watchman ... ... 67 

Ood communicating with Man ... 69 

The Temporary Suspension of the 

Active Ministry of the Prophet ... 69 

CHAPTER IV. 



A Pictorial Sermon 
Bin-bearing ». 

"Defiled Bread •*.« 



••. ... 'u 

... ... 76 

... ... > / 

Substitution ... ... ... 78 

The Chastisement of Famine ... 79 

Yicarions Suffering ... ... 80 

A Symbolic Famine ... ... 81 

The Siege of Jerusalem and the Suffer- 
ings of the People symbolized ... 82 



OHAPTBB V, 



"A Barber's Eazor" 
A Central Position 
Opposed by God ... 
A Unique Event ... 
Biminishment 



87 
87 
88 
89 
90 



The Shame ef Moral Shipwreck, and 

its Lessons ... ... ... 91 

Privileges abused... ... ... 92 

Divine Antagonism ... ... 93 

A Beproach and a Lesson ... ... 93 

Tlie Frophetio OfSce involves Self- 

eacrifice ... ... ... 91 

Abused Privilege produces Condign 

Punishment ... ... ... 95 

The Divine Bemonstrator ... ... 96 

The Sword of the Divine Judgment ... 97 
Pre-eminent Privilege, Perversity, and 

Punishment ... m« ••• 89 



CEAPTEB YL 

The Doom of the Ifonntoin* ... 104 

A Bnined Civilization m ... 101 

The Bemnant ... m» ... 105 

The Oonaoionneis of Qoi .» — 106 



THKUX VAOI 

The Outstretched Hand ... .., 107 

The Idolatry of the Laud avenged .„ 108 

Conviction ... ... ... 109 

"A Bemnant" 110 

Self-loathing ... ... ... Ill 

The Land involved in Man's Punish- 
ment ... ... ... ... 112 

Many lost; few saved ... m. 112 

Ministerial Earnestness ... m. 113 

The Impotence of Idols ... ... Ill 

Stages in the Soul's Progress from Sin 

unto Salvation ... ... ... 115 

The Sorrow of the Servant of God on 

Acoount of the Sins of bis People ... 1 16 



OHAPTEB Vn. 



"The End is come" 
''The Day is come" 
Buyer and Seller ... 
Mourning as Doves 
Gold and Silver ... 
Bumour ... ... 

A Vain Search ... 
Becompense 
Mourning ... 



121 
122 
123 
124 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 



The Limitations to the Power of 

Wealth 129,137 

The Averted Face ... ... 129 

Peace sought in Vain ... ... 130 

The Prophetic Vision dimmed, and 

the Prophetic Voice silenced ... 181 
The Hand of the Clock on the Hour 
of Doom ... ... ... 132 

Fallacious Deliverance ... ... 133 

The Even Balances of Jehovah ... 134 
The Punishment of the Wicked ... 135 
Aspects of the Execution of the 
Divine Judgments ... ... 136 

The Impossibility of becoming truly 
Strong in a Life of Sin ... ... 139 

The Perversion of Desirable Posses- 
sions punished by the Deprivation 
of them ... ... ... 140 

The Dread Development of Moral 
Evil ... ... ... ... 142 



OHAPTEB Vm. 

A Bevelation of Fire ... ... 146 

" The Image of Jealousy " ... ... 147 

Chambers of Imagery m •.. 148 



**<•,•, 



INDEX. 



iii 



THBUB ' FAGB 

"Greater Abominations" ... ... 149 

Bun-Worship ... ... ... 150 

Making Light of Sin 150 

The Glory of God and the Image of 

Jealousy ... ... ... 151 

Base Idolatry ... ... ... 152 

Atheism... ... ... ... 152 

"Weeping for Tammuz" ... ... 153 

Sun-Worshippers in Jerusalem ... 154 

Gradual Disclosure of Human Sin ... 154 
Men Oo-assesaors in Judgment with 

God 156 

The Vision of the Image of Jealousy 156 
The Chambers of Imagery ; or, Secret 

Sins 158 

Man's Provocations of God, and God's 

Punishment of Man ... m. 160 



CHAPTER IX. 

A Writer's Ink-Hom 163 

The Mark upon the Forehead ... 164 

Beginning at the Sanctuary ... 165 

The Temple defiled ... ... 165 

The Inexorable God ... ... 166 

The Completed Task ... ' ... 167 

The Mark of Spiritual Concern ... 168 

« Begin at the Sanctuary 1 " ... 169 

True Obedience ... ... ... 170 

The Hour of Judgment ... ... 171 

Human Intercession ... ... 173 

Divine Discrimination in the Execu- 
tion of Judgment ... ... 173 

The Intercession of the Prophet, and 

the Answer of the Lord ... ... 176 



CHAPTER X. 

The Throne of God ... ... 178 

" Coals of Fire " 179 

The Moving Glory ... ... 180 

" The Form of a Man's Hand " ... 181 

Glory departed ... ... ... 181 

Heavenly Changelessness ... ... 182 

The Throne of Deity ... ... 183 

The Brightness of tlie Divine Glory ... 183 

" The Voice of the Almighty " ... 184 

The Machinei'y of God's Providence ... 185 

The Vision of Judgment by Fire ... 187 
The Withdrawal of the Presence of God 

from a Guilty People ... ». 188 



CHAPTER XI. 

THEMR PAOK 

The False Confidence of Unbelief ... 192 

God's Knowledge of Man's Thought 193 

The Sanctuary of the Exile ... 193 

Restoration and Reunion ... ... 194 

The Heart of Flesh 195 

Preaching to the Captives ... ... 195 

Evil Counsellors ... ... ... 196 

Judgment deferred ... ... 197 

Divine Umniscience ... ... 198 

Remonstrance and Intercession ... 199 

Exile and Restoration ... ... 200 

Spiritual Transformation ... ... 200 

Mutual Possession ... ... 201 

The Prophetic Office 201 

The Summary Punishment of Official 

Guilt 202 

Privilege : Apparent or Real ... 201 
The Presumptuous Security of Sinners 

exhibited and condemned ... 205 

God's Knowledge of our Thoughts ... 207 
A Suffering People scorned by Man 

and comforted by God ... ... 208 

God the Sanctuary of his People ... 210 

A United Heart the Gift of God ... 212 



CHAPTER xn. 

Blind Eyes and Deaf Ears ... ... 215 

Teaching by Example ... ... 216 

God's Net ... ... ... 216 

Pear 217 

A Worthless Proverb ... ... 218 

The End of Delusions ... ... 218 

Hope mingled with Pear ... ... 219 

Trembling Anticipations ... ... 220 

The Human Proverb and the Divine 221 

The Dramatic Form of Prophecy ... 221 

The Snare of Unbelief ... ... 223 

A Parabolic Appeal to a Rebellious 

People ... ... ... 224 

Deprivations caused by Sin ... 225 
The Word of the Lord discredited and 



vindicated ... 

CHAPTER Xm. 

Prophesying against the Prophets . 



227 



Foxes 

False Peace 

" Untempered Mortar" 

Effeminate Beligion 



231 
232 
... 232 
... 233 
884,240 



INDEX. 



Misplaced Sorrow „. ••• 231 

Pretended Prophets ... ... 235 

The Vanity of Flattering Gonnael ... 236 

False Prophetesses ... ... 237 

The Perils of Falseness 238 

The Foolish Builders -a Parable ... 239 
The Sin and Punishment of False 

Prophets ... ... ... 241 

The Breaches of Sin, and the Duty of 

closing them ... ... ... 243 

False Hopes encouraged and destroyed 244 
False Prophetesses, their Character- 
istics and C!ondemnation •.. 245 



CHAPTBB XIV. 

Idols in the Heart ... ... 248 

Bepentance ... ... ... 249 

Qod'a Answer ... ... ... 250 

The Prophet's Punishment „. 250 

Beligious Reciprocity ... ... 251 

Noah, Daniel, and Job ... ... 252 

Purpose in Providence ... ... 252 

Idolatry ... ... ... ... 253 

BepsDtl ... ... ... ... 254 

The Misleader and &e Misled ... 255 

The Piuposes of Punishment ... 255 

Illustrious Piety ... ... ... 256 

The Beasonableness of God's Action 257 

Disastrous Answers to Prayer ... 257 

Human Atonement Valueless ... 25i> 

Hypocritical Inquirers of God ... 260 
The PwVilege and Power of the Godly 

— their Nature and Limitation ... 262 
The Eighteousaesa of God doubted and 

vindicated ... ... ... 264 



OHAPTEB XV. 

The Worthless Vine 266 

The Worthless Vineyard ... ... 266 

Use^ss, if Fruitless ... ... 267 

The True Objeotof the Life of Man ... 268 



OHAPTEB XVL 

Evil Parentage ... ... ... 278 

The Glory of Bedemption ... m. 279 

The Benown of Israel ... ... 279 

Trust in Beauty ... .,, ... 280 

A Weak Heart ... ... ... 280 

The Shunefol Bla of Apostasy ... 281 



How GFod's Anger ceases ... ... 282 

Bemembering the Days of Youth ... 283 

The Salvation of Sodom ... ... 283 

The Everlasting CoTenant... ... 284 

Confounded by Memory ... ... 285 

Undeserved and Lavish Kindness ... 286 

Inexcusable Infidelity ... ... 287 

Beconciliation ... ... ... 288 

Superhuman Love ... ... 289 

Idolatry is Spiritual Adultery ... 290 

Judicial Verdict ... ... ... 291 

Sin seen in the Light of Comparison 292 

ABiftintheStoim-Cloud... ... 292 

A Picture of Human Depravity and 
Destitution, and of Divine Con- 
descension and Favour ... ... 293 

Leading Sinners to • Knowledge of 

their Sins ... ... ... 295 

A Picture of Flagrant Apostasy from 

God 296 

A Picture of Bighteous Betribution 

because of Apostasy ... ... 298 

A Picture of Comparative Iniquity ... 299 

A Picture of Benewed Favour ... 300 

CHAPTEB XVn. 

A Biddle and a Parable ... ... 304 

The Parable of the Two Eagles ... 305 

"Shallit prosper?" ... ... 306 

The Broken Covenant ... ... 306 

Christ, the New Cedar ... ... 307 

The Great Beversal ... ... 308 

"A City of Merchants" ... ... 309 

Prosperity in Adversity ... ... 310 

The Sacredness of Treaties ... 310 

The Goodly Cedar ... ... 311 

The Sovereignty of the Almighty 

Buler ... ... ... ... 312 

The Parable of the Vine ... ... 313 

Spring-time after Winter ... ... 314 

A Parabolic Setting forth of the Ba- 
lations of Judah to Babylon and 

Egypt... ... ... ... 315 

Discontent and its Disastrous Develop- 
ment ... ... ... ... 817 

The Planting and FiQgieu of the 

Kingdom of Ohiiit ... ... 819 



CHAPTEB XVin. 

An Old Proverb discarded ... 
The Death-Penalty ^ 



821 

825 



INDEX. 



THBIIK rAOB 

The Breacn of Heredity ... ... 326 

How God views the Death of the 

Wicked ... ... ... 327 

God accused of Man's Injustice ... 327 

Eeversttls of Cliaraoter ... ... 328 

The Alternativea of Judgment ... 329 

"Why wUlyedie?" 329 

Heredity and Individuality ... 330 

Tlie Moral Alternative ... ... 331 

Personal Rusiioiisibility ... ... 332 

Divine Benevolence ... ... 332 

Divine Remonstrance ... ... 333 

The Divine Equity ... ... 334 

God's Remonstrance with Man's 

Reason ... ... ... 335 

The Path to Life ... ... ... 336 

The Misapplied Proverb of Sour 

Grapes ... ... ... 336 

The Just Man delineated ... ... 338 

Personal Character and Destiny ... 339 
Moral Transformations and their 

Oonsequenoita ... ... ... 341 

A Solemn and Startlin<{ Inquiry ... 343 

CHAPTER XIX. 

"A Lamentation for the Princes of 

Israel" ... ... ... 345 

The Parable of the Lion's Whelps ... 346 
The Parable of the Destruction of the 

Vine ... ' 347 

The Downfall of the Princes ... 347 

The Downfall of the aty 348 

Kingly Power abused ... ... 349 

A Nation's Rise and Fall ... ... 350 

A Lamentation for Fallen Princes ... 350 

National Prosperity and National Ruin 353 

CHAPTER XX. 

The Silent Oracle ... m. 358 

The Elect Israel ... m ... 359 

Law and Life ... ... ... 360 

The Sanctity of the Sabbath ... 360 

A Huuuin Wildeiueaa m. .» 361 



THEHS not 

Ood's Holy Monntain m. ~. 862 

"For ray Name's Sake" ... ... 863 

The Obscurity of Revelation ... 864 

A Rejected Application ... ... 864 

The Memory of the Great Deliverance 365 

The Memory of the Wilderness of Sinai 366 
The Memory of the Wilderness of the 

Wanderings ... ... ... 86fi 

The Memory of Offencaa in the Land 

of Promise ... ... ... 367 

The Purpose of Israel's Election ... 867 

The Glorious Restoration ... ... 368 

Unacceptable Prayer ... ... 368 

Judicial Discrimination ... m. 369 

The Forest in Flame ... ... 370 

On Inquiring of the Lord ... ... 871 

Ood, and Israel in Egypt ... ... 872 

Ood, and Israel in the WilderneM ... 374 

Ood, and Israel in Canaan ... ... 876 

God, and Israel in the then Present... 378 
The Sovereignty of God in the Punish- 
ment of Sin ... ... ... 379 

The Gracious Restoration of the 

People ... ... ... 880 

A Parable of Judgment .^ ... 882 

CHAPTER XXL 

The Common Fate of Bighteona and 

Wicked ... ... ... 387 

The Sword of War ... ... 388 

The Satisfaction of God's Fnry ... 389 

Transgressions discovered ... .., 389 

Revolution and Restoration ... 390 

Undisoriminating Infliction ... 391 

The Sign of Sighing 392 

The Sword ... 392 

The Impartiality of Divine Justice ... 393 

The Divine Reversal ... ... 394 

Irresistible Slaughter ... ... 394 

The All-oontrolling Providence of God 895 

The Sacred Song of the Sword ... 396 

The Approaching Judgment m. 898 

Mundane Revolutions ... ... 400 

The Judgment of Amnion m« «. 401 



