b|r  fyt  same 


AN  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  ECCLESIASTES. 

WITH  REFERENCE  TO  THE  HKISREW  GRAMMAR  OF  GESENIUS, 
AND  NOTES,  CRITICAL  AND  EXPLANATORY. 

To  which   is   added   the   Book    of   Ecclesiastes    in    Hebrew    and 
English,  in  parallel  columns. 

4/0,  Cloth,  y.  M. 
With  Gesenius's  Hebrew  Grammar,  8s.  6d. 


GESENIUS'S    HEBREW    GRAMMAR. 

NI.AKGfl)     AM)     l.MfKOVED     HV     PROFESSOR     E.     RoDIOKU. 

With  a  Hebrew  Reading  Book. 

275  //•>  4^1  Cloth,  5.?. 
With  Lloyd's  Analysis  of  Genesis  I.— XI.,  8s.  6d. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


Critical  itntr  <£#j)0sitrmT  Commintarg 


OF    THE 


HEBREW    TEXT. 


BY   THE   REV. 

JOHN    LLOYD,    M.A.,  F.  R.  HIST.  Soc., 

RECTOR   OK    I.LANVAI'LF.Y,    MONMOUTHSHIRE; 

Author  of  "Analysis  of  Helreiv  Text  ff  Gen.  i.  to  xi."  "  Analysis  of  Hebrew 
Text  of  Ecclesiastes"  etc. 


HO  DDE  R    AND    STOUGHTON, 
27,  PATERNOSTER  ROW. 


MDCCCLXXXVI. 


s 

.  i 
L-77 


Printed  by  Hazell,  Watson,  &  Viney,  Ld.,  Lom'on  and  Aylesbury. 


PREFACE 


TH  E  following  Commentary  comprises  notes 
grammatical,  exegetical,  historical,  and  ethi-, 
cal.  The  Grammar  followed  is  that  of 
Gesenius,  not  only  in  the  syntax,  but  the  ortho 
graphy  ;  for  thus,  when  Hebrew  words  are  written 
in  th'eir  corresponding  English  letters,  p  is  always 
expressed  by  g,  and  X  by  ts,  instead  of  by 
k  and  s  respectively,  as  in  many  grammars. 
Further,  in  giving  the  derivation  and  meaning  of 
the  Hebrew  names  of  persons,  places,  towns,  etc., 
the  Lexicon  of  Gesenius  has  been  chiefly  consulted. 
Many  also  of  the  renderings  which  differ  from  those 
in  the  Authorised  Version  will  be  found  to  agree 
with  those  in  the  Revised  Version,  which  had  not 
been  published  when  this  work  was  finished.  The 
author  acknowledges  his  obligations  to  the  Com- 


vi  PKEFA  CE. 

mentaries  of  Keil,  Rosenmiiller,  Knobel,  Fay,  and 
others,  for  much  help  in  the  exegesis  of  the  Hebrew 
text  ;  and  to  Dean  Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
Robinson's  Palestine  and  Later  Biblical  Researches, 
Walton's  Ncgeb,  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible, 
and  many  other  works,  for  illustrations  of  the  history 
and  geography  of  the  book.  The  ethical  remarks, 
which  are  interspersed  here  and  there  throughout 
the  notes,  are,  in  a  great  measure,  drawn  from 
Bishop  Wordsworth's  Commentary^  who  has  done 
more  perhaps  than  any  other  recent  expositor  to 
call  attention  to  the  typical  and  spiritual  meaning 
of  the  "  Book  of  Joshua." 

It  is  well  known  that  the  Palestine  Exploration 
Fund  has  been  successful  in  discovering  the  probable 
sites  of  many  of  the  towns  mentioned  in  this  book, 
which  had  been  previously  unrecognised.  Some 
allusions  to  these  will  be  found  in  this  Commentary, 
but  many  of  the  positions  assigned  cannot  be 
established  according  to  the  boundaries  of  the  tribes 
as  marked  out  in  existing  maps.  Such  is  the  case 
with  regard  to  the  Biblical  Atlas,,  which  the  author 
of  this  Commentary  has  mainly  followed,  and  which 
is  that  of  Clark,  edited  by  that  eminent  historio- 


PREFACE.  vii 

grapher,  Sir  George  Grove,  who  has  written  many 
of  the  articles  on  Scripture  places  in  Dr.  Smith's 
Dictionary  of  the  Bible. 

It  only  remains  for  the  author  to  add  that,  having 
taken  much  pains  to  render  this  work  useful  to 
biblical  students,  he  devoutly  hopes  that  the  blessing 
of  the  Great  Head  of  the  Church,  the  true  Joshua, 
may  rest  upon  it. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  title  of  this  book  does  not  necessarily 
imply  that  Joshua  was  its  author,  for,  like 
the  books  of  Ruth  and  Esther,  it  may  have  been 
named  from  its  subject-matter,  as  giving  an  account 
of  the  deeds  of  Joshua,  by  whom  God,  accord 
ing  to  His  promise,  brought  His  people  into 
Canaan,  and  portioned  it  out  among  them.  It  has, 
however,  been  most  generally  ascribed  to  Joshua,  in 
accordance  with  the  testimony  of  the  early  Hebrew 
Church,  which  says,  "Joshua  scripsit  librum  suum  et 
octo  versus  in  lege"  (Tr.  Bava  Bathra,  fol.  14,  c.  2). 
Certainly,  none  could  have  been  better  fitted  to.  write 
it  than  Joshua,  who  was  not  only  present  in  all  the 
great  transactions  which  it  records,  but  received 
personal  communications  from  Jehovah,  which  no 
one  but  himself  could,  in  the  first  instance,  have 
divulged  to  others ;  who  also  spoke  the  speeches 
recorded  in  chapters  xxiii.,  xxiv.,  and  is  expressly 
said  to  have  added  to  the  Book  of  the  Law  some 
account  of  his  own  acts  (xxiv.  26).  As,  however, 
Joshua  could  not  have  recorded  his  own  death 
(xxiv.  29),  whoever  added  thit  account  might  have 
written  the  rest  of  the  book,  mainly  from  records 

I 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


left  probably  by  Joshua  himself.  Thus  the  author 
ship  has  been  attributed  to  Phinehas  (Lightfoot),  or 
to  one  of  the  elders  who  survived  Joshua  (Keil). 
Though  the  exact  date  of  its  composition  cannot  be 
fixed,  it  is  clear  that  the  book  must  have  been 
written  before  the  time  of  David  (see  notes  on  xv. 
63  and  xi.  8)  ;  also  by  one  who  was  living  at  the 
time  when  Rahab  was  still  alive  (vi.  25).  The 
oft-repeated  expression,  "  to  this  day," l  does  not 
necessarily  denote  a  long  period,  not  at  farthest  more 
than  twenty-five  or  thirty  years  (comp.  the  use  of 
the  same  phrase  in  Matt,  xxviii.  15).  The  writer 
speaks  of  himself  as  one  of  those  who  had  crossed 
over  Jordan  (v.  i),2  and  to  whom  the  land  had 
been  promised  (v.  6)  ;  describes  Gibeon  "  as  one  of 
the  royal  cities  "  of  Canaan  (x.  2)  ;  and  mentions 
the  Canaanitish  names  of  the  towns  at  the  time  of 
the  invasion,  e.g.,  Kirjath-Arba,  afterwards  called 
Hebron  (xiv.  15),  Kirjath-Sepher,  afterwards  Debir 
(xv.  15).  Other  indications  of  an  early  date  are  fur 
nished  by  the  style  and  diction  of  the  book.  Thus, 
the  scriptio  defective*,  which  is  the  ancient  form,3 
prevails  far  more  throughout  than  the  scriptio  plena. 
Old  forms  of  words  occur  which  are  not  found  in  the 
later  books,  e.g.,  ^TCfl  (iii.  4,  iv.  18,  xx.  5),  as  in 
the  Pentateuch,  for  TTDflK  (i  Sam.  iv,  7  ;  2  Sam.  v.  2) ; 

1  See  iv.  9,  v.  9,  vi.  25,  vii.  26,  viii.  28,  29,  ix.  27,  xiii.  13, 
xiv.  14,  xv.  63,  xvi.  10,  xxii.  3,  17,  xxiii.  8,  9. 

2  "  The  reading  of  the  Q''ri  2"}?1?  (till  they  were  passed  over) 
is   nothing    but   an  arbitrary  and   needless   conjecture,    and 
ought    not    to   have   been    preferred  by  Bleek    and   others, 
notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  ancient  versions  and  some 
MSS.  also  adopt  it"  (Keil).     The  majority  of  the  MSS.  read 
•1^?y 

3  Ges.,  Gram.,  §  8,  4  b. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


iens'  (Micah  ii.  8  ;  Isa.  xxx.  3  3) ;  fnrjx  (xxi.  9),  cf.  Drmj?. 
(Gen.  xxxii.  i),  rob'X-i  (xxi.  10),  only  used  again  in 
Job  xv.  7;  nnt?B  (x.  40);  aar.  (x.  19),  cf.  Deut. 
xxv.  1 8  ;  \h\  from  j-i^,  to  murmur  (ix.  1 8),  found 
only  besides  in  the  books  of  Exodus  and  Numbers  ; 
the  unusual  form  WS  (xiii.  14)  ;  &  for  TJ;^:,  though 
it  occurs  as  early  as  Judges,  is  not  found  in  Joshua. 
The  old  suffix  D-  is  repeatedly  used,  but  the  later 
form  DIT— ,  only  in  xi.  6,  9,  xviii.  21.  Phrases 
common  to  the  Pentateuch  are  occasionally  met 
with,  such  as  "wrought  folly  in  Israel"  (vii.  15)  ; 
"  people  even  as  the  sand  shore  for  multitude " 
(xi.  4)  ;  "a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey " 
(v.  6)  ;  "  heads  of  the  fathers,"  or  "  of  the  house  of 
the  fathers"  (xiv.  I,  xix.  51,  xxii.  14),  etc. 

But  though  the  book  thus  bears  resemblance  to 
the  Pentateuch  in  its  style  and  diction,  it  is  quite 
independent  or  distinct  from  it.  This  is  evident 
from  the  references  made  in  it  to  the  Pentateuch 
(cf.  Josh.  xiii.  14,  33,  xiv.  4,  with  Numb,  xviii. 
20  ;  Deut.  xviii.  I,  2),  and  its  repetition,  but  with 
additional  particulars,  of  the  conquest  of  the  country 
on  the  east  of  Jordan.  Also  from  the  fact  that 
certain  archaisms  in  the  Pentateuch  are  not  found 
in  it,  e.g.,  N-in,  used  as  a  fern.  (Ges.,  Gr.,  §  32,  6)  ; 
bj*n  for  nks  (§  34)  ;  -IM  for  rnip.  (§  2,  3  Rem.)  Again, 
Jericho,  which  throughout  the  Pentateuch  is  spelt 
irrv,  is  always  spelt  in  Joshua  inn;,  or  NTV ;  the 
form  J"i5^pD,  used  in  the  Pentateuch,  is  changed 
to  JVG^pD  in  Josh,  xiii.,  where  it  five  times  occurs. 
The  following  forms  also  are  not  found  in  the 
Pentateuch,  viz.,  y»b>  (Josh.  vi.  27,  ix.  9)  ;  N13£ 
(xxiv.  19)  ;  KT  (xxii.  25)  ;  ^nn  n.133  (i.  14,  vi. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


2,  viii.  3),  but  y$  V3  (Deut.  iii.  1 8)  ;  law,  a 
bottle  (ix.  4,  13),  for  non  (Gen.  xxi.  14,  15,  19); 
JV-yn,  to  set  on  fire  or  burn  (viii.  8,  19)  ;  my,  to 
spring  down  (xv.  1 8)  ;  pvi?»  a  prince  or  leader 
(x.  24);  t3i?K>,  to  rest  (xi.  23,  xiv.  15).  Thus  the 
book  may  be  said  to  occupy  in  style  and  diction  a 

'  middle  place  between  the  Pentateuch  and  the  books 
which  follow.  It  affords  also  internal  evidence  of 

^  being  the  composition  of  one  author,  and  not  of 
several ;  for  on  no  other  supposition  can  we  account 
for  the  easy  flow  of  the  narrative  in  the  historical 
part,  where  event  follows  event,  if  not  always  in  the 
exact  order  of  time,  yet  of  thought  ;  and  the  whole 
is  narrated  with  a  vividness  which  bespeaks  an  eye 
witness  of  the  various  scenes  depicted.  It  is  true 
that  there  is  a  difference  in  the  style  of  that  portion 
of  the  book  which  records  the  partition  of  the  land, 
and  that  which  relates  its  conquest ;  but  this  is 
what  might  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the 
subject-matter,  and  from  the  fact  that  this  portion 
of  the  book  was  apparently  in  the  main  derived 
from  written  surveys,  made  previously  to  the  appor 
tionment  of  the  conquered  territory  (see  ch.  xviii.) 
Yet  in  this  part,  as  well  as  in  the  foregoing,  there  is 
connection  and  method,  the  transactions  following 
one  another  in  chronological  order,  and  all  serving  to 
show  (what  was  evidently  a  principal  design  of  the 
author)  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promise  to  give  the 
land  of  Canaan  to  His  people  Israel.  Hence  the 
supplementary  theory  of  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  others, 
according  to  which  the  hand  of  several  authors  is 
traceable  in  the  book,  does  not  seem  at  all  applicable 
to  it. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  5 

The  Divine  authority  of  this  book  is  established 
by  the  references  made  to  it  in  Holy  Writ1  ;  also  by 
the  fact  of  its  having  been  included  in  the  Canon  of 
Scripture  by  the  early  Hebrew  Church,  and  tacitly 
acknowledged  by  our  Saviour,  when,  "  beginning  at 
Moses  and  the  Prophets,  He  expounded  to  His  dis 
ciples  in  all  the  scriptures  the  things  concerning 
Himself." 

Various  objections,  indeed,  have  been  raised  to  its 
credibility,  and,  therefore,  to  its  Divine  inspiration. 
One  of  these  is  drawn  from  the  apparent  discrepancies 
which  are  met  with  in  the  book,  as,  e.g.,  the  state 
ment  in  xi.  23,  xxi.  43-5,  that  the  whole  land  was 
subjugated  ;  whereas  in  xiii.  1-3  and  xviii.  3  we 
read  that  a  great  part  was  yet  unoccupied  by  the 
Israelites  ;  for  an  answer  to  which  the  notes  on  those 
passages  in  the  annexed  commentary  may  be  con 
sulted.  Again,  the  statement,  in  xi.  21,  that  Joshua 
cut  off  the  Anakim  from  Hebron,  Debir,  etc.,  is  not 
irreconcilable  with  their  subsequent  extirpation, 
recorded  in  xv.  13,  14  (see  note  on  x.  37).  Nor  is 
the  promise  of  God  that  the  boundaries  of  Israel 
should  extend  to  the  Euphrates  (i.  4)  at  variance 
with  the  fact  that  the  country  which  Joshua  divided 
does  not  reach  so  far  (xiii.  6  ;  see  note  on  i.  4). 
Another  and  more  serious  objection  is  the  alleged 
injustice  of  depriving  the  Canaanites  of  their  country, 
and  dooming  them  all  to  destruction.  This  has 
been  satisfactorily  answered  by  many  commentators 
(see  especially  Dr.  Fairbairn's  TypoL,  vol.  ii.,  chap. 

1  See,  e.g.,  i  Kings  xvi.  34  ;  i  Chron.  ii.  7  ;  Psalm  cxiv.  3,  5  ; 
Isa.  xxviii.  21;  Hab.  iii.  11-13;  Acts  vii.  45,  xiii.  19;  Heb. 
iv.  8,  xi.  30-1,  xiii.  5  ;  James  ii.  25. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


iv.).  Here  it  may  suffice  to  remark  that  God  is  the 
supreme  Ruler  and  Judge  of  the  universe,  and,  being 
infinitely  just  and  holy,  must  do  right.  It  was  His 
command  that  the  Canaanites,  on  account  of  their 
flagrant  and  long-continued  enormities,1  should, 
when  the  cup  of  their  iniquity  was  full,  be  extirpated 
from  off  the  earth.  The  Israelites  were  but  instru 
ments  in  executing  the  Divine  purpose  ;  and  they  had 
been  forbidden  by  God  to  spare  those  nations  or  to 
receive  them  into  covenant.2  They  were  thus  em 
phatically  warned  against  the  great  sin  of  idolatry,  to 
which  they  were  themselves  but  too  prone  ;  and  so 
far  were  they  from  being  rendered  hard-hearted  and 
sanguinary  by  the  work  of  vengeance  in  which  they 
were  employed,  that  we  find  from  the  history  that 
they  executed  their  commission  with  reluctance,  and 
far  less  completely  than  they  ought ;  nor  were  they 
allowed  by  God  to  wage  aggressive  war  on  other 
nations  besides  the  Canaanites.  The  fact  that 
innocent  children  were  involved  in  the  fate  of  their 
guilty  parents  is  analogous  to  what  happens  in  other 
judgments,  such  as  a  plague  or  earthquake,  and  can 
present  no  difficulty  to  the  minds  of  those  who 
believe  in  a  future  state,  where  all  apparent  inequali 
ties  in  God's  dealings  now  will  be  redressed.  No 
less  futile  is  the  objection  which  has  been  raised  to 

1  See  Lev.  xviii.  21-25  ;  Deut.  xii.  30,  31. 

-  Deut.  vii.  i,  2;  Exod.  xxiii.  32,  xxxiv.  12.  God,  however, 
made  a  marked  distinction  between  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan 
and  other  neighbouring  nations  ;  peace  might  be  made  with 
the  latter,  if  they  submitted,  but  not  with  the  former  (see 
Deut.  xx.  10-18).  The  case  of  the  Gibeonites  does  not  prove 
the  contrary ;  for  the  fact  that  they  obtained  peace  by  fraud 
shows  that  they  were  aware  that  they  had  no  hope  of  escap 
ing  destruction  in  any  other  way  (see  ix.  24). 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


the  historical  fidelity  of  this  book  on  account  of  the 
miracles  recorded  in  it.      The  whole  history  of  God's 
people  is   miraculous,  and  the  Book  of  Joshua   does 
but  continue  that  series   of  wonders  which  we  meet 
with  in  the  Pentateuch.      Miracles  were  necessary  in 
order  to   put  the    Israelites   into  possession   of  the 
Promised  Land,  for  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  see  how, 
being  scarcely  more  numerous  than  the   Canaanites, 
and  inferior  to  them  in  military  skill  and  equipment, 
having  neither  horses  nor  chariots,  nor  warlike  engines 
for  attacking  the  great  and  fortified  cities,  they  could 
possibly  have  proved  successful.      Moreover,  nothing 
could  have  more  tended   than   God's  visible  interpo 
sition    in  their  behalf,  to  encourage  and  strengthen 
their  faith  in  Him,  and  to  convince  them  that  in  the 
subjugation    of  Canaan   they  were  doing   His   work 
rather  than  their  own.      This  objection,  however,  to 
miracles   proceeds   from   those  only  who   deny   the 
continued  agency  of  an    Omnipotent  and    Personal 
God,  Who,  at   His  own  good  pleasure,  may  depart 
from   those   settled   laws   whereby    He  governs   the 
universe  (cf.  John  v.  17). 

But  further,  to  be  rightly  understood  the  Book  of 
Joshua  must  be  regarded,  not  only  as  a  literal,  but  as 
a  prophetic  and  spiritual  history.  It  was  classed 
by  the  Jews  as  the  first  of  those  books  called  by 
them  "  The  early  Prophets,"  D^fiMT)  DW3?,  not  only 
as  written  by  inspired  men  or  prophets,  but  as  pro 
phetical  and  typical  of  God's  dealings  with  His 
Church,  or  people,  to  the  end  of  time.  Thus,  Joshua 
means  the  same  as  Jesus  ('l-^crovs),  Jehovah-Saviour; 
and  in  his  office  as  general  of  the  armies  of  Israel 
he  was  a  type  of  Jesus,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 


THE  BOOK  OF  fOSPIUA. 


(Heb.  ii.  10).  The  Canaan,  into  the  possession  of 
which  he  brought  the  children  of  Israel,  was  a  type 
of  heaven,  and  also  of  the  state  of  true  believers 
here  on  earth,  whilst  they  are  yet  carrying  on  a 
warfare  with  their  spiritual  enemies,  but  are,  at  the 
same  time,  "  seated  together  with  Christ  in  heavenly 
places,"  and  have  "their  conversation  "  (or  citizenship) 
"  in  heaven."  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the 
Israelites  who  were  brought  by  Joshua  into  Canaan 
were  very  different  in  character  from  those  who 
perished  in  the  wilderness.  The  long  course  of 
discipline  which  they  had  undergone  during  their 
thirty-eight  years'  wanderings,  the  instructions  of 
Moses,  and,  above  all,  the  influence  of  Divine  grace, 
seem  to  have  humbled  and  inclined  them  readily 
to  obey  the  will  of  God.1  With  these,  therefore, 
God  renewed  His  covenant,  as  we  read  in  Deut 
xxix.  i  ;  and  these,  under  the  conduct  of  Joshua, 
having  passed  through  the  Jordan,  and  having  been 
circumcised,  and  partaken  of  the  Passover  (v.  10), 
entered  at  once  on  the  work  of  conquest  to 
which  they  were  called.  In  all  which  we  may  see 
a  prophetic  reference  to  Christians  now,  who,  having 
been  baptized  into  Christ,  circumcised  with  the  true 
circumcision  of  the  Spirit,  and  strengthened  by  the 
Bread  of  Life,  are  both  qualified  and  pledged  to  fight, 
under  the  banner  of  their  Divine  Leader,  against  His 
and  their  spiritual  foes,  and,  as  far  as  in  them  lies, 
to  establish  His  empire  here  on  earth.  Viewed  in 
this  light,  there  is  a  striking  parallel  between  the 
Book  of  Joshua  and  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 

!  This  their  character  seems  clearly  indicated  in  this  book  ; 
see,  e.g.,  the  note  at  the  end  of  xxii.  34. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


Ephesians,  where  the  great  privileges  which  all 
Christ's  followers  already  enjoy  by  union  with  Him, 
their  risen  Head,  and  their  corresponding  spiritual 
duties,  are  forcibly  delineated.  But  Canaan,  as  has 
been  already  said,  was  a  type  also  of  heaven  itself, 
whither  Christ  has  gone  before  "  to  prepare  a  place  " 
for  us.  As  Moses,  who  typified  the  Law,  could  not 
bring  the  Israelites  into  the  Promised  Land,  so  "  by 
the  deeds  of  the  Law  shall  no  flesh  be  justified;  but 
now  the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  Law  is 
manifested,  even  the  righteousness  of  God  which  is  by 
faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that 
believe"  (Rom.  iii.  20-22).  This  spiritual  character 
of  the  Book  of  Joshua  has,  however,  been  often 
dwelt  upon  by  Christian  commentators,  and  it  may 
suffice,  therefore,  to  refer  to  such  well-known  works 
as  Bishop  Pearson,  On  the  Creed,  art.  ii.,  pp.  115-118; 
Dr.  Barrow,  Sermons  on  the  Creed,  ser.  xvii.,  p.  230  ; 
Mather,  On  the  Types,  vol.  i.,  pp.  134-7;  and  of 
more  ancient  authors,  Origenis  Opera,  torn,  ii., 
PP-  397 — 457)  ed-  Benedict,  Paris,  1733. 

The  number  of  years  comprised  in  this  history 
cannot  be  exactly  determined,  for  we  know  not 
certainly  the  age  of  Joshua  at  the  time  of  the 
invasion,  nor  the  length  of  his  war  with  the  Canaan- 
ites,  nor  of  his  life  after  that  war  was  ended.  Some 
light,  however,  is  thrown  on  this  subject  by  Joshua 
xiv.  7,  10.  There  Caleb,  who  not  improbably 
may  have  been  of  the  same  age  as  Joshua,  who  is 
called  a  young  man  in  Exod.  xxxiii.  ii,  declares 
himself  to  have  been  forty  years  old  when  he  was 
sent  by  Moses  from  Kadesh  to  spy  out  the  land, 
but  eighty-five  when,  after  the  conquest  of  Canaan, 


io  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

he    came    before    Joshua    to  claim    Hebron    for    his 
possession.      As,  then,  the  mission   of  the  spies  took 
place   in   the  second  year  after  the   exodus    (Numb. 
xiii.    20),    and    the    period    from    the  exodus    (B.C. 
1491,     Usher)     to    the     crossing     of    the     Jordan 
(B.C.  1451)   was   forty  years,  Caleb   must  have  been 
thirty-eight  years  old   when   he   passed  through  the 
Red  Sea,  and  seventy-eight  when  he  passed  through 
Jordan.     Thus,  a_]3griod  of  seven  years  is  left  for 
Joshua's  conquest  of  Canaan1  ;  and,  as  Joshua  died 
at'The  age  of  one  hundred  and  ten  (xxiv.  29),  he 
must,  if  of  the  same  age   as   Caleb,  have  survived 
the   conquest  twenty-five  years,  which,  added   to  the 
seven  years,  would  embrace  a  period  of  thirty-two 
years    as    comprised  in   this   book,    and    quite    bear 
out    the   assertion    in    xxiii.    I,   that    "a   long    time 
after  that  the  Lord   had  given  rest,  Joshua  waxed 
old  and  stricken  in  years."      Josephus,  however,  says 
(Ant.,  v.,    i.,  19)   that  the   war  with   Canaan   lasted 
five  years,  and  in  Ant.,  v.,  I.,  29,  that  Joshua  lived 
forty    years    with     Moses    before    the    invasion    of 
Canaan  ;    and    after  Moses'   death    was    head    over 
Israel  for  twenty-five  years  ;    which,  since  he  lived 
to  the  age  of  one  hundred  and  ten,  would  make  him 
to    have    been   forty-five    years  old    at  the   time  of 
the  exodus   (<?.£:,  45 +40+ 25=  1 10).     This  view  is 
adopted   by  Ewald,  Knobel,  and   Fiirst,  and   is   not 
very  different  from  the  first-mentioned,  if  we  suppose 
Caleb   to  have  used    round    numbers.      Others  (e.g., 
Theoph.,  Ad.  Autol.,  iii.,  24  ;   Clem.  Alex.,  Strom.,  i., 
21  ;  Euseb.,  Chron.,  i.)  reckon  twenty-seven  years  as 

1  Theodoret,    C.    a   Lap.,    Keil,   and    most    modern    com 
mentators  think  this  was  the  length  of  the  war. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


the  length  of  Joshua's  government.  Eupolemus  (ap. 
Euseb.,  Prap.  Evang.,  ix.,  30,  x.,  14)  names  thirty 
years.  C.  a  Lap.,  on  xxiv.  29,  says  that  the  two 
most  generally  supported  views  are  those  which 
assign  to  his  government  seventeen  (or  eighteen)  or 
twenty-seven  years. 

The  book  may  be  divided  into  two  parts.  The 
first  has  reference  to  the  conquest  of  the  land,  and 
contains  :  I,  The  campaign  against  the  south (i. — x.); 

2,  The    campaign   against    the  north    (xi.    I  —  1 8)  ; 

3,  The  war  against  the  Anakim    (xi.  21-23)  ;   4>  A 
general   summary  of   the   conquest   (xi.    23    to  the 
end    of   xii.).      The    second    describes    the    division 
of    the    land     and    the    settlement    of    the   tribes : 

1,  The  territory  assigned  by    Moses  to   the   trans- 
Jordanic   tribes,  and  Caleb's   inheritance  (xiii.,  xiv.)  ; 

2,  The  allotments  of  Judah,  Ephraim,  and  Manasseh 
(xv. — xvii.)  ;   3,  The  setting  up  of  the  tabernacle  at 
Shiloh,  and   the  distribution   of  territory  among  the 
remaining  seven   tribes   (xviii.,  xix.)  ;  4,   The  cities 
of  refuge   (xx.)  ;     5,   The  cities  of  the  priests   and 
Levites     (xxi.)  ;     6,   The    dismissal    of    the     trans- 
Jordanic  tribes  to   their  homes  (xxii.)  ;   7,   The  two 
last  addresses  of  Joshua,   renewal  of  the   covenant, 
Joshua's  and  Eleazar's  death. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 


CHAPTER  I. 
VERS.  1-9. — Introduction  to  the  Book. 

JOSHUA,  before  Moses'  death,  had  been  nominated 
as  his  successor  (Numb,  xxvii.  18,  etc.),  and  had 
received  a  solemn  charge  from  Jehovah  ;  but  now, 
Moses  being  dead,  he  is  called  to  the  active  perform 
ance  of  the  duties  of  his  office.  Jehovah  renews  to 
him  His  promises,  and,  as  a  condition  of  their  fulfil 
ment,  requires  of  him  a  faithful  observance  of  His 
law. 

Ver.  i. — vn,  "  And  it  came  to  pass"  \  \  consec. 
(Ges.,  Gr.,  §  49,  2),  connecting  this  book  with 
the  close  of  Deuteronomy  (see  Dr.  Pusey,  On  Daniel, 
p.  309,  and  note  £,  of  Ges.,  Gr.,  §  49,  2),  but  not  so 
t.l;; intimately  as  to  indicate  a  sameness  of  authorship 
(cf.  Ruth  i.  i,  where  the  "  Vav  "  has  the  same  power 
in  reference  to  Judges,  of  which  Ruth  is  an  appendix). 
ry\  "After  the  death  of  Moses"  :  i.e.,  after  the  expiration 
of  the  thirty  days'  mourning  for  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiv. 
8).  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord"  :  i.e.,  one  commissioned 
by  Jehovah  and  sent  by  Him  to  do  His  work.  It 
was,  therefore,  Moses'  regular  official  title  (see  Deut. 
xxxiv.  5  ;  Josh.  i.  13,  15,  viii.  31,  33,  ix.  24, 
xi.  15,  xii.  6,  xiii.  8,  xiv.  7,  xviii.  7,  xxii.  4,  5), 
applied  to  Joshua  also,  after  he  had  succeeded  Moses 


VER.  i.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  13 

(Josh.  xxiv.  29  with  Judges  ii.  8),  a  higher  title 
than  that  of  rnti'p,  borne  by  Samuel  when  a  boy 
(l  Sam.  ii.  1 1,  iii.  i).  Dean  Perowneon  Psalm  xviii. 
(inscription  of)  remarks  that  the  title  run"1  nor  is 
never  applied  by  the  individual  to  himself,  and  in 
this  respect,  therefore,  differs  from  the  SouXos  ®eoC 
(Xpiorov)  of  the  New  Test.  (Phil.  i.  i  ;  Titus  i.  i). 
"  The  Lord  spake  unto  Joshua  "  :  Either  in  a  dream 
or  vision,  or  through  the  intervention  of  the  High 
Priest  by  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or 
by  a  direct  revelation  to  his  mind ;  for  it  is  not 
said  that  God  appeared  to  him.  The  occasion 
being  one  of  great  importance,  it  is  likely  that  the 
address  was  immediate  and  personal.  "Jos/ma": 
A  prince  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  originally 
named  Hoshea,  tf^in  (Numb.  xiii.  8),  i.e.,  help,  to 
which  Moses,  on  some  occasion  not  mentioned, 
pTefixed  the  name  PP,  whence,  by  contraction,  rPirv, 
"Jehovah-help"  (Numb.  xiii.  16),  written  JMi?» 
(Neh.  viii.  17)  ;  Sept.  Tr/crovs,  so  in  Greek  Test. 
(Acts.  vii.  45  ;  Heb.  iv.  8)  ;  a  type  of  the  Messiah, 
Whose  name  Jesus,  therefore,  means  a  Divine 
Saviour  (Matt.  i.  21).  jir|3,  the  form  "bin"  for 
"  ben  "  is  rare  (Ges.,  Gram.,  §  96,  2),  but  always  used 
when  followed  by  the  pr.  n.  "Nun"  (Ges.,  Lex.). 
"  Moses'  minister"  :  The  piel  participle  is  here  used  as 
a  noun  in  construe.  (Ges.,  Gr.,  §  135,  i,  2).  The  term 
is  never  equal  to  nay,  and  is  translated  in  the  Sept.  by 
VTrovpyos  or  Xetrovpyos  (see  here),  or  6  TrapevTrjKajs 
(Exod.  xxiv.  13,  and  cf.  Deut.  i.  38,  where  HTfP  is 
interchanged  with  ^p1?  ne'yn,  one  who  stands  before 
another,  waiting  instructions),  but  never  by  SoOXo?. 
It  might  be  rendered  "  assistant,"  and  answer  to  our 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

word  adjutant  or  aide-de-camp.  When  a  young 
man,  Joshua  filled  this  office,  and  continued  in  it  up 
to  the  time  of  Moses'  death.  Having  thus  been  long 
trained  to  obedience,  and  being  intimately  acquainted 
with  the  counsels  of  Moses,  and  eminent  for  his 
courage,  skill,  and  fidelity  (see  Exod.  xvii.  8,  etc.  ; 
Numb.  xiv.  6-14),  he  was  better  fitted  than  any 
other  to  be  Moses'  successor.1  As  the  minister  of 
Moses  he  was  also  a  type  of  Christ,  Who  was  "  made 
under  the  Lazv  "  (Gal.  iv.  4). 

Ver.  2. — nriitt.,  "And  now"  :  Sept.  vvv  ovv  (cf.  A. 
Ver.).  The  adverb  seems  to  be  here  not  so  much  a 
particle  of  time,  as  of  inference,  as  frequently  the 
Greek  vvv.  With  the  imperative  it  has  an  hortatory  * 

power  (cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  i  3  ;  Isa.  xxx.  8  ;  Micah  iv.  14). 
"  This  Jordan  "  :  The  pronoun  is  used  Set/cri/coig,  as 
the  Jordan  was  within  sight  of  Shittim,  where  the 
Israelites  were  encamped  ;  ni-tf,  always  with  the 
art.  in  prose,  prop.  "  the  Descender  ;  "  from  TV,  to 
descend  (Ges.,  Lex. ;  Reland,  Pal.,  iii.,  63),  so  called 
from  its  rapid  descent.  The  Arabic  name  is  now 
Esh-Sheriah,  the  watering-place,  or  SJieriat  el  K/iebir, 
the  great  watering-place,  to  distinguish  it  from 
Sheriat  el  Mandhur,  the  Hieromax.  Between  the 
Sea  of  Galilee  and  the  Dead  Sea  is  its  most  rapid 
descent ;  but,  though  its  course  for  that  distance  is 

1  In  Eccles.  xlvi.  i  he  is  called  the  successor  of  Moses  in 
prophecies  (cf.  Joseph,  Antiq.,  iv.,  c.  7,  2,  and  Sherlock,  On 
Proph.  Disc.,  vi.,  p.  128).  Had  he,  however,  been  strictly  a 
prophet,  it  is  strange  that  he  should  have  been  directed  to 
seek  the  Divine  will  through  Eleazar,  the  priest  (Numb,  xxvii. 
21).  Most  probably  he  was  only  qualified  by  Divine  wisdom 
to  be  the  leader  and  governor  of  Israel  after  the  death  of 
Moses. 


VER.  3.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  15 

only  sixty  miles,  it  is  increased  to  two  hundred1  by 
its  multiplied  windings  (Dean  Stanley's  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  pp.  283-4,  n°te  2)-  It  rises  in  Antilebanon, 
flows  into  the  Dead  Sea,  and  forms  the  eastern 
boundary  of  Canaan  proper.  "  Thou  and  all  this 
people  "  :  The  Reubenites,  Gadites,  and  half  tribe  of 
Manasseh,  who  had  received  their  possessions  on  the 
east  side  of  Jordan,  being  excepted,  though  under 
the  conditions  mentioned  in  vers.  12-15  (°f-  Numb, 
xxxii.).  "  Which  I  do  give  "  :  The  Vulg.  renders  by 
"  quam  dabo"  but  the  present  jni),  "  am  giving" 
implies  that  the  bestowal  of  the  gift  had  already 
begun.  ^rUH  is  emphatic  ;  and  the  fact  that 
Canaan  was  thus  God's  own  gift  shows  that  the 
Israelites  were  not  chargeable  with  the  crime  of 
unjustly  invading  it.  "v?\  'O?,  at  the  end  of  the  verse, 
is  explanatory  of  the  succeeding  suff.  Dn  (cf.  Exod.  ii. 
6).  "  She  sazv  him,  the  child'1):  It  may  throughout  this 
book  be  rendered  sons,  rather  than  children,  of  Israel, 
because,  in  a  political  sense,  males  were  regarded  as 
representatives  of  the  whole  nation.  Note  that  in 
this  verse,  as  in  the  preceding,  there  is  a  typical 
reference  to  Christ,  Who  brings  all  true  believers  into 
the  heavenly  Canaan,  thus  doing  what  the  Law,  of 
which  Moses  was  the  representative,  could  not  do, 
owing  to  the  weakness,  i.e.,  depravity,  of  man  (see 
Rom.  iii.  19,  etc.,  vii.  4,  viii.  3). 

Ver.  3. — DlpO'^3,  a  nom.  absol.  (Gr.,  §  145,  2  ;  cf. 
xiii.  6).    "  On  which  the  sole  of  your  foot  shall  tread"  : 

1  So  Lieutenant  Lynch  (Official  Letter,  p.  265,  ofNarrat.), 
who  published  the  first  authentic  account  of  this  river,  after 
actual  survey ;  some,  however,  make  the  distance  to  be 
increased  to  only  113  miles. 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

The  expression  implies,  as  in  xiv.  9,  possession  in  its 
utmost  entirety.  "I__  have  given  it":  The  perfect 
denotes  the  certainty  of  the  gift  (Gr.y  §  126,  4).  In 
the  last  clause  the  reference  is  to  Deut.  xi.  24,  where 
the  same  promise  is  given  from  God  by  Moses, 
nearly  word  for  word  as  here  and  in  the  next  verse. 
"  /  spoke  "  :  On  the  distinction  between  ~\y\  and  ipx, 
see  Ges.,  Lex.,  under  the  latter  verb. 

Ver.  4. — The  general  statement,  "  Every  place  that 
the  sole,  etc."  (ver.  3)  is  here  explained  by  a  delineation 
of  the  farthermost  boundaries.  "  From  the  wilder 
ness  "  :  z>.,  the  Arabian  desert,  the  southern  boundary. 
"  This  Lebanon "  (the  white)  :  The  Sept.  has  Anti- 
lebanon,  but  both  are  parts  of  the  same  mountain, 
and  formed  the  northern  boundary  j1  '  this  '  indicates 
that  the  mountain  was  within  sight  of  the  Israelitish 
camp.  "  Unto  the  great  river"  \  The  Euphrates  (Heb. 
Perath)  was  so  called  /car*  e'^o^v  (cf.  Gen.  xv.  18  ; 
Deut.  i.  7)  ;  also  simply  irun  (Gen.  xxxi.  2  i  ;  Exod. 
xxiii.  31  ;  2  Sam.  x.  16,  etc.)  ;  "iru  always  means  a 
constantly-flowing  stream,  like  the  Euphrates  or 
Nile,  and  is  never  used  of  fleeting  brooks  or  torrents  ; 
rt.  "ina,  to  flow.  The  Heb.  Perath  is  derived  by  Ges. 
(Lex.}  from  "  parath,"  an  unused  rt.,  meaning  in  Syr. 
and  Chal.  "  to  break  ;  "  but  in  Arab.,  "  to  be  sweet  ;  " 
Sept.  Eu(/>paT7?9  ;  in  Old  Persian,  Ufrata,  "  the  good 
and  fertile  stream  "  (Delitzsch)  ;  now  "  Frath."  The 
great  sea  "  :  i.e.,  the  Mediterranean,  called  "  great  " 
in  contrast  to  the  Dead  Sea  and  Lake  of  Genesa- 


1  The  Arabic  poets  say  of  this  mountain,  "  He  bears  the 
Winter  on  his  head,  the  Spring  on  his  shoulders,  in  his  bosom 
the  Autumn,  and  Summer  slumbers  at  his  feet"  (Volner,  i., 
243)- 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  17 

reth.  _B>nB>n  N-QO,  accusative  of  place  (Gr.,  §  1 18,  i), 
literally  "  at  the  entrance,"  i.e.,  the  setting,  "  of  the 
sun  "  (cf.  Deut.  xi.3O  ;  Psalm  1.  i)  ;  hence  the  West. 
"  Your  coast":  The  Hebrew  word  ^3|  denotes  properly 
the  cord  by  which  the  limit  of  a  field  or  region  is 
marked  out,  rt.  ^23,  to  twist,  or  to  wreathe,  hence  "  a 
boundary."  The  intermediate  statement  "  all  the 
land  of  the  CJiittites"  (see  note  on  iii.  10)  has  occa- 
sjoned  a  difficulty.  The  Sept.  omits  the  words,  and 
the  Arabic  version  must  have  read  hy  for  fe,  for  it 
renders  "  ultra  terrain  Cliittceorum"  But  probably 
the  words  were  intended  to  mark  out  the  limits  of 
the  land  of  Canaan  strictly  so  called,  the  Chittites, 
as  one  of  the  principal  nations  of  Canaan,  being 
taken  as  a  representative  of  the  rest  ;  yet  we  need 
not  with  Keil  regard  the  broad  description  of  the 
land  given  in  this  verse  as  rhetorical,  i.e.,  as  merely 
indicating,  in  a  general  way,  certain  well-known 
points  within  which  the  land  to  be  given  to  the 
Israelites  would  lie.  In  the  reign  of  Solomon  the 
kingdom  reached  to  Eloth  and  Eziongeber,  on  the 
CElanitic  gulf  of  the  Red  Sea  (i  Kings  ix.  26),  and 
to  Tiphsah  on  the  river,  i.e.,  the  Euphrates  (i  Kings 
iv.  24),  having  for  its  western  boundary  the  sea  of 
the  Philistines  (Exod.xxiii.  3  i),  i.e.,  the  Mediterranean, 
and  for  its  southern  boundary  the  Desert,  i.e.,  the 
wilderness  of  Shur  and  Paran.1  God's  promise,  how 
ever,  of  this  enlarged  dominion  was  conditional 
(Deut.  xi.  22-4),  and  it  was  His  people's  sinfulness 
which,  after  Solomon's  death,  deprived  them  of  it  ; 
yea,  as  regards  the  Canaan  strictly  so-called,  we  are 


1  Probably  identical  with  the  desert  of  Et  Tih  (Grove). 

2 


i8  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

told  that  in  consequence  of  their  sloth  and  wicked 
ness  they  could  not,  after  Joshua's  death,  fully  drive 
out  their  enemies  (Judges  ii.  20-1). 

Ver.  5. — In  this  and  the  next  verse  the  order  of 
events  in  the  book  is  briefly  indicated,  viz.,  I,  The 
Conquest  ;  2,  The  Division  of  the  Land.  With  the 
first  clause  cf.  Deut.  xi.  25,  where  the  same  promise 
is  made  to  all  the  people,  igh  3V_r\\,  literally  "shall 
place  himself  before"  is  varied  to  r??3  Itf^  (Deut.  vii. 
24,  xi.  25),  "all  the  days  of  thy  life":  for  after 
Joshua's  death  the  Canaanites,  owing  to  the  supine- 
ness  and  sinfulness  of  the  children  of  Israel,  re-esta 
blished  themselves  in  many  places,  whence  they  had 
been  driven  out  (Judges  i.  27,  etc).  "  /  will  be  with 
thee"  i.e.,  I  will  assist  thee  (cf.  v.  17).  T]-,  in  pause 
for  ?j-  (§  103,  2  a).  "/  will  not  fail  thee"  (Auth. 
Vers.)  :  nEn,  used  intrans.,  means  properly  "  to  be  let 
down  or  relaxed,"  and  is  applied  to  the  letting  of  the 
hands  hang  down  (Zeph.  iii.  16)  ;  hence  it  may  be  used 
metaphorically  of  the  mind,  and  be  rendered  here  in 
Hiphil,  "  /  will  not  let  thee  despond"  Better,  how 
ever,  "  /  will  not  relax  my  hand  from  itpJiolding  thee  " 
(cf.  Deut.  iv.  31,  xxxi.  6  ;  i  Chron.  xxviii.  20  ;  Heb. 
xiii.  5,  ov  ^r)  ere  ctvoj). 

Ver.  6. — "Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage  "  (Auth. 
Vers.).  The  first  verb  prn  means  lit.  "  to  hold  fast," 
i.q.,  pQN  (Ges.,  Lex.  [2],  p.  72)  ;  hence  "to  strengthen," 
but  more  often  "  to  be  or  to  become  strong,"  and  like 
nsn  (ver.  5),  is  used  of  the  hands  (Judges  vii.  1 1 ;  2  Sam. 
xvi.  21  ;  Isa.  xxxv.  3),  The  second  verb,  fEN,  "to 
be  alert,"  and  hence  "  to  be  firm,"  refers  primarily  to 
alertness  of  the  feet  (Ges.,  Lex?),  or  to  strength  of 
knees  (see  Isa.  xxxv.  3).  The  two  expressions  to- 


VER.  7.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOSHUA.  19 

gether  denote  firmness  and  resolution  of  mind  (cf. 
( Deut.  xxxi.  7,  2  3).  The  concluding  words  of  the  verse  • 
do  not  imply  a  reason  for  firmness  and  resolution, 
viz.,  that  without  such  qualities  Joshua  could  never 
put  the  people  in  possession  of  Canaan,  but  are  rather 
a  promise  to  inspire  him  with  courage  (cf.  Deut.  i.  38, 
xxxi.  7,  23).  b^lJPl,  Hiph.  imperf.,  "  tJwu  sJialt  cause 
to  inherit"  with  an  accus.  of  person  and  of  thing 
(§  !39>  i  ;  cf-  Deut.  i.  38),  from  hn),  primarily  "to 
receive  as  a  possession,"  "  to  possess,"  but  spec.  "  to 
receive  as  an  inheritance";  and  in  Hiph.,  "to  cause  to 
inherit,"  which  latter,  according  to  Keil  and  Fay,  is  the 
meaning  here  (cf.  Auth.  Vers.).  fnsrrnx  :  Some  MSS. 
read  "^  for  "D^,  whence  Maurer  thought  that  they 
must  have  read  also  ^nj.n,  thou  slialt  lead,  but  as  ^ru  in 
Hiph.  is  applicable  rather  to  the  leading  of  a  flock 
than  of  an  army,  it  would  not  here  be  suitable,  and 
doubtless  -^  is  the  emendation  of  a  transcriber. 

Ver.  7. — pi,  "  g/z/j/,"  here  implies  a  condition.  The 
two  following  verbs  are  repeated  from  the  first  clause 
of  ver.  6,  but  jare  rendered  more  forcible  by  the  addi 
tion  of  nsp  to  the  latter  verb.  "  Turn  not  from  it  to 
the  right  hand  and  to  the  left  "  (cf.  Deut.  v.  29  [Heb. 
Bib.],  xxviii.  14)  :  1-1D  here  answers  to  npa  in  Numb. 
xx.  1 7.  The  masc.  suffix  in  -israp  may  refer  either  to 
the  foregoing  words,  "  which  Moses  .  .  .  commanded 
thee,"  or  to  isp,  understood  before  rninn.  The_"_Vav" 
before  'Pim?  is  better  rendered  "and"  than  "or" 
which,  however  allowable  in  some  passages  (see  Ges., 
Lex.  [3],  p.  235),  here  rather  weakens  the  sense.  The 
allusion  is  to  travellers  who  avoid  all  paths  deviating 
from  the  main  road.  Wp  \yvh,  "  That  thou  mayest 
act  wisely":  Sept.,  Iva  avvfjs  ;  Vulg.,  "  lit  intelligas"; 


\ 

20  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  I. 

but  Chald.  and  Auth.  Vers.,  "  tJiat  thou  may est prosper'' 
As  wisdom  in  conducting  affairs  is  connected  with 
prosperity,  the  word  psb  sometimes  denotes  "  to  pros 
per  "  (see,  e.g.,  Prov.  xvii.  8),  _but  here  the  primary 
meaning  "  to  be  wise  "  (in  Hiph.,  "  to  make  wise,"  "  to 
act  wisely  ")  seems  preferable,  because  in  ver.  8  WV'PI 
is  distinguished  from  DvV9.  In  the  last  clause,  bb?  is 
—  T^TT1???,  "  in  all  thy  ways,"  i.e.,  in  all  thy  actions 
(cf.  i  Sam.  xviii.  14;. 

Ver.  8. — n:rn  may  refer  to  the  Book  of  the  Law  as 
having  been  already  mentioned,  ver.  *j  ;  or,  perhaps, 
indicates  that  Jehovah  was  addressing  Joshua  from 
the  Holy  of  Holies  in  the  Tabernacle,  where  the  Penta 
teuch  was  deposited.  The  frequent  allusions  to  the 
Book  of  the  Law  throughout  this  Book  of  Joshua 
are  a  testimony  to  the  genuineness  of  the  former. 
"  Shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  month  "  :  i.e.,  Joshua's 
judgments  and  orders  were  to  be  in  accordance  with 
the  Divine  Law  ;  on  all  occasions  he  wras  to  speak  in 
accordance  with  it ;  and  evidently  he  had  a  written 
copy  of  the  Law,  as  the  kings  afterwards  were 
required  to  have  (Deut.  xvii.  18,  19).  "And  thou 
shalt  meditate  in  it  day  and  night  "  :  i.e.,  he  was  to 
be  continually  pondering  it  in  his  mind  with  a  view 
to  compliance  with  all  its  directions  ;  Psalm  i.  2 
appears  to  allude  to  this  verse.  "  For  then  shalt 
thou  make  thy  way  prosperous,  and  then  shalt  thou  act 
wiselv  "  (see  note  on  ver.  7}. 

Ver.  9. — Nl^n  is  here  equal  to  a  strong  positive  asser^ 

/tion  (§  153,  2.  Rem.j.      It  is  generally  employed   by 

I  those  who  wish   to   infuse  into  another  courage  and 

I  alacrity.     The  Sept.  uses  run  in  place  of  it,  translating 

by  'loou.      nnn,  Niph.  imperf.   2   p.   m.  s.   in  pause, 


VER.  10.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  21 

from  rmn,  to  break  or  to  be  broken,  used  here  meta 
phorically  of  a  mind  broken  by  terror.  This  and  the 
preceding  verb,  with  the  negative  ^N,  give  greater 
force  to  the  foregoing  positive  injunction,  "  Be 
strong"  etc.  (cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  6,  8). 

Let  us  remember  that  the  same  encouragements 
which  were  given  to  Joshua  are  also  given  to  our 
selves  in  our  spiritual  warfare.  God  will  be  with 
us  (Heb.  xiii.  6)  to  aid  us  in  our  conflicts,  and  to 
bring  us  ultimately  into  possession  of  the  heavenly 
Canaan.  Only  we,  like  Joshua,  must  be  very 
courageous,  and  firm  in  rendering  an  undeviating 
obedience  to  the  revealed  will  of  God  (Matt.  vii.  2 1  ; 
John  xv.  14). 


VERS.  10-18. — Joshua's  Command  to  the  Overseers 
of  the  People,  and  his  Appeal  to  the  Reubenites, 
Gadites,  and  Half  Tribe  of  Manasseh. 

Dntpb>,  lit.  scribes,  from  "it3v£  to  write ;  Sept  ypa/Ji- 
/xaretg  ;  so  the  Syriac  and  Samaritan  versions.  The 
rendering  " overseers "  or  "  superintendents"  though 
not  etymologically  correct,  perhaps  sufficiently  ex 
presses  the  meaning.  They  appear  to  have  been 
Hebrews,  who  drew  up  the  Hebrew  genealogies,  and 
were  generally  in  attendance  on  the  elders,  captains 
and  judges.  Joshua  employed  them  on  this  occa 
sion  to  convey  his  orders  to  the  people,  and  to  see 
them  executed.  On  Egyptian  monuments  they  are 
frequently  represented  giving  in  written  accounts  to 
their  immediate  superiors.  Passages  in  which  they 
are  mentioned  are  Exod.  v.  6  ;  Numb.  xi.  16  ;  Deut. 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

xvi.  1 8,  xxix.  10,  xxxi.  28  ;  Josh.  viii.  33,  xxiii. 
2,  xxiv.  i.  After  the  death  of  David  it  would 
seem  that  they,  as  well  as  the  judges  (to  whom 
the  genealogical  knowledge  of  the  shoterim  must 
have  been  highly  useful  in  determining  cases  re 
lating  to  property,  etc.),  were  chosen  from  the 
Levites  (i  Chron.  xxiii.  4  ;  2  Chron.  xix.  1 1, 
xxxiv.  13). 

Ver.  i  I . — "  Pass  through  the  midst  of  the  camp  "  (cf. 
Vulg.,  "transite  per  medium  castrorum  ").  rn^,  Pr°P?r!y 
"Jlesh  which  is  taken  in  hunting"  from  1-1V,  to  hunt ; 
also  any  food,  but  especially  "provision  for  a  journey  " 
(Gen.  xlii.  25  ;  Exod.  xii.  39).  The  manna  had  not 
yet,  as  Keil  asserts,  ceased  (see  Josh.  v.  1 2),  but 
when  Joshua  issued  this  command,  he  doubtless  knew 
that  the  manna  would  cease  when  the  people  had 
crossed  the  Jordan  (Exod.  xvi.  35),  and  because  it 
would  not  keep  fresh  beyond  the  first  day,  and  there 
may  have  been  no  time  to  collect  and  prepare  it,  he 
commanded  other  food  to  be  gathered.  Indeed, 
manna  never  formed  the  sole  sustenance  of  the 
people  (see  Deut.  ii.  6,  26-28)  ;  and  the  country  of 
Sihon  and  Og,  which  they  had  lately  conquered, 
would  furnish  them  with  the  supplies  they  now 
needed.  "  Within  yet  three  days"  (cf.  Gen.  xl.  13), 
Sept.  ert  T/oets  ^/xepat  :  A  question  has  been  raised 
whether  the  three  days  here  mentioned  are  identical 
with  those  in  iii.  2.  Most  commentators  think  so, 
and  suppose  that  this  chapter  anticipates  the  regular 
course  of  events  ;  in  other  words,  that  we  have  the 
order  of  thought  rather  than  of  time.  The  sacred 
writer,  having  a  religions,  rather  than  an  historical, 
design  in  view,  may  have  wished  to  put  prominently 


VERS.  12,  13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  23 

forward  God's  faithfulness  in  the  performance  of  His 
promise  to  give  Canaan  for  an  inheritance  to  His 
people,  and,  therefore,  mentioned  first  God's  com 
mand  to  Joshua,  and  Joshua's  immediate  proceedings 
thereupon,  and  then  returned  in  the  second  chapter 
to  state  what  had  taken  place  before  this  command 
of  God  to  Joshua,  and  immediately  after  the  thirty 
days'  mourning  for  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiv.  8),  viz.,  the 
sending  forth  of  the  spies  to  Jericho,  etc.  On  any 
other  supposition  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how 
the  collecting  of  provisions  for  the  vast  host  of  the 
Israelites,  the  sending  forth  and  return  of  the  spies, 
and  the  removal  of  the  camp  from  Shittim  to 
Jordan,  could  all  have  been  accomplished  within  the 
period  mentioned  (i.  ii).  According,  however,  to 
the  above  view,  the  order  of  events  was  probably 
the  following :  On  the  third  of  the  first  month, 
Abib,  or  Nisan,  the  spies  were  sent  out  (ii.  i),  on  the 
sixth  they  return  (ii.  23),  on  the  seventh  the  camp 
is  removed  from  Shittim  to  Jordan  (iii.  i),  and  the 
command  (i.  i  i)  is  issued,  and  on  the  tenth  the 
river  is  crossed  (iv.  19). 

For  other  views,  viz.,  those  of  Keil,  Maurer,  Knobel, 
etc.,  see  note  in  Keil's  Comment.,  pp.  72 — 75,  Clark, 
pub.  1857.  ny-\h,  "  to  possess"  or  "  to  take  possession 
of"  :  Sept,  Karacrx^  ',  Vulg.,  "  ad  possidendam  " 
(cf.  I  Kings  xxi.  I  5).  This  is  the  primary  meaning 
of  Err,  whence  the  secondary  meaning  "  to  inherit " 
(Gen.  xxi.  10  ;  see  Gesen.,  Lex.}. 

Ver.  i  2. — The  tribes  here  mentioned  had  received 
their  inheritance  on  the  east  of  Jordan  (Numb,  xxxii.) 

Ver.  13. — The  infin.  absol.  TDT  is  here  used  for 
the  imperative  (§  131,4  b).  "  The  word"  but  also  in 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

Hebrew  "  the  mandate"  ;  so  in  Esther  i.  19  and  in 
Exod.  xxxiv.  28,  Deut.  iv.  13,  x.  4,  the  "ten  words" 
mean  the  "  ten  commandments."  The  quotation 
which  follows  is  not  literal,  and  bears  a  greater  resem 
blance  to  Deut.  iii.  18-20  than  to  Numb,  xxxii. 
20,  29.  rpjp,  Hiph.  part,  (is),  "giving  rest"  i.e.,  by 
assigning  to  them  settled  habitations  in  place  of  a 
wandering  life. 

Ver.  1 4. — "  Your  little  ones  "  :  From  SI?B,  to  trip_ 
along.  The  sing,  fp  is  often  used,  as  here,  collectively 
(§"  1 08,  i).  The  "-wives  and  little  children"  were  to 
dwell  in  fenced  cities  for  protection  from  the  inhabi 
tants  of  the  land  (Numb,  xxxii.  17).  rnpp,  "cattle"  : 
From  nji"),  to  possess  (cf.  KTTJVTJ  from  /crao/Aou).  Wealth 
in  early  times  chiefly  consisted  in  them. — '*n  1?P, 
"  on  tJie  other  side  of  the  Jordan"  Sept.  Trepav  TOV 
'lopSdvov,  is  explained  in  ver.  1 5  by  "  toward  the 
sun-rising."  The  Auth.  Vers.  here  and  in  Numb, 
xxii.  i  ;  Deut.  i.  5,  iii.  8,  etc.,  renders  it  "  on  this  side 
Jordan"  but  in  Deut.  iii.  20,  25,  "  beyond  Jordan"  as 
[the  Sept.  and  other  versions  generally.  The  phrase 
means  lit.,  "  at  the  side,  or  passage,  of  Jordan"  and 
was  usually  applied  to  the  district  east  of  Jordan, 
and  corresponded  closely  to  the  Greek  name  Percea. 
Here,  and  often  elsewhere,  it  is  used  quite  irrespec 
tively  of  the  actual  position  of  the  speaker  or  writer.; 
D^pn  is  derived  by  Ges.  from  5?!?n,  nearly  allied  to 
the  roots  Don  and  pnn,  "  to  be  eager  or  sharp  ;"  hence 
"  eager,  or  ready  prepared,  for  fighting  " ;  Aq.  ez'o>7rAi- 
cr/AeVoi ;  Symm.  Ka^wTrXicr/xeVot ;  Vulg.  armati.  But 
perhaps  a  better  rendering  is  "  arrayed"  Arab,  in- 
structi,  marshalled,  lit.  with  their  loins  girt  (cf.  Eph. 
vi.  14;  I  Peter  i.  13),  from  tt'io'n,  lumbiis,  synony- 


VER.  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  25 


mous  with  DH  (Numb,  xxxii.  32;  Deut.  iii.  18), 
from  D'V^q  (only  in  the  dual),  "  the  two  loins"  Sept. 
ev&voi.  Ewald  (GescJi.  des  Volkes  Israel,  ii.,  p.  54) 
would  render  it  "  arrayed  in  five  divisions"  from 
Bfon,  five,  whence  perhaps  the  strange  rendering  of 
the  Sept.,  TrefJiTTTy  ye^ea  (Exod.  xiii.  18),  but  this 
rendering,  says  Keil  (Comment.,  A.D.  1857),  assumes 
the  reading  D^pq  to  be  correct,  the  evidence  for 
which  is  less  than  that  for  D^pn.  or  D^'-iaq.  <i;?1?, 
"  before  "  (Auth.  Ver.),  Sept.,  Vat.,  irporepoi  TOJV  dSeX.- 
<f)o)i>  vfjitov,  but  Masius  and  Drusius  "  in  the  presence 
of"  as  the  word  means  in  Exod.  vii.  10,  which  render 
ing  seems  less  suitable  here,  for  it  was  obviously  fitting 
that  these  tribes,  in  return  for  the  concessions  made 
to  them  by  Moses,  should  be  exposed  more  than  the 
others  to  the  brunt  of  battle,  'n  niaa  h'3,  "all  the  strong 
heroes"  (§  108,  3,  cf.  vi.  2,  viii.  3)  :  The  expression  is 
not  found  in  the  Pentateuch  ;  in  Deut.  iii.  I  8  we  have 
^n  ^?"^3.  It  is  incredible  that  all  the  armed  men 
from  these  tribes  are  here  included.  The  number  of 
fighting  men  in  each  of  these  tribes  is  given  in  Numb. 
xxvi.  7,  1  8,  34,  and  their  aggregate  number  was 
136,930  men,  of  twenty  years  old  and  upward,  able 
to  go  out  to  war  (Numb.  xxvi.  2).  ^21,  therefore,  is 
not  to  be  taken  here  in  its  full  sense.  The  real  number 
which  passed  over  is  stated  in  iv.  I  3  as  forty  thousand. 
Ver.  15.  —  "Until  the  Lord  have  given  .  .  .  rest" 
(cf.  Deut.  iii.  20,  and  see  note  on  ver.  13.  "  Then  ye 
shall  return  "  (Auth.  Ver.).  }  begins  the  apodosis 
(§  155,  i  a,  3rd  par.)  For  the  form  DnipT,  see  §  69, 
3,  Rem.  4,  and  cf.  xxiii.  5  ;  for  ntfv  we  have  n-rnx.,  in 
Josh.  xxii.  4,  9.  The  words  "  toward  the  sun-rising  " 
qualify  the  preceding  "  on  this  side  Jordan"  and  deter- 


26  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  i. 

mine  their  sense,  for  the  phrase  is  in  itself  ambiguous, 
being  sometimes  used  of  cis-Jordanic,  sometimes  of 
trans-Jordanic,  territory  (cf.  Josh.  ix.  I  with  Numb, 
xxii.  i,  xxxii.  32). 

Ver.  1 6. — "  And  they  answered"  etc.  :  The  "they" 
does  not  include  all  the  tribes,  but  only  the  two 
tribes  and  a  half  whom  Joshua  had  just  been 
addressing,  for  such  is  the  natural  and  obvious 
reference. 

Ver.  1 7. — TJ;X:  ^b|,  "  in  all  respects  as  "  :  pi,  "  only": 
here  expressing  with  what  follows  not  a  condition  but 
a  wish. 

Ver.  r  8. — rnp^,  Hiph.  imperf.,  "  shall  rebel  against'' 
"  Thy  commandment "  (cf.,  for  this  meaning  of  '•S, 
Eccles.  viii.  2).  Usually,  as  Keil  remarks,  rnpn,  fol 
lowed  by  this  noun,~is~used  of  rebellion  against  God 
(see  Deut.  i.  26,  43,  ix.  23  ;  i  Sam.  xii.  14),  but 
here  of  rebellion  against  a  ruler.  np-V,  Hoph.  (in 
pause),  "  shall  be  put  to  death  "  :  So  the  Jewish  law 
prescribed  (Deut.  xvii.  12).  The  words  '•'only  be 
strong"  etc.  (cf.  ver.  6)  further  show  the  desire  of 
these  tribes  to  encourage  Joshua  in  his  undertaking, 
and  their  resolve  to  aid  him  and  their  brethren. 

Several  of  the  Christian  Fathers  saw  in  these  two 
tribes  and  a  half  a  type  of  true  believers  under  the 
Old  Testament  dispensation.  Reuben,  Gad,  and 
Manasseh  were  all  elder  sons,  and  the  conduct  of 
their  descendants,  as  here  recorded,  shows  remark 
able  faith  in  the  promises  of  God  and  ready  obedience 
to  His  will.  But  as  these  two  and  a  half  tribes 
had  their  inheritance  assigned  only  to  them  by 
Moses,  but  were  put  into  actual  possession  of  it  by 
Joshua,  so  the  believers  under  the  Old  Testament 


VER.  18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  27 

dispensation  inherited  the  promises  not  through  the 
Law,  but  by  faith  in  the  Messiah  (Heb.  xi.  39,  40). 
See  Origen,  Horn.  3  and  1 6  ;  Bede,  Qu.  in  Josh.,  c.  4 ; 
Theodoret,  in  Josh.  Qu.,  1 6. 


CHAPTER    II. 
VERS.   1-7.  —  The  Mission  of  the  Spies  to  Jericho. 


Ver.  i.  —  IWJJ:  Though  not  grammatically  a  plu 
perfect,  yet  is  so  as  to  sense,  since  it  refers  to  what 
had  occurred  prior  to  i.  1  1  (see  note).  "  Shittiin  " 
(lit.,  the  acacias),  mentioned  in  connection  with  the 
history  of  Balaam  (Numb.  xxv.  i  ;  Micah  vi.  5).  It 
was  not  far  from  Jordan  (sixty  furlongs,  says  Josephus), 
and  was  the  last  place  in  which  the  Israelites  encamped 
in  the  plains  of  Moab.  It  is  called  DWH  hzx,  "the 
acacia  meadow  "  (Numb,  xxxiii.  49),  and  Josephus  is 
supposed  to  refer  to  it  under  the  name  Abila  (Abel, 
"  meadow,"  or  "  moist  place"),  Antiq.,  iv.  8,  i,  v.  i,  i  ; 
Bel.  Jud.  iv.  7,  6.  D^N*  is  rendered  by  the  Sept. 
veavio  KOVS,  under  the  idea  that  they  were  probably 
young  and  active  men,  which,  though  not  implied 
here  in  the  Hebrew  word,  accords  with  vi.  23.  D^J.ID, 
Piel  part,  from  'prj,  to  go,  to  tread,  and  hence  "  to 
explore  "  (cf.  Gen.  xlii.  9  ;  i  Sam.  xxvi.  4  ;  2  Sam. 
xv.  i  o).  tnn,  lit.  "  silence"  but  here  used  as  an 
adverb,  "secretly"  (§  100,  2  b)  ;  the  conjunctive 
accent  shows  that  it  is  to  be  construed  with  "ibNJ?,  i.e., 
Joshua  gave  these  spies  their  directions  in  secret, 
fearing,  perhaps,  that  the  people,  if  they  knew  of  their 
mission,  would  be  alarmed,  as  in  the  time  of  Moses 


23  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  c 

(Numb.  xiv.  i),  by  the  tidings  they  might  bring. 
•IN"},  "  vieiv  ye  "  :  i.e.,  explore  ye  (cf.  Gen.  xlii.  9).  "Even 
\Jericho"  (Auth.  Ver.)  :  The  1.  has  perhaps  the  force 
I  of  especially  (Ges.,  Lex.,  (c},  p.  234).  inn*,  always 
so  s  written  in  this  book,  but  in  the  Pentateuch 
irn>  ;  once  nnn*  (i  Kings  xvi.  34).  The  word 
means,  according  to  some,  "  a  place  of  fragrance," 
from  n-n,  to  breathe  ;  nnn,  to  smell  ;  being  celebrated 
for  its  palms  and  balsam  (Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  lib.  xii., 
cap.  25)  ;  but  the  older  Commentators  and  Gesenius 
derive  it  in  the  form  inn11  from  nT|,  the  moon,  which 
was  the  principal  deity  there  worshipped  x  (cf.  Helio- 
polis,  city  of  the  sun).  It  was  situated  in  a  plain,  and 
was  a  key  to  the  entrance  of  Canaan  on  the  south 
east  side  (Joseph.,  De  Bel.  Jud.,  iv.,  cap.  8,  §  2,  3  ; 
Robinson's  Pales.,  ii.,  p.  523,  etc.,  and  544,  etc.) 
Every  trace  of  the  ancient  town  has  disappeared,  but 
the  present  dirty  and  miserable  village,  called  Erika, 
or  Rika,  by  the  Wady  Kelt,  is  supposed  to  be  near 
the  site.  miT  n^X,  "  a  woman,  a  harlot  "  :  Written 

T  T      •     1 


without  n£>N  in  Gen.  xxxviii.  i  5  ;  Deut.  xxiii.  1  9  ; 
but  with  it,  here  and  in  Judges  xi.  i  ;  Lev.  xxi.  7  ; 
Sept.  yvraifcos  ir6pvT)<$  ;  so  the  Syriac  and  Arabic  ; 
and  in  Greek  Testament,  rj  rropvr)  (Heb.  xi.  31; 
James  ii.  25);  but  an  "  innkeeper"  TravSo/cevrpto, 
(S.  Chrysos.,  Epis.  to  Cor.  ;  the  Targum  ;  Joseph., 
A  ntiq.,  v.,  1,2;  and  some  of  the  Rabbis  and  modern 
Commentators),  as  though  the  word  was  derived  from 
Jit,  to  feed  or  to  nourish,  a  rendering  not  accordant 
with  the  use  of  the  word  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  and 
probably  designed  to  avoid  the  obloquy  implied  in 

1  Or  rather,  Ashtoreth,  of  whom  the  moon  was  a  symbol,  was 
there  worshipped. 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  29 

the  epithet  rnn.  Women,  however,  of  that  class  may 
have  kept  houses  of  entertainment,  as  anciently  the 
women  in  Egypt  (see  Herodotus,  ii.  35).  "  RachabJi  "  : 
Meaning"""  to"  be  wide  or  spacious"  (cf.  the  name  of 
Japheth,  Gen.  ix.  27).  She  is  evidently  the  same  as 
the  Rachabh  mentioned  as  the  wife  of  Salmon  in  the 
genealogy  of  the  Messiah  (Matt.  i.  5),  and  Josephus 
(Antiq.,  v.,  i)  calls  her  r)  Pa^dftrj.  The  Fathers 
regarded  her  as  a  type  of  the  Christian  Church 
(Clemens,  Rom.  ad.  Cor.,  §  12  ;  Justin  Martyr,  c. 
Tryphon.,  §112;  Irenasus,  iv.  37  ;  Origen,  Hom.}  3). 
Probably  she  was  at  this  time  a  believer,  though  she 
had  not  openly  renounced  heathenism  ;  and  the  spies 
may  have  been  directed  to  her  house  by  Joshua,  who, 
having  formerly  visited  the  country  as  a  spy  (Numb, 
xiii.  1 6),  may  have  known  something  of  her  faith  ;  at 
all  events,  the  convenient  situation  of  her  house  on 
the  town  wall,  and  perhaps  the  fact  that  she  may 
have  kept  a  lodging  for  travellers,  easily  accounts  for 
their  coming  thither.  "And  they  lay  doivn  there"  : 
With  the  intention  of  sleeping,  as  they  had  arrived  at 
the  beginning  of  the  night. 

Ver.  2. — "And  it  was  told  the  king-  of  Jericho" : 
Josephus  (Antiq.,  v.,  I,  2)  says  the  news  was  brought 
to  the  king  while  at  supper.  If  Rachabh  kept  a 
house  for  travellers,  some  one  lodging  there  may 
have  informed  the  king,  or,  since  it  was  known  that 
the  Hebrews  were  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan 
watchers  may  have  been  set  at  the  gates  to  report 
any  suspicious  persons  who  entered  in.  "  To-night " 
(Auth.  Ver.),  lit.  "  the  night."  It  appears_  from_ver.  5 
that  it  was  the  beginning  of  the  night,  just  before 
the  gates  were  shut,  isi^,  properly  "  to  dig,"  as  a 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  n. 

_well  or  pit,  and  hence  "  to  explore  "  (cf.  Deut.  i.  22.) 
p$n-n§,  "  the  land" 

Ver.  3. — "  Bring  forth"  \  The  respect  which  is  paid 
in  the  East  to  women's  apartments  explains  why  the 
king's  messengers  did  not  search  the  house.  "  Who 
Tidve  come  to  tJiee  "  :  These  words  are  omitted  in  the 
Sept.  and  Syr.,  perhaps  to  avoid  -tautology. 

Ver.  4. — "  And  the  woman  took  .  .  .  and  hid  them  "  : 
n\h  here  means,  as  in  Esther  ii.  8,  16,  to  bring  or 
to  conduct.  Probably  Rachabh  did  this  before  the 
king's  messengers  arrived,  for  to  have  kept  them 
waiting  at  the  door  would  have  excited  suspicion. 
But  this  is  no  reason  for  rendering  the  verbs  as 
-,  pluperfects.  "  The  historian,"  says  Keil,  "  has 
I  merely  arranged  the  particular  occurrences  in  such 
a  manner  that  he  describes  first  what  was  done  by 
the  king,  and  then  all  that  was  done  by  the  womanj 
The  king  sent  to  Rachabh,  and  commanded  her  to 
deliver  up  the  spies,  but  she  took  them  and  con 
cealed  them,  and  then  said  to  the  servants  of  the 
i  king,  and  so  on."  If  Rachabh  suspected  that, 
information  had  been  sent,  or  might  be  sent,  to  the 
king,  she  would  naturally  at  once  hide  the  spies. 
The  sing,  suffix  in  fJSyfi  is  distributive,  meaning  each 
of  them  (cf.  Deut.  xxi.  10;  Jer.  xxxi.  15).  |3,  so, 
or  it  is  true.  D^'JXn,  "the  men  "  :  i.e.,  those  referred 
to.  \Wft,  "  whence "  :  Everywhere  else  this  word  is 
used  as  an  interrogative.  True  that  in  Psalm  cxxi.  i 
the  Auth.  Vers.  renders  it  as  a  relative,  "whence  cometh 
my  help,"  but  there  also  the  interrogative  sense  is 
better. 

Ver.  5. — Tfap^?  .  .  .  <in.vi,  "and  when  the  gate  was 
about  to  be  shut "  (see  for  this  construction  §  132,  3  ; 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  31 

Rem.,  1,2):  Less  accurately  the  Sept.  renders  by 
eK\eiero,  "  was  being  closed  "  ;  for,  had  the  closing 
actually  begun,  the  spies  in  going  out  could  scarcely 
have  escaped  observation.  ijETia,  "when  it  was  dark" 
(Auth.  Vers.),  not  "  when  it  grew  dusk  "  (De  Wette)  : 
In  the  East  there  is  very  little  twilight,  and  the 
Hebrew  word  for  it,  viz.,  v\$),  sometimes  means  night 
(see  Isa.  v.  1 1,  xxi.  4,  lix.  TO).  "  Purstte ye  quickly"  : 
The  infinitive  "inrp  is  here  used  as  an  adverb.  More 
often  the  finite  verb  which  governs  the  infinitive  is  so 
used  (see  Exod.  ii.  i  8,  and  §  142,  4,  Rem.  i.). 

The  deceit  of  Rachabh  cannot  be  justified  on  the 
ground  of  expediency,  or  of  the  goodness  of  her 
motives.  All  falsehood  must  be  sin  ;  but,  being  in 
her  case  a  sin  of  weakness  and  ignorance,  it  was 
doubtless  pardoned  by  reason  of  her  faith  and 
devotion  to  the  cause  of  God  and  His  people. 

Ver.  6. — Her  mode  of  concealing  the  spies  is 
here  described.  The  roof  was  fiat  (cf.  2  Sam.  xi.  2  ; 
Matt.  x.  27  ;  Acts  x.  9).  The  word  used  throughout 
the  Sept.  for  }\  is  Sw/xa,  which  is  also  used  in 
Luke  v.  19,  xii.  3,  xviii.  31  ;  Acts  x.  9.  By  the  law 
it  was  required  that,  for  safety's  sake,  the  roof  should 
have  a  battlement  (Deut.  xxii.  8).  prn  Wfi?,  lit. 
"m  the  flaxes  of  wood"  i.e.,  "J,n  the  stalks  of  fiax  "  : 
Sept.  iv  rfj  \ivoKa\dpy,  "  the  flax  which  is  not  yet 
removed  from  its  stalk  " ;  Vulg.,  stipula  lini ;  less 
fitly,  "  tree-fax,"  or  "pods  of  cotton"  (Arab.  Vers.).1 
The  flax  (nfltrs  or  nntra)  was  ripe  at  that  season  (the 
month  Nisan)  in  Egypt  (Exod.  ix.  31),  the  climate 

1  So  Gesenkis  (Lex.,  p.  595),  but  the  season  was  early  spring, 
and  cotton  is  not  gathered  till  autumn  ;  it  is  improbable  also 
that  cotton  was  cultivated  in  Palestine  at  so  early  a  period. 


32  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  n. 

of  which  is  nearly  similar  to  that  of  Canaan  ;  and  in 
both  countries  it  grows  more  than  three  feet  in 
height,  with  a  stalk  as  thick  as  a  cane.  Rachabh 
was  probably  a  manufacturer  of  linen,  'rh  nirnyn, 
"which  were  set  in  order  for  Jier  upon  the  roof"  :  viz., 
for  the  purpose  of  being  dried  in  the  sun  ;  *  nb  is 
here  a  dativus  connnodi. 

Ver.  7.  —  "And  the  men":  i.e.,  those  sent  by  the 
king  of  Jericho.  '»n  i\~p,,  "  the  way  of  tJte  Jordan  "  : 
Accus.  denoting  the  direction  taken  (§  118).  '»n^>y: 
The  jprep.  ^r  does  not  here  denote  •"  beside  "  or  "  near 
to"  nor  ir,  "  as  far  as"  nor  ~^K,  "  towards  ;  "  but 
retains  its  primitive  meaning  "j22£f"  (Keil).  The 
words  should  be  connected  with  the  foregoing,  e.g., 
"  The  way  of  the  Jordan  over  the  fords"  i.e.,  which 
led  over  the  fords  ;  Vulg.,  "  per  viam  quae  ducit  ad 
vadum  Jordanis."  The  fords  meant  were  opposite 
Jericho,  and  are  called  in  Judges  iii.  28  "  the  fords  of 
for  dan  towards  Moab."  It  is,  however,  improbable 
that  the  pursuers  crossed  the  fords,  for  the  Israelitish 
camp  was  in  the  vicinity,  -nap,  "  they  shut  "  :  The 
indeterminate  third  person  (§  137,  3).  "iE'N.3  nqx  is 
an  unusual  form  for  Tj'xpnqx  (§  155,  2  c;  cf.  T^  |5"nn.x, 
Gen.  vi.  4).  The  gates  were  shut  in  case  the  spies 
should  be  yet  in  the  town,  but  the  narrative  which 
follows  shows  how  useless  was  such  a  precaution. 

VERS.  8-21.  —  Rachabh  helps  the  Spies  to  escape,  liaving 
first  stipulated  with  them  for  the  Security  of 
Herself  and  Family. 

Ver.  8.  —  nng,  "  not  yet"  :   Lit.  "  a  cutting  off,"  fol- 


1  This  custom  is  alluded  to  by  Josephus,  Ant.,  v.,  i,  §  2. 


VERS.  9,  10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  33 

lowed  by  an  imperfect  coming  within  the  sphere  of 
the  past,  "  and  they  had  not  yet  laid  down"  (§  127, 
4,  a  ;  and  Ges.,  Lex.  [3],  p.  325)  :  It  seems  that  they 
intended  to  sleep  upon  the  roof,  a  common  practice 
in  the  East. 

Ver.  9. — The  V?,  which  thrice  follows  ^lj  in  this 
verse,  means  "  that "  =  quod,  as  often  after  verbs  of 
knowing  (§  I  5  5,  I,  <?,  3rd  par.).  "Jehovah":  This  cove 
nant-name  of  the  God  of  Israel  she  may  have  heard  of 
by  report,  and  may  here  use  without  a  knowledge  of  its 
import :  see  ver.  1 1,  where  she  only  speaks  of  Jehovah  ; 
as  a  God  (Elohim)  "  in  heaven  above  and  upon  the 
earth  beneath"  "  Your  terror "  :  i.e.,  that  of  which 
you  are  the  object,  or  which  you  inspire  (§  121,  5). 
•IMo;,  "  have  melted  away  "  :  Niph.  of  MO,  to  flow,  to 
flow  down,  a  metaphor  taken  from  the  melting  of  ice 
or  snow,  or  of  wax  before  the  fire.  Like  expressions 
to  those  in  this  verse  are  found  in  Exod.  xv.  15,  r  6, 
where  we  have  a  prophecy  of  which  we  here  see  the 
fulfilment.  DS/JSpp,  "because  of  you"  (Auth.  Vers.)  : 
or  "from  the  face  of  you"  i.e.,  "  before  you  "  (cf.  ver.  I  o, 
where  the  Sept.  has  CXTTO  TrpocrwTrov  v/jL^f}. 

Ver.  10. — '3,  "for":  This  verse  gives  the  reason 
why  Rachabh  knew  that  Jehovah  had  given  the 
land  of  Canaan  to  the  Israelites,  viz.,  the  great 
miracles  which  He  had  wrought  for  them,  two  of 
the  most  striking  of  which  are  here  mentioned. 
-C'N.  n«  (see  §  155,  i,  e,  3rd  par.)  epD-D',  lit.,  "the 
sea  of_weeds,"  Coptic,  Schari-sea  (weedy,  or  reedy  sea), 
/>.,lhe~Arabian  Gulf,  which  abounds  in  seaweed  ; 
always  in  the  Sept.  17  IpvOpa  OaXacrora,  except  in 
Judges  xi.  1 6,  where  ^ID  is  rendered  2u<£.  "  Stch&n" 
lit,  "  a  sweeping  away,"  i.e.,  a  leader  carrying  every- 

3 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  n. 

thing  before  him,  rt.  n-1D,  i.q.,  nnp,  to  wipe  away. 
"  'Ogk"\  Hebrew  Ml?,  perhaps  contracted  from  33'y,  piy, 
i.e.,  in  stature,  long-necked,  gigantic  (Ges.,  Lex.}. 
Hercules,  thought  to  be  the  same  with  Joshua,  is  by 
Lucian  (In  Hercule}  called  Ogmius,  from  slaying  Og, 
as  is  supposed  (Dickenson,  Delph.  Phmiic.,  c.  4,  p.  44). 
D^Pinn,  "ye  devoted"  or,  "ye  put  under  a  ban"  from 
Dnn,  properly,  "  to  shut  up  "  (cf.  D'nri,  a  net),  hence  "  to 
prohibit  to  common  use,"  "  to  consecrate  ; "  and  in 
Hiphil,  "  to  dedicate  to  God  in  an  irredeemable 
manner,"  whence  "to  extirpate,"  "to  destroy  utterly" 
(cf.  Auth.  Vers.),  because  the  unholy  object  so  dedi- 
rated  was  abominable  to  God,  and  could  not  be  used 
in  His  service  (Lev.  xxvii.  29  ;  Deut.  vii.  23,  etc.). 
For  the  events  alluded  to  in  this  verse,  see  Exod. 
xiv.  i  5,  etc. ;  Numb.  xxi.  24-35  '•>  Deut.  ii.  31,  iii.  10. 
31:  Ver.  11. — BB£,  Niph.  imperfect  from  Dpn,  to  melt, 
to  flow  down  (see  on  M»,  ver.  9,  and  cf.  v.  i,  vii.  5). 
n»frfc6i:,  "  and  tJiere  remained  not "  :  Dip,  "  to  stand," 
and  hence  "  to  remain."  n-n,  "  courage  "  (Auth.  Vers.) ; 
or,  more  simply,  "breath?  from  n-n,  to  breathe.  In 

1  Kings  x.  5,  nearly  the  same  expression  is  used  of 
great  astonishment. 

In  her  confession  at  the  end  of  the  verse  Rachabh 
seems  to  contrast  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah  with  that 
of  the  heathen  deities,  who  were  supposed  to  preside 
over  particular  localities  only  ;  but  she  was  not  yet  so 
enlightened  as  to  acknowledge  Him  the  one  only  true 
God  (cf.  Deut.  iv,  39).  Note,  however,  the  different 
effect  produced  upon  her  and  her  countrymen  by  the 
reports  they  had  heard  :  in  her  they  wrought  faith  ; 
in  them  terror  and  astonishment  (cf.  Luke  ii.  34  ; 

2  Cor.  ii.  1 6). 


VERS.  12,  13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  35 

Ver.  12. — 13  is  either  here  causal,  and  =  because 
["  since  "  (Auth.  Vers.)],  or,  is  introductory  to  the  oath 
and  =  that,  e.g.,  "  sivear  unto  me  .  .  .  that  I  have 
shown  you  kindness,  and  ye  vvill  also  show  kindness  " 
(i.e.,  according  to  the  English  idiom,  "  that  as  I  have 
shown  kindness  to  you,  so  you  will  also  show  kind 
ness,"  etc.),  and  zvill  give  me  a  token  of  truth,  and 
will  save  alive  .  .  .  and  will  deliver','  etc.  Here  all 
the  verbs  which  follow  •llp^n  are  subordinate  to  it, 
and  dependent  upon  •'3,  though  the  three  last  may  be 
rendered  as  imperatives  [e.g.,  " and  give"  " and  save 
alive"  etc.],  and,  therefore,  as  co-ordinate  with  W?s;n, 
and  independent  of  the  l)3.  n»$  rrux,  "a  sign  (or  token) 
of  truth "  :  Keil  identifies  this  token  with  the  oath 
itself,  which  the  spies  were  required  to  take,  but  thus 
there  seems  to  have  been  no  occasion  for  mentioning 

^ 

it  separately,  as  it  would  have  been  implied  in  thv 
words,  "  Swear  unto  me  by  the  Lord."  Rather,  rm 
means  here,  as  often  in  Scripture,  something  outward 
and  visible  (cf  2  Kings  xx.  8,  9  ;  Isa.  vii.  1 1,  14, 
xxxviii.  7,  22  ;  and  cr^juetbz'  in  Luke  ii.  12  ;  2  Thess. 
iii.  17),  and  was  the  token  referred  to  in  ver.  18. 
True  that  the  spies  were  let  down  from  the  window 
by  Rachabh  before  she  had  received  this  token,  but 
this  may  be  easily  accounted  for  on  the  supposition 
that  after  their  oath  (ver.  14)  she  was  satisfied,  and 
at  once  lowered  them,  whereupon  they  gave  her  the 
outward  pledge  which  assured  safety  to  herself  and 
relatives. 

Ver.  13. — This  verse  explains  more  fully  the  ex 
pression  "  my  father's  house  "  in  ver.  1 2,  and  indicates 
that  she  had  neither  husband  nor  children.  Drvn.ni., 
"and  (that)/*?  will  save  alive"  (cf.  note  on  ver.  12). 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  n. 

The  usual  pointing  („...)  is  changed  to  the  shorter  (...) 
(§  27,  Rem.  5),  after  \  consec.  Drf?  "iK;K.-^3  :  Not  their 
material  property,  but  the  children  and  other  relatives 
of  her  brothers  and  sisters  (see  vi.  23,  25).  -l^nb'jpa  : 
The  plural  suffix  shows  that,  though  in  the  previous 
part  of  the  verse  she  speaks  of  her  relatives  only,  she 
included  herself  among  them.  Yet  her  unselfishness^ 
which  is  one  of  the  signs  of  a  true  conversion,  beauti 
fully  appears  in  this  part  of  the  narrative. 

Ver.  1 4. — n-1»b  •  •  •  •1J^?5,  lit.,  "  our  life  instead  of 
you  to  die  "  :  A  form  of  oath  by  which  they  invoked 
the  vengeance  of  Jehovah  on  themselves  if  they  proved 
false  to  their  word.  A  more  frequent  form  is  "  as  thy 
soul  liveth"  (i  Sam.  i.  26,  xvii.  55,  xx.  3  ;  2  Kings 
ii.  24).  The  pi.  m.  suffix  in  D^nnn  refers  to  Rachabh 
and  her  father's  house.  To  this  oath  is  annexed  the 
condition,  "  if  ye  tell  not  (lit.,  if  ye  bring  not  to  light) 
this  our  business"  njm,  "  and  it  shall  be"  (§  126,  6, 
Rem.  2),  rnrp  nns,  "when  Jehovah  shall  give"  (§  132,  2). 
The  infinitive  here  expresses  future  time.  -13*^1 :  The 
1.  equals  then,  and  introduces  the  apodosis.  new  ipD, 
"  mercy  and  truth  "  :  Not  an  hendiadys  for  "  sincere 
kindness,"  which  rendering  weakens  the  sense,  but 
kindness  together  with  fidelity  in  the  performance  of 
their  promise. 

Ver.  15. — ^2113,  the^  article  in  the  prep.  .may_  refer, 
says  Lyra,  to  a  rope  by  which  Rachabh  had  before 
been  wont  to  draw  up  or  let  down  those  who  visited 
her.  ny?,  through  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  This  prep.,  according 
to  Ges.  (Lex^  is  derived  from  an  obsolete  verb  *W3, 
"  to  be  without  "  (opposed  to  "  to  be  within  "),  "  to  be 
near  or  beside."  Often  it  may  be  rendered  "  behind" 
as  in  Gen.  xxvi.  8  ;  Judges  iv.  28  ;  and  so  perhaps 


VER.  16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  37 

here,  as  implying  that  Rachabh  stood  behind  the 
window  (|t?nn)  whilst  lowering  the  spies.  Prof.  Lee 
says  (Hcb.  Lex?)  that  the  cognate  word  in  Arabic 
means  "  after  "  or  "  behind."  Cf.  the  account  of  the 
escape  of  David  (i  Sam.  xix.  12),  and  of  St.  Paul 
[2  Cor.  xi.  33,  where  the  words  Sta  9 vp  1809 
(through  a  little  door  or  aperture)  e'^aXacr^v,  are 
similar  to  the  Sept.  Vers.  here,  viz.,  /care^ctXacrev 
avrous  8ta  TT}?  #vpiSo<?].  St.  James  (ii.  25)  alludes 
to  this  window  or  aperture,  when  he  speaks  of  Rachabh 
as  "  having  thrust  forth  (e/c/3a,Xovcra)  the  spies  erepa 
68c3,  "  by  another  way"  i.e.,  other  than  that  by  which 
they  had  come,  njpfnn  "Vp^,  "  on  the  side  of  the  wall"  : 
•vp  here  answers  to  the  Latin  paries,  Greek  rot^O9, 
but  iTpin  to  mums  and  ret^o?.  In  Exod.  xxx.  3, 
nTVp  is  rendered  "sides"  by  English  version.  The 
city  wall  appears  to  have  formed  the  back  wall  of 
Rachabh's  house.  niT^T  NTi,  "  sJie  was  dwelling"  The 
opinion  of  Masius  and  others  that  this  verse  has  been 
transposed,  and  ought  to  follow  verse  20,  is  not  recon 
cilable  with  the  use  of  the  perfect  "  thou  didst  let  us 
down "  (ver.  1 8),  which  shows  that  the  spies  had 
been  let  down  before  the  conversation  recorded  in 
vers.  16-20. 

Vers.  1 6. — rnnn,  "to  the  mountains":  The  sing. 
in  is  here  used  coll.  Jericho  was  surrounded  by 
mountains  on  the  north,  south,  and  west  ;  those  here 
referred  to  were  probably  situated  on  the  northern 
side,  and  were  the  jagged  range  of  the  white  limestone 
mountains  of  Judaea,  afterwards  called  Quarantania 
(Arabic,  Kuruntul],  from  the  belief  that  they  were 
the  scene  of  our  Lord's  forty  days'  temptation  ;  they 
rise  from  1,200  to  1,500  feet  above  the  sea,  and 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  n. 

abound  in  caves  (Robinson,  ii.,  p.  289  ;  Dean  Stanley, 
Syria  and  Palestine,  p.  307-8).  Dparui,  "  and  hide 
yourselves  "  :  Niph.  perf.  with  1  consec.  of  the  imper., 
from  nan,  i.q.,  to  hide  ;  (  -  )  for  ( .)  before  the  guttural 
n  (§  22,  2,  a). 

Ver.  17. — "  We  (are]  free  from  this  thy  oath  which 
thou  hast  made  us  to  swear "  [supply,  "  unless  thou 
observest  the  following  conditions]  ;  n^3  (in  the  passive) 
"  to  be  cleansed  or  freed  from  pollutiqni"_hence  "  to 
be  accounted  innocent  or  guiltless  ;  "  here,  therefore, 
D*P.3;  followed  by  jp  means  pure  or  free  from  the  guilt 
of  having  violated  our  oath  (cf.  ver.  19  ;  Gen.  xxiv. 
8,  41  ;  Numb,  xxxii.  22).  n$n,  with  a  fern. _ noun 
is  an  anomaly,  explained  by  Trie  fact  that  nt  is  often 
used  without  regard  to  gender  (Ewald,  LJirb.,  §183,  a). 
•IjflyaJf'n  :  The  more  usual  form  of  the  2nd  pers. 
sing,  f.  with  suffix  would  be  •U'wyatpn,  or,  without,.' 
•uriyaspn  (cf.  Jer.  xv.  i  o  ;  Cant.  iv.  9  ;  Exod.  ii.  i  o)  ; 

'  but  the  masc.  form  is  here  used  (§  59,  4,  with  Farad. 

i  C.,  p.  280-1),  or  the  suffix  -13—  is  joined  to  the  Jem. 

form,  Jjipaipn  (Lee's  Hcb.  Gr.,  Art.  209,  8). 
a.qn  Ver.  1 8. — fnxa  •  •  •  s§s,  lit.  "  Behold  !  we  coming 
into  this  land"  i.e.,  when  we  shall  have  entered  into  this 
land  :  The  apodosis  follows  in  the  next  clause.  n:jn 
•  •  •  rilprrnx,  "  the  line  of  this  crimson  thread]'  i.e.,  this 
line  spun  out  of  crimson  thread  :  The  gender  of  the 
pronoun  is  here  determined  by  the  uomen  rectum  (Ewald, 
Lchrb.,  §  307,  c).  nippi  is  =  ip.  or  mp,  a  line,  rt.  njpr,  to 
twist  ;  in  Psalm  xix.  5,  according  to  Ges.  and  Simonis, 
"  the  string  of  a  harp,"  whence  the  Sept.  </>#dyyos,  but 
more  usually  "  a  measuring  line."  Here,  probably, 
not  identical  with  the  cord  or  rope  by  which  Rachabh 
had  lowered  the  spies,  for  which  a  different  term  (^n) 


VERS.  19,  21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  39 

is  employed.     So  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Schulz,  Maurer,  and 
Keil  (Comment.,  1857).      The  spies  may  have  given 
this  line  to  Rachabh  by  fastening  it  to  the  rope  by 
which  they  had  been   lowered,  which  she  then  drew 
up  to  the  window  where  she  was  standing.     W  equals 
*y$  nyjW  (Exod.  xxv.  4),  the  cochineal  or  coccus  ilicis, 
an  insect  from  which  this  crimson  colour  is  procured. 
T^'S'  refers  to  the  "  window,"  not  the  "  cord  "  (cf.  Sept.). 
In  -larrnin,  the  (. .)  takes  the  place  of  ( . )  (§  59,  4).    The 
bright   crimson   colour  of   this  rope  would  render  it 
a  very   conspicuous   object,  but  it  was  more  than  a 
pledge  of  the  preservation  of  the  life  of    Rachabh 
and   her   relatives.       Christian   expositors,  from   the  j 
days  of  the  Apostles,  have  regarded  it  as  a  type  of 
salvation  by  the  blood   of  Christ.      See,  for  the  use 
of  scarlet  in  rites  of  purification  for  sin,  Levit.  xiv. 
4,  6,  5  i  ;  Numb.  xix.  6. 

Ver.  19. — rvm  (cf.  note  ver.  14).  With  the  ex 
pression  TCMO?  1KH,  cf.  12  VEH  (Lev.  xx.  9,  1 1- 1  3,  1 6). 
The  fuller  form  used  here  by  Joshua  occurs  also  in 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  4. 

Ver.  21. — N-in  |3,  "so  it  is"  i.e.,  so  let  it  be. 
Dnf^Jjil,  "and  she  dismissed  them  "  :  Not  meaning,  as 
some  think,  that  she  lowered  them  from  the  window, 
or~that  had  been  already  done  (see  note  ver.  12). 
"  And  she  bound"  etc.:  Perhaps  not  immediately,  but' 
when  the  Israelites  advanced  against  the  city  ;  for, 
though  a  crimson  line  would  have  been  less  con 
spicuous  than  a  crimson  cord,  yet  it  might  havei 
excited  suspicion,  and,  moreover,  as  a  means  of 
security  was  not  at  once  necessary.  The  historian, 
says  Keil,  mentions  the  circumstance  here  for  the 
purpose  of  bringing  the  subject  to  a  close. 


40  7UE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in.. 


VERS.  22-24.  —  Return  of  the  Spies  to  Joshua. 


Ver.  22.  —  nnnn,  see  on  ver.  16. 

Ver.  23.  —  •'naiw,  "and  crossed  over"  viz.,  the  Jordan, 
as  is  evident  from  the  context.  DnfN  n'isyterrb'a,  "  all 
that  befell  them."  xyn,  followed  by  an  accus.  of  the 
person,  often  means  "  to  overtake,"  or  "  to  befall  any 
one"  (Ges.,  Lex.,  3,  p.  499  ;  cf.  rn(3,  Gen.  xlii.  29). 
"Ver.  24.  —  %  "truly"  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  But  rather 
"  tliQt"  quod,  as  often  in  quotations  (§  155,  i,e,  a;  cf. 
i  Sam.  x.  19  ;  Ruth  i.  10).  D31:,  "and  also"  rather 
than  "jfor  even  "  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  The  wojdsjollowing 
are  a  quotation  of  those  of  Rachabh  (ver.  9). 


CHAPTER  III. 

VERS.  1-6. — Preliminary  Regulations  for  the  Passage 
of  the  Jordan. 

Ver.  i. — This  verse  properly  belongs  to  chap.  ii. 
DSK'fi,  the  verb  is  used  in  Hiph.  only,  and  is  a  denom. 
of  D3^  and  means  lit.  "  to  put  a  load  on  the  shoulder 
of  beasts  of  burden,"  which  among  nomads  was  done 
very  early  in  the  morning.  The  word  is  sometimes 
used  without  "ij?33  (e.g.,  in  Gen.  xix.  2  ;  Exod.  xxxii. 
6  ;  Josh.  viii.  14),  sometimes  with,  as  here  and  in 
Gen.  xix.  2,  27,  xx.  8,  xxii.  3.  Here  perhaps  "1(533 
is  used  to  signify  that  the  removal  of  the  camp  took 
place  in  the  twilight  or  early  dawn.  Wpfi,  "and  they 
broke  up  their  encampment  " :  tfD3,  to  pull  up  the  stakes 
of  a  tent.  DWno  (see  ii.  i).  '»rr"ii; :  The  prep,  can 
here  mean  only  "  near  to"  not  "  to  the  actual  brink  ;  " 
otherwise  the  distance  of  two  thousand  cubits  between 


VEKS.  2,  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA,  41 

the  ark  and  the  camp  could  not  have  been  kept 
(ver.  4).  -13^1,  "and  they  tarried":  Vulg.,  "  morati 
sunt,"  viz.,  for  three  days  (ver.  2).  f6,  properly,  "  to 
pass  the  night,"  frequently  means  "  to  tarry "  (cf. 
Prov.  xv.  31  ;  Psalm  xxv.  13,  xlix.  13  ;  Job 
xli.  14). 

Ver.  2. — D»pj  •  •  •  nypn,  lit.,  "from  the  end  of  three 
days"  i.e.,  after  three  days,  or  at  the  end  of  the  third 
day  (see  note  on  i.  1 1).  Dnp'^n  (see  i.  10).  ten  Z'ipl, 
"through  tlie  midst  of  the  camp"  (cf.  i.  1 1). 

Ver.  3. — Dajtfra  :  Some  MSS.  read  tnriioa.  Of  the 
two  particles  ?  prop,  expresses  indefinite  time,  "  when 
ye  see"  or,  "  at  the  sight  of ;  "  ?  definite  time,  "  wliilst 
ye  see"  (Ewald,  Lchrb.,  §  221  and  327,  ^.)  ;  yet  this 
distinction  is  not  always  observed.  "  Ark  of  the 
covenant" :  The  symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence  (Numb. 
x.  33),  called  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  because  it 
contained  the  Law,  which  was  the  covenant  between 
God  and  the  people.  "  The  priests- — the  Levites" 
(cf.  viii.  3  3).  Vulg.,  "  sacredotes  Leviticae  stirpis  ;  " 
the  Sept.,  Chald.,  Syr.,  and  several  Hebrew  MSS. 
arbitrarily  interpose  ]  ;  but  the  word  "  Levites  "  is 
evidently  put  in  apposition  to  the  word  "  Priests," 
probably  to  distinguish  the  priests  of  true  Leviticalj 
descent  from  the  unlawful,  non-Levitical  priests,  who 
may  at  this  time  have  sprung  up.  For  the  same 
reason,  perhaps,  the  like  expression  so  often  occurs  in 
the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  whereas  in  the  earlier 
books  of  the  Pentateuch  the  priests  and  Levites  are 
generally  mentioned  apart.  To  bear  the  ark  was 
indeed  one  of  the  duties  of  the  Levites,  but  that  it 
was  sometimes  undertaken  by  the  priests  is  evident 
not  only  from  this  passage,  but  from  vi.  6  ;  2  Sam. 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 

xv.   24;    I    Kings  viii.    3.       Wpn  DFiNI.,  lit.,   "  then  ye 
shall  break  up  "   (cf.  ver.  I ). 

Ver.   4. — T]X,  only,      pin")  is   generally  used   as   an 
adjective,  but  here  as  a  substantive,  of  the  form  1123, 
(Parad.,  iii.),  "  a  distance  "  (cf.  the  use  of  ecr^arov  in  a 
substantive    sense,     I    Peter    i.   20  ;    Alford).       The 
Kethibh  wa,  is  probably  more  correct  than  the  Qeri 
V^2,  the  plural  YV2  being  almost  exclusively  restricted 
to  those  cases  in  which  the  suffix  also  has  the  plural 
sense   (Ewald's  LeJirbucJi,    §    266,   a).     ''About  two 
thousand  cubits"  which,  according  to  rabbinical  tra 
dition,  was  the  distance  between  the  Tabernacle  and 
the  furthest  point  of  the  camp  in  the  wilderness,  and 
the  prescribed  distance  for  the  suburbs  of  Levitical 
cities  (Numb.  xxxv.  5) ;  afterwards  called  a  Sabbath- 
day's  journey  (Acts  i.  12).      This,  if  we  reckon  the 
cubit  at  twenty-one  inches,  would  be  five  furlongs  and 
twenty  feet,  or  a  little  more  than  five-eighths  of  a 
mile.     This  distance  was  to  be  observed  not  merely 
out  of  reverence  for  the  ark,  but  that,  as  they  came 
down  the  heights  above  the  Jordan,  they  might  see 
the  direction  they  were  to  take,  and  how  a  way  for 
them    through    the    waters    would    be    miraculously 
opened.      DC?<>K>  blDJ59,    lit.,  "  since  yesterday  and  (the 
third  day,  i.e.}  the  day  before  _yesterday"  (Ges.,  Lex.  ; 
cf.  Gr.,  §   155,  I,  d).      The  form  blOJlX,  which  occurs 
in  I  Sam.  iv.  7,  x.  1 1,  xiv.  21,  xix.  7  ;  2  Sam.  v.  2  ; 
Micah    ii.    8  ;     Isa.  xxx.    33,    is   not    found    in   the 
book  of  Joshua,  nor  in  the  Pentateuch  (see  Gen.  xxxi. 
2  ;  Exod.  iv.  10,  v.  8  ;    Deut.  xix.  6  ;   Josh.  iv.  1 8, 
xx.  5).     The  expression   refers  not  merely  to  time 
just  past,  but  to  any  more  remote  period,  as  in  Gen. 
xxxi.  2,  5  ;  Ruth  ii.  1 1,  etc.;  cf.  \0itp,  /ecu  7rpa>'i£a,  (//., 


VERS.  5-8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  43 

ii.  303),  where  the  reference  is  to  many  years  past. 
The  "  way  "  here  meant  is  that  miraculous  passage 
which  the  ark  would  open  for  the  Israelites. 

Ver.  5- — "  Sanctify  yourselves"  cf.  Exod.  xix.  10, 
though  we  may  suppose  that  there,  as  here,  the 
command  relates  to  spiritual,  as  well  as  outward, 
purification,  viz.,  to  that  preparation  of  the  heart 
implied  in  a  belief  of  God's  promises,  and  a  readi 
ness  to  do  His  will.  "  To-nwrow":  Which,  according 
to  iv.  19,  would  be  the  tenth  day  of  Abib  or  Nisan. 
ntK^J  is  used  also  in  Exod.  iii.  20,  xxxiv.  10,  con 
cerning  the  miracles  which  God  covenanted  to 
perform  for  His  people  (cf.  Psalm  ix.  i). 

Ver.  6. — The  command  issued  by  Joshua  in 
this  and  the  previous  verse,  and  the  prediction 
of  the  miracle  (ver.  5)  show  that  he  had  already 
received  his  instructions  from  God.  The  concluding 
sentence  of  the  verse  anticipates  the  course  of  events, 
for  it  is  unlikely  that  the  command  of  God  to 
Joshua  (vers.  7,  8),  and  Joshua's  address  to  the 
people  (vers.  9-13)  were  delivered  after  the  priests 
had  once  set  forward  with  the  ark.  It  is  a  custom, 
says  Keil,  peculiar  to  Hebrew  historical  literature, 
to  mark  the  close  of  each  section  by  a  sentence 
embracing  the  whole  transaction,  and  forming  a 
temporary  conclusion.  Hence  the  repetitions  which 
occur  in  this  and  the  next  chapter. 

VERS.  7,  8  (Je/iovah  encourages  Joshua}.. — Ver. 
7. — ^,  "  I  will  begin":  Hiph.  future  of  hhr\.  The 
passage  of  the  Jordan  was  the  first  of  that  series 
of  wonders  which  Jehovah  was  about  to  perform, 
in  order  to  put  His  people  into  possession  of  the 
Promised  Land.  One  great  design  of  it  is  here 


44  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 

intimated,  viz.,  the  establishment  of  the  authority  of 
Joshua  (iv.  14),  just  as  the  miracle  at  the  Red  Sea 
established  the  authority  of  Moses.  A  second  design 
is  mentioned  in  ver.  10,  and  a  third  may  be  inferred 
from  v.  i.  ~i£\S,  "m  order  that." 

Ver.  8. — nFkX),  emphatic,  n.yp,  lit.,  "  the  extremity 
of"  refers  not  to  the  opposite  bank,  but  to  that  on 
the  east  side,  at  which  the  Israelites  were  ;  here 
equal  to  "  tJie  border"  or  "  beginning  of"  (cf.  ver.  i  5 
with  Exod.  xvi.  3  5).  "  Yc  shall  stand  still"  :  The  object 
of  their  doing  so  was  not  to  mark  out  to  the 
Israelites  the  ford  by  which  they  were  to  pass,  but 
to  form  a  dam,  as  it  were,  against  the  force  of  the 
water,  which  was  miraculously  arrested  in  its  course, 
and  piled  up  in  a  heap.  The  command  itself  was  a 
trial  of  the  faith  of  the  priests  ;  and  the  safety  of 
the  ark,  which  they  carried  on  their  shoulders,  may 
be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  safety  of  Christ's 
Church  amid  the  dangers  which  surround  it. 


VERS.  9-13  {Joshua  encourages  tJie  People], 
— Ver.  9. — wz  for  -it^i  (cf.  Ruth  ii.  14  ;  i  Sam.  xiv. 
38),  from  tT33,  the  accent  retracted,  because  the  fol 
lowing  word  is  accented  on  the  penultima  (§  29,  3,  b] ; 
the  half  vowel  (:)  gives  place  to  f  (§  29,  4,  b}. 

Ver.  i  o. — A  second  design  of  the  miracle  (see  on 
ver.  7).  nit?,  "  by  this"  viz.,  the  miracle  announced 
in  ver.  1 1.  bx,  from  ?W,  to  be  strong,  is  used  of  the 
true  God  in  two  hundred  and  four  passages  of  the  Old 
Testament.  sn,  "  living,"  opposed  to  idols  which  are 
D^x,  "  nothings"  (Psalm  xcvi.  5)  and  D^2ri,  "breaths" 
(Deut.  xxxii.  21  ;  cf.  i  Cor.  viii.  4,  x,  19).  Render 


VER.  10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  45 

"  a  Living  God  "  (cf.  Psalm  xiii.  2,  Ixxxiv.  2  ;   Hosea 
i.  10  ;  the  only  other  places  where  the  same  form  of 
expression  occurs).      This  Living  God  is  a  personal 
Being,  and,  therefore,  very  different  from  "  Chance"  or 
the  "  Order  of  Nature"     DJJHi??,  "  in  the  midst  of  you" 
i.e.,  so  as  to  protect  and  to  powerfully  aid  you.     "And 
zvill  certainly  drive  out "  (see  for  this  force  of  the  infin. 
absol.,  §  131,  3,  #).      trnin,   "to   cause  a  person    to 
possess,"  and  hence  "  to  drive  out  another  in  order  to 
v,  make  room  for  him."      "  The  Kenaanite"  (lit.,  a  low- 
lander,  rt.  ws),  used  here  coll.  (§  109,  i),  though  the 
Hebrews  have   also  the  form  D'jyjs.     In   its  widest 
sense  the  term   includes  all  the  people  of  Canaan, 
but  here  is  limited  to  the  tribe  which  dwelt  on  the 
Mediterranean  coast,  and  in  the  valley  on  the  west 
of  Jordan  (cf.  Numb.  xiii.  29;Deut.  xi.  30;  Josh.  v.  i). 
"  The  CJiittite  "  :  A  people  who  dwelt  at  first  in  the 
south  of  the  Promised  Land,  chiefly  in  the  mountain 
ous  parts,  near  to   Hebron   (Gen.  xxiii.   3,   7),  and 
perhaps   extended    as   far  as  Beersheba  (Gen.  xxvi. 
33,  34).      In  Numb.  xiii.  29  they  are  mentioned  as 
inhabiting  the  hill  country.      At   a    still   later  period 
they,  or  at  least  a  portion  of  the  tribe,  seem  to  have 
been  settled  in  the  north  of  Palestine,  on  the  borders 
of  Syria  (see  Judges  i.  26  ;  i  Kings  x.  29  ;   2  Kings 
vii.  6).     These   have   been  supposed   identical  with 
the  Katti,  mentioned  in   the  Assyrian  inscriptions  as 
dwelling  in   the  valley  of  the   Orontes   (see  Art.  on 
Hittites    in    Dr.  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}.      In  Josh.  i.  4 
they  are  put  for  all  the  nations  of  Canaan.     "  The 
Chivvite"  from   n-jn  =  =  mn,  a  family  or  tribe  (Ges., 
Lex}  ;    they    dwelt   near   to  Shechem  (Gen.  xxxiv. 
2),  and   at   Gibeon  (Josh.  ix.  7,  xi.  19),  also  at  the 


46  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 

foot  of  Hermon  and  Antilibanus  (Josh.  xi.  3  ;  Judges 
iii.  3).  They  appear  to  have  been  a  peaceable 
people,  addicted  to  the  pursuits  of  trade  and  com 
merce.  "  The  Perizzite  " :  A  people  not  mentioned  in 
Gen.  x.  among  the  descendants  of  Canaan,  and, 
therefore,  perhaps  not  of  Hamitic  origin,  though  fre 
quently  enumerated  among  the  nations  inhabiting 
Canaan  (see  Gen.  xiii.  7,  xv.  20  ;  Exod.  iii.  8,  17). 
Gesenius  and  Hengstenberg  suppose  them  to  have 
had  their  name  from  their  living  originally  in  un- 
walled  villages  (mnf,  from  T~|,  to  separate),  and 
addicting  themselves  to  agriculture  and  the  rearing 
of  cattle  ;  but  they  also  appear  to  have  lived  in 
mountains  and  woods  (see  xi.  3,  xvii.  15).  The 
Girgashite  ["  dwelling  in  a  clayey  soil  "  from  c^na, 
clay  (Ges.,  Lcx^]\  mentioned  in  Gen.  x.  1 6,  xv.  2 1  ; 
Deut  vii.  I ;  Josh.  xxiv.  1 1  ;  I  Chron.  i.  1 4 ;  Neh.  ix.  8 ; 
but  nothing  is  known  as  to  their  exact  position  and 
character  (Joseph.,  Antiq ,  i.,  6,  §  2).  According  to 
an  Armenian  tradition  they  migrated  in  the  days  of 
Joshua  to  Armenia.  It  would  seem  from  Josh. 
xxiv.  1 1  that  they  were  on  the  west  of  Jordan.  The 
Emorite  (Gen.  x.  1 6)  :  Mountaineers  or  highlanders, 
from  ")b$,  elevation  (Simonis  and  Gesen.),  for  thus  they 
are  frequently  described  as  dwelling  in  the  mountains 
(Numb.  xiii.  29  ;  Deut.  i.  20,  44  ;  Josh.  x.  6,  xi.  3). 
They  were  the  most  powerful  of  all  the  nations  of 
Canaan,  and  first  inhabited  the  mountainous  region 
afterwards  occupied  by  the  tribe  of  Judah,  where 
they  were  subject  to  five  kings  (Gen.  xiv.  7,  i  3)  ;  and 
thence  many  of  them  passed  over  Jordan,  made  war 
on  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites,  and  seized  on 
Heshbon  and  Bashan,  and  all  the  country  between 


VER.  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  47 

the  rivers  Jabbok  and  Arnon,  which  lands  Moses 
wrested  from  them,  and  gave  to  the  tribes  of  Reuben 
and  Gad,  and  to  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  (Numb. 
xxi.  26-29  with  Deut.  xxix.  7,  8).  The  prophet 
Amos  (ii.  9)  speaks  of  their  gigantic  stature  and 
strength.  Frequently  their  name  is  used  to  denote 
the  Canaanites  universally  (Gen.  xv.  16,  xlviii.  22; 
Josh.  xxiv.  1 8  ;  Judges  vi.  10,  etc.).  The  Y'bMsite 
(Gen.  x,  1 6)  :  A  small  mountain  tribe,  whose  principal 
city  was  Yebhus,  (lit.,  "  a  place  trodden  down,"  as  a 
threshing  floor,"  rt.  D13,  to  tread  with  the  feet ;  or 
meaning  in  Canaanitish  "  the  waterless  "  hill),  after 
wards  Jerusalem,  from  the  fortress  or  citadel  of 
which  they  could  not  be  expelled  till  the  time  of 
David  (2  Sam.  v.  6).  With  a  slight  variation  in  the 
order,  the  same  list  of  seven  races  is  given  in  Deut. 
vii.  i  (see  also  Josh.  ix.  I,  xi.  3,  xxiv.  1 1).  The 
remnants  of  five  of  them  are  mentioned  in  i  Kings 
ix.  2  i  as  forced  to  labour  for  Solomon. 

Ver.  1 1 . — "  The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of 
tJie  whole  earth"  :  So  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  Syr.,  and  Arab., 
but  since  in  the  Hebrew  there  is  a  great  distinctive 
accent  over  nn?n,  Masius  takes  {Hx*  as  a  noun  in 
apposition  to  the  foregoing  "  ark  of  the  covenant  ;  " 
it  seems,  however,  inappropriate  to  speak  of  the  ark, 
though  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence,  as  "  The 
Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  Others,  as  Kimchi,  repeat 
;n$  before  JIT^,  e.g.,  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  ark 
of  the  Lord,"  etc.  ;  but  Keil  rightly  remarks  that  the 
words  are  all  dependent  on  one  another,  but  the  first 
two  are  drawn  more  closely  together,  so  as  to  express 
a  single  idea,  and  are  specially  defined  by  the  article, 
whilst  the  connexion  between  the  second  member  of 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 


|the  constructive  state  (f^xrra  )n$)  and  the  first  is 
blackened  in  consequence,  which  the  punctators  indi- 
,cated  by  the  zaqeph-qaton  between  the  two  members. 
The  title  here  given  to  God,  viz.,  "  The  Lord  of  the 
whole  earth,"  occurs  elsewhere  five  times  only  in  the 
Old  Testament,  viz.,  in  v.  13  ;  Micah  iv.  3;  Zech. 
iv.  14,  vi.  5.  It  was  well  suited  to  encourage  the 
Israelites  when  about  to  enter  on  the  conquest  of 
Canaan.  n")-3>  "  int°  (Auth.  Vers.),  not  through  (as 
Vulg.)  the  Jordan  "  :  For  the  ark  did  not  go  before  the 
Israelites  from  one  bank  of  the  Jordan  to  the  other, 
but  remained  stationary  in  the  river  (see  vers.  8,  I  5). 

Ver.  1  2.  —  Though  the  command  in  this  verse 
appears  again  in  iv.  2,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
(as  Meyer)  that  it  has  been  here  inserted  by  the  mis 
take  of  some  ancient  copyist,  or  that  the  author 
anticipated  the  order  of  events.  Joshua  gave  the 
command  doubtless  by  God's  direction,  for  the  next 
verse  shows  that  he  was  divinely  inspired,  nrii;  is 
emphatic,  denoting  the  time  when  the  election  was 
to  take  place,  viz.,  before  the  crossing  began,  that 
the  twelve  men,  as  representatives  of  the  people, 
might  be  eyewitnesses  of  the  miracle,  and,  having 
taken  their  station  near  Joshua  and  the  bearers 
of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  might  be  at  hand  to 
execute  the  orders  afterwards  given  them  (iv.  3).  So 
Keil.  -inp,  "  take  yc"  i.e.,  "  choose  ye,"  imper.  of  r^h. 
"  T*welve  men  out  of  the  tribes  of  Israel":  In  all  matters 
which  concerned  the  entire  nation  we  find  that  all  the 
tribes  were  represented  (cf.  viii.  33  ;  Numb  xiii.  2  ; 
i  Kings  xviii.  31).  The  word  BT^',  here  used  for 
tribe,  means  literally  a  rod  or  sceptre  ;  it  is  employed 
in  the  historical  portions  of  this  book  to  denote  a 


VERS.  13,  14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHbA.  49 

tribe  in  its  political  or  corporate  sense,  as  being  under 
one  sceptre,  and  is  thus  distinguished  from  nap,  a 
term  used  in  the  geographical  chapters  of  the  book, 
and  denoting  a  tribe,  as  genealogically  descended 
from  one  stem  or  root.  The  different  meaning,  there- 
1  fore,  of  these  words  furnishes  no  ground  for  the  sup 
position  of  some  that  the  history  was  compiled  from 
the  narratives  of  two  different  authors. 

Ver.  i  3. — 131  D.'sn  are  put  in  apposition  to  jTvn  '». 
Render  "  the  ivaters  of  Jordan  shall  be  cut  off,  vis., 
tJie  waters  wJiich  come  down  from  above,  and  they  shall 
stand  in  one  heap "  (or,  "  as  one  heap ").  So  the 
Chald.,  Arab.,  and  Luther,  though  the  two  latter  for 
perspicuity  omit  the  words  "»n  *p.  Less  fitly  the 
Sept.  and  Vulg.  regard  WO  'Vi  Q*on  as  a  nom.  absol., 
and  I.  before  -1"ip^  as  a  sign  of  the  apodosis  or  sub 
ordinate  clause;  e.g.,  "as  to  the  waters  which  come 
down  from  above,  they  shall  stand"  etc.  "  Shall  be 
cut  off,"  i.e.,  so  as  no  longer  to  flow  down  from  above. 
nnx*  T! :  Accus.  (§  1 1 8),  defining  the  shape  the  waters 
assumed.  Gesenius  renders  "  like  one  heap  "  (Lex.}  ; 
the  expression  is  evidently  poetic,  and  taken  from 
Exod.  xv.  8  (cf.  Psalm  xxxiii.  7,  Ixxviii.  i  3),  where 
it  is  used  of  the  waves  of  the  sea. 

VERS.  14-17. — Commencement  of  the  Passage. 
The  apodosis  to  vers.  14,  15  begins  at  ver.  16.  In 
the  second  hemistich  of  ver.  14  either  the  substantive 
verb  should  be  understood  before  the  participle,  e.g., 
"  and  tJie  priests  (were)  carrying"  etc.,  or  rw.3  should 
be  repeated,  e.g.,  "  and  when  the  priests  set  out  carry 
ing"  etc.  On  the  construction  Jinan  .  .  \s'^3,  see 
§  i  T  o,  2,c.  Some,  as  Prof.  Lee  (Hcb.  Gr.,  Art.  221,6), 

4 


50  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 

suppose  an  ellipsis  of  jfn^  before  nn?n,  "  the  bearers  of 
the  ark,  the  ark  of  tJie  covenant"  (cf.  Exod.  xxxviii.  2  l). 
Ver.  15. — In  the  second  clause  the  construction  is 
changed  from  the  infinitive  to  the  finite  verb  (-l^jipj), 
as  frequently  in  Hebrew  (§  132,  Rem.  2  ;  cf.  iv.  18, 
x.  20).  The  meaning  of  the  last  clause  is  correctly 
given  by  Auth.  Vers.,  "for  the  Jordan  overflowed  all 
its  banks"  ?y  means  "  over"z  not  "  against,"  or  "up 
to,"  implying  merely  (according  to  the  rendering 
of  the  Sept.  and  Vulg.)3  that  the  Jordan  ran  with 
full  banks,  or  was  brimful.  "  There  are,  as  it  were, 
two  banks  to  the  Jordan.  The  first  is  that  of  this 
river  in  its  natural  state,  the  second  is  that  of  its 
overflowings  "  (Calmet's  Diet.}  So  Kitto  :  "  On 
leaving  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth  the  river  enters  a 
very  broad  valley  or  Ghor,  within  which  valley  there 
is  a  lower  one,  and  within  that,  in  some  parts, 
another  still  lower,  through  which  the  river  flows  ; 
the  inner  valley  is  about  half  a  mile  wide,  and  is 
generally  green  and  beautiful,  covered  with  trees  and 
bushes,  whereas  the  upper  or  large  valley  is  for  the 
most  part  sandy  or  barren.  In  the  season  of  flood, 
in  April  and  early  in  May,  the  river  is  full,  and  some 
times  overflows  its  lower  banks,  to  which  fact  there 
are  several  allusions  in  Scripture  (Josh.  iii.  1 5  ; 
I  Chron.  xii.  15;  Jer.  xii.  5,  xlix.  19,  1.  44)." 
(Encyclop.  of  Bib.  Lit}  TVpr  ^3,  "  all  the  days  of 
harvest"  (accus.  of  time,  §  1 1  8,  2)  :  Barley-harvest 

1  Or  literally,  "  wa  s  filled  over"  (Keil) ;  cf.  Ges.,  Lex.,  on 

*6o(2),  p.  473. 

2  As  in  Isa.  viii.  7,  the  Euphrates  "  shall  come  ii-p  over  (?V) 
all  its  channels  and  go  over  (IV)  all  its  banks." 

Sept.,  67rXr;poi)  naff  oA^i/  TT]V  KprjTrifta  avrov  ;   Vulg.,  "  Jordanis 
autem  ripas  alvei  sui  tempore  messis  impleverat." 


VER.  16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  51 

is  meant,  which  took  place  in  the  month  called 
Abib,  the  month  of  ears,  Tnxn  tsnh  (Exod.  xiii.  4), 
and  afterwards  Nisan  (Neh.  ii.  i  ;  Esther  iii.  7), 
beginning  at  the  new  moon  of  April,  the  first  month 
of  the  old  year,  as  instituted  when  the  Israelites 
came  out  of  Egypt  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  15  ;  Deut. 
xvi.  i).  The  overflow  of  the  Jordan  is  owing  to 
the  melting  of  the  snow  of  Hermon  during  the  hot 
days  of  April.  When  the  melted  snow  has  filled  the 
lakes  of  Merom  and  Tiberias,  the  flood  is  discharged 
in  a  torrent  through  the  Jordan  into  the  Dead  Sea. 
At  such  a  season  the  river  is  impassable  by  any  of 
the  usual  fords,  and,  therefore,  the  passage  of  the 
vast  host  of  the  Israelites  through  it  was  clearly 
miraculous. 

Ver.  1 6. — "tn^"t?.  (see  ver.  i  3).  According  to  Keil 
and  others,  the  Kethibh  0^?,  "  at,"  or  "  near  Adam," 
is  a  better  rendering  than  the  Qeri  Enxo,  "  from 
Adam,"  the  meaning  being  (say  they)  that  the  I 
waters  stood  in  a  heap,  very  far  from  the  spot  where 
the  Israelites  crossed,  near  Adam.  The  Qeri,  how 
ever,  is  followed  by  the  Auth.  Vers.,  the  Vulg.,  '„ 
and  other  ancient  versions,  and  expresses  the  more 
general  and  popular  view,  viz.,  that  the  waters  were 
piled  up  in  one  continuous  heap  in  the  rear  of  the 
place  of  crossing,  where  the  priests  stood  with  the 
ark,  and  as  far  as  the  city  Adam,  where  the  current 
of  the  stream  from  above  was  arrested.  As  the  bed 
of  the  river  lies  greatly  beneath  the  level  of  the 
country,  such  a  pile  of  water  may  have  been 
attended  with  little  or  no  inundation.  This  view 
accords  with  what  Keil  himself  says  on  ver.  8  (see 
note  above),  also  greatly  heightens  the  impressive- 


52  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  in. 

ness  of  the  miracle,  and  explains  the  haste  of  the 
children  of  Israel  to  effect  the  passage  (iv.  10), 
which  would  have  been  hard  to  account  for,  if  the 
waters  had  receded  as  far  as  Adam.  This  city,  the 
name  of  which  may  have  been  derived  from  the 
colour  of  the  clay  in  the  neighbourhood,  is  now 
unknown,  and  is  mentioned  here  only  ;  its  position  is 
further  defined  by  the  words  "  the  city  which  is  beside 
Zarctan  "  (Tsarethan).  This  latter  is  probably  the 
same  as  that  in  I  Kings  vii.  46,  and  identical  with 
the  modern  Kurn  Sartabch,  a  lofty,  rocky  ridge, 
about  seventeen  miles  north  of  Jericho  (Robinson, 
Knobel).  As  the  rocks  here  on  both  sides  converge 
and  contract  the  valley  to  its  narrowest  point,  it 
seems  to  have  been  a  suitable  place  for  damming  up 
the  waters.  Render  the  next  clause,  "  and  those 
which  were  coming  down  to  tlic  sea  of  tJie  plain^  the  sea 
of  salt,  were  altogether  cut  off"  -1BF1  here  serves  for 
an  adverb  (§  142,  3,  &).  "  TJie  sea  of  the  Arabah 
(or  Desert-plain),"  (cf.  xii.  3).  Sept.,  TT)^  OaXao-crav 
"Apafia  ;  Vulg.,  "  mare  solitudinis."  The  word  nzny, 
derived  from  niy,  to  be  dry,  arid,  was  the  name 

/  given,  in  its  widest  sense,  to  the  Ghor,  or  deep 
valley,  extending  from  Mount  Hermon  even  to  the 
CElanitic  Gulf;  but  in  its  more  limited  sense  to  the 
district  which  extends  along  the  valley  of  the  Jordan, 

"from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Lake  of  Gennesareth, 
about  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  length,  and 
now  called  by  the  Arabs  El  GJwr  (see  Dean 
Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine,  Appendix,  p.  48/).1 

1  This  deep  valley  lies  625  feet  below  the  Mediterranean, 
where  the  Jordan  leaves  the  Sea  of  Gennesareth,  and  1231  feet 
where  it  empties  into  the  Dead  Sea.  In  it  there  is  no  tillable 


VER.  17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  53 

At  the  present  day  the  Arabs  confine  the  name 
Arabah  to  that  portion  of  the  Ghor  which  lies  south 
of  the  Holy  Land  (Clarke's  Biblical  Atlas,  note  p, 
13).  "The  sea  of  salt"  :  The  usual  and  perhaps  most 
ancient  name  (Gen.  xiv.  3).  According  to  Josephus, 
this  sea  or  lake  is  five  hundred  and  eighty  furlongs 
in  length,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  breadth. 
Now  called  the  Dead  Sea  (a  name  not  found  in  the 
Bible,  but  first  used  in  Greek  by  Pausanias,  and  in 
Latin  by  Justin)  ;  in  Arabic  Bahr  Lut,  the  "  Sea  of 
Lot "  (Smith's  Bib.  Dict^ 

Ver.  1 7. — "  In  the  midst  of  Jordan,  i.e.,  not  in  the 
mid-channel,  but  in  the  bed  of  the  river,  as  opposed  to 
its  bank  (so  in  iv.  3,  8,  1 8),  —  "in  Jordan"  iii.  8 
(cf.  Ezek.  xxvi.  5,  where  Tyre  is  described  as  "in  the 
midst  of  the  sea,"  though  it  was  but  a  short  distance 
from  the  continent).  }5n,  "firmly"  Hiph.  infin.  absol. 
taken  adverbially  (§131,2).  n-i  :  A  word  often  used 
in  the  singular  to  denote  the  Israelitish  nation  (see 
Exod.  xix.  6,  xxx.  13  ;  Josh.  iv.  I,  v.  6,  8,  x.  13),  but 
in  the  plural  the  Gentiles,  or  nations  of  the  earth,  as 
distinguished  from  the  Jews  (e.g.,  in  Psalm  ii.  I,  ix.  5, 
15,  17).  TDl^  -IBfi,  lit,  "  had finished  crossing"  (cf. 
iv.  i,  v.  8). 

soil,  except  at  Bethshean,  in  the  north,  and  about  Jericho,  at 
the  south  end  of  the  Ghor  (Von  Raumer,  p.  58).  The  word 
"Arab"  comes  from  the  same  root,  and  denotes  an  inhabi 
tant  of  a  dry,  arid  region. 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  LCHAP-  IV- 

CHAPTER  IV. 
VERS.  I- 1 8. — Completion  of  tJic  Passage. 

Ver.  i. — "And  it  came  to  pass  .  .  .  tJiat  JeJwvaJi 
spake  unto  Joslma"  :  As  the  command  of  Jehovah  to 
Joshua  (vers.  1-3)  has  not  been  expressly  mentioned 
before  (see  iii.  12),  Knobel,  Bleek,  and  Maurer  sup 
pose  that  we  have  here  the  blending  of  two  separate 
accounts  ;  while  others,  e.g.,  Kimchi,  Calvin,  Masius, 
and  Rosenm.,  regard  ver.  1^-3  as  parenthetical,  and 
render  "ipN»i  in  the  pluperfect  ("  Now  Jehovah  had 
spoken,"  etc.),  the  apodosis  to  the  first  hemistich  of 
ver.  i  commencing,  according  to  them,  at  ver.  4  ; 
but,  as  in  i.  1 1,  ii.  i,the  order  of  thought,  rather  than 
of  time,  seems  to  be  followed,  so  likewise  here.  The 
sacred  writer,  wishing  to  give  due  importance  to  the 
particular  incident  he  is  about  to  relate,  represents  it 
not  merely  as  having  been  commanded  by  Joshua, 
but,  as  it  really  was,  by  Jehovah  Himself.1 

The  Pisqua  (o)  at  the  end  of  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  i  is  an  old  pre-Masoretic  mark,  denoting  a 
pause  in  the  middle  of  the  verse  (see  marg.  note), 
and  the  commencement  of  a  parashah  or  section. 

1  "  So  far  as  the  meaning  is  concerned,  Kimchi,  Calvin, 
and  many  others,  were  perfectly  correct  in  taking  vers.  \b — 3 
as  a  parenthesis,  and  rendering  "TON*1  as  a  pluperfect,  though, 
grammatically  considered,  and  from  a  Hebrew  point  of  view, 
the  historical  sense  with  ' '  Vav ' '  consec  does  not  correspond  to 
our  pluperfect,  but  always  expresses  the  succession  either  of 
time  or  thought.  This  early  Hebrew  form  of  thought  and 
narrative  is  completely  overlooked  by  Knobel,  when  he  pro 
nounces  i  £-3  an  interpolation  from  a  second  document,  and 
finds  the  apodosis  to  ver.  la  in  ver.  4." — Keil. 


VERS.  2-6.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  55 

Ver.  2. — -inp  (cf.  iii.  12):  Though  the  command 
was  given  to  Joshua,  the  plural  is  here  used,  because 
the  twelve  men  were  to  be  chosen  by  the  tribes  them 
selves  (cf.  iii.  12),  but  subject,  doubtless,  to  Joshua's 
approbation,  and,  therefore,  spoken  of  in  ver.  4  as 
"prepared "  by  him. 

Ver.  3. — ISO,  lit,  "the  standing  place  (of)":  From 
nV3,  to  set,  to  place,  pn,  firmly  (cf.  iii.  1 7) :  Connected 
here  with  2->'£>p,  e.g.,  "from  tJic  spot  wJiere  tlie  priests' 
feet  stood  firm  ;  "  so  Auth.  Vers.,  Maurer,  Gesen,  Keil. 
Others,  Walton  (/Wj'^Rosenm.,  regard  it  as  a  gerund, 
"  praeparando,  aptando,"  and  as  referring  to  the  selec 
tion  of  suitable  stones  ;  Sept.,  erot/xous  SoiSe/ca 
XiOovs ;  Vulg.,  "  duodecim  durissimos  lapides  ; " 
Syr.,  "  parate  duodecim  lapides."  "And  lay  down" 
lit.,  "  make  to  rest."  "  In  the  lodging-place"  i.e.,  in  the 
place  of  encampment,  viz.,  Gilgal  (ver.  20).  DJTfK  : 
m.  pron.  (§  117,  2)  referring  to  fern,  noun  [D^D^,  fern, 
with  plural  m.  ending]  (§  121,6,  Rem.  i)  ;  cf.  nr  for 
rust  (ii.  17). 

Ver.  4. — 'N^l,  "and  Joshua  called":  \  does  not 
commence  the  apodosis,  and  =  "  tJicn "  (Auth. 
Vers.),  see  note  on  ver.  i.  "  Whom  he  had  prepared"  : 
see  note  on  ver.  2.  Probably  these  twelve  men  had 
not  crossed  over  with  the  rest  of  the  Israelites,  but 
remained  with  Joshua  on  the  hither  bank  of  the 
river,  waiting  to  receive  his  orders. 

Vers.  6,  7  (The  Object  of  tJie  Divine  Command 
stated?)  — JiNT,  this,  viz.,  their  taking  of  twelve  stones 
with  them,  and  setting  of  them  up.  ""3,  "  wJien  yoiir 
children  shall  ask"  etc.  (cf.  Exod.  xii.  26,  etc.  ;  Deut. 
vi.  20,  21).  ino,  "  in  future  time"  (cf.  xxii.  24  ;  Gen. 
xxx.  33;  Exod.  xiii.  14).  no,  "  ivhat"  is  rarely 


56  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  iv. 

pointed  with  (  T  )  before  a  word  beginning  with  n?  as 
here  and  in  ver.  21  (see  §  37,  I,  Rem.) 

Ver.  7. — T^,  "t/iat"  (Auth.  Vers.)  ;  Sept.,  STL, 
after  a  verb  of  saying  (cf.  Esther  iii.  4)  ;  but  Vulg. 
" quia"  as  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  27  ;  I  Kings  viii.  33.  The 
words  "  tJie  waters  .  .  .  were  cut  off"  are  repeated  for 
emphasis.  "  SJiall  be  for  a  memorial"  (cf.  Numb, 
xvii.  5  [xvi.  40,  A.  V.]  ;  Psalm  cxi.  4).  "For  ever"  : 
i.e.,  to  all  posterity. 

Ver.  8. — What  was  done  by  the  twelve  men  is  here 
ascribed  to  "  the  sons  of  Israel"  because  the  former 
having  been  chosen,  each  from  a  tribe,  were  repre 
sentatives  of  all  the  people.  For  the  masc.  suffix  in 
D-1"Q1V!  and  in  D-ina*,  referring  to  a  fern,  noun,  see  §121, 
6,  Rem.  i.  "  There"  i.e.,  in  Gilgal,  as  the  place  of 
their  encampment  was  afterwards  called  (ver.  20). 
The  word  -in^  denotes  that  at  first  they  only  deposited 
the  stones,  afterwards  they  set  them  up  as  a  memorial 
(see  the  word  D'j?n,  ver.  2O).1 

Ver.  9. — It  is  evident  that  the  twelve  stones  men 
tioned  in  this  verse  were  different  from  those  in  ver. 
8,  otherwise  the  article  would  not  have  been  omitted, 
and  the  verse  would  have  begun  with  the  historical 
Dj?.»T1.  To  mark  this  difference,  the  Sept.  inserts  ctXXovs 
(Vulg.,  alias}  before  SwS.  Xi^ou?.  These  stones  may 
have  been  collected  by  the  people  from  the  adjacent 
fields.  The  verse  is  not  a  gloss,  as  some  think,  for  it 
occurs  in  all  MSS.  and  versions  (so  Keil,  p.  120). 

1  Besides  being  a  memorial  of  the  literal  passage  of  the 
Jordan,  these  stones  may  have  been  typical  of  the  testimony 
borne  by  the  preaching  of  the  twelve  apostles  to  that  still 
greater  event,  our  true  Joshua's  victorious  passage  through 
the  Jordan  of  death,  and  His  opening  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  to  all  believers. 


VER.  io.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  57 

"  In  tJte  midst  of  Jordan"  see  on  iii.  17.  "  Unto  t/iis 
day"  i.e.,  to  the  time  when  the  writer  of  this  book 
lived.  As  a  memorial  these  stones  indicated  the 
exact  place  of  the  crossing,  as  those  at  Gilgal  the 
place  where,  after  the  crossing,  the  Israelites  first 
encamped.  x 

Ver.  io. — u  And  the  priests — (were)  standing."  In 
the  next  clause  D'n,  infin.  of  DOPi,  is  used  intrans.  Tn, 
either  "  word  "  or  "  tiling."  "A ccording  to  all  that  Moses 
commanded":  refers  not  to  any  special  commands  of 
Moses  about  the  crossing,  but  indicates  that  Joshua's 
obedience  to  the  commands  of  the  Lord  accorded  with 
the  injunctions  given  by  Moses.  "And  tJic  people 
hasted"  etc. :  Such  haste  was  necessary,  not  only 
because  the  priests  bearing  the  ark  were  to  remain 
standing  till  all  the  people  should  have  crossed 
(Knobel),  or  because  the  people  may  have  feared  a 
sudden  return  of  the  waters  (see  note  on  iii.  16),  but 
because  the  passage  had  to  be  completed  by  so  vast 
a  multitude  in  one  day  (Keil). 

1  Keil  well  remarks  that  "  the  monument  did  not  fail  of  its 
object,  even  if  it  only  existed  for  a  short  time.  The  account 
of  its  erection,  which  was  handed  down  by  tradition,  would 
necessarily  help  to  preserve  the  remembrance  of  the  miracu 
lous  occurrence.  Nor  can  it  be  absolutely  affirmed  that  these 
stones  would  be  carried  away  at  once  by  the  stream,  so  that 
they  could  never  be  seen  any  more.  As  the  priests  did  not 
stand  in  the  middle  or  deepest  part  of  the  river,  but  just  in  the 
bed  of  the  river,  and  close  to  its  eastern  bank,  and  it  was  upon 
this  spot  that  the  stones  were  set  up,  and  as  we  neither  know 
their  size  nor  the  firmness  with  which  they  stood,  we  cannot 
pronounce  any  positive  opinion  as  to  the  possibility  of  their 
remaining.  It  is  not  likely  that  they  remained  there  for  cen 
turies  ;  but  they  were  intended  rather  as  a  memorial  for  the 
existing  generation  and  their  children,  than  for  a  later  age, 
which  would  be  perpetually  reminded  of  the  miraculous  help 
of  God  by  the  monument  erected  in  Gilgal." 


58  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  iv 

Ver.  II. — "In  the  presence  of  the  people"  (Auth. 
Vers.)  :  But  as  ^57  elsewhere  in  this  book  means 
"before"  (see  iii.  6,  14,  vi.  4,  6,  7,  8,  9),  the  same 
sense  should  perhaps  be  retained  here,  the  meaning 
being  that  the  priests  crossed  the  river,  and  passed 
through  the  multitude  on  the  opposite  bank,  till  they 
took  up  their  station  in  front  of  the  people.  Vulg., 
"  ante  populum." 

Vers.  12,  13. — •1"i?^?l  :  The  imperfect  herewith  \ 
consec.  denotes  not  the  order  of  time  but  of  thought 
(cf.  iv.  i).  The  author,  having  stated  that  all  the 
people  crossed,  while  the  priests  bearing  the  ark 
stood  in  the  river,  takes  occasion  here  to  add  that 
the  tribes  of  Reuben,  Gad,  etc.,  had  obeyed  the  com 
mands  of  Moses  (Numb,  xxxii.  20,  29)  by  crossing 
over  before  their  brethren.  D^'pn  (see  i.  14). 

Ver.  13. — "  Prepared  for  tJie  war":  evtftivot  eis 
[^oi^rjv  (Sept.)  :  The  participle  b*y^q  is  derived  by 
Gesenius  from  fbn,  "  to  be  active,"  "  to  be  manful  ;  " 
but  see  for  another  derivation  note  on  i.  14.  "  The 
plains  of  Jericho "  formed  the  higher  terrace  of  the 
Ghor  or  Jordan  valley,  where,  by  the  retreat  of  the 
mountains  of  Judaea,  it  widened  towards  the  west,  and 
is  about  seven  miles  broad.  The  plural  "  araboth " 
is  always  used  without  the  article  (cf.  v.  10,  xiii. 
3  2 ;  Dean  Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine,  Appendix, 
§  10).  From  the  palm-trees  which  flourished  in  those 
plains  Jericho  derived  its  name  of"  the  city  of  palms" 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  3  ;  Judges  i.  16,  iii.  13  ;  Josephus, 
Bel.  Jud.,  iv.,  8,  §  3). 

Ver.  14. — Cf.  iii.  7  (note). 

Vers.  15-18. — The  crossing  of  the  priests  with 
the  ark  had  been  already  recorded  (ver.  1 1),  but  as  a 


VERS.  16-19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOSHUA.  59 

leading  feature  in  the  narrative  it  is  again  mentioned 
here  with  additional  particulars,  which  clearly  show 
that  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  by  the  Israelites 
must  have  been  miraculous, 

Ver.  1 6. — rvnyn,  "the  testimony"  rt  "M,  "to  say 
again  and  again,"  "  to  affirm  strongly  "  :  The  name 
"  ark  of  the  testimony  "  denoted  that  the  Tables  of 
the  Law,  kept  in  the  ark  (Exod.  xxv.  16),  con 
tained  the  testimony  of  Jehovah  against  sin  in  man  ; 
(cf.  what  is  said  of  the  whole  book  of  the  Law,  which 
was  laid  up  by  the  side  of  the  ark,  Deut.  xxxi.  26, 
27).  fe  :  The  )  =  "  that"  Lat,  ut  (§  i  55,  I,  e\  cf. 
Judges  xiv.  15  ;  I  Sam.  xi.  12). 

Ver.  1 8. — The  verb  -ipflJ  with  "7$  has  a  pregnant 
sense,  viz.,  "  were  plucked  up  (from  the  muddy 
channel)  and  set  on  (the  dry  ground),"  (§  141). 
"  As  heretofore"  (see  note  on  iii.  4).  hy,  over  (cf. 
iii.  15). 

VERS.  19-24. — Erection  of  the  Memorial  at  Gilgal. 

Ver.  1 9. — "  The  first  month,"  i.e.,  Abib,  afterwards 
called  Nisan  (see  end  of  the  note  on  iii.  15).  The 
year  is  not  mentioned,  but  it  appears  to  have  been 
the  fortieth  after  the  exodus  (cf.  v.  6).  If,  therefore, 
we  assume  the  date  of  the  exodus  to  be  1491  B.C. 
(Usher),  that  of  the  invasion  of  Canaan  would  be 
145  i  B.C.  "  The  tenth  day"  i.e.,  the  same  day  of  the 
month  on  which  the  paschal  lamb  was  set  apart  to 
be  killed  on  the  fourteenth  (see  Exod.  xii.  3).  Thus 
the  Israelites  were  reminded  that  their  departure  out 
of  Egypt  and  their  entrance  into  Canaan  were  owing 
to  God's  redeeming  mercy.  So,  under  the  Gospel, 
our  salvation  from  first  to  last  is  the  fruit  of  Christ's 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  iv. 

atonement.  "  In  [the]  Gilgal"  (lit,  a  circle  or  wheel, 
rt.  7^|,  to  roll,  generally  with  the  art.  when  a  place  ; 
(see  Gr.,  §  109,  3)  :  So  called  by  anticipation  (see  v. 
9).  It  was  apparently  on  a  hillock  or  rising  ground, 
and,  according  to  Josephus  (Antiq.,  lib.  v.,  cap.  I, 
§  4),  was  fifty  stadia,  or  about  five  miles  (Dean 
Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine,  p.  307),  from  the  river 
Jordan,  and  ten  stadia  from  Jericho.  Here  the  camp 
of  the  Israelites  remained  for  some  time,  and  was 
probably  fortified  ;  also  the  Tabernacle  was  set  up, 
though  afterwards  removed  to  Shiloh  (viii.  i).1 

Ver.  20. — D*j?n,  "erected"  or  "setup"  as  a  memo 
rial.  The  stones  had  before  been  merely  deposited 
(ver.  8). 

Ver.  21. — Yj'g,  "  w/icn  "  :  Sept.,  OTO.V,  Vulg., 
quando  (cf.  Levit.  iv.  22),  though  it  less  often  than 
*3  bears  this  sense  (§  155,  I,  e}.  With  this  verse 
cf.  ver.  6. 

Ver.    23. — x;:x,    '•'because":    (Chald.     and     Syr.) 

1  The  site  thus  chosen  for  the  encampment  has  been  for 
tunately  identified,  after  more  than  three  thousand  years,  by 
the  intelligent  labours  of  the  members  of  the  Palestine  Survey. 
The  name  Jiljulieh,  which  is  the  same  word  as  Gilgal,  still 
clings  to  a  mound  about  three  miles  south-east  from  the  spot 
where,  apparently,  the  city  of  Jericho  must  have  stood,  near 
the  beautiful  fountain  known  as  the  Sultan's  Spring,  and  close 
to  the  steep  background  of  the  limestone  hills  of  Judah.  The 
host  of  the  Hebrews,  at  the  camp  thus  chosen  for  them,  were 
about  five  hundred  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  Jordan,  and  had 
the  stream  from  the  Wady  el  Kelt  close  on  the  south.  The 
river  they  had  crossed  lay  underneath  them,  about  four  and 
a-half  miles  to  the  east.  An  open  plain  stretched  on  all 
sides,  and  permitted  free  movement ;  the  wall  of  the  hills  of 
Judah,  rising  one  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  camp, 
at  the  distance  of  about  three  miles  to  the  west.  (Conder's 
Tent  Work,  p.  201,  f.  ;  Palestine  Fund  Large  Map  of 
Palestine,  ^heet  18  ;  Geikie's  Hoiirs  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii., 
P-  391)- 


VER.  24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  61 


"  quia  "  (Vulg.).  »^5IpV.,  "  until  we  had  passed 
over"  :  The  suff.  of  the  infin.  refers  to  the  Israelites 
as  being  essentially  the  same  nation  as  that  which 
came  out  of  Egypt. 

Ver.  24.  —  It  is  here  declared  that  the  miracle  was 
to  serve  a  twofold  purpose,  viz.,  (i)  To  impress  the 
heathen  with  a  sense  of  the  omnipotence  of  Jehovah  ; 
(2)  To  keep  the  children  of  Israel  steadfast  in  the 
fear,  i.e.,  the  worship,  of  their  God  (cf.  Exod.  xiv.  31). 
'NH  ifty-hs,  "  all  JJie  peoples  of  the  earth  "  :  There  seems 
no  reason  here  to  limit,  with  Keil,  the  term  "  crcts  "  to 
the  land  of  Canaan,  for  though  in  v.  I  the  Canaanites 
are  mentioned  as  an  example  of  the  effect  produced 
by  the  miracle,  yet  it  was  one  example  out  of  many 
more  to  follow.  "  The  hand  of  Jehovah  .  .  .  tniglity  " 
(cf.  Exod.  iii.  19,  vi.  i)  :  In  the  last  clause,  for  D.pNT 
Ewald,  Maurer,  and  Knobel  would  read  DriK*v,  the 
infin.  construe.,  with  plur.  masc.  suffix,  "  tJiat  tJicy  [the 
heathen]  may  fear  ;"  but  the  perfect,  says  Keil,  may 
be  here  used  to  express  the  speaker's  certainty  of  the 
duty  of  such  holy  fear  ;  to  which  the  heathen  could 
not,  as  the  Israelites,  be  suitably  exhorted.  Further, 
all  the  ancient  versions  follow  the  reading  in  the  text. 
D^rr^a,  "  ahvays  "  :  cf.  T^/xara  Travra,  in  the  Greek 
poets. 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  v. 


CHAPTER    V. 

VER.  i. —  The  Effect  of  tJie  Invasion  on  tJie 
Inhabitants  of  the  Land. 

Concerning  the  Emorites  and  Canaanites,  see  iii.  10 
(note).  Here  the  former  stand  as  the  representatives 
of  the  highlanders,  the  latter  of  the  lowlanders. 
;»n  151;?,  "  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan  "  :  Not 
referring  to  the  country  on  the  east  side  of  the 
Jordan,  as  in  i.  14,  15,  but  on  the  west  ;  hence  the 
addition  of  n»}  (cf.  ix.  i,  xii.  7,  xxii.  7).  "iy\v;  nx  (cf. 
ii.  10).  •IJ'ilir'iy,  "until  we  had  passed  over"  :  The 
Qeri  reads  cmy,  so  the  ancient  versions,  and  some 
MSS.,  but  a  change  of  persons  is  common  in  Hebrew 
(§  137,  Rem.  3  ;  cf.  v.  6  below).  The  expression 
seems  that  of  an  eyewitness,  but  we  cannot,  says 
Keil,  infer  from  it  either  that  the  book  was  written 
by  Joshua  himself,  or  that  it  was  composed  during 
his  lifetime.  The  historian  may  have  spoken  col 
lectively,  just  as  Joshua  (in  iv.  23)  refers  to  what  he 
and  a  few  of  his  contemporaries  had  witnessed,  as 
though  it  had  been  seen  by  all  the  people.  DSM  (cf. 
ii.  1 1)  :  They  had  probably  thought  that  the  swollen 
waters  of  the  Jordan  would  prove  for  a  time  an 
insuperable  barrier  to  Israel. 

VERS.  2-12. —  The  Circumcision  of  the  People,  and 
Celebration  of  the  Passover  at  Gilgal. 

Ver.  2. — "At  that  time"  :  Probably  not  later  than 
the  eleventh  of  the  month  Abib,  or  Nisan,  the  day 
after  the  arrival  at  Gilgal,  for  the  Passover  took  place 


VER.  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  63 

on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  same  month  (see  ver.  10). 
Dny  main,  lit,  "  knives  of  rocks  "  (or,  of  flints)  :   So 
Sept.,  Vulg.,   Syr.,    and    Arab.    (cf.    Exod.    iv.    25). 
These  were  the  most   ancient   kind   of    knives,  and 
were  especially  used  in  embalming  (Herod.,  ii.,  86) 
and  in  emasculation  (Juv.,  Sat.,  vi.  514;   Ovid,  Fasti, 
iv., 237,  "acuto si/ice").    The  Auth. Vers.  "sharp knives" 
or  "  knives  of  edges"    though  agreeing  with  the   use 
of  -1-1  v,  in    Psalm    Ixxxix.   44,  is   not    here   required. 
Many  ancient l  and  modern  commentators  have  seen 
in    the   term    "  rock "  a  reference  to  Christ,  through 
whom    we   receive    the    circumcision    of    the    spirit 
(cf.  i    Cor.  x.   4;    Rom.  ii.   29  ;    Col.  ii.    11).      n-ijy, 
"•again"   (§    142,  4,  Rem.  i),  the  latter  of  the  two 
verbs  is   generally  put  in  the  abbreviated  form   (cf. 
Exod.   iv.    1 9).      JVJCJ*,   "  a    second   time "  :    Gives    a 
greater  force  to  n-VJ>  (cf.  Isa.  xi.  1 1),  and  TO  Sevrepov 
(Jude  5)  :  The  meaning  is  not  that  the  same  persons 
should  be  circumcised   a   second    time,  but  that  all 
the  Israelites,  who  had  not  before  been  circumcised, 
should   now   undergo   that   rite,    so   that    the  whole 
nation  should    be    a    circumcised    people,  as    it  had 
been  at  the  exodus  from  Egypt  (cf.  Keil,  in  loc.}. 

Ver.  3. — "  The  hill  of  the  foreskins"  i.e.,  the  hill 
which  was  afterwards  so  called,  because  the  foreskins 
(the  emblem  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  Col.  ii.  11-13, 
iii.  1-6)  were  buried  there.  This  "hill"  (Gibeah) 
is  probably  one  of  the  argillaceous  hills  which  form 
the  highest  terrace  of  the  Jordan  (Dean  Stanley's 
Sinai  and  Palestine,  vii.,  p.  307,  note  i). 

1  E.g.,  Tertullian,  adv.  Jud.,  c.  9  ;  and  c.  Marcion.,  iii.,  16; 
Origen,  Homil.  in  Jos.  ;  Justin  Martyr,  c.  Tryphon.,  §  24  ; 
S.  Aug.,  in  loc. ;  Theodoret,  Qu.  4. 


64  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  v. 

VERS.  4-7  (A  Reason  given  for  the  Command  in 
vcr.2}. — Ver.4. — T^  i:nn,"//k?  reason  that"  or  "why" 
(cf.  *i£N:  "QT^,  Deut.  xxii.  24;  2  Sam.  xiii.  22).  M// 
the  people  that  came  out  of  Egypt"  i.e.,  those  who  were 
twenty  years  old  and  upward  at  the  time  of  the  rebel 
lion  at  Kadesh  (see  Numb.  xiv.  29, 32).  D.nysp  DntfX?., 
not,  "  after  they  had  come  out  of  Egypt "  (Le  Clerc  and 
Rosenm.),  but  "  on  their  coming  out  of  Egypt"  i.e., 
during  the  journey.  The  words  more  strongly  define 
the  preceding  "n^.3. 

Ver.  5. — *3,for,  not  now  (Auth.  Vers.).  -vn  D^p  : 
The  participle  with  the  substantive  verb  is  not  here 
used  as  a  preterite  or  pluperfect,  but  as  an  adjective, 
"  were  circumcised  "  men  (Keil).  A  general  circum 
cision  of  the  people  by  Moses,  before  they  left  Egypt, 
is  not  recorded  in  Scripture.  The  statement  in  the 
remainder  of  the  verse  can  refer  to  those  Israelites 
only  who  were  born  in  the  wilderness,  after  the  re 
bellion  at  Kadesh,  for  all  children  born  in  the  interval 
between  the  exodus  and  the  passover  celebrated  at 
Sinai  in  the  first  month  of  the  second  year,  must  have 
been  circumcised  (see  Numb.  ix.  1-5  ;  Exod.  xii.  48). 

Ver.  6. — "  Forty  years"  a  round  number,  for  the 
period  was  strictly  thirty-eight  years  (see  Deut.  ii. 
1 4).  "  Till  all  the  nation,  the  men  of  war  "  :  The  "  men 
of  war"  are  specially  mentioned,  because  such  were 
those  who  had  been  numbered  from  twenty  years  old 
and  upwards  (Numb.  i.  45),  and  whose  doom  was  to 
perish  in  the  wilderness  (Numb.  xiv.  29-31);  '?. 

•  T^s*,  not  "  because  "  (or  "  wherefore  ")  Jehovah 
had  sworn "  (Rosenm.),  but  giving  a  relative  sense 
to  Drr?  (§  123);  Render  "to  zuhom"  etc.,  as  in 
Auth.  Vers.,  Sept.,  and  Vulg.  "  To  give  to  us  "  :  Some 


VER.  7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  65 

MSS.,  and  the  Sept.,  Syr.,  Arab.,  and  Chald.,  read 
Dr6  for  w^,  but  the  Kethibh  is  preferable,  for  the 
word  "fathers "  refers  to  the  patriarchs,  to  whom 
and  their  posterity  the  promise  was  made,  "  A  land 
flowing  witJi  milk  and  honey  "  :  An  expression  frequent 
in  the  Pentateuch  (see  Exod.  iii.  8,  17,  xiii.  5, 
xxxiii.  3;  Levit.  xx.  24;  Numb.  xiii.  27;  Deut. 
vi.  3,  etc.),  and  denoting  a  land  rich  in  grass  and 
flowers.  The  same  phrase,  after  its  use  here  in  the 
Book  of  Joshua,  does  not  re-occur  till  met  with  in 
Jer.  xi.  5,  xxxii.  22  ;  Ezek.  xx.  6,  15. 

Ver.  7. — "And  their  sons  He  raised  up  in  their 
stead,   them  Joshua    circumcised"    i.e.,  caused    to   be 
circumcised  (see  the  end  of  note  on  ver.  8)  :  Many 
conjectures   have  been  made  why  circumcision  was 
omitted  during  the  period  between  the  rebellion  at 
Kadesh    and   the   arrival    at    Canaan  ;  but  the  true 
reason  appears  to  be  that   suggested  by  ver.  6,  viz., 
that  the   whole    nation,   during     that     period,  were 
under    a    ban.     The    iniquity   of   the    fathers    was 
visited  on  the  children.     There   was  a  partial  and 
temporary,  though  not  a  total  and  final,  rejection  of 
the  people  ;  and,  therefore,  till  the  allotted  period  of 
their   punishment  was   accomplished,  they  were  not 
admitted   to   the  privileges  implied  in   Circumcision 
and    the    Passover    (so   Calvin,   Hengstenberg,   and 
Keil).     To   the  question,  why    God   had    not  com 
manded    Moses,    when    the    thirty-eight     years    of 
wandering  were  finished,  to  circumcise  the  people  in 
the  plains  of  Moab,  it  has  been  well  replied  by  Keil, 
that  God  delayed   the  performance  of  the  rite,  that 
He  might   first  give  proofs   to   the   people   of  His 
power  and  mercy  in  the  miraculous  passage  of  the 

5 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  v. 

Jordan,  and  thus  render  them  more  inclined  to  that 
obedience  to  which  circumcision  pledged  them.  Nor 
could  any  occasion  be  more  suitable  for  their  renewal 
of  their  covenant  with  God,  than  when  they  were 
about  to  enter  on  a  war  with  foes  mightier  than 
themselves.  Moreover,  this  circumcision  was  typical 
of  that  "made  without  hands"  (Col.  ii.  11),  and, 
therefore,  was  fitly  performed  by  Joshua,  a  type 
of  Jesus,  after  he  had  brought  the  children  of 
Israel  into  Canaan,  a  type  of  the  Christian  Church, 
into  which  we  are  introduced  by  baptism,  prefigured 
by  the  passage  of  the  Jordan. 

Ver.  8. — -1EFI,  followed  by  the  infin.,  with  "?,  "  had 
left  off  to  be  circumcised"  (cf.  iii.  17,  iv.  i,  1 1).  DPinn 
•U^.,  lit.,  "  they  sat  under  themselves  "  :  "  The  phrase" 
(says  Le  Clerc,  on  Exod.  xvi.  29)  "  seems  derived 
from  the  custom  of  the  Orientals,  who  sit  on  the 
ground  or  pavement,  for  '  to  remain  under  oneself  is, 
properly,  to  remain  in  that  place  which  was  under 
us  when  we  first  sat  down."  "  Till  they  were  whole  " 
(Auth.  Vers.),  lit,  "  till  they  lived,"  i.e.,  till  they  re 
covered,  cf.  2  Kings  i.  2,  xx.  7  :  It  appears  from 
Gen.  xxxiv.  25  that  on  the  third  day  after  circum 
cision  its  effects  were  still  painful,  and  hence  some 
supposed  that  on  the  fourth  day  the  wound  was 
healed,  and  consequently,  if  this  circumcision  of 
the  Israelites  took  place  on  the  nth  of  Abib,  the 
day  after  their  arrival  at  Gilgal,  they  would  have 
felt  no  inconvenience  from  it  on  the  I4th  of  Abib, 
at  least  none  sufficient  to  incapacitate  them  from 
eating  the  Passover.  It  has,  indeed,  been  objected 
that,  because  at  the  census  taken  after  the  thirty- 
eight  years'  wandering  the  people  amounted  to 


VERS.  9,  10.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOSHUA.  67 

nearly  a  million,  it  was  impossible  that  the  cir 
cumcision  could  have  been  performed  in  one  day  ; 
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  large  number 
were  already  circumcised  (see  note  ver.  5),  and  that, 
with  the  assistance  of  these,  the  operation  could 
easily  have  been  got  over  in  a  day. 

Ver.  9. — "T/ie  reproach  of  Egypt"  i.e.,  the  reproach 
which  proceeds  from  Egypt  :  For  the  like  use  of 
the  genitive  see  Isa.  li.  7  ;  Ezek.  xvi.  57,  xxxvi.  15  ; 
Zeph.  ii.  8.  This  reproach  was  that  God  had  cast 
them  off,  and  intended  to  destroy  them  (cf.  Exod. 
xxxii.  12;  Numb.  xiv.  13-16;  Deut.  ix.  28, 
xxxii.  27)  ;  the  entrance  into  Canaan,  and  the 
renewal  of  the  covenant,  rolled  away  that  reproach. 
"  Is  called"  lit.  in  Heb.,  "  one  called"  (Nn^),  indeter. 
3rd  pers.  sing.,  §137.  "  Gilgal"  lit,  " a  rolling  away  "  : 
From  hk$,  to  roll ;  not  a  town,  but  a  site  and  en 
campment  seem  meant.1  The  name  is  given  also 
to  other  places  (see,  e.g.,  Deut.  xi.  30  ;  Josh.-xii.  23), 
and  perhaps  for  reasons  which  would  admit  of  a 
different  derivation  of  the  word. 

Ver.  10. — "  Encamped  in  Gilgal"  2  :  The  spot  was 
well  suited  for  an  encampment,  as  it  possessed  both 
shade  and  water.  "  They  celebrated  (lit.,  they  made) 

1  Though  the  name  Gilgal  was  thus  given  in  direct  allusion 
to  the  rolling  away  of  the  reproach  of  Egypt,  yet  there  may 
have  been  also  an  allusion  to  the  circle  of  twelve  stones,  raised 
by  Joshua's  orders  (iv.  8),  the  first  sanctuary  of  Israel  in 
Palestine.  Many  similar  rings  still  exist  in  Moab  and  else 
where,  and,  indeed,  such  cromlechs  and  dolmens  were  associated 
with  the  earliest  forms  of  religion  in  almost  every  country.  The 
circle  of  Gilgal  seems  ultimately  to  have  become  the  seat  of 
idolatry  (see  Hosea  iv.  15,  ix.  15,  xii.  n  ;  Amos  iv.  4,  v.  5). 
See  Geikie's  Hours  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii.,  p.  392. 

'2  Lit.,  "  the  Gilgal"  (cf.  iv.  19,  note). 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  v. 

tJie  Passover"  :  This  was  the  second  Passover  since 
the  exodus  from  Egypt.  The  first  was  at  Sinai 
(Numb.  ix.  1-14).  Calvin  thinks  that  the  celebra 
tion  of  the  Passover  was  permitted  by  God  to 
continue  after  the  rebellion  at  Kadesh-Barnea  ;  yet 
it  is  strange  that  no  record  of  the  fact  is  found  in 
the  Pentateuch,  nor  is  it  likely  that  the  covenant 
festival  of  the  Passover  would  be  observed,  when 
circumcision,  the  sign  of  the  covenant,  was  discon 
tinued.  It  seems  clear  from  Exod.  xii.  25,  xiii. 
5-10,  that  after  its  first  celebration  at  Sinai,  it  was 
not  to  be  renewed  till  the  people  had  entered  Canaan. 
"  On  the  fourteenth  day  "  (see  Exod.  xii.  6,  1 8  ; 
Lev.  xxiii.  5).  "/«  the  evening"  but  more  accurately, 
"  between  the  two  evenings  "  (Exod.  xii.  6  ;  Lev. 
xxiii.  5),  or  "at  the  going  down  of  the  sun"  (Deut. 
xvi.  6).  "In  the  plains  of  Jericho"  (cf.  iv.  13,  note). 
"  All  the  great  movements  of  the  ancient  Church  of 
God  were  begun  with  eating  the  Passover.  The 
Israelites  ate  the  Passover,  and  went  forth  from 
Egypt,  and  crossed  the  Red  Sea.  They  ate  the 
Passover  at  Sinai,  when  the  tabernacle  had  been 
raised,  and  set  forth  on  their  march  towards  Canaan  ; 
and  now  they  ate  the  Passover  under  Joshua,  and 
began  their  march  of  victory.  Here  is  a  lesson  to 
the  Christian  Church  and  to  every  Christian  soul  in 
it,  not  to  undertake  any  great  work,  especially  not  to 
go  forth  on  its  way  from  this  world  into  eternity, 
without  being  first  strengthened  with  the  Divine 
viaticum  of  the  Christian  Passover,  the  holy  Eu 
charist."  (Bishop  Wordsworth,  in  loc.} 

Ver.  II. — "t-131?:  Found  here  and  in  ver.  12  only, 
The  Auth.  Vers.  (after  Kimchi  and  others)  renders  it 


VER.  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSH  DA.  69 

"  old  corn"  i.e.,  corn  of  the  past  year,  from  "flJJ,  to  pass, 
or  to  pass  by  ;  but  the  same  word  in  Syr.  and  Arab, 
means  simply  "  corn,"  or  "  produce,"  and  is  frequently 
used  in  the  Targums  as  equal  to  fin  ;  hence  it  is 
probable  that  the  rt.  ")?r  has  another  and  original 
sense,  viz.,  to  cover,  to  impregnate,  to  produce,  and 
that  "i-liy  here  is  synonymous  with  nx-UJji  in  ver.  1 2 
(cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  39),  and  means  "produce,"  not  of  the 
past,  but  of  the  present  year.  "  On  the  morrow  after 
the  Passover"  :  This  expression  (in  Numb,  xxxiii.  3) 
means  the  I5th  of  Abib,  but  here  apparently  the 
sixteenth  (so  Keil),  because  the  Israelites  could  not 
lawfully  eat  of  the  new  corn  till  the  presentation  of 
the  wave-sheaf  on  "  the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath  " 
(Lev.  xxiii.  11).  The  "  Sabbath"  in  that  passage 
means  the  first  day  of  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread 
(viz.,  the  i  5th  of  Abib),  called  a  Sabbath,  because, 
though  not  necessarily  the  seventh  day  of  the 
week,  it  was  kept  as  a  Sabbath.  To  it  corresponds 
in  this  verse  the  term  passover,  which  sometimes 
denotes  the  paschal  lamb  (Exod.  xii.  21),  or  the 
paschal  meal  (2  Chron.  xxx.  1 8),  eaten  on  the 
evening  of  the  1 4th  of  Abib  ;  sometimes  the  feast 
of  unleavened  bread,  beginning  on  the  I5th,  and 
lasting  seven  days  (Deut  xvi.  2).  ""-l^,  "parched" 
(corn},  (A.  V.)  :  Put  for  e:?o  *b\>  n^x,  "  ears  of  corn 
baked  by  the  fire  "  (Lev.  ii.  14),  a  food  much  relished 
still  by  the  Arabs.  These  and  the  unleavened  cakes 
(nrsE>)  pertained  to  the  produce  of  the  new  year, 
whereas  the  unleavened  bread,  which  the  Israelites 
ate  with  the  paschal  lamb  on  the  fourteenth  day 
of  Abib,  must  have  been  of  old  corn  of  the  land. 
'Dvr?,  "  in  this  self-same  day"  (see  §  124,  Rem.  3). 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  v. 

Ver.  12. — "A nd  tJie  manna  ceased"  etc.  (cf.  Exod. 
xvi.  35,  and  see  on  "  Manna"  the  article  in  Smith's 
Bib.  Diet.}  :  This  total  cessation  of  the  manna  shows 
that  it  had  been  a  miraculous  gift  from  God,  but  was 
now  withdrawn,  because  it  had  served  the  purpose 
for  which  it  was  given.  So  in  the  Christian  Church 
miraculous  gifts  and  powers  ceased  when  no  longer 
necessary. 

Vers.  13-15,  vi.  1-5. — These  verses,  with  the  ex 
ception  of  vi.  I,  are  closely  connected,  and  record 
the  appearance  of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  to  Joshua, 
and  the  message  He  gave  to  him. 

Ver.  13. — inn11?,  "by"  (Auth.  Vers.),  i.e.,  near 
"Jericho"  :  For  this  meaning  of  ?  see  §  154,  3,  a, 
2  ;  and  cf.  x.  16,  xxiv.  26  ;  Gen.  xiii.  18  ;  Vulg.,  "in 
agro  Jericho."  Keil  thinks  it  implies  not  only  that 
Joshua  was  on  the  outskirts  of  Jericho,  but  that  in 
imagination  he  was  already  in  it,  i.e.,  was  occupied 
with  the  thought  of  conquering  the  town.  "He  lifted 
lip  his  eyes  and  looked"  :  An  expression,  says  Keil, 
which  denotes  the  unexpected  sight  of  an  object  (cf. 
Gen.  xviii.  2,  xxxiii.  i)  ;  it  may  also  be  classed 
among  the  instances  of  the  pictorial  style  of  writing, 
so  common  to  the  Hebrews,  by  which  not  only  the 
doing  of  a  thing,  but  the  manner  of  doing  it,  is 
stated  (cf.  such  phrases  as  "  he  arose  and  went"  "  Jie 
opened  his  lips  and  spake"  "  he  put  forth  his  hand  and 
took  ").  K»K,  "  a  man  "  :  Some  say  a  created  angel  in 
human  form,  but  the  ancient  Jewish  Church,  and  the 
majority  of  the  Christian  Fathers,  agree  in  the  belief 
that  it  was  the  Second  Person  of  the  Ever  Blessed 
Trinity,  The  Word,  He  Who  said,  "  No  man  hath 
seen  God  (the  Father)  at  any  time.  The  Only 


VER.  14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  71 

Begotten,  Who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He 
hath  declared  Him  "  (John  i.  1  8).  This  view  is 
confirmed  by  the  command  to  Joshua  in  ver.  i  5,  and 
by  vi.  2,  where  the  Person  Who  here  appears  to  him 
is  called  JelwvaJi,  and  issues  His  commands  with 
authority.  "  A  nd  His  sword  drawn  in  His  hand  " 
(cf.  Numb.  xxii.  23,  31  ;  Rev.  i.  16,  ii.  12,  16, 
xix.  15,  22,  where  the  Son  of  God  is  represented 
as  having  a  sharp  two-edged  sword).  "  And  Joshua 
went  unto  Him  and  spoke  to  Him"  :  Clearly,  therefore, 
this  was  not  a  dream  nor  vision. 

Ver.  14.  —  N^>,  "Nay"  (Auth.  Vers.,  Chald.,  and 
Vulg.):  More  suitable  than  -6,  the  reading  adopted  by 
the  Sept.  and  Syr.,  and  found  in  some  MSS.  The 
Masora  does  not  include  this  verse  among  the  fifteen 
examples  where  &6  is  used  for  b.  V3,  "  but  "  :  After  a 
negative  (§  155,  i,  d,  p.  272).  ^  includes  the  subs. 
verb  (§  121,  i).  1B>,  "captain  (of),"  (A.  V.),  as  in  Gen. 
xxi.  22,  or  "prince  (of)"  (cf.  Dan.  x.  13,  20,  xii.  i)  ; 
"the  host  ofJeJiovaJi"  :  This  expression  does  not  refer 
to  the  Israelitish  army,  which  is  never  so  called, 
though  twice  described  by  the  plural,  "  tJic  hosts  of 
the  Lord"  (Exod.  vii.  4,  xii.  41)  ;  the  singular  can 
only  refer  to  the  angels,  as  in  Psalm  cxlviii.  2  (T&oy, 
KethibJi)\  cf.  i  Kings  xxii.  19,  own  xny.  "Now 
I  have  come":  Either  the  sentence  is  abrupt,  and  He 
was  about  to  explain  the  object  of  His  coming,  when 
He  was  interrupted  by  Joshua's  falling  down  before 
Him,  and  addressing  Him  (so  Keil)  ;  or  the  expression 
is  simply  a  solemn  announcement  of  His  Presence. 
•inrik^1  :  As  this  word  is  used  of  reverence  paid  to 


1  For  this  form  see  Gr.,  §  75,  Rem.  v.,  18. 


72  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

men  (2  Sam.  ix.  6,  8  ;  2  Sam.  xiv.  33),  it  does  not 
necessarily  imply  here  Divine  worship.  Joshua  seems 
at  first  not  to  have  recognized  the  true  nature  of  the 
Being  Who  appeared  to  him,  for  he  calls  him  Adoni, 
"  my  lord,"  not  Adonai,  "  The  Lord." 

Ver.  i  5. — bw  :  Imper.  per.  aphcer.  for^J,  "pull,"  or 
"  pluck  off."  bj?3  :  Rt  bin,  to  bolt  or  to  fasten,  means 
a  sandal,  or  sole  attached  to  the  foot  by  thongs,  Sept. 
a  or  crct^SaXiov  (so  in  Josh.  ix.  5,  13  ;  cf. 
,  Mark  vi.  9).  On  this,  as  an  act  of  Divine 
homage,  see  note  ver.  13,  above.  £Hp  for  EHJrncnx, 
Exod.  iii.  5.  The  ground  of  Gilgal  was  the  first 
portion  of  Palestine  which  was  pronounced  holy  (Dean 
Stanley,  Sinai  and  Palestine,  vii.,  p.  308). 


CHAPTER   VI. 
VERS.   1-27. —  The   Conquest  of  Jericho. 

Ver.  i. — This  verse  is  parenthetical  (see  note  v. 
13-15),  and  is  introductory  to  ver.  2,  being  designed 
to  show  that  so  strong  a  city  as  Jericho  could  not 
have  been  overcome  by  the  Israelites  without  the 
Divine  aid.  n^pp-1  nnjp,  "  lit.,  (was)  shutting  its 
gates,  and  closely  shut  up  "  :  The  participles  express 
a  state  of  continuance,  and  the  Pual  participle,  being 
intensive,  denotes  that  the  city  was  secured  with 
bolts  and  bars,  the  Qal  part,  simply  that  the  gates 
were  shut  (Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  5  79).  The  last  clause 
of  the  verse  is  added  for  emphasis. 

Ver.  2. — Here  the  "Captain  of  Jehovah's  host"  is 
identified  with  "Jehovah"  and  speaks  with  authority 


VERS.  3,  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  73 

as  such.  "  /  have  given  "  :  The  perfect  denoting  the 
certainty  of  accomplishment  (cf.  i.  3).  '^3|,  (cf.  i.  14)  : 
Put  in  opposition  to  Jericho  (i.e.y  the  inhabitants)  and 
its  king. 

Vers.  3-7  (Instructions  how  tJie  City  was  to  be  taken}. 
— Ver.  3. — Drop),  "  and  ye  shall  compass"  (Auth. 
Vers.)  :  But  here  (says  Ges.,  Lehrgeb.,  p.  767,  5,  b)  it 
has  the  force  of  an  imperative  (cf.  Sept.,  irepLO-Trjcrov, 
Vulg.,  circuite).  ^jp.n,  "in  going  round"  :  Written  more 
usually  S]j3.n,  as  in  ver.  1 1.  Hiph.  inf.  absol.  of  t\\n,  to 
go  in  a  circle  (Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  566)  ;  here  it  defines 
more  accurately  the  preceding  verb.  "  Once"  lit.  in 
Heb.,  "  one  tread  or  stroke."  "  Six  days "  :  The 
marchings  on  these  six  consecutive  days,  and  that 
which  was  repeated  seven  times  on  the  seventh 
day,  were  a  trial  of  the  people's  faith,  patience, 
and  obedience  (cf.  Heb.  xi.  30).  To  mere  human 
reason  the  means  to  be  employed  would  have 
seemed  utterly  inadequate. 

Ver.  4. — The  number  seven  occurring  four  times 
in  this  verse  denotes  completeness,  and  was  a  sacred 
number  ;x  it  was,  therefore,  symbolic  of  the  Divine 
agency  in  the  overthrow  of  Jericho.  "  Before  the  ark"  : 
The  seat  of  God's  special  presence,  "n  nn^iE?,  lit, 
"  cornets  of  soundings"  and  hence  "  cornets  of 
jubilee"  hy\  according  to  Gesenius  ( Thes.,  ii.,  561) 
is  an  onomatopoetic  word,  meaning  jubilum,  or  a 
joyful  sound,  formed  from  the  syllable  v,  denoting 

1  So  likewise  among  the  Persians  (Esther  i.  10,  14);  among 
the  ancient  Indians  (Von  Bohlen's  Alt.  Indien,  ii.,  224,  etc.) ; 
among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  to  a  certain  extent,  and  prob 
ably  among  all  nations  where  the  week  of  seven  days  was 
established,  as  in  China,  Egypt,  Arabia,  etc.  (Ideler's  Chronol. 
i.,  88,  178,  ii.,  473). 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

"  a  crying  out,"  like  the  Greek  io>  and  lov,  (cf.  the 
name  ^\  given  to  the  inventor  of  stringed  and 
wind  instruments,  Gen.  iv.  21).  Others,  with 
Carpzov,  derive  it  from  73J,  "  to  flow  copiously  and 
with  some  violence,"  and  hence  ^3t»,  a  rushing, 
penetrating  sound.  The  Auth.  Vers.  "  rams' 
horns"  is  from  an  unused  rt.  ?3^,  to  be  compressed, 
to  be  hard,  strong;  whence  hy  or  bjT*,  the  strong, 
and  in  Arab,  a  ram;  thus  the  Chaldee  Targum 
generally  translates  ^Of1  f"p.,  "  trumpet  of  ram's  horn." 
But  many  Arabic  scholars  deny  that  hlV  ever  means 
"  a  ram  "  in  Arabic,  and  a  ram's  horn,  being  solid, 
could  not  emit  sound,  "lais?  [so  called  from  its  clear 
and  sharp  sound,  rt.  "is^,  to  be  bright  (Ges.,  Lex.}\  i.q., 
i^i?,  ver.  5,  means  a  bent  trumpet,  Lat.,  I  it  mis.  Ac 
cording  to  Engel  (Hist,  of  Music,  p.  292)  it  is  the 
only  Hebrew  musical  instrument  which  has  been 
preserved  to  the  present  day  in  the  religious  services 
of  the  Jews,  being  blown  at  the  Jewish  new  year's 
festival,  according  to  the  command  of  Moses  (Numb. 
xxix.  i).  The  word  differs  from  nnyVG,  the  silver 
trumpet  used  to  summon  to  war  (Numb.  x.  2),  and 
which  was  straight  in  form.  Thus  these  horns  of 
jubilee,  associated  with  occasions  of  peace,  served, 
like  the  other  particulars  mentioned,  to  teach  the 
Israelites  that  the  conquest  of  Jericho  would  be 
effected  by  Divine  power.  'E>3  Wplp?,  "  tliey  shall  blow 
(lit.,  shall  strike  by  blowing  into)  the  trumpets." 

Ver.  5. — ']-$$  T]b>p2,  lit.,  "  when  they  draw  with  the 

jubilee  horn"  i.e.,  when  they  blow  the  jubilee  horn 

with  long  drawn  notes  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  13).      pj5  may 

be  here  taken  collec.  for  ninafC?  (ver.  4).    nr-niji :  Is  used 

specially  of  a  joy 'fill  shout  (i  Sam.  iv.  5),  and  of  a  war- 


VERS.  6,  7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  75 

like  shout,  dXaXo/y/A09  (Jer.  iv.  19)  ;  this  latter  may 
be  meant  here  and  in  ver.  20.  rpflOfl,  lit.,  "tinder 
itself"  :  The  meaning  is  not  "the  city  wall  shall  sink 
into  the  earth  "  (Chaldee  Vers.,  "absorbebitur  sub  se  "), 
but  (as  Keil)  "shall  be  overthrown  from  the  founda 
tions  ; "  Vulg.,  "  muri  funditus  corruent  civitatis." 
The  Sept.  Treo-eirat  atird/xara  ra  Ttfyvj,  /c.r.X.,  though 
not  a  literal  rendering  of  the  Hebrew,  indicates  that 
the  overthrow  of  the  wall  would  be  effected  not 
by  any  assault  of  the  Israelites,  but  by  miraculous 
agency.  HjiJ,  "  straight  before  him,"  i.e.,  passing  over 
the  fallen  wall,  and  keeping  as  far  as  possible  in 
the  same  direction  (cf.  Joel  ii.  7,  "  they  shall 
march  every  one  on  his  ways  ").  >ho,  "  shall  ascend"  : 
Refers  to  the  ruins  of  the  wall,  by  passing  over  which 
they  were  to  press  into  the  city. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Joshua  announces  first  to  the  priests 
and  then  to  the  people  the  instructions  he  had 
received.  In  ver.  7  the  Qeri  has  "  he  said  "  (so 
the  Auth.  Vers.)  for  the  Kethibh  "they  said,"  but 
the  plural,  as  being  the  more  difficult  reading,  was 
probably  altered  to  the  singular,  and  may  be 
explained  by  supposing  that  Joshua  issued  his  com 
mands  through  the  Shoterim  (see  i.  10,  11,  iii.  2). 
•1~i?y,  "  move  on"  or  "  march  forward"  :  So  in  the  next 
hemistich,  and  in  ver.  8  (cf.  Psalm  xlii.  5,  Heb.  Bib.). 
p'pnn  :  Used  collectively  for  xn->'n  »y&q  (iv.  1 3,  see 
note).  Cor.  a  Lap.,  Rosenmuller,  and  Knobel  under 
stand  the  term  here  to  refer  to  the  warriors  of  all  the 
tribes,  and  f)£^pn  (the  rereward,1  Auth.  Vers. ;  see  ver. 
9)  to  the  rest  of  the  people,  or  the  unarmed  multi- 

1  An  old  English  word,  i.q.>  rearguard,  used  also  in  Numb. 
x.  25  ;   i  Sam.  xxix.  2  ;  Isa.  lii.  12,  Iviii.  8. 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

tude,  Vulg.,  "  reliquum  vulgus  ;  "  but  Keil  and  others, 
after  Kimchi  and  Rashi,  limit  the  former  term  to  the 
armed  men  of  the  tribes  of  Reuben,  Gad,  and  half 
tribe  of  Manasseh  (who  may  have  been  intended  to 
take  the  lead  not  only  on  the  occasion  of  the  passage 
of  the  Jordan  [iv.  1 2],  but  on  all  other  occasions,  till 
the  conquest  of  Canaan),  but  include  under  the  latter 
term  the  warriors  of  the  other  tribes.  This  view 
seems  to  accord  with  ver.  3,  where  the  command  to 
go  round  the  city  is  given  to  "  the  men  of  war  " 
only,  which  command  is  here,  and  in  ver.  9,  more 
fully  stated.  Since,  however,  the  tribe  of  Dan  in  the 
march  through  the  wilderness  always  brought  up  the 
rear  (Numb.  x.  25),  p]DNpn  may  possibly  refer  to  that 
tribe,  and  f-l'pnn  include  all  the  rest  of  the  men  of 
war. 

Vers.  8-1 1  (TJie  First  Day's  Procession  and  Order 
of  March}. — Ver.  8. — 'rp  ibND  'iri,  "  and  it  came  to  pass 
w/ien  Joshua  had  spoken  "  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  The  Syr. 
renders,  "And  it  happened  according  to  the  words  of 
Joshua ; "  but  3  prefixed  to  the  infin.  often  means 
"  when,"  or  "  as  soon  as  "  (see  Ges.,  Lex.,  5,  b]  ;  and 
\T1,  though  generally  followed  by  the  imperfect  with 
1  conversive  in  the  second  clause,  is  often  followed  by 
the  perfect  (see,  e.g.,  Gen.  xxii.  I  ;  I  Kings  viii.  54 ;  Isa. 
xxxvii.  38)  (Keil).  1.  before  ny?^  begins  the  apodosis 
(§  155,  i,  a,  3rd  par,).  The  art.  before  D^x'^J  is 
omitted  (cf.  ver.  13,  and  see  §  1 1 1,  2,  b}.  "  Before 
Jehovali"  i.e.,  before  the  ark,  which  was  the  symbol  of 
the  Divine  presence,  and  also  called  here  "tlie  ark  of 
tlw  covenant"  because  containing  the  tables  on  which 
the  covenant  was  written. 

Ver.  9. — The  Kethibh,  Wpri,  requires  an  ellipsis  of 


VERS.  10,  ii.]          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  77 


it'S  (§  123,  3),  and  though  more  often  followed  by 
3,  here  governs  an  accus.,  as  in  Judges  vii.  22  ;  Psalm 
Ixxxi.  4;  Jer.  iv.  5,  etc.  ^ENpn,  "  the  rereward" 
(Auth.  Vers.),  lit,  "  the  gatJtering  (host)  "  :  Piel  part. 
with  art.  used  as  a  noun,  from  f)DX,  "  to  collect,"  and 
"to  bring  up  the  rear,"  "agmen  claudere  "  (Isa.  Iviii.  8)  ; 
so  here  in  Piel  (cf.  Numb.  x.  25  ;  Isa.  Hi.  12  ;  see  note 
on  ver.  7).  T)l  tpfi,  "going  on  and  blowing"  (Auth. 
Vers.),  i.e.,  trumpeting  continually  (§  131,  3,  b]  : 
The  meaning  is  that  during  the  march  the  trumpets 
(cornets)  continued  to  sound. 

Ver.  i  o.  —  njy,  "  had  commanded"  (Auth.  Vers., 
Rosenm.  and  Keil)  :  This  verse  is  parenthetical,  and 
throws  light  on  ver.  5.  "  Ye  shall  not  shout  "  :  They 
were  to  shout  on  the  seventh  day  only  (see  ver.  1  6),  for 
not  till  that  day  would  the  victory  be  obtained.  On 
the  other  days  the  deep  silence  observed  was  befitting 
the  solemnity  of  the  occasion,  when  God  Himself, 
under  the  symbol  of  the  ark,  was  going  before  them, 
and  about  to  discomfit  so  signally  their  enemies  (cf. 
Hab.  ii.  20;  Zech.  ii.  13). 

Ver.  1  1.  —  3D»i  :  The  Arab.  Vers.,  Kimchi,  Masius, 
Rosenm.,  and  others,  render  "  and  (Joshua)  caused  to 
go  round;"  but  as  ver.  10  is  parenthetical,  the 
nominative  "  Joshua  "  can  hardly  with  propriety  be 
borrowed  from  it,  and  Hiphil  often  has  an  intrans. 
signification  (see,  e.g.,  3DH  in  2  Sam.  v.  23,  and  »app, 
Psalm  cxl.  10  ;  Ges.,  Lex.,  4,  p.  577);  hence  the 
Vulg.,  Syr.,  Chald.,  and  Auth.  Vers.  render  it  here 
intrans.  :  so  Winer,  Gesen.,  and  Keil. 

Vers.  12-14.  —  The  same  order  of  march,  as  on 
the  first  day,  is  repeated  on  the  second  and  four 
following  days. 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

Vers.  12. — "  Rose  early" :  Activity  and  prompti 
tude  were  characteristics  of  Joshua. 

Ver.  13. — tfl?rj  Dpph,  (were)  "continually  proceed 
ing  "  :  The  participle  has  here  the  same  construction 
with  the  infin.  absol.  as  the  finite  verb  (§  131,  3, 
Rem.  3).  -ittp.r)),  the  finite  verb  frequently  succeeds 
in  Hebrew  to  the  participle  (§  134,  Rem.  2). 
Gesenius,  indeed  (in  §  131,  3,  b],  says  that  this  is  an 
instance  of  the  finite  verb  being  put  instead  of  the 
infin.  (tflpn,  ver.  9)  ;  but  rather  it  here  corresponds 
with  wpni.  in  ver.  8.  In  the  last  clause  the  Qeri 
rj-6n  need  not  be  read  for  the  Kethibh  ^in,  for  the 
latter,  as  expressive  of  continuance,  differs  little  from 
the  former,  and  frequently  the  infin.  absol.  and  the 
participle  are  interchanged,  see,  e.g..  Gen.  xxvi.  13, 
Judges  iv.  24,  2  Sam.  xvi.  5,  where  an  infin.  absol. 
is  followed  by  a  participle  instead  of  by  another 
infin.  absol. 

Vers.  15-19  (The  Seventh  Day's  Proceedings, 
and  Joshuds  Final  Commands  respecting  Jericho). 
— Ver.  15. — "On  the  seventh  day":  According  to 
Jewish  writers,  the  Sabbath  day.  To  the  objection 
of  Marcion,  that  thus  the  Sabbath  was  violated, 
Tertullian  replies  that  the  work  here  commanded 
was  not  a  human  but  a  Divine  work  (Tertul.,  c. 
Marcion.,  iv.,  12).  rife,  the  Qeri  is  rife,  "  about  the 
time  that  (the  morn)  arose "  :  On  the  distinction 
between  ?  and  ?  see  iii.  3.  n:jn  t3St?S3,  lit," according 
to  this  rule"  i.e.,  "  in  the  same  prescribed  manner " 
(cf.  Lev.  v.  10,  ix.  16).  "  Seven  times"  :  As  Jericho 
was  of  considerable  size,  and  an  interval  of  rest  was 
probably  required  after  each  circuit,  the  seven  circuits 
may  not  have  been  finished  till  the  close  of  the 


VERS.i6-i8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  79 

Sabbath,  and  thus  the  slaughter,  which  followed, 
may  not  have  taken  place  on  that  day. 

Ver.  1 6. — "  WJien  tJie  priests  blew  "  ( Auth.  Vers.)  : 
The  word  "  when  "  is  not  in  the  original.  Keil  more 
correctly  renders  "  the  priests  had  blown  the  trumpets, 
tJien  Josliua  said"  etc. 

Ver.  17. — Dnp,  once  Dnri  (Zech.  xiv.  1 1),  "a  thing- 
devoted  "  :  Sept.  dvaOefJia,  from  onn,  to  shut  up,  and 
hence,  to  devote,  to  consecrate,  and  to  exterminate 
(Ges.,  Lex.;  see  Levit.  xxvii.  21,  28,  29).  Jericho, 
as  being  the  first  city  captured  in  Canaan,  was  to  be 
devoted  with  all  its  inhabitants  (except  Rachabh  and 
her  household)  and  property  to  destruction,  in  vin 
dication  of  the  Divine  justice  in  the  punishment 
of  the  wicked,  and  as  a  kind  of  firstfruits  to  the 
Lord,  in  acknowledgment  of  His  gift  of  the  land, 
and  of  His  help  in  its  conquest.  In  the  case  of 
the  other  Canaanitish  cities  the  inhabitants  only 
were  to  be  destroyed,  but  the  cattle  and  other 
possessions  became  the  booty  of  the  conquerors 
(Josh.  viii.  26-7),  whereas  in  Jericho  nothing  was  to 
be  preserved  (ver.  21),  except  the  silver  and  gold, 
etc.  (ver.  1 9),  which,  being  indestructible,  were  to  be 
brought  into  the  treasury  of  the  Lord  (cf.  Joseph., 
Antiq.,v.,  I,  5).  nntf?nn:  Hiph.  3  p.  f.  s.,  with  n  parag., 
which  is  perhaps  emphatic,  "  she  carefully  concealed" 
written  in  ver.  25,  ns'acin,  but  the  form  here  is  borrowed 
from  verbs  r\h  (see  §  75,  Rem.  vi.,  21,  a).  Another 
reason  for  her  preservation  was  the  oath  of  the  spies 
(ii.  14). 

Ver.  1 8. — "But  only  be  yc  on  your  guard  against 
tJie  devoted  thing,  lest  ye  devote  a  thing  to  God,  and 
take  of  the  thing  devoted"  :  •innnrrta  has  not,  accord- 


So  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

ing  to  the  Auth.  Vers.,  a  reflex  sense,  "  lest  ye  make 
yourselves  accursed"  nor,  as  Kimchi  and  Drusius 
say,  is  the  -i  before  Dflni?1?  explanatory  of  the  fore 
going  verb,  e.g.,  "  tliat  is,  lest  ye  take  /"  but  Joshua 
here  warns  the  Israelites  not  to  appropriate  to  them 
selves  what  they  had  previously  devoted  to  God 
(cf.  Deut.  xiii.  17).  Among  the  ancient  Gauls  and 
Germans  there  were  similar  enactments  with  regard 
to  what  had  been  devoted  to  their  deities  (see 
Caesar's  Bell.  Gall.,  vi.,  17  ;  Tacit.,  Annal.,  xiii.,  57). 
In  the  last  clause,  Drray  may  contain  an  allusion  to 
Achan  (vii.  25),  or  may  be  used  by  the  author  un- 
designedly,  since  the  same  verb  in  the  same  sense 
occurs  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  30. 

Ver.  1 9.— -IV1N  :  Accus.  loci.  (§  118,  i,  a).  The 
reference  is  to  the  treasury  in  the  Tabernacle  (cf. 
ver.  24  and  Numb.  xxxi.  54). 

Vers.  20-25  (Execution  of  tJie  above-mentioned 
Commands  of  Joshua], — Ver.  20. — Dyn  inji,  "and  so 
the  people  sJiouted"  :  Hiph.  imperf.  apoc.  of  y-n,  to 
make  a  loud  noise  :  \  (see  §  49,  2).  It  might  seem 
from  the  words  which  next  follow,  viz.,  "  and  they 
blew"  etc.,  that  the  shouting  preceded  the  blowing 
of  the  trumpets,  but  the  next  clause  shows  that 
such  was  not  the  case.  As  Joshua,  in  ver.  16,  had 
mentioned  shouting  only,  this,  as  Keil  conjectures, 
may  explain  the  order  of  the  words  here.  On  the 
remainder  of  this  verse  see  note  ver.  5. 

Vers.  2 1 . — nnn  ^  •  •  •  -lonq?!,  "  and  they  utterly 
destroyed  (devoted)  with  the  edge  of  the  sword "  (cf. 
Deut.  xiii.  16,  where  the  same  expression  is  used 
synonymously  with  nnn  ^  n|D)-  ^  is  here  used  of 
the  instrument  (see  Ges.,  Lex.} ;  it  is  a  particle  which 


VERS.  22,  23.]          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  81 

properly  denotes  relation  in  the  widest  sense,  and 
is  most  commonly  =  "  as  to"  "  ivith  respect  to," 
the  precise  relation  being  left  to  be  determined 
by  the  context.  The  wholesale  extermination  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Jericho  was  justified  by  their 
enormous  wickedness,  the  time  given  them  for 
repentance,  and  the  necessity  of  making  them  a 
warning  to  others,  and  to  the  Israelites  in  particular, 
of  the  awful  consequences  of  sin.  That  many  inno 
cent  children  were  involved  in  the  destruction  shows 
that  the  guilt  of  parents  may  be  visited  in  this  life 
on  their  offspring,  though  doubtless  all  who  die  in 
infancy  are  objects  of  the  Divine  mercy,  being  de 
livered  from  sin  and  its  consequences,  and  made 
partakers  of  eternal  happiness. 

Vers.  22. — "ipx  is  used  here  as  a  pluperfect 
(Rosenm.  and  Keil),  for  it  is  hardly  likely  that  this 
order  was  given  only  when  the  carnage  had  begun, 
and  not  when  the  commands  of  Joshua  were  issued 
(ver.  17,  etc.)  "  Go  ye  .  .  .  house"  :  Hence  it  appears 
that  that  portion  of  the  wall,  against  which  the  house 
of  Rachabh  had  been  built,  had  not  fallen  with  the 
rest  ;  a  clear  proof  of  the  Divine  interposition  in  her 
favour.  "  As  ye  swore  unto  Jier  "  (see  ii.  14). 

Ver.  23. — onw  :  Not,  as  Kimchi,  "-servants" 
though  "W3,  like  puer,  sometimes  means  a  servant, 
but  "young  men"  as  in  A.  V.,  Sept.  Suo  veavio-KOi, 
Vulg.  juvenes  (cf.  Gen.  xxii.  3,  xxxiv.  19,  xxxvii.  2; 
Judges  viii.  20).  "Her  brothers":  But  including 
sisters,  who  are  mentioned  ii.  13.  ^  •  •  •  ^?~n^,  "  all 
who  belonged  to  her"  i.e.,  all  her  household,  not  all 
her  goods,  of  which  no  more  could  have  been  re 
moved  than  each  person  could  carry  (cf.  ii.  13). 

6 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

"  All  her  families"  (Hebrew),  i.e.,  all  her  relatives  by 
blood  or  marriage.  "And  they  left  them  (lit.,  made 
them  to  rest)  outside  tJie  camp"  etc.  Till  they  had 
been  proselytized  to  the  Jewish  religion,  they  could 
not  be  admitted  to  the  camp,  which  was  hallowed  by 
the  ark,  the  seat  of  God's  presence. 

Ver.  24. — "And  tJiey  burnt"  (see  note,  ver.  17): 
Rachabh's  house  was  no  doubt  consumed  also,  and, 
therefore,  when  "  travellers  of  the  middle  ages  pre 
tend  that  they  found  the  house  still  standing,  we 
must  set  this  down  as  one  of  the  many  delusions 
which  were  kept  alive  for  centuries  by  pious  supersti 
tion  in  the  Holy  Land  "  (Keil).  "  The  house  of 
Jehovah"  i.e.,  the  Tabernacle  (cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  20  ; 
Psalm  v.  8)  :  The  term  JV2  is  also  used  of  a  tent,  or 
'  movable  dwelling,  in  Gen.  xxvii.  15. 

Ver.  25. — "And  she  dwelt  .  .  .  unto  this  day"  : 
Hence  it  seems  that  she  was  alive  when  this  history 
was  written,  and  the  fact  that  she  dwelt  in  Israel 
implies  that  she  had  embraced  the  Hebrew  religion. 

Ver.  26  (Curse  on  the  Rebuilder  of  Jericho]. — 
"  And  Joshua  adjured  (them),"  i.e.,  "  he  solemnly 
charged  them  "  (cf.  I  Kings  xxii.  1 6),  or  "  made  to 
swear  "  (cf.  Gen.  xxiv.  3,  and  the  Greek  e£o/3/a£o), 
Matt.  xxvi.  63).  "inx,  "cursed"  (cf.  the  curse  of 
Agamemnon  on  Ilium,  Strabo,  xiii.,  ch.  I,  §  42  ; 
and  of  Scipio  on  Carthage,  Appian,  lib.  i.,  cap.  20). 
"  Before  Jehovah"  i.e.,  Jehovah  Himself  being  the 
judge,  and  inflicting  the  punishment.  "  Who  riseth 
up  and  buildetli"  i.e.,  who  shall  attempt  to  build  (cf. 
Neh.  ii.  1 8,  "  Let  us  rise  up  and  build"  i.e.,  let  us 
begin  or  attempt  to  build).  Knobel,  Kitto  (Encyc.  of 
Bib.  Lit.},  and  others,  understand  rm  here  in  its 


VER.  27.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOSHUA.  83 

ordinary  sense,  "  to  build  ;  "  but  it  rather  denotes  "  to 
fortify,"  for  it  has  that  meaning  in  2  Chron.  xiv., 
where,  after  it  is  said  that  Asa  built  fenced  cities  in 
Judah  (ver.  6),  it  is  added  that  he  said  unto  Judah, 
"  Let  us  build  these  cities "  (i.e.,  let  us  fortify  these 
cities  which  have  been  already  built),  and  make  about 
them  walls  and  towers,  etc.;  so  in  i  Kings  xv.  22, 
"  Asa  built "  (i.e.,  fortified)  with  them  Geba  of  Benja 
min  and  Mizpeh"  It  is  clear, too,  that  before  Hiel,  in 
the  reign  of  Asa,  incurred  this  curse  (i  Kings  xvi. 
34),  Jericho  had  been  rebuilt  (see  Josh,  xviii.  2 1  ; 
Judges  iii.  1352  Sam.  x.  5),  and  it  is  not  stated  that 
it  had  been  rebuilt  on  a  different  site  from  that  of 
the  ancient  town.  Further,  the  expression  "  to  set  tip 
the  gates"  is  such  as  could  be  appropriately  employed 
in  reference  only  to  the  fortification  of  the  town. 
nb^a,  "  In  his  first-born  "  :  The  prep,  a  denotes 
the  price  in  exchange  for  which  a  thing  is  procured 
(Ges.,  Lex.,  B.,  9).  Keil  and  many  others  suppose 
that  the  rebuilder  of  the  city  was  threatened  with 
the  loss  of  all  his  children,  beginning  from  the  eldest 
to  the  youngest,  but  Josephus  (Antiq.,  v.,  i.,  8), 
Theodoret,  Knobel,  and  Bishop  Wordsworth  limit  it 
to  the  death  of  the  eldest  and  youngest.  Certainly, 
there  is  no  express  mention  made  of  any  other 
children,  either  here  or  in  i  Kings  xvi.  34,  where  the 
fulfilment  of  the  curse  is  mentioned.  Perhaps  the 
rhythmical  form  in  which  the  curse  is  expressed  may 
have  been  designed  to  fix  it  in  the  memory  of  the 
people  (Bishop  Wordsworth). 

Ver.  27  (JosJmds  Renown). — "Jehovah  was  with 
Joshua"  (cf.  the  promise,  i.  5,  9).  uc^,  "report," 
and  hence  "fame,"  occurs  again  in  ix.  9  ;  Jer.  vi.  24  ; 


84  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vi. 

Esther  ix.  4,  only  ;  in  the  Pentateuch  the  form  used 
is  IW  (see  Gen.  xxix.  I  3  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  I  ;  Numb, 
xiv.  i  5  ;  Deut.  ii.  25). 

Note  that  the  overthrow  of  Jericho  cannot  be 
accounted  for  from  natural  causes,  but  was  un 
doubtedly  brought  about  by  Divine  interposition. 
Not  only  is  such  interposition  clearly  indicated 
throughout  the  narrative,  but  was  obviously  necessary, 
because  the  Israelites,  being  a  nomad  people,  and 
unacquainted  with  the  art  of  besieging  cities,  could 
not  have  taken  a  place  so  strong  as  Jericho  without 
supernatural  aid.  The  city  also,  by  its  position,  was 
the  key  of  the  eastern  pass  to  Canaan,  and,  therefore, 
its  miraculous  conquest  at  the  outset  of  the  invasion 
was  calculated  to  render  the  Israelites  confident  that 
God  was  on  their  side,  and  would  be  with  them 
throughout  their  enterprise,  while,  at  the  same  time,  it 
struck  their  enemies  with  dismay.  Further,  its  over 
throw  was  prophetical  and  typical,  for  the  vision  of 
the  seven  trumpets  in  the  Apocalypse  (Rev.  viii.  2, 
etc.),  corresponds  to  the  narrative  of  the  siege  and 
capture  of  Jericho.  Christ,  our  Divine  Joshua,  now 
enables  His  people  to  overcome  the  world  by  faith 
(i  John  v.  4),  but  at  His  second  coming  He  will 
"  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the  voice  of 
the  arcJiangel  and  the  trump  of  God"  (i  Thess.  iv. 
1 6),  and  then  will  take  place  the  final  judgment 
of  all  His  enemies.  Till,  however,  the  full  time 
(denoted  often  in  Scripture  by  the  perfect  number 
seven)  for  the  execution  of  God's  final  purposes 
arrives,  the  overthrow  of  Satan's  empire  is  being 
carried  on  by  means  which,  to  the  eye  of  sense, 
appear  inadequate  to  the  purpose.  Such  a  means  is 


VER.  I.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  85 

the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  which  was  "  to  the  Jews 
a  stumbling-block  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness"  but 
which  was,  and  still  is,  "  tJie  poiver  of  God  imto 
salvation  to  every  one  who  belicvctJi"  Ministers  in 
themselves  are  mere  "  earthen  vessels"  (2  Cor.  iv. 
7),  but  God  magnifies  His  own  power  in  the  use  of 
them,  for  their  weapons  are  "  not  carnal,  but  mighty 
through  God  to  the  pulling  down  of  stt  .ngJwlds" 


CHAPTER   VII. 

Achan's   Theft  and  Punishment. 


Ver.  I  (The  Crime  of  Achan}.  —  "?y»  byy  :  For  the 
cognate  accus.  see  §  138,  I,  Rem.  i.,  and  cf.  djuapra- 
VOVTO.  apapTiav  (  I  John  v.  1  6).  ^BD,  prim.,  "  to  cover" 
(Ges.,  Lex.},  whence  Wp,  "  an  upper  garment  ;  "  then 
"  to  act  covertly,"  and  hence  "  falsely,  treacherously  " 
(Lev.  v.  15),  as  here,  construed  with  ?  of  the  thing, 
and  in  xxii.  1  6,  with  ?,  of  the  person.  £nn?,  "  in  that 
which  had  been  devoted  to  tJie  Lord"  The  sin,  there 
fore,  was  sacrilege,  'b?  \J?  :  The  sin  of  Achan  is  here 
imputed  to  all  the  Israelites,  because  the  whole  nation 
was  in  covenant  with  God  (see  ver.  11),  and,  there 
fore,  the  sin  of  one  among  them  brought  pollution 
upon  the  whole  as  a  body.  The  Sept.,  after  rendering 
"  the  children  of  Israel  committed  a  transgression," 
adds,  by  way  of  explanation,  /cat  eVocr^>icrafTO  0.770 
TOV  avadlpaTos,  "  and  purloined  part  of  the  accursed 
thing"  words  similar  to  those  used  respecting  the 
sacrilege  of  Ananias,  e^ocr^tVaro  O.TTO  rrjs  TLjjLrjs 
(Acts  v.  l).  tpl?,  so  in  xxii.  20,  but  "Dl?,  in  I  Chron. 


S6  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 

ii.  7  (probably  as  a  play  upon  the  word  "i?y,  to  trouble, 
cf.  ver.  25,  below),  and  so  in  the  Vat.  Sept.  (passim}  ; 
Josephus,  "A^apos  (Antiq.,  lib.  v.,  c.  I,  §  10).  Zabh- 
dt,  called  Zimri  (i  Chron.  ii.  6).  Zerach,  the  twin- 
brother  of  Perez,  sons  of  Judah  by  Tamar  (Gen. 
xxxviii.  29,  30).  Thus  Achan  was  the  fourth  in 
descent  from  Judah,  but,  as  in  other  cases,  so  here, 
some  generations  have  been  omitted,  perhaps  between 
Zerach  and  Zabhdi.  It  is  probable  from  the  character 
of  his  ancestry  that  he  had  not  been  religiously 
brought  up.  On  nap,  see  iii.  12.  "And  the  anger 
of  Jehovah"  etc.  :  Inasmuch  as  the  whole  nation  was 
contaminated  by  the  sin  of  Achan,  it  justly  incurred 
Jehovah's  displeasure. 

Vers.  2-5  (The  Defeat  before  'Ay). — Ver.  2. — 
'Ay,1  always  written  (with  the  article)  in  Hebrew 
wn  (§  109,  3),  except  in  Jer.  xlix.  3,  where  a 
different  town  belonging  to  the  Ammonites  is 
referred  to  ;  Sept.,  Fat,  but  'Ayycu  in  Gen.  xii.  8, 
written  JVtf,  Isa.  x.  28,  and  N»y  in  Chaldee,  Neh.  xi.  3  I : 
These  two  latter  names  being  probably  variations  only 
of  the  name  'Ay  here  mentioned,  w  means  "  a  heap 
of  ruins"  according  to  Gesen.  (Lex.},  but  according 
to  Rosenm.  is  here  w,  cumulus y  and  refers  to 
its  situation  on  a  hill.  The  opinion  of  Dean 
Stanley  that  Haai  (the  ruins)  may  have  been  a  later 
name  to  indicate  the  fall  of  the  city  (Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  203)  is  irreconcilable  with  the  fact  that  in  the  time 
of  Abraham  the  city  was  so  called  (Gen.  xii.  8).  Its 
site,  though  known  in  the  time  of  Eusebius  (Onom. 


1  According  to  the  Jewish  pronunciation  the  "yodh  "  here 
retains  its  consonant  power  (Gr.,  §  8,  5). 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  87 


),  has  long   been  the    subject  of  conjecture. 
Dean  Stanley  places  it  at  the  head  of  Wady  Harith  ; 
Krafft,   Strauss,  Ritter,   and    Keil  identify  its    ruins 
with  those  of  Medinet  Gat,  five  miles  east  of  Bethel, 
and  between    Wady  FaraJi  and    Wady  cs  Suweinit. 
Probably,    however,    Van    de    Velde    is    correct    in 
supposing  that  the  true    site  is    T  ell-  el-  H  ajar,    the 
Mount  of  Stones,  about  forty-five  minutes  south-east 
of   Bethel  (cf.   Clark's  Bib.  Atlas,  Plate  X.).      This 
site  answers  in    every  way   to  the   requirements  of 
the  Scripture  account  of  the  conquest  of  'Ay,  (see 
V.  de    Velde's    narrative,    ii.,    278  —  282,   and  Pal. 
Fund   Reports,    1881,  p.  36).     Dy,  "near"  cf.   Gen. 
xxv.  ii    (Ges.,  Lex^}.     Beth-  Avert  (house  of  vanity), 
on  the  northern  border  of  Benjamin,  xviii.  1  2,  and 
east    of    Bethel,    lying    between    it    and    Michmash 
(i  Sam.  xiii.    5).     The  name  was  afterwards  trans 
ferred  by  the  Prophet  Hosea  to  Bethel,  to  denote 
that,  though  once  the  house  of  God,  it  had  become 
a  house  of  idols  (Hos.  iv.  15,  v.  8,  x.  5).     Beth-'El 
(house  of  God),  anciently  called  Luz  (=  almond-tree), 
Gen.  xxviii.    19;    Judges  i.   23,  but  by  anticipation 
Bethel  (Gen.   xii.    8),  one  of  the  cities   assigned   to 
Benjamin    (Josh,    xviii.     1  3),    and    situated    on    its 
northern  boundary,  but  afterwards  taken  by  Ephraim 
(Judges  i.  22-26),  and  made  one  of  the  two  principal 
seats  of  Jeroboam's  idolatry.      It  lay  in  the  direct 
thoroughfare  of    Palestine,  whence  the   expressions 
"  the  highway  that  goeth  up  to  Bethel  "  (Judges  xx. 
31),  "the  highway    that  goeth    up  from   Bethel  to 
Shechem  "   (Judges  xxi.    19).      No  place   (with  the 
single  exception  of  Shechem)    comprises    a    longer 
series  of  remarkable  scenes  of  sacred  history  (Sin. 


88  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 

and  Pal.,  p.  2  1 7).  It  is  probably  the  same  as  the 
modern  Beitdn  or  Beitin,  twelve  miles  north  of 
Jerusalem,  on  the  road  from  the  latter  to  Sichem 
(Nablus).  (Robinson's  Palestine,  ii.,  p.  126).  by. 
implies  an  ascent  to  the  city  from  the  plains  of 
Jericho.  The  valley  of  the  Jordan  is  3,000  feet 
below  the  mountains  of  Judaea  (Stanley's  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  p.  283),  and  Bethel  lay  2,890  feet  above  the 
sea  (Great  Pal.  Map]. 

Ver  3. — -133,  "and  let  them  smite"  i.e.,  let  them 
take  by  assault  (Ges.,  Lex.,  on  rt33,  Sept.  e/ 
<rd~(Da-av  (cf.  2  Kings  iii.  19  ;  I  Chron.  xx.  i) 
l^yyrpx  seems  to  have  a  pregnant  sense,  viz.,  weary 
not  by  leading  thither?  "*3,  "for  they"  (i.e.  the  in 
habitants  of  'Ay)  "  are  few  ;  "  it  appears  from  viii.  2  5 
that  the  total  population  of  'Ay  was  about  twelve 
thousand  ;  hence  three  thousand  men  might  have  been 
supposed  quite  sufficient  for  its  conquest. 

Ver.  4. — "And  they  fled  before  the  men  of 'Ay"  : 
The  Sept.  has  t-<j>vyov  O.TTO  TrpocraiTr  w,  /c-r.X.,  as 
though  it  had  read  r^p  ;  and  thus  their  rendering 
might  imply  that  the  Israelites  fled  at  the  very  sight 
of  their  enemies :  such  a  supposition,  however,  is 
unnecessary ;  there  may  have  been  an  engagement, 
and  what  caused  the  defeat  of  the  Israelites  was  not 
the  prowess  of  the  men  of  'Ay,  but  the  anger  of  God 
on  account  of  the  sin  of  Achan  ;  see  the  warning 
which  had  been  given  (Deut.  xxiii.  9).  Hence  we 
may  learn  how  the  sin  of  even  one  individual  may 
bring  down  calamity  upon  a  whole  people  i^cf.  the 
consequence  of  Saul's  sin  in  breaking  his  covenant 
with  the  Gibeonites,  2  Sam.  xxi.  i,  and  of  David's 
sin  in  numbering  the  people,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  10-15)  ; 


VERS.  5,  6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  89 

and   be,  therefore,  the  more  careful  individually    to 
avoid  its  commission,  and  to  deter  others  from  it. 

Ver.  5. — nnn^rny  :  Some  take  the  noun  as  an 
appellative,  thus  Gesenius  (see  "13*1?,  Ler.>  3,  p.  803), 
"even  to  destruction"  as  in  Prov.  xvi.  18  ;  Isa.  i.  28; 
Lam.  ii.  1 1,  iii.  47  ;  Sept.  (Alex.),  (rvverpi^av 
avrovs,  perhaps  from  a  different  reading  ;  Keil,  "  as 
far  as  the  stone  quarries"  for  "Q2>  means  lit.  "  a 
breaking."  But  perhaps  the  word  has  reference  to 
the  deep  fissures  in  the  ground  in  that  particular 
locality  ;  thus  Dean  Stanley  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  ch.  iv., 
p.  202)  understands  by  it  the  breakings  or  fissures  at 
the  opening  of  the  passes.  "  In  the  going  down"  or 
"  declivity,"  viz.,  that  into  the  Jordan  valley.  With 
the  expression  "  the  hearts  melted "  cf.  ii.  1 1  ;  here 
it  is  rendered  more  emphatic  by  the  simile  in  the 
last  clause. 

Vers.  6-9  (Joshuas  Prayer). — Ver.  6. — "Rent  his 
clothes."  Ffoftty  properly  denotes  the  ordinary  outer 
garment,  but  is  here  used  in  the  plural,  as  in 
Gen.  xxxvii.  34,  for  clothes  generally.  Rending 
of  the  clothes  was  designed  to  be  a  symbol  of 
rending  of  the  heart  (Joel  ii.  13).  "  And  fell  upon 
his  face"  (cf.  Numb.  xx.  6).  "  Befor'c  the  ark"  i.e., 
before  the  Tabernacle,  in  which  the  ark  was,  and 
with  his  face  towards  the  ark.  "  Until  the  eventide  "  : 
And,  therefore,  we  may  infer  that  they  fasted  during 
the  whole  time  (see  2  Sam.  i.  12).  "  Tlie  Elders'  :  The 
term  is  applied  to  the  heads  of  tribes,  families,  and 
households.  They  were  the  representatives  of  the 
people  of  Israel,  and  seem  from  the  earliest  period 
to  have  formed  a  political  council  or  senate  (Exod.  iii. 
1 6,  iv.  29).  "  And  put "  (lit.  made  to  ascend)  "  dust  " 


90  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.-  [CHAP.  vn. 

(cf.  Job  ii.  12;  I  Sam.  iv.  12;  2  Sam.  i.  2).  So 
Achilles,  when  he  heard  of  the  death  of  Patroclus, 
//.,  ^,  22,  etc.,  and  Latimis,  when  he  grieved  for  the 
death  of  his  queen  (Alneid,  xii.,  609-61 1,  "it  scissa 
veste  Latinus,  etc."}. 

Ver.  7. — njrp,  so  pointed,  because  it  follows  1)7$ 
but  to  be  pronounced  Elohim  (see  Keil  on  Gen.  ii.  4). 
fi~i3yn  is  an  unusual  form  for  rnnyn  (§63,  Rem.  4), 
cf.  r6yn,  for  r6in,  Hab.  i.  15.  The  infin.  absol.  "ingn, 
with  the  unusual  i  in  the  last  syllable,  is  here  put  for 
emphasis  after  the  finite  verb  (§  131,3  Rem.,  i),  "  Why 
hast  thou  at  all  brought  over  "  (Auth.  Vers.),  or,  "  Why 
hast  thou  in  so  wonderful  a  manner  brought  us  over" 
"  The  Emorite"  iii.  10.  303  •  •  •  b\,  "And  would  that 
we  had  been  content  to  remain  "  :  Sept.,  KCU  et  /care/x-et- 
vafjiev,  /c.T.X.,  where  et  =  ei#e,  utinam  (see  for 
the  construction,  §  142,  3,  a)  ;  the  primary  meaning 
of  bwfn  is  "  he  willed"  or  "  let  himself  be  pleased," 
Hiph.  of  b«»,  to  will,  to  wish  (Ges.,  in  Thess.}  ;  cf.  Keil 
on  Exod.  ii.  2  i). 

Ver.  8. — »3,  a  particle  of  entreaty,  "Pray"  con 
tracted  from  ^3,  prayer,  rt.  ni?3,  to  ask  ;  always  joined 
with  "on^  or  »3'n^  (Gen.  xliii.  20,  xliv.  18  ;  Exod.  iv. 
10,  13).  "  What  shall  I  say  after  that  Israel  hath 
turned  the  neck  before  his  enemies  ?  "  ffty  ^?n  or  rus 
t$)  (ver.  1 2)  corresponds  to  our  expression,  "  to  turn 
the  back,"  i.e.,  to  flee. 

Ver.  9. — "All  the  inhabitants  of  the  land"  :  Here 
probably  the  Philistines,  who  were  not  of  Canaanitish 
race  (Gen.  x.  14),  but  had  established  themselves  in 
place  of  the  Avvim,  whom  they  had  exterminated 
(Deut.  ii.  23).  33D,  followed  by  by,  means  "to  sur 
round  in  a  hostile  manner"  (cf.  Gen.  xix.  4.  "And 


VERS.  10,  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  91 

what  wilt  Thou  do  to  (i.e.,  with  regard  to)  Thy  Great 
Name  ?  "  i.e.,  how  wilt  Thou  preserve  it  from  being 
dishonoured  among  the  heathen,  who  will  impute 
the  destruction  of  Israel  to  a  want  of  faithfulness,  or 
power,  on  Thy  part  to  fulfil  to  them  Thy  promises  ? 
See  a  similar  plea  urged  by  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  I  2  ; 
Numb.  xiv.  13  ;  Deut.  ix.  28).  The  (••)  in  the  last 
syllable  of  nbyri  is  regarded  by  Gesenius  as  an 
Aramaism  (see  §  75,Rem.  v.,  17).  Maurer  considers 
such  forms  as  instances  of  a  constructive  state  in 
verbs,  analogous  to  that  of  nouns  ending  in  n— ,  which 
in  construction  become  n—  (§  89,  2,  c).  Joshua's 
piety  was  shown  by  this  his  concern  for  the  Divine 
glory,  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  despondency  and 
unbelief,  which  his  complaint  and  expostulation 
evinced,  are  not  to  be  excused,  for  he  should  have 
called  to  mind  God's  past  mercies,  and  have  relied 
upon  His  gracious  promises.  But  here  we  see  how 
impartially  Holy  Scripture  records  the  failings  of 
good  men. 

Vers.  10-15  (Jehovah's  Answer  and  Directions  to 
Joshua]. — Ver.  10. — ^  (in  pause  for  *fa,  §  103,  2,  a) 
gives  greater  intensity  to  the  verb,  nr,  "thus"  (cf.  Gen. 
xxv.  22).  This  reproof  on  the  part  of  God  indicated 
that  the  time  spent  in  fruitless  lamentation  should  be 
employed  in  earnest  reformation. 

Ver.  ii. — "  Israel  hatJi  sinned"  see  on  ver.  i.  D3, 
"also;"  the  repetition  of  this  word  before  each 
clause  of  the  indictment  is  intended  to  put  their  guilt 
in  the  strongest  light.  "  They  have  transgressed  my 
covenant"  i.e.y  the  covenant  mentioned  in  Exod.  xix. 
8,  xxiv.  7,  in  which  they  had  pledged  themselves  to 
obey  all  the  commands  ®f  God  (cf.  Josh.  i.  16-18). 


92  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 

Some,  as  Drusius,  think  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
command  given  with  respect  to  Jericho  (vi.  18-19), 
and  render  DJ1.  in  the  next  clause  "  for  even  "  (cf.Auth. 
Vers.),  but  the  rendering  "  and  also  "  marks  their  dis 
obedience  with  regard  to  Jericho  as  one  particular 
item  of  their  general  breach  of  the  covenant.  (See 
above  in  this  note.)  D"}nrr)p,  "  of  the  ban"  or 
"  devoted  tiling"  of  which  they  had  been  expressly 
charged  not  to  take  (vi.  18-19).  -l^rto  DJ1:,  ''and have 
also  lied  " :  Though  no  denial  of  the  theft  is  recorded, 
yet  perhaps  Joshua,  after  the  destruction  of  Jericho, 
may  have  inquired  whether  the  silver  and  gold,  etc., 
had  been  brought  into  the  treasury  of  the  Lord, 
and  all  else  destroyed,  and  may  have  been  assured 
that  it  had  ;  or,  if  no  inquiry  had  been  made,  the 
verb  may  here  denote  concealment  of  what  ought 
to  have  been  confessed  with  penitence  (Keil  after 
Schmidt).  "  A  mong  their  own  stuff"  (A.V.),  or  "house 
furniture  "  :  This  was  the  climax  of  their  offence, 
viz.,  the  appropriation  to  their  own  use  of  what  had 
been  consecrated  to  God  and  stolen  from  Him. 

Ver.  12. — 'by  t6),  "  Therefore  the  sons  of  Israel 
cannot  stand,"  etc.  \  often  means  "  therefore "  at 
the  beginning  of  a  sentence,  when  the  reason  is 
contained  in  what  preceded  :  see  Ges.,  Lex.  (5),  p. 
235.  -13??  syTJJ,  "they  turn  the  neck"  (cf.  ver.  8). 
S^rfi  •  •  •  *3,  "for  they  have  become  a  devoted  thing" 
i.e.,  have  fallen  under  the  ban  (cf.  vi.  18).  "Neither 
will  I  be  with  you  any  more,  unless  ye  shall 
destroy"  etc.  (cf.  St.  Paul's  address  to  his  Corin 
thian  converts,  I  Cor.  v.  6,  7,  13;  2  Cor.  vi. 

17,  1 8). 

Ver.  13. — Dj5,  "arise":  Not  implying,  as  in  ver.  10, 


VER.  14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  93 

that  Joshua  was  still  lying  on  the  ground,  but  inviting 
him  to  activity.  "  Sanctify  the people"  i.e.,  command 
them  to  sanctify,  or  to  purify  themselves  (cf.  iii.  5). 
"  Thou  canst  not  stand"  etc.  ;  so  in  our  spiritual  con 
flicts  one  hidden,  unrepented,  sin  may  lead  to  our 
discomfiture. 

Ver.  1 4. — Dflfli?^,  "  then  ye  shall  approach"  or  lit, 
"ye  shall  be  brought  near  "  :  The  same  word  in  Niphal 
occurs  again  in  Exod.  xxii.  7  only,  where  it  denotes, 
as  here,  an  involuntary  approach,  and  is  followed  by 
D'n^N-^K,  "to  God,"  i.e.,  to  the  place  where  judgment 
was  given  in  God's  Name.  "  Which  Jehovah  shall 
take "  :  As  I?1?  is  used  of  taking  by  lot  in  I  Sam. 
x.  20,  xiv.  42,  so  probably  here  ;  thus  Josephus, 
after  recording  this  command  of  God,  says  that 
Joshua  /caret  (j)v\r)v  €K\yjpov  (Antiq.,  lib.  v.,  cap.  i., 
§  1 4).  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  lot "  is  bnf 3,  a  stone, 
or  pebble,  which,  having  a  name  inscribed  on  it,  was 
cast  into  an  urn,  whence  the  expression,  "  the  lot  came 
up"  (Josh,  xviii.  1 1)  and  "came  out"  (xix.  i).  From 
Prov.  xvi.  33  it  appears  that  the  lot  was  thought  to 
be  under  the  Divine  direction.  It  was  used  on  many 
occasions  among  the  Jews,  as,  e.g.,  in  the  apportion 
ment  of  land  (Numb.  xxvi.  5  5  ;  Josh.  xiv.  2  [see 
note],  xviii.  10  ;  Acts  xiii.  19)  ;  the  appointment  of 
persons  to  offices  and  duties  (i  Sam.  x.  20,  21  ; 
Acts  i.  24-26  ;  cf.  Herod.,  iii.,  128,  vi.,  109);  the  divi 
sion  of  spoil  or  captives  (Joel  iii.  3  ;  Nahum  iii.  10  ; 
Matt,  xxvii.  35  ;  cf.  Xenophon,  Cyroped.,  iv.,  5,  55  ; 
Thucyd.,  iii.,  50)  ;  in  the  settlement  of  doubtful 
questions  (Prov.  xvi.  33,  xviii.  18)  ;  in  the  detection 
of  guilty  persons,  as  here  of  Achan,  of  Jonathan 
(i  Sam.  xiv.  41,  42),  of  Jonah  (Jonah  i.  7),  '», 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  VH. 

"families"-.  From  nQK>,  to  spread  out;  each  tribe 
was  divided  into  families,  and  each  family  into 
houses,  and  each  house  into  persons  (Keil).  In 
Judges  vi.  15,  a  "thousand"  is  used  as  = 
"  mishpach "  (cf.  I  Sam.  x.  19,  21),  because  the 
number  of  the  heads,  or  chiefs,  of  the  families  in  a 
tribe  would,  on  the  average,  amount  to  that  number. 
(See  Keil  on  Exod.  xviii.  25  ;  Numb.  i.  16). 

Ver.  15. — D^na  'an,  "he  who  is  taken  in  (with)  the 
ban"  i.e.,  he,  on  whom  the  lot  falls,  and  who  is 
thus  proved  to  have  stolen  what  was  devoted  to  God. 
fp'*^  :  The  Niph.  future  is  here  used  as  an  impers.  ac 
tive,  and  followed  by  the  object  of  the  action  in  the 
accus.  (§  143,  i,  a).  As  it  appears  from  ver.  25  that 
Achan  was  stoned,  the  burning  can  refer  to  his  dead 
body  only.  The  severity  of  the  penalty  was  increased 
by  this  treatment  of  the  body  after  death.  "  He  Jiath 
transgressed  tJte  covenant  of  Jehovah  "  (see  ver.  1 1 )  : 
By  his  sacrilege  he  had  brought  himself  under  the 
ban,  ver.  1 2,  vi.  1 8,  and  was  justly  doomed,  like 
Jericho,  to  destruction.  "  Folly"  not  only  of  the  mind, 
but  of  the  heart ;  so  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Judges  xx.  6  ; 
2  Sam.  xiii.  12.  The  expression  "wrought  folly" 
is  not  found  in  the  later  books. 

Vers.  16-26  (The  Detection  of  Achan,  his  Con 
fession,  and  Punishment}. — Ver.  1 7. — "  The  family 
of  Judah "  :  For  the  sing.  "  mishpachath"  seven 
MSS.  (see  De  Rossi  in  Append.  Varr.  Lect.,  vol. 
iv.,  p.  227)  read  "  mishpechoth"  and  are  followed 
by  the  Sept.  and  Vulg.  Gesenius  and  Winer  say 
that  it  is  here  used  loosely  for  03^,  but  rather, 
according  to  Schmidt  and  Keil,  it  denotes  col 
lectively,  or  distributively,  all  the  families  of  Judah. 


VER.  18-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  95 


n|,"  man  by  man"  :  Some  MSS.  have  D^ro?,  which 
reading  is  followed  by  the  Aldine  edition  of  the  Sept., 
and  by  the  Vulg.,  also  by  Dathe,  Maurer,  Rosenm., 
and  others  ;  but  the  Alex.  Vers.  of  the  Sept.  has 
KO.T'  cu'Spas,  Vat.  Kar'  avSpa,  nor  is  there  any  reason 
to  alter  the  reading  in  the  Hebrew  text,  since  Dl"O^ 
may  denote,  not  that  all  individuals  composing  the 
houses,  but  only  their  chiefs,  were  present  at  the 
casting  of  the  lot.  So  Keil. 

Ver.  1  8.  —  "  Achan"  (see  note  on  ver.  i).  The 
detection  of  the  sin  of  Achan  strikingly  displays  the 
awful  omniscience  of  God,  and  the  truth  of  the 
declaration,  "  Evil  shall  hunt  the  wicked  man  to 
overthrow  him  "  (Psalm  cxl.  1  1). 

Ver.  1  9.  —  "  My  son  "  :  Spoken,  not  ironically,  but 
sincerely,  and  showing  us  that  judges,  while  they 
punish  offences,  ought,  as  far  as  justice  permits,  to 
be  merciful  to  the  offender.  "  Give  glory  .  .  .  and 
make  confession":  A  form  of  adjuration  (cf.  John 
ix.  24),  calling  on  a  man  to  tell  the  truth.  The 
confession  of  Achan  would  tend  to  the  glory  of 
God's  Omniscience,  Truth,  and  Holiness.  rnw, 
"  confession  "  (Ges.,  Lex.},  or  praise  (Keil),  cf.  Ezra 
x.  1  1  ;  but  as  the  latter  meaning  has  been  already 
expressed  by  the  word  TQ3,  the  former  seems 
preferable,  and  the  confession  would  be  virtually  a 
giving  of  praise  to  God. 

Ver.  20.  —  njpx,  "truly"  \  Adverb  of  affirmation 
(§  150,  3,  c.  ;  cf.  Gen.  xx.  12).  By  his  confession, 
which  was  full  and  explicit,  without  any  attempt  at 
excuse,  Achan  seems  to  have  been  truly  penitent, 
and  therefore,  though  punished  in  this  life,  may  have 
been  rendered  happy  in  the  next  (see  Prov.  xxviii.  1  3). 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 


Ver.  2  i  .  —  riKnxi,  "  and  I  saw  "  :  The  vowels  belong 
to  the  apoc.  form  intheQeri,  but  with  "Vav"  consec.  the 
full  form  without  apocope  frequently  occurs  in  verbs 
rh,  especially  in  the  first  person  (see  §  75,  Rem.  i., 
3,  e,  second  par.).      Note  that  the  loosely  connected 
sentences,  "  thus  and  thus  have  I  done  ;  and  I  saw 
.  .  .  and  I  coveted,"  etc.,  exhibit  the  simplicity  of 
the  Hebrew  style  (see  Ges.,Lex.  on  the  letter  1,  p.  233), 
and  well  express  the  disturbed  state  of  Achan's  mind. 
"  A  goodly  robe  (or  cloak)  of  Shinar  "  (see  Gen.  x.  i  o, 
xi.  2).     "i$,  from  TIN,  to  be  wide,  a  garment  worn  by 
kings  on  state  occasions  (Jonah  iii.  6),  also  by  prophets 
(i  Kings  xix.  13  ;   2  Kings  ii.  13,  14).      Shinar  was 
the  plain  in  which  Babylon  was  situated  (Gen.  x.  i  o, 
xi.  2).     The  Sept.  renders  the  term  in  Isa.  xi.  1  1  by 
Ba/SvAoma,  and  in  Zech.  v.  1  1   by  yr\  BaySuXco^o?  ; 
and  so  here  Aquila,  and  the  Chald.,  Syr.,  and  Arab. 
Versions  render  'y&  "IN,  "  a  Babylonish  cloak."     These 
cloaks  were  not  hairy  like  that  mentioned   in  Zech. 
xiii.  4,  but  smooth,  and  embroidered  with  pictures  of 
men  and  animals  (Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  lib.  viii.,  ch.  48)  ; 
Sept.  \jjL\7)i>  iroLKiXijv  ;   Vulg.  "  pallium-coccineum." 
As  Jericho  lay  in   the  route  from    Babylon  to  the 
ports  of  the  Mediterranean,  it  is  not  surprising  that 
articles  of  commerce  from  that  city,  or  at  least  from 
the   district   around    (for  it   cannot   be  proved  that 
the   garment   was   undoubtedly    Babylonish)   should 
have   been   found   in    it.      "  Two  hundred  shekels  of 
silver"  :  =  £,2$  in   English  money,  if  the  shekel  is 
valued   at   2s.   6d.      The    reference    is    to    ttncoined 
money,  as  there  is  no  mention  of  coined  money  in 
Scripture  before  the  Babylonish  captivity.    "  A  tongue 
of  gold"  :  Probably  a  golden  ornament  shaped  like  a 


VERS.  22,  23.]          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  97 

tongue.  The  name  "  lingula  "  was  given  by  the 
Romans  to  a  spoon  (Pliny,  N.  H.,  xxi.,  49),  and  to 
an  oblong  dagger  formed  in  the  shape  of  a  tongue 
(Gellius,  Noct.  Attic.,  x.,  25).  Gesenius  (Lex.}  thinks 
that  here  a  bar  of  gold,  resembling  a  tongue,  is 
meant ;  Vulg.,  "  regula  aurea."  "  Fifty  shekels  in 
respect  to  its  weight "  :  i.e.,  =  about  2  5  ounces,  at 
the  rate  of  about  half  an  ounce  avoirdupois,  or  220 
English  grains,  to  the  shekel.  "And  I  coveted  and 
took  them  " :  He  first  saw,  and  next  coveted,  and 
next  took  (cf.  the  several  steps  in  the  sin  of  Eve, 
Gen.  iii.  6).  D^pp,  not  merely  "  hid "  (A.  V.),  but 
"buried"  as  in  Gen.  xxxv.  4;  Exod.  ii.  12.  Josephus 
(Antiq.,  v.,  c.  I,  §  10)  says  that  Achan  dug  a  deep 
hole,  or  ditch,  in  his  tent,  and  put  there  the  Baby 
lonish  garment  and  the  wedge  of  gold,  supposing 
that  he  should  not  only  be  concealed  from  his  fellow- 
soldiers,  but  from  God  Himself  also,  ^nxn  :  The 
article  prefixed  to  a  noun  with  a  suffix  is  contrary 
to  the  rule  (§  no,  2)  ;.  it  may,  however,  be  regarded 
as  either  =  a  demonstrative  pronoun,  "  that  my 
tent"  (cf.  "PypLi,  viiL  33,  §  110,  2,  Rem.  a),  or, 
according  to  Hengstenberg  (ChristoL,  iii.,  p.  362), 
has  lost  its  force,  and  become  absorbed  into  the 
noun.  Hariri,  "  underneath  tliem"  i.e.,  the  cloak  of 
Shinar  was  probably  put  on  the  top,  and  below  it 
the  tongue  of  gold,  and  underneath  that  the  silver. 
The  fern.  suff.  is  a  neuter  coll.,  and  refers  to  all  the 
stolen  property  except  the  silver ;  Sept.  viroKara) 
avraiv. 

Ver.  22. — r6nfcn,  "to  the  tent"  nT,  loc.  (§  90,  2, a). 

Ver.   23. — Qi>V?l,  "and  they  placed  them":    Sept. 
avrcu     pv   means  to  pour  out,  and  so  the 

7 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 

Hiphil  form  p^'in  (see  2  Kings  iv.  5)  ;  but  P'-yn  has 
nearly  the  same  meaning  as  a»-yn  (Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  361), 
and  signifies  here  and  in  2  Sam.  xv.  24,  "  to  place" 
or  "  to  set."  "  Before  JeJwvaJi"  i.e.,  before  the  Taber 
nacle,  where  was  the  Ark,  the  seat  of  the  Divine 
Presence  (cf.  vi.  8). 

Ver.  24. — "  The  son  of  Serach"  i.e.,  the  great  grand 
son  of  Serach  (see  ver.  i).  "His  sons  and  Ids 
daughters  "  :  Because  in  Deut  xxiv.  1 6  it  is  forbidden 
that  children  should  be  put  to  death  for  the  sin  of 
their  parents,  Schulz,  Hess,  and  others,  have  thought 
that  Achan's  family  were  merely  obliged  to  be  spec 
tators  of  his  punishment,  that  they  might  take 
warning  therefrom  ;  it  is  probable,  however,  that 
they  were  privy  to  his  guilt,  since  the  stolen  goods 
had  been  hidden  in  the  midst  of  the  tent,  and  the 
fact  that  the  crime  of  Achan  had  brought  himself 
and  family  and  property  under  the  ban,  would  justly 
involve  all  in  the  same  fate  (see  ver.  15).  Moreover, 
it  is  a  principle  of  God's  government,  to  regard 
children  as  represented  in  their  parents,  and  parents 
in  their  children  ;  see  the  case  of  Canaan,  the  son  of 
.Ham  (Gen.  ix.  25),  and  the  death  of  the  firstborn  of 
the  Egyptians  (Exod.  xii.),  and  confer  the  declaration 
of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxxii.  i  8).  nitrnx]  :  This  and  the 
two  accusatives  which  follow  are  used  coll.  (§  108,  i). 
i1?  .  •  •  hi  715O,  "  and  all  its  furniture"  The  following 
words,  "  and  all  Israel  with  him"  are  to  be  joined 
with  \W\\\\  Rj5»i,  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse.  The 
reference  is  to  all  Israel  as  acting  by  their  chiefs 
and  representatives.  "  The  valley  of  AcJwr"  (i.e.,  of 
trouble).  pEy  is  always  translated  "  valley "  by 
A.  V.,  rt.  Per,  to  be  deep,  but  used  rather  of  lateral 


VER.  25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  99 

extension  than  depression,  like  /Baderj  av\rj  (//.,  v., 
142),  and  the  expression  deep,  as  opposed  to  shallow, 
house  ;  thus  the  word  is  not  applied  to  ravines,  but 
to  the  long  broad  sweeps  sometimes  found  between 
parallel  ranges  of  hills.  Such  is  the  valley  of 
Jezreel,  between  Gilboa  and  Little  Hermon  (Dean 
Stanley,  6".  and  P.,  Append.,  p.  481).  The  valley  of 
Achor  lay  to  the  south  or  south-west  of  Jericho,  and 
was  on  the  north  border  of  Judah  (xv.  7),  and  from  the 
camp  of  the  Israelites  at  Gilgal  there  were  probably 
ridges  to  be  ascended  before  the  valley  could  be 
reached,  hence  the  use  of  the  word  ??gj  here.  The 
name  "Achor"  is,  like  "Gilgal"  in  iv.  19,  used 
proleptically,  or  by  anticipation  (see  ver.  26). 

Ver.  25. — Ul  n»,  "  Why  hast  thou  troubled  us?" 
(Auth.  Vers.),  or  "  What  trouble  hast  thou  brought  upon 
us  ?  "  So  Ahab  was  the  troubler  of  Israel  (i  Kings 
xviii.  i  8).  "A  nd  all  Israel  stoned  him."  Dri,  prop,  "to 
pile  "  (Gesen.),  "  to  overwhelm  with  stones"  (Syr.  and 
Arab.)  ;  frequently  in  this  latter  sense  in  the  Penta 
teuch  ;  here  followed  by  two  accus.  (cf.  Levit.  xxiv.  2  3), 
once  with  omission  of  }3X  (Levit.  xxiv.  14).  Achan 
only  is  referred  to  because  the  principal  offender, 
but  that  all  the  rest  suffered  the  like  punishment  is 
evident  from  the  occurrence  of  en's  in  vers.  24,  25. 
Stoning  was  the  ordinary  mode  of  execution  among 
the  Jews  (Exod.  xvii.  4;  Deut.  xiii.  10;  Luke  xx.  6  ; 
John  x.  3  i  ;  Acts  xiv.  5).  "  A  nd  they  burned  them  " 
(i.e.,  after  they  were  dead).  The  Sept.  omits  this. 
Burning  alive  does  not  occur  anywhere  among  the 
punishments  inflicted  by  the  Jewish  law,  says  Keil 
after  Michaelis  (Mos.  R.,  v.,  §  235),  in  which  case, 
however,  Levit.  xx.  14,  xxi.  9  cannot  be  under- 


loo  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vn. 

stood  without  qualification.  '•1!?i?l?*!  (omitted  by  the 
Vulg.,  as  well  as  by  Sept.),  "and  they  pelted  them 
with  stones "  :  h\)Q,  to  pelt  (Lee),  "  to  overwhelm 
with  stones,"  rt.  h\M,  to  be  heavy  (Ges.,  Lex), 
Michaelis  thinks  that  stoning  of  the  ashes  of  the 
dead  is  meant ;  Knobel,  that  the  clause  has  been 
inserted  to  prevent  any  misunderstanding  of  the 
preceding  in'N  ;  Keil,  that  the  allusion  is  to  the 
heaping  of  a  pile  of  stones  on  the  dead  bodies.  If 
this  latter  meaning  is  here  adopted,  we  must  regard 
the  first  clause  of  ver.  26  as  intended  to  give  only 
a  fuller  description  of  the  same  fact.  The  punish 
ment  thus  inflicted  for  Achan's  sin,  though  terrible, 
was  not  too  severe,  for  by  that  sin  he  had  robbed 
God,  and  endangered  the  safety  of  the  whole  nation.1 
He  had  also  committed  it  shortly  after  his  renewal 
of  his  covenant  with  God  by  circumcision  and  the 
eating  of  the  Passover,  and  after  the  recent  proof  of 
God's  power  and  love  to  Israel  in  the  overthrow  of 
Jericho.  From  his  history  we  may  learn  especially  (i) 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  inasmuch  as  it  never  affords 
the  gratifications  expected  from  it ;  (2)  the  certainty 
of  its  exposure,  because  nothing  can  escape  the  all- 
seeing  eye  of  God  ;  (3)  the  awful  retribution  which 
often  overtakes  it  in  this  life,  and  will  certainly  do 
so  in  the  next,  if  not  averted  by  repentance,  con 
fession,  and  faith  in  Christ ;  (4)  its  injuriousness  to 
others  as  well  as  to  ourselves.  "  One  sinner  destroyeth 
much  good"  (Eccles.  ix.  18). 

1  See  note  on  ver.  i.  There  is  an  analogy  between  Achan's 
sin  and  that  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  and  the  severity  of  the 
punishment  in  both  cases,  occurring  at  the  outset  of  a  new 
career,  was  a  salutary  warning  to  future  generations  (cf. 
Numb.  xv.  32-36;  2  Sam.  vi.  6-12). 


VER.  26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  101 

Ver.  26. — H  "a  rude  cairn,"  or  "pile  of 
stones "  (D'jnK.  is  generally  added,  as  here)  roughly 
rolled  together  (Dean  Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  1 19), 
from  7^3,  to  roll  ;  it  was  intended  to  be  a  memorial 
of  the  punishment  (cf.  viii.  29;  2  Sam.  xviii.  17). 
A  like  custom  prevailed  among  the  Romans  (Propert, 
iy->  5>  75).  as  still  among  the  Arabs.  It  was  not 
always  a  mark  of  dishonour  (Burkhardt,  Beduinen, 
p.  8 1 ).  "  Unto  this  day  "  (cf.  iv.  9,  &Oj5,  indeterm. 
3rd  pers.,  =  passive,  §  137,  3,  a).  "Ac/tor"  (see 
ver.  24).  The  only  other  places  in  which  the 
name  is  found  are  xv.  7;  Hos.  ii.  17  (Heb.);  Isa.  Ixv. 
8,  lo.1 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

VERS.  1-29. —  The   Conquest  of  'Ay. 

Ver.  I. — "Fear  not  .  .  .  dismayed"  (cf.  i.  9; 
Deut.  i.  2  i,  xxxi.  8).  "  All  tlie  people  of  war" :  Vulg. 
"  omncm  multitudinem  pugnatorum ;  "  as,  however, 
out  of  all  the  fighting  men  of  Reuben,  Gad,  and  the 
half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  who  were  commanded  to 
cross  over  Jordan  before  their  brethren  (i.  14),  the 
actual  number  sent  was  only  40,000  (iv.  13);  so 
here  the  term  all  may  imply  not  every  man  capable 
of  bearing  arms,  but  the  army  generally,  as  compared 


1  Understood  spiritually,  every  Achor  (trouble)  becomes  "a 
door  of  hope,"  when  it  is  sanctified  by  repentance  and  faith. 
Thus,  in  Achan's  case,  we  may  trust  that  his  confession,  if 
sincere,  was  followed  by  pardon,  and  by  happiness  in  a  future 
life  (see  note  on  ver.  20). 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vin. 

with  the  detachment  which  had  been  previously  sent. 
"  Go  up  "  :  'Ay  stood  on  higher  ground  than  Jericho, 
but  r\hy  is  also  used  of  the  advance  of  an  army 
against  a  fortified  place,  because  such  a  place  was 
regarded  as  a  height  to  be  scaled  (Keil).  "  /  have 
given  "  (see  note  vi.  2). 

Ver.  2. — Only  the  .  .  .  spoil  for  a  prey"  (see  note 
on  vi.  17).  2"jy,  used  coll.,  "Hers  in  wait"  from 
2"W,  to  weave,  and  hence  "  nectere  insidias."  "From 
behind  it"  i.e.,  on  its  western  side,  see  TfrtN,  Isa.  ix. 
1 1  (12  Auth.  Vers.);  Job  xxiii.  8.  On  the  sanction 
given  by  God  to  the  employment  of  stratagem  in 
war,  Calvin  (as  quoted  by  Keil)  remarks,  "  If  war  is 
lawful  at  all,  it  is  indisputably  right  to  avail  oneself 
of  those  arts  by  which  victory  is  usually  obtained. 
It  is,  of  course,  understood  that  neither  must  treaties 
be  violated,  nor  faith  broken  in  any  other  way." 

Ver.  3. — "  Thirty  thousand"  :  There  is  difficulty 
in  reconciling  this  number  with  the  number  five 
thousand  in  ver.  12.  Some,  as  Ewald,  Maurer, 
and  Knobel,  unwarrantably  assume  that  vers.  1 2, 
1 3  have  been  inserted  from  another  narrative  by 
a  later  editor,  who  omitted  to  harmonize  them 
with  ver.  3.  Others  (Abarbanel,  Clericus,  etc.) 
suppose  that  there  were  two  distinct  companies  of 
liers-in-wait,  an  opinion  irreconcilable  with  vers. 
9,  12,  where  the  spot  in  which  each  was  posted 
is  described  as  being  between  Bethel  and  'Ay,  and 
on  the  west  of  'Ay.  True,  Abarbanel  conjectures 
that,  though  both  ambushes  were  on  the  same  side 
of  the  city,  the  smaller  was  set  nearer  to  it,  and  was 
only  intended  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy  when 
they  came  out  of  the  city,  while  the  larger  captured 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  103 

the  city  itself ;  but  in  the  account  of  the  execution 
of  Joshua's  order  (vers.  12,  13,  14,  19)  there  is 
nothing  to  support  this  view.  IHlN'n,  in  ver.  19, 
clearly  seems  to  indicate  that  there  was  one  ambush 
only.  Nor  is  the  difficulty  solved  by  supposing, 
with  Bishops  Patrick  and  Wordsworth,  that  the 
5,000  men  were  sent  as  a  reinforcement  to  the 
30,000,  for  so  large  a  force  as  30,000,  or  35,000, 
could  hardly  have  eluded  observation  while  lying  in 
ambuscade  near  to,  and  between,  two  hostile  cities, 
apparently  for  two  nights  and  an  intervening  day 
(vers.  3,  9,  10,  13).  Others,  as  Masius,  Rosenmiiller, 
and  Calvin,  conclude  that  the  number  30,000  refers 
to  the  entire  army  sent  against  'Ay,  and  the  number 
5,000  to  those  placed  in  ambush.  But  thus  the 
words  "sent  t/iem"  in  ver.  3,  must  denote  by  synec 
doche,  "  sent  some  of  them,"  a  meaning  rather  forced, 
and  though  the  expressions  "  the  people "  (ver.  10) 
and  "  all  Israel "  (ver.  15)  need  not  include  every 
one  capable  of  bearing  arms  (see  note,  ver.  i),  yet 
they  would  seem  to  imply  a  much  larger  number 
than  30,000.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  solution 
of  Keil  is,  perhaps,  the  most  satisfactory,  viz.,  that 
for  "  thirty  thousand  "  in  ver.  3  should  be  read  "  five 
thousand,"  the  letter  b  (30)  having,  by  the  mistake 
of  a  copyist,  been  substituted  for  n  (5).  That  there 
is  sometimes  an  inaccuracy  in  the  figures  of  the 
historical  books  is  evident  on  a  comparison  of  those 
in  the  earlier  with  those  in  the  later  books  (see  Keil 
and  Del.,  Comm.,  p.  86). 

Ver.  4. — \y\  -1X1,  "  see  "  (or  "  take  heed  ")  "ye  wJio 
are  about  to  lie  in  ambush  for  tlie  city  .  .  .  that  ye  go 
not  very  far"  etc.  -INI  should  be  construed  with  the 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vin. 


words  -ip-rprr  (Rosenm.).  D'os;,  "prepared"  (cf. 
Exod.  xix.  11,  15),  i.e.,  to  rise  up  and  assault  the 
city. 

Ver.  5.  —  "At  the  first"  viz.,  when  the  former 
attack  was  made  on  'Ay  (vii.  4).  -1:531.,  "  then  (or 
"  that  ")  we  will  flee"  D-13,  to  flee  ;  1.  with  the  apod. 

Ver.  6.  —  '•'And  tJiey  will  come  out  after  us":  These 
words  need  not  be  put  in  a  parenthesis,  as  in  the 
Auth.  Vers.  ("  for  they  will  come  out,"  etc.)  "  Until 
we  have  drawn"  lit.,  have  torn  away,  Hiph.  infin. 
with  suffix,  see  pn:.  Render  }  in  the  last  clause 
"  and"  not  "  therefore  "  (Auth.  Vers.). 

Ver.  7.  —  DPik^ntn,  "ye  shall  occupy"  lit,  ye  shall 
make  yourselves  to  possess  "  (cf.  xvii.  12).  Hjnp,  "will 
deliver  it"  :  The  perfect  denotes,  as  in  ver.  i,  God's 
determinate  purpose. 

Ver.  8.  —  "  When  ye  shall  have  taken  "  :  In  Deut. 
xx.  19,  ban  is  also  used  of  capturing  a  town.  •IJV-yri, 
"ye  shall  set  on  fire"  :  Hiphil  imperfect  of  ny:,  i.g.,  ny*, 
(§  7  0>  "  to  set  on  fire>"  a  word  not  found  in  the  Penta 
teuch.  "  According  to  the  commandment  "  (word),  etc.  : 
No  express  command  had  been  given  to  burn  the 
city,  but  it  was  implied  in  the  command  to  treat  it 
like  Jericho  (ver.  2).  In  the  last  clause,  "  See,"  etc., 
there  is  perhaps  a  covert  allusion  to  the  circumstances 
of  Achan's  disobedience. 

Ver.  9.  —  Here,  as  in  iv.  8,  an  account  of  the 
execution  of  the  command  follows  on  that  of  the 
command  itself,  inx.^n,  "  tlie  place  of  ambush  "  :  The 
prefix  B  denotes  place  (§  84,  14).  D*p,  "  on  the 
west":  &  is  so  called,  because  the  Mediterranean  Sea 
was  on  the  west  of  Palestine.  The  exact  site  of  the 
ambush  cannot  be  ascertained;  but,  as  between  Bethel 


VERS.  10,  ii.]  7 HE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  105 

and  'Ay  rise  two  rocky  heights,  it  would  seem  that 
the  liers-in-wait  took  their  position  behind  them 
(Van  de  Velde,  Narrative,  ii.,  p.  280).  This  could 
not  have  been  far  from  the  site  of  Abraham's  altar 
(Gen.  xii.  8).  "In  the  midst  of  the  people"  i.c.,  in  the 
camp,  with  the  rest  of  the  army. 

Ver.  i  o. — ip??!,  "  and  reviewed"  Sept.  eVecrKer//aTo  : 
Keil  supposes  that  this  had  really  been  done  before 
the  despatch  of  the  liers-in-wait,  and  that  the  begin 
ning  of  this  verse,  "And  Joshua  rose  np?  is  only  a 
resume  of  the  beginning  of  ver.  3,  further  particulars 
being  added  ;  there  is,  however,  nothing  in  ver.  3 
which  forbids  the  conclusion  that,  after  Joshua  had 
despatched  the  ambuscade,  he  proceeded,  the  follow 
ing  morning,  to  review  the  remainder  of  his  forces, 
preparatory  to  their  march  with  him  against  'Ay. 
"  The  elders  of  Israel"  i.e.,  not  as  Masius  says,  "  mili 
tary  tribunes,"  who  were  called  elders  on  account  of 
their  superior  military  skill,  but  the  heads,  or  repre 
sentatives,  of  the  people,  who  attended  Joshua  as  a 
council,  and  whose  presence  and  authority  may  have 
been  necessary  to  ensure  a  proper  division  of  the 
booty  (Numb.  xxxi.  27). 

Ver.  1 1. — '^n  Dim  :  For  the  construction  see  §  1 10, 
2,  c,  and  cf.  iii.  14.  ^  Jtayp  :  Construe,  state  with 
prep.,  §  i  1 6,  i.  The  Sept.  and  Arab,  for  north  put 
east,  as  though  they  had  read  Dnprp,  which,  however, 
is  not  found  in  any  of  the  MSS.  ^ni;,  "and  the 
ravine  "  (was).  N.VL  or  *O|.,  and  by  omission  of  Aleph, 
^,  means  properly  a  ravine  or  gorge,  generally  trans 
lated  <£a/>ay£  by  the  Sept.,  but  "  valley  "  by  Auth. 
Vers.  (passim],  rt  N$,  i.q.,  rpa,  "  to  flow  together," 
because  water  flows  together  there  (Ges.,  Lex?) ;  or  rt. 


106  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  viu. 

rp|»  "to  break  out,"  whence  perhaps  the  name  Gihon 
(Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.).  The  article  in 
dicates  that  the  author  is  referring  to  a  well-known 
locality.  Probably  the  allusion  is  to  the  deep  and 
steep-sided  ravine  to  the  north  of  Tell-el-Hajar  (Van 
de  Velde).  1^3  should  probably  be  pointed  T^a  (cf. 
iii.  4). 

Ver.  12. — n[3»i,  "and  he  took":  Masius,  Cor.  a 
Lapid.,  and  others,  render  as  a  pluperfect ;  but,  though 
the  verb  refers  to  what  Joshua  had  already  done 
(ver.  3),  it  should  rather  be  here  regarded  as  a  kind 
of  aorist  (Keil),  which  in  the  New  Testament  often 
has  the  force  of  a  pluperfect  (Winer,  Gram,  of  New 
Test.,  part  iii.,  sect.  xl.).  On  the  discrepancy  between 
the  numbers  five  thousand  here  and  thirty  thousand 
in  ver.  3.  see  note  above  on  that  verse.  Ti6  evidently 
refers  to  'Ay,  and,  therefore,  need  not  be  altered  to  '•r1?, 
to  correspond  to  ver.  9. 

Ver.  13. — Render,  "  and  so  the  people  posted  the 
whole  camp."  DIM  may  be  best  regarded  as  a  noun- 
collec.,  and  as  the  subject  of  the  verb  (§  146,  i  ;  cf. 
Vulg.  and  Chald.),  for,  if  it  was  the  object,  as  in  the 
Syr.,  Arab.,  and  A.  V.,  having  ror]G>rr^3Ti$  in  apposi 
tion  to  it,  Vis:,  the  sign  of  the  def.  accus,,  would  hardly 
have  been  omitted  (Keil).  "  And  its  ambuscade"  rt. 
2\M,  to  circumvent,  to  defraud  (Gen.  xxvii.  36)  ;  so  in 
Psalm  xlix.  6.  "apl?  is  rendered  "  my  supplanters  " 
by  Ewald,  Hitzig  (who  refers  to  this  passage),  and 
Delitzsch,  who  quotes  other  like  forms.  The  render 
ing  of  Gesen.  and  Winer,  "  its  rearguard"  cannot  be 
supported,  as  they  allege,  by  Gen.  xlix.  19.  The 
word  evidently  here  relates  to  what  had  been  stated 
in  ver.  12,  and  corresponds  to  3^fX,  in  ver.  12. 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  107 

"  That  night"  :  Not  that  in  which  the  liers-in-wait  had 
been  sent  out  (ver.  9),  but  that  on  which  Joshua  and 
the  rest  of  the  host  had  arrived  on  the  north  of  'Ay. 
"  The  valley  "  (Auth.  Vers.) :  See  note  on  the  Hebrew 
word  in  vii.  24.  When  Joshua  went  that  night  into 
the  valley,  he  was  no  doubt  accompanied  by  a  chosen 
detachment  from  his  main  army,  that  thus  at  the 
early  dawn  he  might  engage  the  attention  of  the 
enemy,  and  give  them  no  time  to  discover  the  ambush 
in  their  rear. 

Ver.  1 4. — "  When  the  king  of  'Ay  saw  "  :  Either 
with  his  own  eyes,  or  by  information  from  others. 
After  "  saw"  the  Auth.  Vers.  supplies  "  it"  viz., 
Joshua  and  the  picked  body  of  troops  with  him. 
"Against"  :  The  Hebrew  word  always  indicates  the 
going  forth  to  meet  an  enemy,  see  Deut.  i.  44  ; 
Psalm  xxxv.  3  (Dean  Perowne's  critical  note). 
llttft!?,  "at  (or  "to"}  the  place  appointed"  (Ges.,  Lex., 
and  Keil  ;  cf.  I  Sam.  xx.  35).  The  reference  seems 
to  be  to  a  spot  selected  for  a  concentrated  attack. 
"  Before  the  plain  "  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  See  iii.  1 6,  i.e.,  at 
the  entrance  of  the  tract  sloping  down  into  the  Jordan 
valley,  and  probably  the  same  as  the  wilderness  of 
Bethaven  (xviii.  I  2). 

Ver.  i  5 . — "  A  nd  they  feigned  themselves  to  be 
beaten  "  :  So  Gesen.  (Lex.}  and  Masius,  and  cf.  Auth. 
Vers.  Niphal  has  here  the  signification  of  Hithpael 
(§  51,2,  f),  for  that  the  flight  was  designed  is  evident 
from  ver.  6.  "  By  the  way  of  the  zvildcrness  "  (Auth. 
Vers.).  "onp  properly  means  "  a  pasture  ground," 
from  -O^,  to  drive  (to  pasture),  cf.  the  German  trift 
from  treiben.  "  The  idea"  (says  Dean  Stanley)  "  is  that 
of  a  wide  open  space,  with  or  without  actual  pasture; 


io8  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vin. 

the  country  of  the  nomads,  as  distinguished  from 
that  of  the  agricultural  and  settled  people.  With 
the  article  it  is  generally  used  for  the  desert  of 
Arabia,  but  sometimes  for  the  barren  tracts  which 
reach  into  the  frontier  of  Palestine,  as  in  the  valley 
of  the  Jordan  (Josh.  viii.  15),  or  in  the  southern 
mountains  of  Judaea  (Judges  i.  16  ;  Gen.  xxi.  14)." 
— Appendix  to  Sin.  and  Pal.  Here  and  in  vers. 
20,  24,  it  seems  to  be  used  for  the  same  region  as 
the  Arabah  in  ver.  14. 

Ver.  1 6. — -Ip™,  lit.,  "were  torn  away,"  i.e.,  were 
completely  separated  (cf.  ver.  6). 

Ver.  17. — B»x  vb,  i.e.,  no  one  of  the  fighting  men, 
for  it  appears  from  ver.  24  that  some  persons  were 
left  in  the  town.  "Bethel"  :  This  name  is  omitted 
in  the  Sept.,  but  in  none  of  the  other  ancient  versions. 
Probably  Bethel  sent  succour  to  'Ay  after  Joshua's 
first  attack  on  the  latter  (vii.). 

Ver.  1 8. — nt?3,  subau.  TT  (cf.  vers.  19,  26  ;  Exod. 
viii.  i).  in1"??,  with  tlie  javelin,  Sept.  iv  ro>  ycucrw 
or  "  light  spear,"  which  is  thrown,  distinguished  from 
n^n,  which  was  much  heavier  (i  Sam.  xvii.  7).  Such 
is  its  meaning  in  all  the  other  passages  where  it 
occurs,  viz.,  in  I  Sam.  xvii.  6,  45,  where,  though  the 
Vulg.  renders  it  "  clypeus,"  as  here,  and  Auth.  Vers. 
"  target,"  and  "  shield,"  it  probably  denotes  a  javelin 
or  spear,  which  was  slung  across  the  shoulders,  as 
often  the  sword  in  like  manner  (see  //.,  ii.,  45)  ;  so  in 
Jer.  vi.  23,  1.  42  ;  Job  xxxix.  23,  xli.  29.  It  may 
have  been  furnished  on  this  occasion  with  a  flag  at 
the  extremity,  and  being  light  could  have  been  held 
for  some  time  without  fatigue.  Probably  Joshua 
stood  on  an  eminence  to  render  the  signal  (the  raising 


VERS.  19-22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  109 

of  which,  but  not  the  time,  was  doubtless  preconcerted) 
the  more  visible. 

Ver.  19. — -irr-V!,  for  irvv;  (§  72,  Rem.  v.,  9),  from 
n-1¥,  i.q.>  nxj,  to  set  on  fire. 

Ver.  20. — D.1^,  lit.,  "two  hands,"  hence  metaph. 
"  strength,"  as  in  Psalm  Ixxvi.  6,  "  None  of  the  men 
of  might  have  found  their  hands "  ;  so  the  Vulg., 
Chald.,  Syr.,  Arab.,  Jarchi,  Drusius,  etc.  The  render 
ing  "  space  "  or  "  place  "  (Calvin,  Masius,  Clericus, 
Ges.,  Lex.}  would  require  Dr6  for  DH3.  1J1  Dtfrn,  "  and 
the  people,  which  was  fleeing  to  the  wilderness  [ver.  15], 
turned  back  upon  the  pursuers  "  :  }  seems  to  have  here 
the  force  of  "  for,"  cf.  Ges.,  Lex.  (4). 

Ver.  21. — "And  Joshua"  etc.:  Since  it  appears 
from  ver.  26  that  Joshua  remained  apart  from  his 
troops,  holding  out  his  spear  till  'Ay  had  been 
destroyed,  Masius  thinks  that  the  name  Joshua  may 
be  here  put  for  the  detachment  he  had  brought  into 
the  valley,  and  "  all  Israel "  for  the  rest  of  the  army, 
which  now  came  to  the  aid  of  its  comrades  ;  but  this 
supposition  is  unnecessary,  since  the  mention  of 
Joshua  may  merely  imply  that  what  was  done  was 
done  by  his  orders.  Vers.  21,22  more  fully  explain 
how  all  escape  was  cut  off  from  the  men  of  'Ay. 

Ver.  22. — rtao.,  "and  these,"  viz.,  the  men  who  had 
been  placed  in  ambush  (ver.  19),  contrasted  with  the 
Israelites  who  had  fled  (ver.  20).  DnjOj^?,  "  to  -meet 
them"  i.e.,  the  Israelites,  who  had  turned  round  to 
attack  the  'Ayites  (ver.  21).  »J-fem?,  "  until  not','  fol 
lowed  here,  according  to  Ges.  (Lex.,  p.  124,  3,  c),  by 
a  pret.,  as  in  Numb.  xxi.  35  ;  Deut.  iii.  3  ;  Josh, 
x.  33  ;  but,  rather,  in  all  these  passages  the  verb  is 
in  the  Hiph.  infin.,  and  the  characteristic  n  has  i 


no  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  CHAP.  vni. 

instead  of  a  (cf.  tps'n,  xi.  14  ;  yn.n,  Jer.  1.  34;  Ewald, 
Lehrb.,  §  238,  d}.  ta^Q-l  "P"]'^,  "  a  survivor,  or  one  who 
has  escaped  by  flight"  :  Masius  thinks  that  the  former 
word  is  =  TOV  ^yprjOevTa,  "  one  who  had  been 
taken  prisoner,"  a  meaning  not  contained  in  the  rt. 
*nb,  to  escape  ;  the  Sept.  correctly  renders  by  crecrwcr- 
[i€vov  KOL  StaTre^evyora. 

Ver.  24. — "In  the  wilderness"  (see  ver.  15,  note): 
Here  put  in  apposition  to  rn'B>3.  13  •  •  •  "i£>$,  i.e.,  in  which 
the  men  of  'Ay  had  chased  the  Israelites  (see  vers. 
15,  1 6).  '^Vi  cf.  vi.  21  ;  the  expression  always 
denotes  a  great  slaughter  of  the  enemy.  Dftrrw,  lit., 
"  unto  tlieir  finishing"  i.e.,  wholly  (Ges.,  Lex. ;  cf.  Deut. 
xxxi.  24,  30).  '-1TJ'*!,  "that  all  Israel  returned  unto 
'Ay"  "And  they  smote  it"  :  viz.,  all  the  inhabitants, 
old  men,  women,  and  children,  who  had  been  left  in 
the  town.  Cf.  ver.  14  for  the  construction,  and  iv.  I 
for  the  Pisqa  in  the  middle  of  the  verse. 

Ver.  25. — "All  the  men  of  Ay"  :  This  expression 
taken  in  connection  with  the  preceding  nearly}  E^NO, 
shows  that  the  number  twelve  thousand  comprised 
the  entire  population  (cf.  note  vii.  3).  No  mention  is 
made  of  the  Bethelites,  who  probably  shared  the  fate 
of  those  'Ayites  who  were  slain  outside  the  town. 

Ver.  26. — The  same  custom  of  not  lowering  a 
signal  till  the  battle  was  finished  prevailed  among 
other  ancient  nations  :  see  Suidas  in  ^/zeta  Cquoted 
by  Rosenm.).  Some,  however,  think  that  this  act  of 
Joshua,  like  that  of  Moses,  recorded  in  Exod.  xvii. 
1 1,  etc.,  carried  with  it  a  Divine  efficacy,  and  was  a 
means  of  securing  victory  to  the  Israelites  (see  Poole's 
Annot^}. 

Ver.  27. — They  were  allowed   to  take  possession 


VERS.  28, 29.]          THE  %OOK  OF  JOSHUA,  m 

of  the  cattle  and  spoil  of  'Ay,  because  it  was  not 
the  intention  of  Jehovah  to  give  to  His  people  a 
barren  and  empty  land  (see  Deut.  vi.  10,  etc.),  but  in 
the  case  of  Jericho  the  cattle  and  spoil  had  been 
offered  to  Jehovah  as  the  firstfruits  of  the  land. 
"  According  unto  the  word"  etc.,  see  ver.  2. 

Ver.  28. — "Joshua  burnt"  lit.,  "absorbed  by  fire," 
i.e.,  the  town  was  totally  burnt  down,  whereas  before 
(see  ver.  1 9)  it  had  been  only  set  on  fire.  D^lir^ri,  "  a 
permanent  heap "  :  7R  from  ?^FI,  to  heap  up,  occurs 
only  here  and  in  xi.  13  ;  Deut.  xiii.  16  ;  Jer.  xxx. 
1 8,  xlix.  2,  and  in  the  compound  names  of  some 
Babylonian  cities  (Ezek.  iii.  15  ;  Ezra  ii.  59;  Neh. 
vii.  61).  DJpttf,  as  in  Deut.  xv.  17  ;  i  Kings  i.  31, 
denotes  a  long  time  only,  for  'Ay  appears  to  have 
been  rebuilt,  if  not  on  the  same  site,  yet  near  to  it 
(see  Isa.  x.  28  ;  Ezra  ii.  28  ;  Neh.  vii.  31). 

Ver.  29. — "He  hanged  on  the  tree"  :  The  def.  art. 
before  }>y  denotes  the  tree  selected  for  the  purpose. 
n'pri  means  simply  "lie  suspended"  and,  therefore,  does 
not  of  itself  authorize  the  rendering  of  the  Sept., 
eKpejjLacrev  eVi  £uXov  StSu/xou,  "  he  hung  on  a  double 
tree  "  (or  wood),  i.c.,  on  two  transverse  pieces  of  wood, 
viz.,  a  cross  ;  nor  that  of  the  Targum  of  Jonathan, 
and  Arab.  Vers.,  "  he  crucified"  Hieron.  "  suspendit 
super  patibulo."  Sometimes,  however,  the  word 
yj2fn  is  used  (see  Numb.  xxv.  4),  which  means  to 
rend,  tear,  or  dislocate,  and  might  be  applied  to  im 
paling  on  a  cross.  Such  suspension,  whether  from 
cross  or  gallows,  took  place  after  the  penalty  of  death 
had  been  inflicted,  and  was  used  to  enhance  the  dis 
grace  of  the  punishment  (see  Numb.  xxv.  4  ;  Deut. 
xxi.  22,  23).  Hanging,  or  crucifixion,  was  not  a 


112  THE  BOOK   OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vm. 

mode  of  execution  among  the  ancient  Jews  (Light- 
foot,  Hor.  Hebr.,  in  Matt,  xxvii.  31).  "  Until  the 
eventide"  see  Deut.  xxi.  23.  nrtS'^,  the  Sept.  ets 
TOV  (360pov,  may  have  arisen  from  a  transposition  of 
letters,  viz.,  nns  for  nng,  or  from  a  wish  to  assimilate 
the  rendering  to  that  in  2  Sam.  xviii.  17,  where  nns 
is  used.  7|i  see  note  on  vii.  26.1 

VERS.  30-35. — Erection  of  an  Altar  on  Mount 
Ebal,  and  a  Rehearsal  of  the  Blessings  and 
Curses  upon  Moimt  Gerizim  and  Mount  Ebal, 

Though  in  the  Vat.  and  Aldine  copies  of  the 
Sept.  this  paragraph  is  inserted  after  ix.  2,  and  some 
commentators  would  assign  it  a  place  after  xi.  3,  yet 

1  It  is  not  stated  in  this  chapter  whether  Bethel,  which  had 
taken  part  with  'Ay,  was  at  this  time  taken  by  Joshua,  nor  is  it 
certain  that  the  Bethel  in  xii.  16  is  identical  with  it  (see  note 
there).  "  With  the  conquest  of  Ai  a  sure  footing  in  the  land," 
Geikie  (ffours  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii.,  p.  408,  etc.)  remarks, 
"  had  been  obtained,  and  such  a  dread  of  the  invaders  excited 
among  the  inhabitants  as  of  itself  made  them  resistless.  The 
population  of  Central  Palestine  seems  to  have  fled  before  them, 
for  no  intimation  of  a  struggle  with  them  is  found  either  in 
Joshua  or  Judges.  Perhaps  the  subdivision  into  small  com 
munities,  incapable  of  prompt  united  action,  may  have  aided 
the  general  demoralisation,  and  it  is  noticeable  besides,  that 
very  few  fortified  towns  are  mentioned  in  this  region.  But  the 
terrible  fate  of  Jericho  and  Ai  sufficiently  account  for  a  universal 
panic  and  abandonment  of  all,  before  the  advancing  Hebrews. 

.  .  .  Some  of  the  fugitives  seem  even  to  have  emigrated  to 
Africa,  if  we  can  trust  the  statement  of  Procopius  (De  Bella 

Vandalico,  ii.,  10)  that  two  marble  pillars  were  to  be  seen  in 
the  Numidian  town  Tigisis,  with  a  Phoenician  inscription  : — 
'  We  are  those  who  fled  from  the  face  of  Jesus  (Joshua),  the 
robber,  the  son  of  Nun.'  Suidas  states  this  also  ;  giving  the 
words  as  '  We  are  Canaanites,  whom  Jesus,  the  robber,  drove 
out '  (s.  v.  Xavadv} ;  and  the  Talmud  states  that  the  Girgasites, 
driven  out  by  Joshua,  wandered  to  Africa  (ferus.,  Tr.  Schebiit, 
vi.,  36,  3)-" 


VER.  30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  113 

there  is  no  proof  that  it  does  not  here  occupy  its 
original  and  proper  position.  We  might  reasonably 
suppose  from  the  terms  of  the  command  in  Deut 
xxvii.  4,  5,  that  Joshua  would  take  the  earliest  op 
portunity  of  obeying  that  command,  and  such  an 
opportunity  occurred,  when  the  conquest  of  'Ay  had 
laid  open  the  road  to  Shechem,  and  "  the  terror  of 
the  Lord"  (cf.  Gen.  xxxv.  5)  had  fallen  on  the  in 
habitants  of  the  surrounding  country.  Moreover,  as 
Havernick  has  shown,  the  distance  between  'Ay  and 
Ebal  was  not  more  than  twenty  miles,  or  less  than 
two  days'  journey  (Einleit.,  ii.,  I,  p.  17). 

Ver.  30. — TN,  followed  by  an  imperf.  (§  127,  4,  a; 
cf.  x.  12,  xxii.  i  ;  Exod.  xv.  i).  This  particle,  says 
Ewald  (§  136,  b\  is  used  in  cases  where  the  historian 
either  wishes  to  introduce  contemporaneous  facts, 
which  do  not  carry  forward  the  main  course  of  the 
history,  or  loses  sight  for  the  time  of  the  strictly  his 
torical  sequence,  and  simply  takes  note  of  the  occur 
rence  of  some  particular  event.  "  God  of  Israel  " : 
The  expression  indicates  that  He  only,  as  the  true 
God,  was  to  be  worshipped.  "  On  Mount  Ebal  "  : 
In  the  Samaritan  Pentateuch  "  Gerizim  "  is  read  for 
Ebal  (Deut.  xxvii.  4),  which  reading  is  followed  by 
Kennicott,  Semler,  Colenso,  etc.,  but  is  opposed  to 
the  Hebrew  MSS.  and  the  ancient  versions,  and 
no  doubt  arose  from  a  wish  to  give  a  scriptural 
sanction  to  the  Samaritan  worship.  ^yy  means 
"  void  of  leaves,"  from  hiv  (unused),  in  Arab.,  "  to 
strip  a  tree  of  leaves  "  (Ges.,  Lex?).  Dean  Stanley, 
however,  says  that  the  present  aspect  of  the  moun 
tain,  as  compared  with  Gerizim,  is  not  so  barren 
as  to  justify  this  derivation  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  ch.  v., 

8 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vm. 

p.  237).  It  lies  to  the  north  of  Sichem,  in  the 
tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  is  about  2,700  feet  in  height. 
The  true  situation  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim  is  evident 
from  Deut.  xi.  30  (see  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
pp.  238-9),  where  it  is  shown  that  the  opinion  of 
Jerome  (which  had  been  before  held  by  Eusebius, 
Procopius,  and  Epiphanius),  that  these  mountains 
were  near  Jericho,  cannot  be  sustained.  As  Ebal 
was  the  mount  of  cursing,  the  altar  may  have  been 
erected  there,  rather  than  on  Gerizim,  to  signify  that 
by  Christ,  our  true  altar,  the  curse  of  the  Law  is 
removed. 

Ver.  3  i . — The  words  "  as  Moses  ....  law  of 
Moses "  form  a  parenthesis,  and  n??p  in  the  next 
clause  must  be  joined  to  the  preceding  verse,  e.g., 
"an  altar  (I  say)  of"  etc.  niB^,  lit.  "sound"  i.e., 
stones  which  had  been  un violated  by  any  tool,  rough, 
unhewn.  "  On  which  no  one  hath  lifted  lip  (lit.  hath 
shaken)  [any]  iron":  See  Exod.  xx.  22  (25,  Auth. 
Vers.)  ;  Deut.  xxvii.  5.  fpn,  with  indeter.  nomi 
native  (§  137,  3)-  The  reason  of  this  command 
probably  was  that  no  image  or  figure  might  be  carved 
on  the  stones  and  afterwards  worshipped.  "  Burnt- 
offerings  "  :  n^'y  means  "  what  ascends,"  i.e.,  in  smoke 
and  fragrance  ;  hence  sometimes  called  ^3,  because 
the  whole  victim  was  consumed,  Sept.  oXo/cavrwjaa. 
Here  these  burnt-offerings  were  symbolic  of  the 
dedication  of  the  whole  nation  to  the  service  of  God. 
"  Peace-offerings"  offered  in  thanksgiving  (Levit.  vii. 
12)  to  God  for  bringing  them  to  the  Promised  Land. 
These  burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings  had  been 
enjoined  (Deut.  xxvii.  6,  7). 

Ver.  32. in?."!,  *,  Qamets-chatuph  for  i  before 


VER.  32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  115 

Maqqeph,  §  47,  3,  Rem.  I.  "  The  stones"  not  of  the 
altar  (ver.  30),  as  Josephus  (Antiq.,  iv.,  8,  §  44),  the 
Syr.  Vers.,  Maurer,  Rosenm.,  but  the  great  stones 
mentioned  in  Deut.  xxvii.  2,  4,  and  which  are  clearly 
distinct  from  those  of  the  altar  afterwards  mentioned 
in  ver.  5.  The  fact  that  the  setting  up  of  the 
former,  and  the  plastering  of  them  with  plaster,  is 
not  recorded  in  the  brief  narrative  here  before  us, 
but  apparently  assumed  as  a  matter  of  course,  it 
having  been  so  expressly  enjoined  by  Moses,  pro 
bably  led  to  the  above  error  ;  cf.  John  xxi.,  where 
"  tJie  stone  "  is  that  mentioned,  not  by  John  himself, 
but  by  the  other  Evangelists,  and  which,  therefore, 
John  deemed  it  sufficient  to  allude  to  as  already 
well  known.  Evidently  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy 
had  been  written  before  the  time  of  Joshua,  nj&pp, 
properly  "  a  duplicate  or  repetition  of "  (cf.  Deut. 
xvii.  1 8),  Sept.  Alex.,  TO  Sevrepovofjuov,  Vulg. 
Deuteronomion.  The  meaning  here  has  been  much 
disputed.  According  to  Cor.  a  Lapid.  the  whole  of 
Deuteronomy  was  inscribed,  which  is  very  unlikely. 
Keil,  in  his  earlier  commentary,  supposes  with  Vater 
and  Hengstenberg  that  the  commandments  (not  the 
exhortations  by  which  they  were  enforced)  from 
Deut.  iv.  to  xxvi.  19,  called  the  second  Law,  are 
here  meant ;  others,  as  Grotius  and  Kennicott,  "  the 
Decalogue  "  :  Masius,  Maurer,  and  Rosenm.,  the 
curses  and  blessings  which  had  just  been  pronounced 
(so  Josephus,  Antiq.,  iv.,  8,  §  44),  which  opinion 
Bishop  Patrick,  on  Deut.  xxvii.,  thinks  not  impro 
bable,  as  in  those  curses  and  blessings  several  select 
precepts  are  cited,  and  the  last  of  them  seems  to 
respect  the  whole  law  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxvii.  26). 


n6  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  vnr. 

But  neither  of  these  two  latter  views  accords  with 
the  expression  "  all  the  words  of  this  law "  in 
Deut.  xxvii.  3,  nor  would  the  "  large  stones  "  (ver.  2) 
have  been  necessary  to  contain  either  the  "  Deca 
logue  "  or  "  the  blessings  and  cursings."  The  choice, 
therefore,  seems  to  lie  between  the  view  of  Vater 
and  Hengstenberg  given  above,  and  that  of  Micha- 
elis  (Laws  of  Moses,  ii.,  §  60),  Knobel  on  Deut. 
xxvii.  i,  and  of  Keil  on  Deut.  xxvii.  3,  viz.,  that 
all  the  legal  enactments  (not  the  historical,  didactic, 
ethnological,  nor  any  other  legislative  matter)  con 
tained  in  the  Pentateuch  were  inscribed, — a  thing  not 
impossible,  as  we  know  not  the  number  of  the  large 
stones. 

Ver.  33. — "All  Israel"  i.e.,  all  the  congregation 
above  twenty  years  old,  and  not  merely  their 
representatives  who  are  next  mentioned.  CPIp'y, 
(were)  "  standing  "  :  The  Sept.  has  TrapeTropevovro,  as 
though  it  had  read  Dn^y.  "  On  this  side  and  on  that 
of  the  ark"  i.e.,  the  ark  was  between  them  in  the 
valley,  near  to  Shechem.  "  Priests  and  Levites"  viz., 
those  of  the  Levites  who  were  priests,  for  the  rest  of 
the  tribe  are  mentioned  in  Deut.  xxvii.  12  as  among 
the  six  tribes  who  stood  on  Mount  Gerizim.  "  As 
well  tJie  stranger"  i.e.,  the  proselyte  (cf.  ver.  35).  "As 
the  native  "  :  The  term  rnjs'  denotes  primarily,  accord 
ing  to  Gesenius,  "  a  native  tree,"  from  rnr,  to  shoot 
forth.  ^W^X,  "  over  against "  (Auth.  Vers.),  which 
may  be  understood  as  meaning  that  six  tribes  stood 
on  Mount  Ebal,  and  six  tribes  on  Gerizim  over  against 
Ebal  ;  so  Poole  (on  Deut.  xxvii.  1 2) ;  but  Ges.  (Lex.} 
"  tozvards"  Sept.  Trkrjcriov,  Vulg.  juxta.  The  prepo 
sition  used  in  Deut.  xxvii.  12  is  ^y  upon  (A.  V.), 


V:R.  34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  117 

which  might  also  be  translated  "  nigh,"  or  "  beside." 
It  is  evident  that,  whether  they  stood  on  the  top  or 
slopes  of  the  mountain,  half  of  the  tribes  were  ranged 
on  the  side  of  Sichem  towards  Gerizim,  and  half  on 
that  towards  Ebal.  Gerizim  was  to  the  south  of 
Sichem,  and  rather  less  high  than  Ebal.  Gesenius 
derives  it  from  <-n|,  "dwellers  in  a  shorn  (i.e.,  desert) 
land,"  from  na.  to  cut  off;  perhaps  the  tribe  subdued 
by  David  (i  Sam.  xxvii.  8  ;  Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pa/., 
p.  237).  The  sides  of  both  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  as 
seen  from  the  valley  between,  are  alike  bare  and 
sterile,  the  only  exception  in  favour  of  the  latter 
being  a  small  ravine  coming  down  opposite  the  west 
end  of  the  town,  which  is  full  of  fountains  and  trees 
(Robinson's  Pal.,  iii.,  96-7).  Gerizim  may  have  been 
chosen  as  the  mount  of  blessing,  because  situated  in 
the  south,  the  sunny  region,  symbolical  of  blessing  ; 
and  Ebal,  for  the  contrary  reason,  as  the  mount  of 
cursing.  f'Vnn,  for  the  art  see  note  on  ha-Ooli,  vii. 
21.  nib^oa  should  be  construed  with  njy,  for  Moses 
had  given  this  command  as  early  as  Deut.  xi.  29. 
Tpli'p  :  The  blessing  is  mentioned  and  not  the  cursing, 
because  the  former  concerned  the  whole  people,  and 
was  what  God  chiefly  designed  in  giving  the  Law  :  if 
they  fell  under  the  curse,  the  fault  was  their  own. 

Ver.  34. — p'^QNi.,  "and  after  it  had  been  so  done," 
i.e.,  after  the  altar  had  been  erected,  and  the  people 
had  taken  the  places  assigned  to  them.  &O£,  lit.  cried 
out,  proclaimed,  and  hence,  "  recited,"  or  "  read 
aloud  ;  "  here  it  probably  means  he  caused  to  be  read 
by  the  Levitical  priests.  "  The  blessing  and  tJie  curse": 
Apparently  put  in  apposition  to  the  preceding  "  all 
the  words  of  the  Laiu;  "  but  whether  limited  to  the 


ii8  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

blessings  and  cursings  in  Deut.  xxvii.,  xxviii.,  de 
pends  on  the  extent  here  assigned  to  the  term  Law 
(see  note,  ver.  32). 

Ver.  35. — 'b»  ^>nj?  differs  from  'V\  nil?,  which  meant 
the  congregation  represented  by  its  elders  (see  Keil, 
Exod.  xii.  3,  21).  Here  are  included  not  only  men 
but  women,  etc.  If  this  vast  multitude  was  assem 
bled  on  the  lower  slopes  of  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  they 
probably  heard  without  difficulty  the  reading  of  the 
Law,  especially  as  in  a  clear  atmosphere,  like  that 
of  Palestine,  sound  travels  far.1 

With  vers.  33,  34  of  this  chapter  cf.  Luke  vi. 
20-26,  where  the  blessing  and  curse  are  set  over 
against  one  another. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

Vers.  i  and  2  are  introductory  to  chapters  ix., 
x.,  xi.  The  war,  which  had  hitherto  been  limited 
to  attacks  on  single  cities,  was  now  to  be  waged 
by  the  Israelites  against  their  enemies  in  combi 
nation,  first  in  the  south,  secondly  in  the  north  of 
Canaan. 


1  In  Tristram's  Land  of  Israel,  p.  152,  it  is  said,  "  A 
single  voice  might  be  heard  by  many  thousands,  shut  in  and 
conveyed  up  and  down  by  the  enclosing  hills.  In  the  early 
morning  we  could  not  only  see  from  Gerizim  a  man  driving 
his  ass  down  a  path  on  Mount  Ebal,  but  could  hear  every 
word  he  uttered,  as  he  urged  it ;  and  in  order  to  test  the 
matter  more  certainly,  on  a  subsequent  occasion  two  of  our 
party  stationed  themselves  on  opposite  sides  of  the  valley,  and 
with  perfect  ease  recited  the  commandments  antiphonally." 


VER.  I.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  119 

VERS.    1-2. — The  First  League  of  the  Canaanites 
against  Israel, 

This  included  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  to  the 
utmost  western  and  northern  borders,  though,  owing 
to  subsequent  events,  detailed  in  this  chapter,  it 
became  limited  at  first  to  a  confederacy  of  five  kings 
in  Southern  Canaan. 

Vers.  i. — ybtps,  the  object,  which  is  omitted,  may 
be  easily  supplied,  viz.,  what  Joshua  had  done  to 
Jericho  and  'Ay.  '»n  "ill??,  here  applied  to  the  west 
of  Jordan,  as  in  v.  I,  but  with  the  omission  of  nsj. 
"ina,  "in  the  hill  country''  cf.  Numb.  xiii.  17  ;  Deut. 
i.  7  ;  not  limited  to  the  mountains  of  Judah,  but  em 
bracing  the  hill  country  of  southern  and  central 
Canaan.  It  commenced  a  few  miles  below  Hebron, 
and  extended  to  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  going  out  in  a 
north-westerly  direction  to  the  headland  of  Carmel. 
PDj^pa,  "  in  the  plain  "  or  "  low  country"  from  ^3£>,  to 
be  low,  always  found  with  the  definite  article  as  the 
designation  of  the  maritime  plain  of  Philistia,  except 
in  Josh.  xi.  1 6  ("  the  valley  of  the  same  ")  where  it 
seems  to  be  used  of  the  tract  of  Sharon,  fjfn,  "  coast" 
or  "  shore"  from  &)3n,  to  rub  off,  to  wash  off.  It  is 
used  in  poetry  only,  with  the  exception  of  this  place 
and  Deut.  i.  7  (see  Gen.  xlix.  13  ;  Judges  v.  17  ; 
Jer.  xlvii.  7  ;  Ezek.  xxv.  1 6).  "  Over  against "  (or 
towards)  Lebanon!'  The  Sept.  and  the  Vulg.  suppose 
an  omission  of  the  copulative  \,  and  the  former  renders 
/ecu  ot  rrpos  rto  'Ai>TiXi/3dVaj,  the  latter  "  hi  quoque, 
qui  habitabant  juxta  Libanum  ;  "  but  the  words  in 
the  Hebrew  are  only  added  to  define  the  line  of  the 
sea  coast  more  accurately,  and  the  reference  is  to  the 


120  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

coast  of  North  Galilee  and  Phoenicia.  "  The  Hittite  " 
(see  note,  iii.  i  o)  :  The  Girgashites  mentioned  in  this 
latter  passage  are  here  omitted,  perhaps  because  a 
very  small  tribe.  The  name,  however,  is  found  in 
many  copies  of  the  Sept. 

Ver.  2. — '&rna,  "  with  one  mouth" or  "  voice"  i.e.,  with 
one  accord  (cf.  I  Kings  xxii.  13;  2  Chron.  xviii.  1 2), 
adverb,  accus.  (§  118,  3). 

VERS.  3-15. —  The   Craft  of  the  Gibeonites  by  which 
they  obtain  a  Separate  Peace  with  Israel. 

Ver.  3. — jfr?|,  rt.  ina,  to  be  high,  situated,  according 
to  its  name,  on  a  hill,  and  forty  stadia  from  Jeru 
salem  (Josephus,  Antiq.,  vii.,  II,  7),  fifty  stadia, 
according  to  his  Bell.  Jud.,  ii.,  119.  Eusebius  says 
that  in  his  time  it  still  went  under  its  old  name,  and 
was  four  miles  west  from  Bethel.  It  was  a  city  of 
the  Hivites  (ver.  7),  though  said,  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  2, 
to  be  of  the  "  remnant  of  the  Amorites,"  because 
the  Amorites,  being  a  principal  nation  of  Canaan, 
these  denote  the  Canaanites  in  general  (cf.  Deut.  i.  7). 
It  is  described  in  x.  2  as  a  great  city,  because  the 
head  of  the  powerful  Hivite  league,  and  the  key  of 
the  pass  of  Bethhoron,  and,  though  not  under  royal 
government,  equal  in  rank  to  one  of  the  royal  cities, 
celebrated  for  its  strength,  and  the  wisdom  of  its 
inhabitants  (ix.  4,  x.  2).  Its  government  under  the 
Hittites  was  republican,  whence  the  expression  "  the 
inhabitants  of  Gibeon  "  (ix.  3),  and  "  our  elders"  and 
"  all  the  inJiabitants  of  our  country"  (ver.  1 1).  In 
league  with  it,  and  under  the  same  government, 
were  four  other  cities  (ver.  17).  It  was  afterwards 
assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  (xviii.  25),  and  to 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  121 

the  priests  (xxi.  17)  ;  hard  by  it  was  the  "great  high 
place"  (i  Kings  iii.  4,  ix.  252  Chron.  i.  3,  13), 
whither  the  Tabernacle  after  the  destruction  of  Nob 
by  Saul  was  brought  (i  Chron.  xxi.  29,  30),  and 
which  "high  place"  is  probably  identical  with  the 
lofty  height  of  Nebi- Samuel,  towering  immediately 
over  El-jib^  the  modern  name  of  Gibeon  (Stanley, 
Sin.  and  Pal. ,  ch.  iv.,  pp.  215-16). 

Ver.  4. — Dj,  "also"  (not  translated  in  the  Auth. 
Vers.)  is  emphatic,  and  refers  to  what  Joshua  had 
done  (ver.  3),  for,  though  Jericho  was  not  taken  by 
stratagem,  as  'Ay  had  been,  yet  the  Gibeonites  may 
have  imputed  its  capture  to  surprise,  and  resolved, 
therefore,  themselves  to  deal  craftily  ;  Sept.  /cat 
itroirjo-oiv  /cat  ye  avrot  juera  iravovpyias.  -li'lpy?, 
Hithp.  (n  transposed  and  changed  into  to,  §  54,  2,  a), 
from  "1%  not  elsewhere  used  as  a  verb,  "  to  go  round 
in  a  circle,"  whence  "vy,  a  hinge,  or,  as  in  Arabic,  "to 
go,"  whence  "vy,  a  messenger  (Ges.,  Lex?),  and,  as  Hith- 
pael,  sometimes  implies  simulation  (§  54,  3),  hence 
the  A.  V.,  "  made  as  if  they  had  been  ambassadors" 
or  rather  (as  they  actually  were  ambassadors,  and 
only  feigned  that  they  had  come  from  a  distant  land), 
"  made  themselves  ambassadors"  i.e.,  acted  as  such  ; 
Keil,  "  set  out  as  ambassadors"  The  ancient  versions 
appear  to  have  read  -iTcy?,  "  they  furnished  themselves 
with  victuals"  denom.  from  rn%  '•  provision  for  a 
journey"  which  rendering  Gesenius  (Lex?)  and  others 
prefer :  it  is,  however,  unnecessary  here,  and  may 
have  arisen  from  the  occurrence  of  the  same  word  in 


1  Jib    in  Arabic   is  merely  a   contraction  of    the   Hebrew 
Gibean  (Kitto's  Cyclop.}. 


122  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

ver.  12.  D^f,  "worn  out"  or  "decayed"  from  r6a,  to 
fall  away.  The  sacks  were  used  to  carry  provisions 
and  baggage,  because  inns  being  then  unknown, 
travellers  took  with  them  what  things  they  needed. 
ItO  for  "ffcO,  a  skin  in  which  water  is  brought,  i.q.,  non 
in  Gen.  xxi.  14,  15,  19  (rt.  nw  [unused],  Arabic,  to 
give  forth  water),  noun  masc.  with  fern.  term,  in  the 
plur.,  but  retaining  the  gender  of  the  sing,  (see  §  87,  4) ; 
hence  here  nnX3  is  followed  by  three  adjectives  in 
the  masc.  "  Torn  and  bound  together'"  :  The  latter 
word  in  Hebrew,  from  *ny,  "  to  bind  together,"  has 
reference  to  the  mode  of  mending  shoes  by  tying  the 
rents  together,  which  was  generally  adopted  when 
there  was  not  time  to  put  in  a  patch. 

Ver.  5. — rr6l^,  a  form  used  here  only  (Ges.,  Lex?)  ; 
on  btfj,  see  v.  15.  fiN^D,  Pual  intens.,  "strongly 
patched  up"  Symm.  eTrt^X^/xara  e^o^ra,  Sept.  /ca/ra- 
TreTreX/xarwjOteW,  "  patched  in  the  soles,"  from  Tre'A/xa, 
a  sole  :  "  clouted "  (Auth.  Vers.),  which  also  here 
means  "  patched,"  being  derived  from  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  "  clut,"  a  clout  or  rag  ;  not  "  nailed,"  from  the 
French  "  clou,"  a  nail.  niD^,  by  transp.  for  rv6»l?> 
Sept.  fyicma,  were  outer  garments,  and  sometimes  the 
term  is  used  for  clothes  in  general,  as  in  Gen.  xxxv. 
2  ;  Exod.  iii.  22,  etc.  Travellers  who  were  poor 
were  obliged  to  perform  much  of  their  journey  on 
foot,  even  though  they  had  asses  for  their  baggage, 
and  this  would  account  for  the  worn  condition  of  the 
shoes  and  clothes  of  these  Gibeonites.  D'l.iM,  "marked 
with  points  (or  little  spots}"  used  of  sheep  and  goats, 
Ges.  xxx.  32,  etc.,  rt.  "ij53,  to  prick  or  mark  with 
points.  Some,  as  Kimchi,  think  that  the  term  refers 
to  spots  of  mould,  Sept.  apros  eupcurtwv  /cat 


VER.  6.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  123 

s,  "  bread,  mouldy  and  corrupt ; "  Theod.,  aprot 
ot  :  others,  as  Keil,  "  crumbled;  "  Aquila, 
a/oros  e'i/>a^vpajjLteVos  ;  Vulg.,  "  panes  in  frusta  com- 
minuti ;  "  so  Gesen.  (Lex?).  The  Auth.  Vers.  "  dry 
and  mouldy"  well  conveys  the  sense.  Kitto  remarks 
that  the  bread  commonly  used  in  the  East  is 
calculated  to  last  only  for  the  day  on  which  it  is 
baked  ;  and  in  a  day  or  two  more  it  becomes  ex 
ceedingly  hard  and  unfit  for  use.  But  besides  this 
sort  of  bread  there  is  another,  which  will  keep  a  con 
siderable  time,  though  it  ultimately  becomes  hard 
and  mouldy,  and  the  use  of  this  latter  sort  is  almost 
exclusively  confined  to  travellers.  "  It  is  a  kind  of 
biscuit,  usually  made  in  the  shape  of  large  rings, 
nearly  an  inch  thick,  and  four  or  five  inches  in 
diameter.  The  bread  is,  when  new,  very  firm,  and 
rather  crisp  when  broken  ;  but  not  being  so  well 
prepared  as  our  biscuits,  it  becomes  gradually  harder, 
and  at  last  mouldy  from  the  moisture,  which  the 
baking  had  left  in  it.  In  general,  it  is  seldom  used 
till  previously  soaked  in  water.  The  bread  of  the 
Gibeonites  may  have  been  something  of  this  sort " 
(I II us t.  Family  Bible). 

Ver.  6. — In  the  Hebrew,  "  Gilgal "  is  put  in  appos. 
to  "the  camp."  A  few  MSS.  read  r6|^|n,  with  n 
parag.  Keil  thinks  that  this  is  not  the  Gilgal 
near  Jericho,  but  another  between  Jerusalem  and 
Shechem,  near  Mount  Ebal  and  Gerizim  (see  Deut. 
xi.  30),  now  known  as  Jiljilia  :  it  seems,  however, 
strange  that,  after  Gilgal  has  always  in  the  preced 
ing  chapters  denoted  the  Gilgal  near  Jericho,  it 
should  in  chapters  ix.,  x.  refer  to  another  town, 
without  any  intimation  to  that  effect.  It  is  true 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

that  the  Gilgal  near  Jericho,  at  the  south-east  corner 
of  the  land,  may  not  have  been  advantageously 
situated  for  the  conquest  of  central  and  northern 
Palestine,  but  the  holy  associations  connected  with 
it  as  the  spot  where  the  twelve  Memorial  Stones  had 
been  set  up,  Circumcision  renewed,  and  the  Pass 
over  kept,  are  strong  reasons  for  concluding  that  it 
continued  the  headquarters  of  Joshua  during  the 
early  part  of  the  conquest  (see  Smith's  Diet,  of 
the  Bible,  vol.  i.,  p.  700).  '&??  B»N,  used  collectively 
as  in  the  next  verse,  perhaps,  however,  not  the  same 
as  '£»  I??,  but  here  meaning  the  principal  men  of 
the  congregation,  for  K"X  sometimes  refers  to 
eminence  or  rank  [Psalm  iv.  2  (3),  xlix.  2  (3), 
Ixii.  9  (10)]  ;  and  that  this  is  the  force  of  the  term 
here  may  be  gathered  from  vers.  15,  1 8,  19,  21. 
" From  a  far  country"  and,  therefore  (as  they  would 
insinuate),  they  stood  on  a  different  footing  from  the 
Canaanites  (see  Deut.  xx.  1 1).  "  Make  ye  a  league 
with  us  "  (Auth.  Ver.),  n*}3  refers  to  the  slaying  and 
dividing  of  the  victims  in  making  a  covenant  (Gen. 
xv.  10)  ;  cf.  op/act  repveiv,  II.,  B.,  124,  F.,  25  2,  and 
Latin  fcedus  ferire. 

Ver.  7. — E^N,  coll.,  cf.  ver.  6,  and  hence  the  verb  is 
in  the  plur.  (§  146,  i).  The  suffix  in  ^anj??  is  also 
collec. — "And  how  shall  I  make  a  league  with  you  ?  " 
The  allusion  is  to  the  prohibition  in  Exod.  xxiii.  32-3  ; 
Deut.  vii.  2.  Note  that  the  Qeri  has  Tn:?$  for  the 
Kethibh  -ni-pK,  because,  according  to  the  accentuation, 
Cholem  (o)  is  changed  by  Maqqeph  into  chamets- 
chatuph  (6)  (see  §  16  with  §  27,  i). 

Ver.  8. — "  We  (are)  thy  servants  "  :  Probably  only 
an  expression  of  obsequious  courtesy,  usual  in  the 


VERS.  9-12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  125 

East,  for  they  wished  not  to  submit  themselves  to 
Joshua,  but  only  to  make  a  treaty  with  him.  *p  used 
in  reference  to  the  plur.  (§  122,  3).  "  Whence  may 
you  have  come?"  The  imperfect  (ison),  says  Maurer, 
is  here  used  out  of  modesty  and  politeness  (cf.  Judges 
xvii.  9,  xix.  1 7),  whereas  the  perfect  is  used  when  the 
question  is  asked  emphatically  and  sternly,  as  in  Gen. 
xvi.  8,  xlii.  7,  "  Whence  have  ye  come  ?  "  (Heb.  DHN3). 

Vers.  9,  10. — Dg^>,  according  to  Masius,  Junius, 
.and  Tremellius,  "  unto  the  name"  i.e.,  they  were  come 
to  profess  it,  and  embrace  the  religion  of  the 
Israelites  ;  but  rather,  "  on  account  of  tlie  name"  h 
expresses  the  cause  or  object  with  reference  to  which 
anything  has  been  done  (Ewald,  Lehrb.,  p.  4 1  i)  :  what 
is  here  signified  by  the  "  name "  of  Jehovah  is  ex 
plained  by  what  follows,  viz.,  the  fame  of  Him  and 
all  that  He  did  in  Egypt,  etc.  With  ver.  I  o  cf.  ii. 
10,  Numb.  xxi.  21,  etc.,  33,  etc.  "AsJitaroth"  a  city 
of  Bashan,  in  which  Og  dwelt  (Deut.  i.  4),  called  after 
the  Assyrian  goddess  Ashtoreth  (the  Astarte  of  the 
Greeks  and  Romans),  who  was  there  worshipped. 
This  city  was  assigned  by  Moses  to  the  half-tribe  of 
Manasseh  (Josh.  xiii.  29-31).  Some  identify  it  with 
Ashtaroth  Karnaim  (Gen.  xiv.  5),  but  see  Smith's 
Diet,  of  the  Bible,  vol.  i.,  p.  122.  The  ambassadors 
wisely  abstain  from  mentioning  what  had  really 
alarmed  them,  viz.,  the  overthrow  of  Jericho  and  'Ay, 
for  to  have  betrayed  their  knowledge  of  such  recent 
events  would  have  awakened  suspicion. 

Ver.  1 1 . — "  Our  elders,  i.e.,  the  leaders  of  our 
republic  (see  note,  ver.  3). 

Ver.  12. — •ijoob  ru,  "this  bread  of  ours"  sc.,  look 
at  it  (Keil).  nr,  without  the  article,  and  prefixed  to  a 


126  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

noun,  is  emphatically  demonstrative  [Ges.,  Lex. ;  cf. 
ver.  13  ;  Exod.  xxxii.  i  ;  Psalm  xlviii.  14  (15), 
Ixxviii.  8  (9)].  -"OTtpyn,  "  we  took  as  provision"  denom. 
of  TV,  "  provision  for  a  journey."  B  for  n  transposed 
(§  54,  2,  a\  cf.  ver.  4). 

Ver.  i  3  (cf.  vers.  4,  5). — In  the  last  clause,  "by  reason 
of  the  very  great  length  of  the  way  "  :  T'sp  has  here  the 
force  of  an  adjective  (cf.  Isa.  xlvii.  9). 

Ver.  14. — "  And  the  men  (i.e.,  the  elders  of  Israel, 
vers.  1 8-2 1 )  took  of  their  provision"  either  to  test 
its  quality  by  tasting  it,  or  rather  in  token  of  friend 
ship  (cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  30,  xxxi.  46).  "  But  inquired 
not  at  the  mouth  of  Jehovah"  as  they  ought  to  have 
done,  viz.,  by  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim  of 
the  High  Priest  (Numb,  xxvii.  21).  Not  only  priests, 
but  prophets  are  called  "  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  " 
(see  Isa.  xxx.  2  ;  Jer.  xv.  19).  From  this  neglect  of 
the  princes  of  Israel  to  consult  the  Urim  and  Thum 
mim,  Christians  may  learn  their  own  duty  to  consult 
"  the  lively  oracles  of  God,"  and  thereby  to  try  the 
claims  of  any  who  call  themselves  God's  messengers 
(see  i  John  iv.  i). 

Ver.  15. — 'or6  b>iw,  "  and  Joshua  granted  to  them 
peace"  (see  Ges.,  Lex.,  2,  i,  p.  658),  "  and  made  a 
covenant  with  them;"  Dr6,  dat.  commodi,  "m  their 
favour"  "  To  let  them  live "  :  There  may  have  been 
other  articles  of  the  covenant,  but  this  is  mentioned 
as  the  principal,  and  because  these  Gibeonites,  being 
Canaanites,  ought  to  have  been  destroyed  (Deut.  xx. 
1 6,  17).  The  word  rm,  which  occurs  fifteen  times 
in  this  book,  means  literally  "  an  appointed  meeting," 
from  niT",  to  appoint ;  and  is  generally  rendered 
ri  (Sept.),  "  congregation  "  (Auth.  Vers.). 


VERS.  16,  17.]          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  127 

VERS.  16-27. —  TJie  Discovery  and  Punishment 
of  their  Fraud. 

Ver.  1 6. — The  sing,  suffixes  in  V^N  and  f2~ip?  are 
collec.,  and  refer  to  the  Israelites. 

Ver.  17. — "  On  the  third  day"  viz.,  after  the  dis 
covery  of  the  deception  which  had  been  practised 
on  them.  Gibeon  was  less  than  three  days'  journey 
from  Gilgal,  and  on  a  subsequent  occasion  Joshua,  by 
a  forced  march,  accomplished  the  distance  in  a  single 
night  (x.  9),  but  now  there  was  no  necessity  for  hurry, 
and  Eastern  armies  and  caravans  are  proverbially 
slow  in  their  movements  (see  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  219)  ;  yet  had  the  Gilgal  here  mentioned  been 
that  near  to  Bethel  (see  on  ver.  6),  it  would  not 
have  been  easy  to  account  for  the  time  spent  in  the 
journey.  Hak-Kephirah  (lit.  the  village  or  hamlet, 
rt.  "iS3,  to  cover,  to  shelter),  situated  eight  or  nine 
miles  west  of  Gibeon,  afterwards  assigned,  together 
with  Gibeon  and  Beeroth,  to  Benjamin  (xviii.  25,  26), 
now  Kefir,  two  miles  east  of  Yalo.  Its  inhabitants, 
and  those  of  Beeroth  and  Kirjathjearim,  are  men 
tioned  among  those  who  returned  from  Babylon 
(Ezra  ii.  25  ;  Neh.  vii.  29).  "  Beeroth"  lit.  "wells," 
from  1N2,  to  dig,  to  bore,  for  the  wells  in  Palestine 
were  deep  holes  bored  far  under  the  rocky  surface  by 
the  art  of  man  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  147),  allotted  to 
Benjamin  (xviii.  25)  ;  the  murderers  of  Ishbosheth 
dwelt  there  (2  Sam.  iv.  2).  It  is  said  in  the  legends 
of  Palestine  to  have  been  the  place  where  the  parents 
of  the  child  Jesus  discovered  that  He  was  not  in  their 
company  (Luke  ii.  43-45),  now  called  El-Bireh,  the 
customary  resting-place  at  this  day  for  caravans  going 


128  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

northward,  at  the  end  of  the  first  day's  journey  from 
Jerusalem  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  215),  "Qiryatky*  'ar£m" 
(city  of  woods),  called  Baalah  and  Qir-yath-baal, 
perhaps  because  sacred  to  the  worship  of  Baal  (xv.  9, 
60,  xviii.  14),  apportioned  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (xv. 
60)  ;  hither  the  ark  was  removed  from  Bethshemesh, 
and  there  remained  twenty  years  (i  Sam.  vi.  20,  21, 
vii.  2),  whence  it  was  transferred  by  David  to  the 
house  of  Obededom  (2  Sam.  vi.  2,  10),  an  event 
probably  alluded  to  in  Psalm  cxxxii.  6.  It  is 
situated  about  ten  miles  north-west  of  Jerusalem 
(Eusebius  and  Jerome,  Onoinas^),  and  is  perhaps 
identical  with  the  modern  Kuriet  el  Enab,  the  city 
of  grapes  (Grove,  Art.  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet. ;  Rob., 
Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  3  3 4- 3  3  6  I  Kei1)- 

Ver.  1 8. — '0*3  iTX1?1!,  "and  the  Israelites  smote  them 
not"  i.e.,  killed  them  not  by  the  sword.  'W.*j,  "  and 
all  the  congregation  murmured"  :  }>h,  to  tarry,  to  con 
tinue,  and  hence,  in  Niphal,  to  show  oneself  obsti 
nate,  to  murmur,  to  complain,  the  signification  of 
remaining  and  persisting  being  applied  in  a  bad  sense 
(Ges.).  Elsewhere,  the  word  in  Niphal  occurs  in 
Exodus  and  Numbers  only  (see  Exod.  xv.  24,  xiv.  2; 
Numb.  xiv.  2,  xvii.  6).  The  cause  of  the  murmuring 
on  this  occasion  may  not  have  been  disappointment 
of  anticipated  revenge  and  booty,  but  a  fear  of  the 
Divine  displeasure  for  sparing  these  Canaanites  (see 
i  Sam.  xv.  1 1). 

Ver.  19. — |  in;,  "  to  touch"  but  here  "to  injure"  as 
in  Gen.  xxvi.  1 1 ;  Zech.  ii.  1 2  (8,  Auth.  Vers.).  Some, 
as  Masius,  Munster,  and  Calvin,  have  said  that  the 
oath  of  the  princes  was  not  binding,  the  Gibeonites 
having  deceived  them ;  but  Bishop  Sanderson  (Prtzlec., 


VERS.  20,  21.]  THE  BOOK  Ofi  JOSHUA.  129 

ii.  and  iv.),  Cor.  a  Lap.,  Keil,  and  others,  have  judged 
otherwise,  for  the  oath,  though  illegal,  was  not  to  do 
a  thing  in  itself  illegal,  i.e.,  always  and  absolutely 
forbidden,  such,  e.g.,  as  murder.  Had  the  oath  not 
been  kept,  the  Israelites  would  have  been  charged 
with  perfidy,  and  the  name  of  God  have  been  dis 
honoured  among  the  heathen.  The  whole  question, 
too,  is  set  at  rest  by  the  fact,  that  God  prospered  the 
arms  of  Israel  in  defence  of  the  Gibeonites  (cf.  x.  8), 
and  at  a  later  period  exacted  satisfaction  from  the 
descendants  of  Saul,  because  he  had  violated  this 
oath  (2  Sam.  xxi.  i). 

Ver.  20.  —  rvqn,  Hiph.  infin.  absol.,  used  empha 
tically  for  the  finite  verb  in  the  fut.,  "  will  let  them 
live"  (§  131,  4,  a).  'ft6j,  "  tJiat  zvrath  may  not  come 
upon  its."  "  On  account  of  the  oath  "  (cf.  Matt.  xiv.  9, 


Ver.  21.  —  "Unto  tJiem"  i.e.,  to  the  Israelites. 
"  Let  them  live"  emphatic  imper.  -vriM,  "  and  so  tJiey 
became"  1,  §  49,  2.  Our  Auth.  Vers.  renders  "but 
let  them  be"  and  so  Masius  after  the  Sept.  ;  but  this 
would  require  vrn.,  or  •vni.  (§  126,  6,  c).  The  pre 
ceding  sentence  is  called  by  the  Hebrews  2$\)  SO,?p, 
"  an  abbreviated  discourse."  Thus  Kimchi  supplies 
after  "  let  them  live,"  the  words  "  and  let  them  become 
hewers  of  wood  "  :  so  the  Sept.  and  Arab,  versions. 
•vn'i,  therefore,  merely  describes  the  final  issue,  or 
result,  of  the  deliberations  of  the  princes  ;  cf.  i  Kings 
xv.  22,  where  the  execution  of  a  command  is  re 
lated,  but  without  previous  mention  of  the  terms  of 
that  command.  "  To  all  the  congregation"  i.e.,  in 
their  collective  capacity  as  a  congregation  of  the 
Lord  (Numb,  xxvii.  17).  The  Gibeonites  were  not 

9 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

reduced  to  domestic  slavery,  but  were  the  servants  of 
the  Levites  (and  thus  indirectly  of  the  congregation) 
by  discharging  for  them  the  more  laborious  duties  of 
the  Sanctuary.  By  this  measure  the  Gibeonites  were 
disabled  from  tempting  the  Israelites  to  idolatry,  the 
danger  from  which  was  assigned  as  a  special  reason 
for  destroying  the  Canaanites  (Deut.  vii.  2,  4).  It 
would  seem  from  Exod.  xii.  48  that  they  must  have 
been  circumcised,  and  from  Deut.  xxix.  I  I  that  they 
were  admitted  to  a  share  in  the  covenant  of  God  with 
His  people.  They  were  also  an  emblem  and  pledge 
of  the  reception  of  the  Gentiles  into  the  Church  of 
God.  Thus  the  curse  of  slavery,  which  fell  on  them 
as  descendants  of  Ham  (Gen.  ix.  25),  was  turned  to  a 
blessing,  srb,  "  concerning  them"  i.e.,  the  Gibeonites. 
With  this  meaning  of  b,  cf.  Gen.  xx.  I  3,  v  'npx,  "  say 
concerning  me'.' 

Vers.  22,  23  (Joshua  here  announces  to  the 
Gibeonites  the  determination  which  the  princes  of 
the  congregation  had  come  to  concerning  them). — 
Ver.  23. — l?y  •  •  •  fc6l:,  "and  there  shall  not  be  cut  off 
from  you  a  slave,"  i.e.,  there  shall  not  fail  from  you  a 
slave,  ye  shall  be  slaves  for  ever  (cf.  2  Sam.  iii.  29  ; 
I  Kings  ii.  4).  "I3J?  is  here  used  collec.  for  "slaves ;  " 
the  following  }  is  explicative  (§  155,  r>  a)  2nd  par.), 
"  and  that  as  ^woodcutters  and  water-drawers'1  These 
were  the  lowest  class  of  slaves  (Deut.  xxix.  1 1) 
"  For  the  house  of  my  God"  i.e.,  for  the  Tabernacle, 
and  afterwards  for  the  Temple. 

Ver.  24. — " //  was  certainly  told"  :  The  absolute, 
infin.  (in  the  Hebrew)  before  the  verb  expresses  in 
tensity  (§  137,3,  a).  For  the  (..)  in  the  final  syllable 
of  *^n  see  §  53,  3,  10,  and  with  that  in  the  final 


VER.  27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOSHUA.  131 

syllable  of  nb'y:,  cf.  vii.  9  (note).  It  is  evident  from 
this  verse  that  the  motive  which  had  actuated  the 
Gibeonites  \vasfear,  not  any  religious  feeling  such  as 
had  prompted  Rachabh  (ii.  9,  etc.). 

Ver.  27. — 'D3Jji>i,  "and Joshua  made  (or  "appointed") 
than,"  Sept.  /carecrr^cre^  avrovs :  jnj  sometimes  = 
D'i2>  (Ges.,  Z^r.,  3,  a,  p.  573).  Some  think  that  there 
fore  they  were  from  the  first  called  Nethinim  {given 
or  dedicated],  but  this  title  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  assigned  to  them  till  the  reign  of  David  (see 
Ezra  viii.  20),  who  probably  enrolled  among  them 
other  captives  taken  in  war.  "For  tJie  congregation": 
see  note  on  ver.  21.  n3|p!?  is  added  to  define  more 
accurately  their  service  as  a  religious  one.  Dlpsrr^x, 
"  to  the  place  "  ;  grammatically  dependent  on  fro,  but 
not  implying  that  Joshua  sent  them  at  once  thither, 
but  assigned  them  to  it  as  soon  as  it  should  have 
been  chosen  by  God.  nrp»-"Kr&  "  ivhicJi  He  (Jehovah) 
should  (or  shall)  choose  "  :  The  preceding  words  "  unto 
this  day  "  show  that,  when  this  book  was  written,  no 
place  had  yet  been  definitely  chosen  (so  Keil)  ;  but 
as  Shiloh,  where  after  the  subjugation  of  Canaan  the 
Tabernacle  was  set  up  (Josh,  xviii.  i),  is  expressly 
called  by  God  "  My  place,  where  I  set  My  name  at 
first"  (Jer.  vii.  12),  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that 
the  Gibeonites  were  not  employed  in  their  office  till 
Solomon's  Temple  had  been  built. 


132  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 


CHAPTER    X. 

VERS.  1-27. —  The  Defection  of  t/ie  Gibeonites  causes 
Five  Kings  in  their  Neighbourhood  to  Combine 
against  them.  Joshua  succours  t/icm,  and  gains 
a  Great  Victory  over  the  Five  Kings. 

Ver.  i. — "  Adonizedek,"  lit.  "lord  of  righteous 
ness,"  cf.  Mclchizedec,  "  king  of  righteousness,"  pro 
bably  an  official  title,  as  Pharaoh  and  Ptolemy  of  the 
Egyptian  kings.  p?^"l* :  See  for  the  etymology  and 
orthography  Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  367,  and  Smith's  Diet,  of 
the  Bible,  p.  981.  The  name  occurs  here  in  the  Old 
Testament  for  the  first  time  ;  anciently  the  city  was 
called  D^  (Gen.  xiv.  18  ;  Psalm  Ixxvi.  3  [2]),  where 
some  think  that  the  first  half  of  the  compound  name 
is  dropped,  for  brevity's  sake,  as  nnp  for  Dny»n  njni? 
(Josh,  xviii.  28).  It  was  allotted  to  Benjamin  (xviii. 
28),  but  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  territory  of  Judah  (xv. 
8),  by  whom  the  lower  part  of  the  city  was  conquered 
after  Joshua's  death  (Judges  i.  8,  with  Joseph.,  Antiq., 
v.,  2,  §  2).  The  upper  city  and  the  citadel  remained 
in  the  hands  of  the  Jebusites,  the  ancient  inhabitants, 
who  not  only  could  not  be  expelled  by  the  men  of 
Judah  and  Benjamin  (Josh.  xv.  63  ;  Judges  i.  21), 
but  seem  to  have  so  far  gradually  gained  possession 
of  the  whole  place,  that  it  was  called  Jebus  in  the 
time  of  the  Judges  (Judges  xix.  10-12)  ;  they  were 
finally  expelled  in  the  reign  of  David  (2  Sam.  v.  6-9). 
Before  TJ'X.2  repeat  ^  with  1.,  "  and  that."  '-v^fi,  "  and 
were  in  the  midst  of  them,"  i.e.,  were  living  among 
them  on  friendly  terms. 


VERS.  2,  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  133 

Ver.  2. — '-lX"p,  "  Then  (or  "that")  they  (i.e.,  Adoni- 
zedec  and  his  subjects)  feared  exceedingly."  ">3, 
"  because  Gibeon  was  a  great  city"  etc.  :  See  note  on 
ix.  3.  The  fact  that  so  powerful  a  city  should  have 
been  induced  to  make  a  league  with  Israel  showed 
how  formidable  the  latter  people  must  be. 

Ver.  3. — The  names  of  the  kings  mentioned  in 
this  verse  were  probably  characteristic,  e.g.,  Ho-ham 
(probably  for  Dflfrv,  "  whom  Jehovah  drives,"  Ges., 
Lex.} ;  Pir-am  ("  the  wild  ass,"  rt.  &nf,  to  run  swiftly) ; 
Ya-phi-a  ^  (splendid)  ;  DebJdr  (the  writer).  Their 
respective  cities  were  (i)  Hebron  (Chebh-ron),  a  city 
of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  54),  situated  among  the  moun 
tains  (xx.  7),  and  built  seven  years  before  Zoan  in 
Egypt  (Numb.  xiii.  22).  The  name  signified  com 
munity  or  society,  from  "on,  "  to  join  together,"  and  it 
was  the  earliest  seat  of  civilisation  in  Palestine, 
where  Abraham  and  the  patriarchs  had  their  first 
home  and  abiding  settlement  (Gen.  xiii.  1 8,  xxxv. 
27).  It  was  called  Kirjath-arba  (Gen.  xxiii.  2),  or 
"  the  city  of  Arba,"  from  Arba,  the  progenitor  of  the 
giants  Anakim  (Josh.  xxi.  i  I,  xv.  13,  14)  ;  afterwards 
it  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Chittites,  and  was 
governed  by  Ephron  the  Chittite  (Gen.  xxiii.  10). 
Many  (Hengstenberg,  Keil,  etc.)  think  that  Chebh- 
ron  was  the  original  name,  which,  while  the  Israelites 
were  in  Egypt,  was  changed  into  Kirjath-arba  by  the 
Anakim  when  they  took  the  city,  but  was  again 
restored  by  Caleb  after  its  reconquest  (Josh.  xiv.  I  5), 
which  opinion  is  confirmed  by  Gen.  xiii.  i  8.  Euse- 
bius  and  Jerome  (De  Loc.  Heb.,  fol.  87,  E.)  place  it 

1  The  same  name  was  given  to  a  son  of  David  (2  Sam.  v.  15). 


134  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

twenty- two  miles  south  of  Jerusalem.  At  the  present 
day  it  is  called  by  the  Mahommedans  El-Khali/,  "  the 
friend  (of  God),"  because  Abraham  sojourned  there. 
The  cave  of  Machpelah  is  still  there,  surrounded  by  a 
mosque,  and  probably  contains  the  dust  of  Sarah, 
Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  the  embalmed  body  or 
mummy  of  Jacob  (Gen.  1.  i  3,  see  Stanley's  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  p.  102).  (2)  Yann fit/i  (high)  from  np-j,  to  be 
high,  a  town  of  the  Shephelah,  or  low  country,  of 
Judah  (xv.  35  ;  Neh.  xi.  29),  according  to  the  Onomast. 
ten  Roman  miles  south-west  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  road 
to  Eleuthcropolis,1  and  probably  identical  with  the 
modern  Yarmuk  (Robin.,  B.  R.,  ii.,  1 7),  on  a  hill  called 
Tell-Armuth,  where  are  remains  of  ancient  walls 
and  cisterns.  (3)  LakJdsh  (obstinate,  i.e.,  hard  to  be 
captured  [Ges.,  Lexty,  also  in  the  Shephelah  of  Judah 
(xv.  39),  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  9), 
besieged  and  captured  by  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xviii. 
14-17,  xix.  8  ;  Layard's  Nineveh,  p.  150),  reoccupied 
by  the  Jews  after  the  captivity  (Neh.  xi.  30),  regarded 
by  Von  Raumer,  Keil,  and  Van  de  Velde,  as  probably 
identical  with  the  Uin  Lakis,  about  twenty  miles  south 
west  of  Yarmuth,  on  the  road  to  Gaza.  (4)  'Eglilon 

1  Not  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  It  was  a  town  of  South 
Palestine,  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  of  Judah,  on  the  borders  of 
the  great  Philistine  plain,  and  about  twenty-five  miles  from 
Jerusalem,  on  the  road  to  Gaza.  Its  ancient  name  was 
Betogabra,  which  is  first  mentioned  in  the  writings  of  Ptolemy 
in  the  beginning  of  the  second  century.  Its  new  name 
Jileutheropolis  first  occurs  upon  coins  in  the  reign  of  the 
Kmperor  Septimius  Severus,  A.D.  202-3.  In  the  time  of  Euse- 
bius,  Bishop  of  Caesarea,  it  was  so  important  a  place  as  the 
capital  of  a  large  province  and  the  seat  of  a  bishop,  that  he 
makes  it  in  his  Onomast  icon  the  central  point  in  South  Pales 
tine,  from  which  the  positions  of  more  than  twenty  other 
towns  are  determined.  The  name  in  Arabic  is  Beit  Jibrin. 


VERS.  4,  5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  135 

(large  bull-calf  [Simonis])  in  the  Shephelah  of  Judah 
(xv.  39,  xii.  12),  less  than  three  miles  east  of  Lachish, 
and  the  same  as  the  modern  Ajlan  (Robinson,  B.  R., 
ii.,  249).  In  the  Onomasticon  it  is  identified  with 
Adullam  from  the  Sept.  reading  'OSoXXct/i  here  and 
in  x.  34,  but  it  is  evident  from  Josh.  xii.  12,  15,  xv. 
35)  39)  tnat  'Eglon  and  Adullam  were  different 
cities. 

Ver.  4. —  "  Come  up  to  me"  in  a  military  sense, 
i.e.,  with  forces.  There  had  been  a  previous  deter 
mination  among  the  Canaanites  in  general  to  form 
a  league  against  Israel  (ix.  i);  but,  before  any  active 
steps  had  been  taken,  the  defection  of  Gibeon  led  at 
once  to  the  combination  against  it  of  the  five  kings 
(ver.  3),  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  The  object  of 
these  latter  probably  was  not  only  to  punish  Gibeon, 
and  deter  others  from  following  its  example,  but  by 
its  capture,  and  that  of  its  dependent  cities,  to 
impede  the  further  advance  of  Israel.  The  king  of 
Jerusalem  took  the  lead,  his  being,  perhaps,  the 
principal  city,  and  most  exposed  to  attack,  as  lying 
between  Gibeon  and  the  camp  of  the  Israelites  at 
Gilgal. 

Ver.  5. — (Of)  "  The  Emorites"  Sept.  TU>V  'Ie/3ov- 
a-aiaiv.  Both  were  mountain  tribes  (iii.  10,  note)  ; 
but  the  reading  "  Emorites  "  (Auth.  Vers.  "  Amorites  ") 
is  countenanced  by  ver.  6.  As,  however,  Jarmuth, 
Lachish,  and  'Eglon  were  in  the  low-country  (Josh. 
xv-  35)  39))  it  appears  as  if  the  name  Emorites  was 
not  always  confined  to  those  who  dwelt  on  the 
mountains  ;  cf.  Judges  i.  34,  35,  where  it  would  seem 
that,  having  drawn  the  Danites  into  the  mountain, 
the  Emorites  themselves  occupied  the  plain.  Perhaps, 


136  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

however,  as  Keil  conjectures,  the  name  is  here 
employed  because  the  Emorites  were  the  most 
powerful  of  the  Canaanites. 

Ver.  6. — "  Slack  not"  lit.  "  do  not  let  down " 
(cf.  i.  5,  note).  "  And  save  ns"  lit.  "make  ample 
room  for  us."  Ample  space  is  in  Hebrew  applied  to 
deliverance  from  dangers  (Ges.,  Lex^}.  The  expres 
sions  successively  employed  in  this  clause  show  the 
urgency  of  the  peril.  -U'i?x,  "  against  its  "  :  When  the 
motion  towards  an  object  is  hostile,  —  b$  has  the 
force  of  "  against  "  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  8  ;  Judges  xii.  3  ; 
Isa.  ii.  4).  inn  •'2'^,  see  note  on  ver.  5. 

Ver.  7. — "n!2SJ?^,  "  even  all  tlie  mighty  men  of 
valour"  :  Put  in  apposition  to  the  preceding  "all  the 
people  of  war."  \  is  explicative  (§  155,  I,  a\  cf. 
ix.  23).  It  is  probable  that  a  selection  was  made 
of  the  best  warriors,  and  the  rest  were  left  to  protect 
the  camp  at  Gilgal.  On  this  assistance,  so  promptly 
rendered  by  Joshua  to  the  Gibeonites,  Origen  remarks, 
"  Even  although  thou  art  but  a  hewer  of  wood  or  a 
drawer  of  water  in  Christ's  Church,  yet  thou  mayest 
expect  to  be  attacked  by  her  enemies,  but  thou 
mayest  also  hope  for  succour  from  Christ." 

Ver.  8. — "VDK'3  :  Some  (Masius,  Drusius,  Rosenm.) 
render  the  imperfect  here  as  a  pluperf.,  but  unneces 
sarily.  God  may  well  have  renewed  at  such  a  crisis 
the  assurance  of  special  aid,  which  He  had  before 
given  (viii.  I,  vi.  2).  T"^?,  in  the  margin  Y1£,  and 
the  sing,  is  more  commonly  used  in  this  expression 
(see  ii.  24,  vi.  2,  viii.  I,  18). 

Ver.  9. — Cf.  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  iv.,  p.  219), 
"  As  in  the  battle  of  Marathon,  everything  depended 
on  the  suddenness  of  the  blow  which  should  break  in 


VER.  10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  137 

pieces  the  hostile  confederation.  On  the  former 
occasion  of  Joshua's  visit  to  Gibeon,  it  had  been  a 
three  days'  journey  from  Gilgal,  as,  according  to  the 
slow  pace  of  Eastern  armies  and  caravans,  it  might 
well  be.  But  now  by  a  forced  march  '  Joshua  came 
unto  them  suddenly,  and  went  up  all  night.'  " 

Ver.  10. — D®n*,  "threw  tJiem  into  confusion"  from 
Don,  i.q.,  Q-in,  "  to  put  in  motion "  (Keil  ;  cf.  Exod. 
xiv.  24,  xxiii.  27).  This  may  have  been  effected  by 
inspiring  them  with  a  sudden  panic,  or  by  terrifying 
them  by  thunder  and  lightning  (cf.  I  Sam.  vii.  10, 
and  ver.  11  below).  "At  Gibeon":  With  this  mean 
ing  of  ?  (viz.,  "at"}  cf.  v.  13.  "?i~n,  "on  the  way 
which  goetli  up  to  Beth-choron "  (lit.  "  the  house  of 
caves,"  in  allusion  to  the  rocky  nature  of  the  ground). 
Beth-choron  the  Upper  is  meant,  as  distinguished  from 
Beth-choron  the  Nether  (ver.  I  i).  Both  towns  were 
built  by  Sherah,  the  grand-daughter  of  Ephraim 
(l  Chron.  vii.  24),  and  were  on  the  boundary  line 
between  Benjamin  and  Ephraim  (Josh.  xvi.  3,  5  ; 
I  Chron.  vii.  24)  ;  they  were  afterwards  fortified  by 
Solomon  (2  Chron.  viii.  5).  Beth-choron  the  Upper  was 
about  four  miles  north-west  of  Gibeon,  and  r6ro  "qTi 
denotes  the  hilly  road  which  led  from  Gibeon  to  it. 
The  modern  name  is  Beit-ur  cl  Foka  (the  upper),  as 
Beit-ur  el  Tahta  (the  lower)  is  that  of  Beth-choron 
the  Nether  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  208  ;  Grove, 
Bib.  Diet.,  i.,  20 1 ).  "  'Azeqah  "  (a  field  dug  over,  broken 
up),  from  pltf,  to  dig  or  to  till  the  ground  (Ges.). 
It  lay  to  the  north  of  the  plain  of  Judah,  and  near 
Beth-choron  ;  but  its  site  is  not  now  discernible 
(Grove)  ;  it  is  mentioned  along  with  Adullam  and 
Socoh,  towns  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  35),  and  as  near 


138  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

Socoh  (i  Sam.  xvii.  i).  It  was  fortified  by 
Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  9) ;  besieged  by  Nebu 
chadnezzar  (Jer.  xxxiv.  7),  and  inhabited  after  the 
return  from  the  captivity  (Neh.  xi.  30).  "  Maqqcdah" 
(probably  "  place  of  shepherds  "  [Ges.  Lex.]),  its  site 
unknown.  Eusebius  (Onomast.}  says  that  it  was 
eight  miles  east  of  Eleutheropolis,  where  east,  says 
Keil,  seems  to  be  an  error  for  west.  Probably  it 
stood  where  the  mountains  sink  into  the  plain,  for 
in  xv.  41  it  is  mentioned  as  in  the  Shephelah,  or 
maritime  plain,  of  Judah  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  21  i).  It  undoubtedly  lay  to  the  south  of  Beth- 
choron  the  Nether,  as  the  defeated  Canaanites  were 
fleeing  to  the  south  in  order  to  take  refuge  in  their 
fortified  cities  (ver.  ip).1 

Ver.  i  i. — "nin?,  "  in  the  descent  of  Beth-choron"  i.e., 
as  they  were  descending  the  pass  between  Beth- 
choron  the  Upper  and  Beth-choron  the  Nether. 
The  first  stage  of  the  flight  of  the  Canaanites  had 
been  in  the  long  ascent  from  Gibeon  to  Beth-choron 
the  Upper  (ver.  i  o).  The  second  stage  was  when 
having  outstripped  their  pursuers,  and  crossed  the 


1  Captain  Warren,  R.E.,  in  1871,  proposed  the  village  of  El 
Moghar  (the  caves)  as  the  probable  site  of  Maqqedah.  "  This 
position,"  says  he,  "might  well  have  been  chosen  for  a  royal 
city.  It  is  situated  on  the  north  side  of  a  narrow  tajo,  which 
the  valley  of  Sorek  has  scooped  through  the  sandstone  hills. 
Immediately  south  is  Kutrak  (Gederoth)  ;  to  the  west  Dejan 
(Beth-Dagon) ;  north-east,  Akir  (Ekrom)  ;  and  about  three 
miles  further  north-east,  Nianeh  (Naamah)  (see  Josh.  xv.  41). 
It  is  about  seven  miles  south-west  of  Ramleh,  in  the  position,  or 
nearly  so,  where  the  writer  of  the  article  'Makkedah  '  in  Smith's 
Biblical  Dictionary  proposes  it  may  be  found."  {Recent 
Explorations  in  Bible  Lands,  Paper  read  at  Church  Congress, 
1875.)  This  view  has  been  more  recently  confirmed  by  the 
surveyors  of  the  Pal.  Explor.  Fund  (Report,  January  1881). 


VER.  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHLA.  139 

high  ridge  of  Beth-choron  the  Upper,  they  were  in 
full  flight  down  the  descent  to  Beth-choron  the 
Nether  (Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  ch.  iv.).  This  pass 
was  rocky  and  rough,  and  was  the  scene  not  only  of 
this  victory  of  Joshua,  but  that  of  Judas  Maccabaeus 
over  the  Syrians,  under  Seron  (i  Mace.  iii.  13,  etc.), 
and,  still  later,  of  the  destruction  of  the  army  of 
Cestius  Gallus  by  the  Jews  (Josephus,  Bel.  Jud.,  ii., 
!9>§  §  S,  9).  As  the  main  road  to  the  sea  coast 
from  Jerusalem  and  the  Jordan  valley  lay  through 
this  pass,  both  Beth-choron  the  Upper  and  Nether 
were  strongly  fortified  by  Solomon  (2  Chron.  viii.  5)- 
"  Great  stones"  explained  in  the  next  clause  to  be 
hail-stones,  Sept.  Xi$ovs  ^aXct^?.  Cf.  Exod.  ix.  19, 
25  ;  Job  xxxviii.  22,  23  ;  Psalm  xviii.  13,  14,  where 
hail  is  represented  as  employed  by  God  against  His 
enemies.  Though  terrific  storms  occasionally  burst 
over  the  hills  in  Palestine,  yet  this  storm  was 
evidently  miraculous,  like  that  in  Exod.  ix.  24  ; 
i  Sam.  vii.  10,  for  the  stones  were  of  unusual  size, 
and  appear  to  have  slain  the  Canaanites,  but  not  the 
Israelites.  It  must  have  served  to  convince  the 
Israelites,  on  the  one  hand,  that  God  fought  for 
them,  and  their  enemies,  on  the  other,  that  a  greater 
than  human  power  was  the  cause  of  their 
discomfiture.1 


1  The  student  of  ecclesiastical  history  need  hardly  be  re 
minded  of  the  story  of  the  thundering  legion,  in  answer  to 
whose  prayers  a  great  storm  was  sent  to  aid  Marcus  Aurelius 
in  his  victory  over  the  Guadi,  A.D.  174  (Euseb.,  Hist.,  v.,  5). 
This  particular  wonder  is,  however,  now  given  up,  even  by 
those  Protestants  who  insist  on  the  perpetuity  of  miraculous 
powers  in  the  Church.  (P.  Smith's  Anct.  Hist.,  vol.  iii., 
ch.  39,  p.  520.) 


Ho  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

Vers.  12-15. — The  thread  of  the  narrative  is  here 
broken  off,  and  not  resumed  till  ver.  16.  Some 
regard  the  passage  (vers.  12-15)  as  an  interpolation 
by  a  late  reviser  of  this  book,  who  took  it  from 
some  older  historical  narrative,  in  which  was  con 
tained  the  quotation  from  the  Book  of  Yashar.  But 
for  this  opinion  there  is  no  good  authority.  It  is 
based  on  the  questionable  hypothesis  that  the  Book 
of  Joshua  is  in  part  derived  from  older  documents, 
such  as  those  of  the  Elohist  and  Jehovist  Nor  can 
we,  consistently  with  any  just  conception  of  the 
inspiration  of  the  writer  of  our  book,  suppose  that 
he  would  have  left  wholly  unnoticed  the  remarkable 
incident  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Yashar,  whatever 
may  be  the  explanation  given  of  that  incident. 
Most  probably,  therefore,  vers.  12-15  is  a  parenthesis 
from  our  author's  own  hand,  in  which  he  inserted  the 
above  mentioned  quotation,  in  order  to  convey  a 
more  vivid  impression  of  the  event  which  he  wished 
to  record,  than  if  he  had  simply  related  it  in  his  own 
historical  narrative. 

It  is  doubtful  where  the  quotation  begins  and  ends, 
but  reasons  are  given  in  the  following  notes  for 
regarding  it  as  commencing  with  the  word  "  Sun  " 
in  the  latter  half  of  ver.  I  2,  and  terminating  with  the 
first  half  of  ver.  13;  all  that  follows  the  formula  of 
quotation  to  the  end  of  ver.  14  being  taken  as  a 
comment  of  the  author  of  our  book,  and  ver.  I  5  as 
probably  misplaced  from  ver.  43  by  the  error  of  some 
ancient  transcriber. 

Ver.  12. —  TX,  "then"  Sept.  Tore;  Vulg.  tune; 
followed  by  the  imperf.  in  a  past  sense  (§  127,  4,  a)  ; 
cf.  viii.  30,  where  Keil  remarks  that  there  is  not  the 


VEKS.  12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  141 

least  foundation  for  the  assertion  of  some  critics, 
adduced  in  support  of  their  fragmentary  hypothesis, 
that  every  paragraph  commencing  with  TX,  and  fol 
lowed  by  an  imperfect,  is  either  a  fragment  or  an  in 
terpolation.  131*,  " spake"  i.e.,  in  prayer,  as  seems 
implied  by  ver.  14.  Joshua  would  not  have  presumed 
to  give  the  command  which  follows,  unless  he  had 
first  prayed  to  the  Lord,  and  believed  that  his  prayer 
had  been  answered  (cf.  I  Kings  xvii.  I  with  James 
v.  16-iS)1.  The  Chald.  renders  by  rti&,"dccantavit" 
but  when  "i?1!  has  this  sense,  it  is  followed  by  "Y"2>,  as 
in  Judges  v.  12.  *?$b  nri,  "  to  give  into  the  power  of" 
cf.  Deut.  ii.  31,  33,  36;  Judges  xi.  9.  'if'?  M^, 
"  before  the  eyes  of  Israel"  i.e.,  "  in  their  presence," 
"  coram  iis  "  (Vulg.),  so  that  they  were  witnesses  of 
his  words  (cf.  Numb.  xx.  8  ;  Deut.  xxxi.  7).  E'Otv, 
a  word  which  has  reference  to  the  light  of  the  sun,  as 
nsn  and  D^iri  have  to  its  heat.  The  absence  of  the 
article,  which  is  usually  found  with  the  vocative  in 
prose  (§  109,  3,  Rem.  2),  indicates  poetry;  so  rfv  2 
in  the  next  clause  (cf.  the  use  of  px,  Job  xvi.  18)  ; 
hence  it  is  probable  that  our  author  begins  his 
quotation  from  the  Book  of  Yashar  (see  ver.  I  3  below) 
at  the  word  "  shemesh  "  (see  Lowth's  Prcelec.,  vol.  ii., 
lect.  23,  p.  152).  IW?;?,  "at"  or  "on"  (i.e.,  over) 
Gibeon"  on,  Qal.  imper.  of  DO^,  properly  "  to  be 
dumb  with  astonishment,"  then  "  to  be  silent,"  then 

1  Other  remarkable  instances  of  the  importance  and  efficacy 
of  prayer  are  Gen.  xx.  17  ;  2  Kings  xix.  2,  etc.;  Acts  xii.  5,  ii. 

z  This  word  is  masc.,  whereas  nJIP,  another  name  for  the 
moon,  is  fern.  Both  names  are  derived  from  colour,  meaning 
respectively  the  yellow  (or  pale)  and  the  white,  and  thus  were 
silent  protests  against  the  heathen  notion  that  the  moon  was  a 
personal  female  deity. 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

"  to  rest,"  "  to  be  still,"  "  to  wait "  (cf.  I  Sam.  xiv.  9 
and  the  synonymous  use  of  ^"inn,  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  5  ; 
Exod.  xiv.  14).  It  is  here  not  unfitly  rendered  by 
our  Authorised  Version  "  stand  still"  (Sept.  arr^rw), 
because  now  in  ver.  I  3  is  parallel  to  it,  as  in  I  Sam. 
xiv.  9.  "  And  tlwu  moon  "  :  This  direct  address  to 
the  moon  implies  that  it  was  at  the  time  visible ;  cf. 
Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  210,  "  In  front,  over  the 
western  vale  of  Ajalon,  was  the  faint  figure  of  the 
crescent  moon  visible  above  the  hailstorm,  which 
was  fast  driving  up  from  the  sea  in  the  valley  below." 
The  time  of  day  was  probably  about  noon  (cf.  ver. 
13,  "  in  the  midst  of  heaven,")  not,  as  Cor.  a  Lap., 
Clericus,  and  others,  late  in  the  afternoon,  for  then 
the  sun  would  have  appeared  to  Joshua  not  in  the 
east,  but  sinking  below  the  horizon  in  the  west. 
Fay  remarks  that  "  the  joint  apparition  of  the  sun 
and  moon  is  not  very  unusual;  on  the  contrary,  it 
may  be  witnessed  in  a  clear  sky  at  any  time,  during 
the  moon's  first  quarter,  in  the  afternoon,  and  during 
the  last  quarter,  in  the  forenoon,  and,  indeed,  from 
what  is  kindly  communicated  to  me  by  the 
astronomer  Madler,  may  be  seen  in  the  much 
clearer  southern  heavens  early  in  the  afternoon, 
during  the  moon's  first  quarter,  and  until  late  in  the 
forenoon  during  her  third."  J17»K  (place  of  deer 
or  gazelles,  from  !?$»,  a  stag).  The  valley  is  iden 
tified  by  Robinson  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  253,  Hi.,  145)  with 
the  modern  Merj.  Ibn  Omeir,  and  described  by  him 
as  a  broad  and  beautiful  valley  (now  a  valley  of 
cornfields),  running  in  a  westerly  direction  from  the 
mountains  towards  the  great  western  plain  (see  also 
Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  207).  The  town  has  been 


VER.  I3.j  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  143 

identified  with  the  village  Yalo,  situated  on  a  hill 
skirting  the  south  of  the  valley.  After  the  conquest 
it  was  allotted  to  the  tribe  of  Dan  (xix.  42), 
but  from  it  the  Emorites  could  not  be  expelled 
(Judges  i.  35)  ;  was  assigned  with  its  suburbs  to  the 
Levites  (xxi.  24  ;  I  Chron.  vi.  54,  [69]).  Saul  and 
Jonathan  defeated  the  Philistines  near  it  (i  Sam.  xiv. 
31).  It  was  fortified  by  Rehoboam  after  the  revolt  of 
the  ten  tribes  (2  Chron.  xi.  10),  and  captured  by  the 
Philistines  in  the  reign  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  18). 
Ver.  13. — ni  i.e.,  the  people  of  Israel  (cf.  iii.  17), 
more  usually  designated  by  Dtf  ;  thus  the  Chaldee  here 
renders  by  ^N"jv?  Nfty  ;  the  omission  of  the  article  is  a 
sign  of  poetry.  VTX,  accusative,  of  those  from  whom 
vengeance  is  sought  to  be  taken,  but  the  verb  is 
usually  used  with  the  prep,  ip  or  ^  (see  Ges.,  Lex\ 
N^q,  nonne  ?  =  nan  (§  153,2,  Rein. ;  see  2  Sam.  i.  i  8). 
by,  "  upon"  for  in  writing  the  letters  were  inscribed 
upon  a  tablet  or  parchment.  iw'»n  120,  quoted  here 
and  in  2  Sam.  i.  I  8  only,  lit.  "  tlie  book  of  tJie  uprigJit 
one"  (cf.  margin  of  Auth.Vers.,  "  book  of  the  upright;" 
Aldine  and  Complut.  edition  of  Sept.  eVt  /3t/3A.iov 
TOV  evOovs,  Vulg.  "in  libro  justorum;"  but  the 
Peshito  Syr.  "the  book  of  hymns"  reading  T^n  for 
T^n).1  "  Yashar,"  from  "\&,  to  be  upright,  was  probably 
a  poetical  appellation  of  Israel  as  the  covenant  people 
of  God,  cf.  "  Jeshurun  "  in  Deut.  xxxii.  15,  and  see 
Numb,  xxiii.  10,  21  ;  Psalm  cxi.  i,  whence,  and  from 

1  Lowth  (Prcelec .,  lee.  23,  note  10)  adopts  this  view,  and 
says,  "  I  suppose  the  Book  of  Jashar  to  have  been  some  collec 
tion  of  sacred  songs,  composed  at  different  times  and  on 
different  occasions,  and  to  have  had  this  title,  because  the 
book  itself,  and  most  of  the  songs,  began  in  general  with  this 
word  '  veyashar. '  ' ' 


144  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  ix. 

David's  elegy  over  Saul  and  Jonathan  in  2  Sam.  i. 
i  8,  it  has  been  inferred  that  the  Book  of  Yashar  was 
a  collection  of  odes  in  praise  of  certain  heroes  of  the 
Theocracy,  with  historical  notices  of  their  achieve 
ments  interwoven,  and  that  the  collection  was  formed 
by  degrees,  so  that  the  quotation  of  it  here  is  neither 
a  proof  that  the  passage  has  been  interpolated  by  a 
later  hand,  nor  that  the  work  was  composed  at  a 
very  late  period  (Keil).  The  formula  of  quotation 
"  Is  not  this  written  ?  "  is  not  found  elsewhere  in  the 
middle  of  a  verse,  but  always  either  at  its  beginning 
(Numb.  xxi.  14,  27),  or  at  its  close  (2  Kings  xv.  21, 
xx.  20,  etc.)  ;  and  hence  some  (as  Maurer,  Fay, 
Kamphausen)  are  of  opinion  that  the  quotation  itself 
terminates  in  the  first  half  of  ver.  i  3.  This  view 
seems  also  confirmed  by  the  absence  in  vers.  13^-14 
of  the  parallelism  in  12^-13,  and  in  its  being  simply 
stated  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  the  sun  stood  still, 
without  any  mention  being  made  of  the  moon,  and 
then  the  whole  account  being  closed  with  the  prosaic 
remark  in  ver.  15.  On  the  other  hand,  Keil,  Heng- 
stenberg,  and  others,  think  that  the  whole  passage, 
vers.  12-15,  is  taken  from  the  Book  of  Yashar;  but 
on  that  supposition  we  must  conclude  that  that  book 
was  not  entirely  written  in  poetry,  for  ver.  i  5  is  cer 
tainly  prose,  and  of  vers.  13^-14  more  can  hardly 
be  said  than  that  they  are  written  in  a  somewhat 
elevated  style,  such  as  is  often  used  in  prose  itself. 
'&r\  'vn.3>  not  "  in  the  hemisphere"  i.e.,  in  the  upper 
heavens,  those  visible  to  the  spectator,  those  above 
the  horizon  (Cor.  a  Lap.,  Rosenm.,  Calmet  (Frag.,  No. 
154),  but  "in  the  midst  (or  half]  of  heaven"  (cf. 
Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  210,  note  5).  "The  em- 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  145 

phatic  expression  (ver.  i  3),  not  simply  "  in  the  midst" 
but  "  in  the  bisection  of  the  heavens"  seems  intended  to 
indicate  noonday.  "And hasted  not"  p-ix,  "  to  hasten," 
in  xvii.  15,  "  to  be  narrow,  to  be  strait,"  a  word  used 
in  poetry,  but  also  in  prose  (see  Exod.  v.  13,  and  [in 
Hiphil]  Gen.  xix.  15).  D^pFi  DT'3,  not,  as  Clericus, 
"when  the  day  had  passed"  nor,  as  Rosen  m.,  "as  is 
the  case  in  a  perfect  day;"  but  "  about  a  whole  day"  i.e., 
about  twelve  hours,  the  time  between  sunrise  and 
sunset,  cf.  nopj^  rn^,  "  a  whole  year "  (Lev.  xxv. 
30),  and  for  the  particle  3  in  the  sense  of  "  about," 
see  Ges.,  Lex.  (A)  (3),  p.  378. 

Ver.  14. — "  And  there  was  not  like  that  day  before 
and  after  it,  that  Jehovah  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  a 
man,"  etc.  The  Vulg.  for  "  that  day  "  has  "  tarn 
longa  dies,"  for  which  there  is  no  authority  in  the 
Hebrew,  which  here  gives  prominence  only  to  the 
fact  that  the  wonder  (ver.  13)  was  effected  by 
Jehovah  at  the  request  of  a  man.1  In  the  last 
clause  *3  assigns  a  reason  why  the  prayer  of  Joshua 
was  heard.  God  had  before  given  a  promise  that 
He  would  deliver  these  enemies  into  Joshua's  hand 
(ver.  8).  "Jehovah  fought,"  cf.  Exod.  xiv.  14  ;  and 
the  title  "  man  of  war"  given  to  Jehovah  in  Exod. 
xv.  3.  The  7  before  TKTB"  denotes  a  dat.  commodi 
(cf.  i  Sam.  xxii.  15,  ^^7). 

Ver.  I  5. — It  is  evident  from  ver.  43  that  this  verse 
is  not  suitably  placed  here,  and  hence  some  MSS., 
and  the  Vat.  and  Alex,  editions  of  the  Sept.,  omit  it, 
though  it  is  found  in  the  Complut.  and  Aldine  edition. 


1  In  Hezekiah's  case  the  retrogression  of  the  shadow  on  the 
sun-dial  was  given  to  him  as  a  sign,  and  not  as  an  answrer  to 
his  prayer  (2  Kings  xx.  9-11). 

10 


146  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

Masius,  Drusius,  and  Cor.  a  Lapid.  attempt  to  pre 
serve  the  connection  with  the  remainder  of  the  chapter 
by  rendering  3^1  "  and  (Joshua)  proposed  to  return  ;  " 
but  this  sense  would  rather  have  been  expressed  by 
ytitfy  nb'nM.  Either,  therefore,  ver.  I  5  may  have  been 
intended  to  be  merely  a  finish  off  to  the  preceding 
narrative,,  after  which  the  history  is  resumed  from 
ver.  II,1  or  some  ancient  transcriber,  misled  by  the 
similar  endings  of  vers.  14,  42,  may  have  transposed 
ver.  43,  and  inserted  it  here.  So  Ilgen,  Rosenm., 
and  others. 

As  to  the  remarkable  event  recorded  in  the  above 
passage  (vers.  12-14),  it  cannot  be  accounted  for 
from  natural  causes,  nor  satisfactorily  explained  as  a 
mere  poetical  description,  meaning  nothing  more 
than  that  the  day  was  made  to  seem  to  Joshua  and 
the  Israelites  longer  than  it  really  was.2  The  re 
peated  assertion  that  the  sun  stood  still,  and  the 
emphatic  declaration  in  ver.  14  concerning  the 
unusual  character  of  the  event,  are  at  variance  with 
any  such  supposition.  Yet  we  are  not  required  to 
believe  in  an  actual  interruption  of  the  course  of  the 
sun,3  for  it  is  well  known  that  Scripture  speaks  of 
celestial  phenomena  not  scientifically,  but  according 
to  their  appearance,  as  we  say  in  popular  language 
"  the  sun  rises,"  or  "  the  sun  sets,"  because  it  seems 
to  do  so.  All,  therefore,  implied  by  a  stoppage  of 

1  See  Bishop  Wordsworth  in  loc.,    who  remarks  that  this 
practice  of  finishing  off  a  subject,  and  of  afterwards  returning 
to  a  point  in  the  narrative,  is  common  to  both  Testaments. 

2  Such  is  the  view  of  Keil  and  Hengstenberg,  and  was  that 
of  the  learned  Jew  Maimonides  (More  Nevo,  ii.,  c.  53).     So 
Herder,  Heb.  Poesie,  vol.  i.,  p.  237. 

3  This  literal  interpretation  is  the  most  ancient. 


VER.  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  147 

the  sun  might  be  either  that  the  revolution  of  the 
earth  on  its  axis  was  for  a  time  interrupted  (an  event 
which  God  could  have  so  ordered  by  His  power  and 
wisdom  as  to  prevent  any  disastrous  consequences 
to  the  system  of  the  universe),  or  that,  in  some  way 
unknown  to  us,  God  may  have  so  interfered  with 
the  phenomena  of  light,  as  to  have  prolonged  the 
daylight  without  interrupting  the  course  of  the 
heavenly  bodies.1 

Allusions  to  this  miracle  are  probably  made  in 
Isa.  xxviii.  21,  "He"  (the  Lord)  "shall  be  wroth 
as  in  the  valley  of  Gibeon  ;"  and  in  Hab.  iii.  II, 
"  The  sun  and  moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation."2 
There  are  also,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Deluge,  many 
ancient  traditions  and  fables,  which  possibly  have  a 

1  If,  as  some  think  (see  Calmet's  Frag.,  No.  154),  "she- 
mesh  "  and  "  chammah  "  are  distinguished  by  denoting,  the 
one  the  light,  the  other  the  orb  or  substance  of  the  sun,  God 
may,  on  this  occasion,  have  continued  the  solar  light,  while 
He  permitted  the  solar  orb  to  set.  Professor  Young  (Science 
and  Scripture],  in  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
miracle  was  possibly  wrought,  remarks  that  "light  is  not 
merely  an  emanation  of  luminous  particles,  any  more  than 
sound  is  an  emanation  of  sonorous  particles  from  a  sonorous 
body  ;  in  each  case  a  medium  of  conveyance  is  necessary  ; 
and  that  the  vehicle  of  light  is  luminiferous  ether.  Suppose 
now  a  void  had  been  introduced  above  the  scene  of  Joshua's 
operations,  then,  if  the  vibrations  essential  to  light  in  the 
lower  region  had  not  been  suffered  to  cease,  the  light  would 
have  continued  to  be  supplied  without  any  abatement  of 
intensity.  Such  a  temporary  separation  of  the  upper  and 
lower  portions  of  the  luminous  ethereal  fluid  would  have  been 
analogous  to  the  temporary  separation  of  the  two  portions  of 
aqueous  fluid  in  the  miraculous  passage  of  the  Red  Sea. 
And  as  the  water  was  held  in  suspense  in  both  portions  in  the 
one  miracle,  so  might  the  light  be  held  in  suspense  in  the 
two  p-ortions  in  the  other." 

*  n?;iT,  "in  (their)  habitation  ;"  \vheie  the  H—  denotes  a 
general  direction  only  to  the  place  where  an  object  is  (cf.  !T3C' 
'*  there,''1  Jer.  xviii.  2,  oftener  "  thither,'"  \  90,  2,  /;). 


148  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

reference  to  it  ;  such  as  the  Chinese  tradition  that  the 
sun  did  not  set  for  ten  days  (perhaps  a  mistake  or 
exaggeration  for  hours)  in  the  reign  of  the  seventh 
Emperor  Yao,  who  is  conjectured  to  have  lived  about 
A.M.  2554,  and,  therefore,  to  have  been  nearly  con 
temporary  with  the  date  of  the  miracle.  (Martin, 
Sinic.  Hist.,  1.  I.,  p.  25)  ;  and  the  Egyptian  tradition, 
which  may  refer  both  to  this  and  the  miracle  in 
the  time  of  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xx.),  viz.,  that  the 
sun  had  twice  risen  where  it  usually  sets,  and  set 
where  it  usually  rises  (Herod.,  ii.,  142).  The  fable 
also  of  Phaeton  (Hesiod,  TJieog.,  985  ;  Ovid,  Met.,  i., 
fab.  17,  1.  2),  and  the  poetical  imagery  in  //.,  ii.,  4, 
where  Agamemnon  prays  that  the  sun  may  not  go 
down  till  he  has  sacked  Troy  (cf.  //.,  xviii.,  232,  etc.  ; 
Odyss.,  xxiii.,  241,  etc.  ;  Callim.,  Hymn  to  Diana), 
may  contain  allusion  to  the  same  event.  The 
absence,  however,  of  any  positive  testimony  to  it  by 
Pagan  writers  has  been  accounted  for  on  the  sup 
position  that  no  Pagan  records  are  so  ancient  as  this 
miracle,  and  that,  like  the  darkness  over  the  land  of 
Egypt,  it  may  have  been  strictly  local  (see  Comment. 
of  Keil  and  Delitz.,  p.  i  i  i,  and  Bp.  Wordsworth 
in  loc^).  Sufficient  reasons  why  God  should  have 
permitted  the  occurrence  of  so  stupendous  an  event 
are,  that  thus  He  put  the  highest  honour  on  Joshua 
as  His  servant,  and  gave  the  greatest  encouragement 
to  His  people  Israel  in  their  warfare  against  their 
enemies.  Also  He  signally  rebuked  the  idolatry  of 
the  Canaanites,  who  were  worshippers  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  by  showing  that  those  objects  of  their 
adoration  were  wholly  subservient  to  His  will,  and, 
therefore,  powerless  to  aid  them.  Lastly,  by  this 


VERS.  16-19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  149 

miracle  He  may  have  prefigured  the  glorious  victory 
which  Christ,  our  true  Joshua,  will  hereafter  achieve 
over  His  and  His  people's,  enemies,  when  by  a  not 
less  exercise  of  omnipotence  the  sun  will  be  "  turned 
into  darkness  and  the  moon  into  blood  before  the 
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord." 

Ver.  1 6. — The  narrative  is  here  resumed  from  ver. 
1 1.  rni^3,  "  in  the  cave"  (rt.  iw,  to  excavate)  :  The 
article  denotes  a  cave  which  was  well  known  (§  1 09). 
The  hills  in  Palestine  were  chiefly  of  limestone,  and, 
therefore,  abounded  in  caves,  which  were  frequently 
used  as  places  of  refuge  (Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  150)  ;  cf.  the  mention  of  the  cave  of  Adullam  in 
the  history  of  David  (i  Sam.  xxii.  I  ;  2  Sam.  xxiii. 
13  ;  i  Chron.  xi.  15).  rnjpoa  :  The  prep.,  being  the 
same  as  that  before  rni?p,  denotes  that  the  town  and 
cave  were  close  together.  All  efforts  to  discover  it 
have  hitherto  proved  in  vain.  Captain  Warren,  R.E. 
(see  note  on  ver.  10  above),  remarks,  "  It  is  quite  pos 
sible  that  the  cave  itself  may  have  remained  closed  to 
this  day,  the  tradition  hanging  to  the  spot,  and  the 
Hebrew  name,  the  Cave,  being  changed  to  the  Arabic 
name,  the  Caves  (El-Moghar)."  (Recent  Explorations 
in  Bible  Lands], 

Ver.  17. — D'Nati?.  for  Q^am,  cf.  D\syp?  for  D^ypj, 
i  Sam.  xiii.  1 5  ;  Esther  i.  5  ;  from  the  singulars, 
Nnri3,  K>|pj,  the  vowel  ( •••  )  in  the  last  syllable  being 
borrowed  from  verbs  rb  (§  75,  vi.,  21,  a}. 

Ver.  i  8. — *a  :  So  the  entrance  to  a  cave  is  termed 
"  os  "  by  Tacitus  (Annal.,  lib.  iv.,  cap.  59).  n^y  -iTppm, 
"  and  appoint  ye  as  guardians  over  it,"  cf.  Gen.  xxxix. 
5  ;  Numb.  i.  50  ;  Isa.  Ixii.  10. 

Ver.  1 9. — DPiX],  emphatic,  " but  as  for  yon"     ipy 


ISO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

here  means  to  stand  still  or  stop,  as  in  I  Sam. 
xx.  38  ;  Numb.  ix.  8.  The  Piel  25T,  found  here  and 
in  Deut.  xxv.  I  8  only,  is  a  denominative  from  D3T,  a 
tail,  and  means  properly  "  to  injure  the  tail,"  and 
hence  "  to  rout  the  rear-guard  of  an  army"  (§  5  2,  2,  c], 
Sept.  KOL  KaTa\d(3eTe  TT)I>  ovpayiav  avr&v',  Chald. 
and  Syr.  "  assequimeni  eos,"  but  more  exactly  the 
Vulg.  "  et  extremes  quosque  fugientium  casdite." 

Ver.  20. — DEPntf,  see  viii.  24.  In  the  last  clause 
1  before  DHnb'n  introduces  the  apodosis  according  to 
our  Auth.  Vers.,  Jerome,  and  Michaelis,  but  it  might 
equally  well  be  rendered  "  and  "  (e.g.,  "  and  the  sur 
vivors  had  fled  from  them,  and  had  entered  into  for 
tified  cities"),  the  apod,  beginning  at  ver.  21,  " t/iat 
all  the  people  returned." 

Ver.  21. — It  appears  from  the  first  clause  that 
Joshua  remained  at  Maqqedah  with  the  guards  who 
kept  watch  over  the  cave,  while  the  rest  of  his  forces 
pursued  the  enemy  ;  hence,  at  the  beginning  of 
ver.  20,  he  is  mentioned,  only  because  his  soldiers 
acted  by  his  authority.  DT^?,  "in  safety"  cf.  Gen. 
xxviii.  21  ;  Judges  viii.  9.  pn~&6,  "  sharpened  not" 
(Ges.,  Lex^}  ;  the  verb  is  either  in  the  indeterminate 
3rd  pers.  (§  137,  3)  ;  or  t^X  must  be  understood,  or 
perhaps  3^3  (see  Exod.  xi.  7,  where  the  same  proverb 
[though  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible]  occurs  ;  also 
Judith  xi.  19,  Kal  ov  ypv^ei,  KVWV  rfj  yXaxTcrr)  avrov 
aTrevavTL  crov}-  ti^K1?  is  put  in  apposition  to  'b>?  '357, 
but  Houbigant  and  Maurer  think  the  ^  before  £'\x 
arose  from  the  error  of  a  transcriber,  and,  if  so,  E»s$ 
would  be  the  nominative  ;  Vulg.  "  nullusque  contra 
filios  Israel  mutire  ausus  est." 

Vers.  22-28.   What  is  here  recorded  doubtless  took 


VERS.  24,  25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  151 

place  on  the  day  after  the  return  from  the  pursuit  of 
the  enemy. 

Ver.  24. — i"?  t"N^>3,  i.e.,  all  the  soldiers  in  the 
camp,  pvf?,1  lit.  a  judge,  from  rivf?,  to  decide,  and 
hence  a  military  leader  or  commander  (cf.  Judges 
xi.  6).  N'-l^nn  ;  n  for  the  rel.  (§  109,  2nd  par.)  ;  the 
N,  after  Arabic  orthography,  is  paragogic,  or  super 
fluous  (§  44,  2,  Rem.  4  ;  cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  12,  NUH  for 
•ns*,  and  N-lb'J  for  -ib'J,  Psalm  cxxxix.  20).  In  the  im 
perfect  the  form  occurs  only  in  N-lb^  (Jer.  x.  5).  "  Put 
your  feet  on  the  necks"  etc.,  an  act  symbolic  of 
complete  subjection,  but  not  one  of  haughty  con 
tempt  and  insolence,  as  when  Sapor  I.,  King  of  Persia, 
set  his  foot  on  the  neck  of  the  Emperor  Valerian. 
David  says  in  Psalm  xviii.  41  (Heb.),  "Thou  hast  given 
me  the  neck  of  mine  enemies."  The  same  symbol 
is  used  to  denote  Christ's  dominion  over  His  enemies 
(Psalm  ex.  i  ;  Heb.  i.  I  3  ;  I  Cor.  xv.  25).  We  may 
hence  learn,  says  Origen,  to  tread  under  foot  our 
carnal  lusts  and  appetites,  which  are  Christ's  enemies 
and  ours  (Homil.,  11  and  12).  Joshua's  object  on 
this  occasion  was  also  to  encourage  the  Israelites 
(see  next  verse). 

Ver.  25. — Fear  not,"  etc.  For  the  greater  en 
couragement  of  Israel  Joshua  quotes  the  very  words 
of  Jehovah  (see  i.  9,  viii.  i).  Thus  in  our  Christian 
warfare  the  victories  which  we  have  already  gained 
through  God  should  animate  us  to  rely  on  His 
further  help,  till  all  our  spiritual  enemies  are  subdued. 
Drta  here  governs  an  accus.,  as  in  Psalm  cix.  3  ; 


1  A  word,  like  many  others  in  this  book,  not  found  in  the 
Pentateuch. 


152  THE  BOOK    OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

I  Kings  xx.  25,  xxii.  31.  It  is  found  elsewhere 
with  the  prep.  ?,  or  hu  (Neh.  iv.  8),  or  Dtf  (2  Kings 
xiii.  12},  or  -bx  (Jer.  i.  19),  or  "?  (Exod.  xiv.  14,  25). 

Ver.  26. — "  Hanged  them"  see  viii.  29  (note). 
D^T,  "  trees"  from  DV^,  to  be  firm  (cf.  Acts  x.  39). 
*'  Until  tJic  evening"  cf.  Deut.  xxi.  23. 

Ver.  27. — 'B>n  •  .  .  ni/?,  i.e.,  on  the  evening  of  the 
day  after  that  on  which  the  soldiers  of  Joshua  had 
returned  from  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  (see  note, 
ver.  22).  "'Until  this  very  day"  i.e.,  up  to  the  self 
same  day  on  which  the  author  wrote  this  history.1 
On  DVJJ  see  §  124,  2,  Rem.  3. 

VERS.  28-43. — Conquest  of  Southern  Canaan. 

Ver.  28. — N-inn  or?,  "on  that  day"  i.e.,  the  day 
when  the  five  kings  were  executed,  and  were  still 
hanging  on  trees  or  crosses  (ver.  26)  ;  hence  "ipb,  not 
13^*1,  is  used.  The  capture,  though  it  took  place 
before  the  evening  of  that  day  (ver.  27),  is  described 
here  on  account  of  its  connection  with  the  subsequent 
events  (Keil).  nnri  ^  (cf.  vi.  21,  viii.  24).  Q-inn  (see 
ii.  10).  DrrtN,  "  them"  i.e.,  the  king  and  the  inhabitants 

1  Keil,  indeed,  remarks  that  the  formula  Hjn  Di'n  DyiJ  IV  is 
not  elsewhere  used  to  denote  that  a  thing  had  continued  till 
the  author's  own  day,  but  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
day  referred  to  is  the  very  same  day  about  which  the  author  is 
writing  and  no  other  (see  v.  n  ;  Gen.  vii.  13,  xvii.  23  ;  Exod. 
xii.  17,  41,  etc.).  If,  therefore,  DV17  (he  says)  has  any  meaning 
at  all  here,  the  whole  clause  must  be  connected  with  the  one 
preceding,  and  rendered  as  a  relative  clause  :  "  Where  they 
(the  kings)  had  hidden  themselves,  and  they  (the  Israelites) 
had  placed  large  stones  at  the  mouth  of  the  cave  until  that 
very  day  (on  which  the  kings  were  fetched  out  and  executed.)" 
The  demonstrative  pronoun  "that"  would,  however,  be  rather 
expressed  by  N-liin  than  iTJ.n  (see  §  122,  i,  Rem.).  Thus  in  iv.  9, 
vi.  25,  vii.  26,  viii.  29,  i"l-K]  DVn  ~iy  means  "to  this  day." 


VERS.  29-32.]  THE  BOOK    OF  JOSHUA.  153 

of  the  city.  Many  MSS.  read  nrrfN,  and  the  pronoun 
is  omitted  altogether  in  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  and  Syriac. 
C'sr'pa  refers  to  human  beings  only,  as  rcayr^z  in 
ver.  40,  xi.  14  ;  Deut.  xx.  16,  where  it  appears  from 
the  following  verse  (ver.  I  7)  to  refer  to  the  inhabit 
ants  of  Canaan.  "  As  lie  had  done  to  tlie  king  of 
Jericho":  Nothing  is  said  in  vi.  21,  etc.,  as  to  the 
manner  of  the  death  of  the  King  of  Jericho,  but  it 
is  supposed  from  viii.  2,  29  that  he  was  slain,  and 
then  hung  on  a  cross,  or  gallows. 

Ver.  29. — "  All  Israel"  i.e.,  all  the  men  selected  for 
this  war.  "  Libknah"  (whiteness),  a  Canaanite  capital 
(xii.  i  5),  in  the  south  part  of  the  maritime  lowland  of 
Judah  (xv.  42)  ;  afterwards  assigned  to  the  priests 
(xxi.  13).  It  revolted  from  King  Joram,  "  because 
he  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers " 
(2  Kings  viii.  22  ;  2  Chron.  xxi.  10).  Sennacherib, 
King  of  Assyria,  warred  in  person  against  it  (2 
Kings  xix.  8),  but  he  is  not  said  to  have  taken  it. 
On  account  of  the  meaning  of  the  name  Dean 
Stanley  identifies  it  with  the  Blanchegarde  of  the 
Crusaders,  a  hill  on  the  eastern  border  of  the  plain 
of  Philistia,  opposite  Ascalon  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  pp. 
207,  257,  258)  ;  but  Van  de  Velde  places  it  at 
Arak  el  Menshiyeh,  a  hill  about  four  miles  west  of 
Beitjibrin  (Eleutheropolis).  It  is  described  by 
Eusebius  and  Jerome  in  the  Onomasticon  as  a 
village  of  the  district  of  Eleutheropolis.  For  the 
prep.  Dtf  before  n:?1?  some  MSS.  read  hv,  which  is 
more  commonly  used  with  Drta,  in  relation  to 
sieges  (cf.  ver.  36)  ;  in  ver.  3  I  5  is  used. 

Ver.  31. — "  LacJtisJi"  see  ver.  3. 

Ver.   32. — "  On  tJic  second  day"  i.e.,  from  that  on 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

which  the  siege  began.  No  mention  is  made  of  the 
king,  because  he  had  before  been  put  to  death 
(ver.  23,  etc.). 

Ver.  33.  —  n^y  see  note  viii.  i.  "Gezer"  (a  place 
cut  off),  written  often  with  the  pause  accent  "ira,  and 
twice,  where  it  occurs,  translated  Gazer  by  our 
Auth.  Ver.,  viz.,  in  2  Sam.  v.  25  ;  I  Chron.  xiv.  16, 
but  elsewhere  (even  when  the  first  vowel  in  the 
Hebrew  is  lengthened  to  T)  translated  Gezer  (see,  e.g., 
Josh.  xvi.  3,  10  ;  Judges  i.  29  ;  I  Kings  ix.  15,  etc). 
There  was  a  town  of  this  name1  on  the  south-west 
border  of  Ephraim,  between  lower  Beth-choron  and  the 
Mediterranean  (Josh.  xvi.  3),  and  which  was  assigned 
to  the  Kohathite  Levites  (xxi.  2  i  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  67). 
According  to  Conder  (Handbook,  p.  412)  now  Tell 
Jezer,  a  large  ruin.  This  town  was,  however,  at 
least  forty  miles  from  Lachish  (Um  Lakis),  and  hence 
Masius  and  others  think  that  there  may  have  been 
another  town  of  this  name  near  Lachish,  —  an  opinion 
which  receives  some  countenance  from  Josh.  xii.  12, 
where  Gezer  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  Chebh- 
ron,  Lachish,  'Eghlon,  and  Debhir.  If,  however,  the 
town  on  the  border  of  Ephraim  is  meant,  it  probably 
was  not  captured  at  this  time,2  but  Joshua,  having 
signally  defeated  its  troops  and  slain  its  king  (xii.  i  2), 
proceeded  with  his  conquests  of  the  other  towns  in 
the  south,  "^jriy,  see  note  on  viii.  22. 


1  In  the  time  of  Jerome  it  was  a  small  town,  called  Gazara. 

2  In  xvi.   10,  and  Judges  i.  29,  we  read  that  the  Ephraim- 
ites    did    not    expel    the     inhabitants,    but    put    them    under 
tribute,  and  in  the  time  of  Solomon  the  King  of  Egypt  took 
and  burnt  the  town,  and  slew  the  Canaan  ites  who  dwelt  there  ; 
afterwards  he  gave   the  place  to  his  daughter,    the   wife   of 
Solomon,  who  rebuilt  it  (i   Kings  ix.   16). 


VERS.  34-39.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  155 

Vers.  34,  35. — 'Egh-lon  (ver.  3)  ;  its  king  was  one 
of  the  five  whom  Joshua  had  put  to  death  (ver.  23, 
etc.).  D^n.n,  cf.  ver.  28. 

Vers.  36,  37. —  Cheoh-r&n  (ver.  3)  :  Its  mountainous 
situation  is  indicated  by  7|P.  "  The  king  tJicrcof"  : 
Probably  the  successor  of  the  one  whose  death  is 
recorded  ver.  23,  etc.  Ver.  37. — "All  the  cities 
tJiereof"  i.e.,  certain  towns  which  were  subject  to  it. 
"He  left  none  remaining":  Yet  we  afterwards  read 
in  xi.  21,  22  of  Joshua's  destroying  the  Anakim 
in  the  mountains  of  Chebh-ron  and  Debhir ;  and 
again  (in  Judges  i.  10-13)  of  their  extermination  by 
Caleb;  and  hence  some,  as  Maurer,  have  thought  that 
the  account  here  is  interpolated,  and  not  strictly 
historical.  We  may  suppose,  however,  that  on  this 
occasion  the  Chittite  inhabitants  of  Chebh-ron  were 
destroyed,  but  the  Anakim  retained  their  strong 
holds  in  the  mountains  near  the  city,  and,  though 
afterwards  expelled  by  Joshua  and  partially  de 
stroyed  (xi.  21,  22),  yet  those  who  fled  to  the  cities 
of  the  Philistines  (xi.  22)  reoccupied  Chebh-ron  .and 
Debhir,  probably  while  Joshua  was  engaged  in  the 
conquest  of  North  Palestine,  and  were  only  finally 
repulsed  by  Caleb  (Josh.  xiv.  12,  xv.  13-17,  com 
pared  with  Judges  i.  10,  etc).  Masius  remarks  that 
Joshua  in  this  war  only  overran  the  country,  and 
did  not  stay  to  place  garrisons  in  the  captured 
towns,  nor  to  expel  the  enemy  from  every  lurking- 
place,  but  left  the  complete  conquest  to  the 
Israelites  after  they  should  have  apportioned  the 
land  and  settled  in  it. 

Vers.  38,  39. — "3&\\,  "and  JosJiua  turned"  i.e.t 
changed  the  direction  of  his  march.  Debld-rah  (the 


156  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

n—  here  is  not  local,  cf.  ver.  39),  but  elsewhere  Debhir 
(~i:n:,  and  in  Judges  and  Chron.  T:n),  translated  by 
Jerome  "  oracle,"  from  "\z^,  to  speak  ;  but,  according 
to  Gesenius,  "  the  hinder  part,"  and  hence  the  inmost 
recess  of  a  temple;  rt.  "iTi,  to  be  behind  ;  formerly 
called  Qiryath-sepher  (Sept.  TTO/U?  ypap^draiv ;  Josh, 
xv.  15),  and  Qiryath-sannah  (xv.  49),  perhaps  "city 
of  palm-branches,"  but,  according  to  Bochart,  "  city 
of  law,  or  sacred  learning,"  and  thus  it  would  seem 
that  this  city  was  the  seat  of  ancient  Canaanitish 
learning.  It  was  situated  in  the  highlands  of  Judah 
(xv.  49),  but  its  site  is  not  yet  determined.  "  All  tJic 
cities  tJiereof"  i.e.,  the  towns  of  which  it  was  the 
centre  or  metropolis  (cf.  ver.  37).  "  Utterly  destroyed" 
see  note  on  ver.  37. 

Vers.  40-43  {Summary  of  the  Conquest  of  Southern 
Canaan}. — Ver.  40. — "  Smote  the  whole  land"  i.e.,  the 
whole  of  Southern  Canaan  from  Gibeon.  inn,  i.e., 
the  mountainous  district  of  Judah  and  South  Canaan 
generally  (see  ix.  i).  23311,  "  the  NegJicbli"  or  south 
country,  from  233T,  to  be  dry,  the  least  fertile  portion 
of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Its  boundaries  were  from 
Qa-dhesh,  or  from  Mount  Chalaq  (xi.  1 7  ;  Clark's  Bib. 
Atlas},  to  within  a  few  miles  of  Chebh-ron,  and  from 
the  Dead  Sea  westward  to  the  Mediterranean  (cf. 
Josh.  xv.  21-32).  nbs^n,  see  ix.  i.  nnt^n,  "the 
slopes"  i.e.,  undulating  ground  between  the  foot  of 
the  hills  and  the  lowland,  i.q.,  vrrcopetat  (//.,  T.,  v.  218): 
so  it  might  be  rendered  in  Deut.  iii.  I  7,  iv.  49,  lit. 
"  the  pouring  forth  of  streams,"  and  hence,  the  ravines 
by  which  streams  pour  down  from  the  mountains  into 
the  plains,  rt.  Y^x,  to  pour  forth.  The  Sept.,  Vulg., 
and  Syr.  regard  the  word  as  a  proper  name,  but  the 


VER.  4I-]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  157 


Chald.  renders  it  Nnipnp  ^?y;E,  "  a  pouring  forth  from 
a  height  ;  "  it  occurs  only  in  this  book  and  the  Pen 
tateuch.  nE>L?;3rr^3,  lit,  "  every  breath,"  and  hence,  by 
metonymy,  that  which  has  breath,  i.q.,  ^3n-?|  (vers.  32, 
35>  37).  but  restricted  here,  as  there,  to  human  beings 
(see  xi.  I  I,  14,  and  note  on  viii.  27).  "As  JeJiovah 
.  .  .  commanded"  see  Numb,  xxxiii.  51,  etc.;  Deut. 
vii.  I,  etc.,  xx.  I6.1 

Ver.  41.  —  "  Qa-dhesJi-  Barn^a  "  :  It  is  mentioned 
sometimes  as  being  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran 
(Numb.  xiii.  26,  and  at  others  as  in  the  wilderness 
of  Zin,  because  the  name  Zin  was  given  to  the  north 
part  of  the  great  wilderness  of  Paran  in  which 
Qa-dhesh  lay.  We  read  also  of  "  tJie  wilderness  of 
Qa-dJicsJi  "  (Psalm  xxix.  8),  because  the  name  of  the 
city  was  extended  to  the  district  around  it.  If 
Qa-dhesh  is  derived  from  Bhj?,  to  be  holy,  the  word 


1  "If,  on  the  one  hand,  the  character  of  the  religion  of  the 
Canaanites  be  remembered,  and,  on  the  other,  the  Divine 
purpose  to  develop  among  the  Israelites  a  pure  and  lofty 
Theocracy,  through  which,  hereafter,  the  highest  manifestation 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth  was  to  be  made  known  among 
men,  the  apparent  difficulty  in  accepting  the  policy  commanded 
to  Joshua  disappears.  The  heathenism  of  Palestine  and 
Syria  was  so  foul  and  degrading  in  every  sense,  that  there 
is  no  State,  even  at  this  time,  which  would  not  put  it  down, 
if  necessary,  by  the  severest  penalties.  Its  spread  to  Rome 
was  bewailed  1,500  years  later  by  the  satirists  of  the  day 
as  a  calamity  marking  the  utter  decay  of  the  times  (Juv., 
Sat.,  iii.,  62).  It  was  imperative,  therefore,  that  the  land  in 
which  the  Chosen  People  were  to  be  educated  in  the  true 
religion,  so  as  to  become  the  disseminators  of  its  doctrines 
through  the  world,  should  be  cleared  of  whatever  would  so 
certainly  neutralise  the  gracious  plans  of  the  Almighty.  Nor 
is  it  wonderful  that  no  other  means  of  securing  this  great 
end  presented  itself  to  the  Hebrew  legislator  or  reformer,  in 
the  presence  of  such  hideous  immorality  and  corruption, 
than  the  rooting  it  out  with  the  edge  of  the  sword." 
(Dr.  Geikie,  Hours  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii.  ,  pp.  396,  397.) 


158  7 HE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

perhaps  denotes  a  religious  centre,  but  no  satisfactory 
explanation  has  been  given  of  the  term  "  Barnea." 
The  Sept.,  in  Numb,  xxxiv.  4,  renders  it  KaS^g  TOV 
Rapvrj,  which  may  imply  that  Barnea  was  regarded 
as  a  man's  name,  but  elsewhere  it  has  KaSi^?  RapvYJ. 
Fiirst  suggests  inr"a,  "  son  of  wandering,"  a  Bedouin, 
but  in  the  Pentateuch,  where  the  word  Barnea  first 
occurs,  12  is  never  used  for  "  son."  Others  derive  it 
from  12,  a  country  or  land  (cf.  Job  xxxix.  4),  and 
1M3,  to  be  shaken,  supposing  it  to  have  allusion  to  a 
volcanic  convulsion  in  that  neighbourhood.  Keil 
thinks  that  Barnea  was  the  ancient  name,  but  that  it 
was  called  by  anticipation  Qa-dhesh  in  Gen.  xiv.  7, 
xvi.  14,  xx.  i  ;  Numb.  xiii.  26  and  xx.  I,  in  reference 
to  that  judgment  (Numb,  xiv.)  by  which  the  Lord 
would  sanctify  Himself  on  Moses  and  Aaron, because 
they  would  not  sanctify  Him  before  the  people.  It 
is  evident  from  a  comparison  of  Numb.  xiii.  26 
with  Numb,  xxxii.  8,  that  Oa-dhesh  and  Qa-dhesh- 
Barnea  must  denote  one  and  the  same  place  ;  and 
that  Meribah  Kadesh  is  also  the  same  as  Qa-dhesh- 
Barnea  is  clear  on  comparing  Ezek.  xlvii.  19,  xlviii. 
28,  with  Numb,  xxxiv. 4 ;  Josh.  xv.  3;  Deut.  xxxii.  5  I. 
Dean  Stanley  endeavours  to  identify  Qa-dhesh-Barnea 
with  Petra,  but  that  city  lies  far  too  much  to  the 
south,  to  be  described  as  on  the  frontier  of  Judah, 
and  is  not  "  in  the  uttermost  part  of  the  border  of 
Edom  "  (Numb.  xx.  16),  but  rather  in  the  centre 
of  Edom.  Most  probably,  therefore,  the  site  of 
Qa-dhesh-Barnea  is  correctly  identified  by  Robinson 
(ii.,  175)  with  the  modern  Ain  el  Weibeh,  which  lies 
in  the  Arabah,  about  ten  miles  north  of  the  spot 
where  Mount  Hor  touches  on  that  valley,  and  which 


VER.  4i.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  159 

is  nearly  opposite  the   Wady  GJimvcin,  which  affords 
an   access     practicable     for    an    army    through    the 
mountainous  country  of  Edom  to  the  north-west,  and 
which  might  be   fitly   described   as   the  "  kings  liigh- 
way"   (Numb.    xx.     17).       So    Bishop    Wordsworth, 
Porter,  and    others.      The  Ain-Kudes  argued  for  by 
Messrs.  Rowlands  and  Williams    (Holy    City,  i.,  463, 
etc).,    and    which    is    more    than    seventy    miles    to 
westward,   in    a  direct     line    from   Mount    Hor,  and 
sixty  from  the  nearest  spur  of  Mount  Seir,  does  not 
satisfy    the    requirements    of  the    Scripture    history, 
which  speaks  of  Qa-dhesh  as  "  a  city  in  the  uttermost 
part  of  the   border  of  Edom"    (Numb.  xx.    16),  and 
Edom    did   not,  at   that    time,   extend   to    the   west 
beyond   the  Arabah  (Dean    Stanley,  Sin.   and  Pal., 
p.  194,  note;  Clarke's  Bib.  A  tlas,  p.  26).      Moreover, 
the  course  from   Mount   Sinai   to  a  city  so   far  west 
would    not    have  been    by    the   way  of  Mount    Seir 
(Deut.   i.  2),  but,   rather,  by  way   of  Shur.      Gaza,  a 
maritime   city  of   Philistia,   only  an    hour's   journey 
from   the  Mediterranean    (Robinson,  ii.,    1 74),    Heb. 
"  'Azzah"  "strong,"  Sept.  and  New  Testament  (Acts 
viii.  26)  Fa£a,  the   limit   of  the   land   of  Canaan  on 
the  south-west  (Gen.   x.    19),  and  on  the  direct  route 
between    Egypt a    and    Syria.       It   was    allotted    to 
Judah  (xv.  47),  and  taken   by  it  (Judges   i.    18),  but 
soon  recovered  by  the  Philistines   (Judges  iii.  3),  and 
always   mentioned    afterwards    as    a    Philistine    city 

1  All  the  conquests  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  land  of  Palestine 
appear,  according  to  their  monuments,  to  have  been  confined 
to  the  maritime  plain  of  Philistia,  though  they  may  have 
passed  through  the  country  and  exacted  tributes.  ThotmesIIL, 
of  the  eighteenth  dynasty,  is  recorded  to  have  captured  Gaza. 
(See  Philip  Smith's  Anct.  Hist.,  vol.  i.,  ch.  vii.,  p.  117.) 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  x. 

(Judges  xvi.  I,  etc.  ;  I  Sam.  vi.  17;  2  Kings  xviii.  8). 
It  was  chiefly  celebrated  in  profane  history  for  its 
memorable  siege  by  Alexander  the  Great,  who,  after 
its  capture,  treated  the  living  body  of  Batis,  its 
governor,  with  the  same  indignity  as  Achilles  the 
corpse  of  Hector  (Plutarch,  Alexand.,  25  ;  O.  Curt., 
iv.  6).  Jonathan  Maccabaeus  (i  Mace.  xi.  61) 
destroyed  its  suburbs  ;  Simon  Maccabaeus  (i  Mace, 
xiii.  43),  after  great  efforts,  captured  the  city  itself. 
Alexander  Jannaeus,  B.C.  96,  dismantled  it  (Joseph., 
Antiq.,  xiii.,  12,  3),  but  it  was  soon  afterwards 
restored  by  Gabinius  (Joseph.,  xiv.,  5,  3),  and  was 
one  of  the  cities  given  by  Augustus  to  Herod 
(Antiq.,  xv.,  7,  3),  after  whose  death  it  was  united 
to  the  province  of  Syria  (Antiq.,  xvii.,  11,4);  now 
GitzzaJi,  a  flourishing  town,  but  on  a  different  site 
from  the  ancient  Gaza,  against  which  the  threatenings 
in  Amos  i.  6,  7  ;  Zeph.  ii.  4  ;  Zech.  ix.  5,  were  fully 
accomplished.  "All  the  country  of  Goshen  "  :  Of 
course,  not  the  Goshen  in  Egypt,  but  a  district 
perhaps  named  after  a  city  so  called  in  the  south 
part  of  Judah  (xv.  5  i),  or  from  the  Goshen  in  Egypt, 
which  it  may  have  resembled  in  fertility.1  The  words 
"from  Goslien  even  unto  Gibeon  "  describe  the  extent 
of  the  conquered  country  from  south  to  north  on  the 
eastern  side. 

Ver.  42. — "  Af  one  time"  i.e.,  in  one  campaign, 
which  must  have  lasted  a  considerable  time  (xi.  18). 
"  For  Jehova/i  .  .  .  fougJit"  etc.  :  This  is  added  to 
account  for  the  marvellous  rapidity  of  the  conquest. 

Ver.  43. — See  note  at  the  beginning  ofver.  15. 

1  Hitzig  derives  the  word  from  the  Persian  "gauzen,"  a  cow 
(Geschzchfe,  etc.,  p.  60). 


VER.  i.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  161 


CHAPTER    XL 

VERS.    1-15. — Defeat  of  the  Second  League  formed 
against  the  Israelites} 

Ver.  i. — ybb>3  :  The  object  of  the  verb  is  omitted, 
viz.,  those  deeds  recorded  in  the  previous  chapter 
(cf.  ix.  i).  "  Ya-bhtn  "  (lit.  "  he  will  understand,"  and 
hence  " wise,"  "intelligent"),  a  title  of  the  kings  of 
Cha-tsor  (Judges  iv.  2  ;  cf.  x.  i  [note]).  Clia-tsor 
(lit.  "  a  fortified  place  "),  the  principal  city  of  North 
Canaan  (ver.  10),  situated  north-west  of  the  Lake 
Merom,  on  elevated  ground  (see  ver.  1 3),  overlooking 
the  lake  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  v.,  5,  i),  and  apparently 
between  Ramah  and  Kedesh  (Josh.  xix.  36-7  with 
2  Kings  xv.  29),  afterwards  allotted  to  Naphtali 
(xix.  3  6).  Josephus  calls  it  "Acrwpos,  Eusebius  'Acrcop. 
It  is  mentioned  in  Egyptian  inscriptions  of  an  early 
date,  was  taken  by  Tothmosis  III..,  and  was  again  a 
flourishing  place  under  Ramasis  II.  (Chabas,  Voyage 
dun  Egypt.,  p.  i  8  3).  Being  on  the  north  frontier  it 
was  fortified  by  Solomon  (i  Kings  ix.  15),  and  its 

1  This  is  generally  called  the  northern  league,  but  it  was 
not  strictly  limited  to  the  north,  as  ,is  evident  from  ver.  3. 
Dean  Stanley  remarks,  "Round  Jabin  were  assembled  the 
heads  of  all  the  tribes  who  had  not  yet  fallen  under  Joshua's 
sword.  As  the  British  chiefs  were  driven  to  the  Land's  End 
before  the  advance  of  the  Saxon,  so  at  this  Land's  End  of 
Palestine  were  gathered  for  this  last  struggle,  not  only  the 
kings  of  the  north  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  but  from 
the  desert  valley  of  the  Jordan,  south  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee, 
from  the  maritime  plain  of  Philistia,  from  the  heights  above 
Sharon,  and  from  the  still  unconquered  Jebus,  to  the  Hivite 
who  dwelt  in  the  valley  of  Baalbec  under  Hermon."  (Sin.  and 
Pal.,  chap,  xi.) 


1 62  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xi 

inhabitants  were  carried  away  captive  by  Tiglath- 
Pileser  (2  Kings  xv.  29).  Once  more  we  find 
evident  reference  to  it  in  I  Mace.  xi.  67,  where 
the  words  "  plain  of  Nasor,"  the  scene  of  Jonathan's 
victory  over  the  Syrians,  ought  to  be  written  "  plain 
of  Asor,"  i.e.,  Chatsor,  the  "N"  havingbeen  erroneously 
prefixed  from  the  preceding  Greek  word  TTZ&IOV. 
Now,  possibly,  Tell  Kuraibeli  (Robinson,  Bibl.  Res., 
iii.,  365).  "  Ma-dhon"  :  Only  mentioned  again  in 
xii.  1 9,  probably  in  North  Canaan,  and  to  the  west  of 
Lake  Merom  (Knobel),  or  possibly  represented  by 
the  ruin  Madin,  west  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  (Conder's 
Handbook,  p.  425).  "  Shim-ron  "  (watch)  :  Unknown, 
perhaps  the  same  as  Shimron-Meron  in  xii.  20,  after 
wards  assigned  to  Zebulun  (xix.  15).  Some  place  it 
on  Lake  Merom,  but  the  territory  of  Zebulun  never 
reached  so  far  north.  It  may  possibly  be  identical, 
accordingto  the  Talmud,  with  the  Simmias  of  Josephus 
(  Vita,  §  24),  now  Simuniyah,  a  village  a  few  miles 
west  of  Nazareth,  for  it  appears  from  xix.  1 5  to 
have  been  near  to  Bethlehem,  in  Zebulun.  "  Akk- 
sliaph "  (enchantment,  rt.  t\W3,  unused  in  Qal.,  but 
meaning  in  Piel  "to  use  enchantment"  (Ges.,  Lex.  ; 
cf.  xii.  20) :  Perhaps  the  present  Kesaf,  nearly  halfway 
between  Tyre  and  Banias,  assigned  to  Asher  (xix. 
25,  note). 

Ver.  2. — "in2  |fS-yP>  "  northwards  in  the  mountains" \ 
Construe,  state  before  a  prep.  (§  116,  i).  The 
mountains  stretching  through  Naphtali  seem  to  be 
meant  (cf.  xx.  7).  "/;/  the  ArabaJi  to  the  south  of 
Kinnaroth "  (Heb.),  i.e.,  in  the  plain  or  Ghor 
(iii.  1 6)  to  the  south  of  the  lake  afterwards  called 
Gennesaret.  Kinnaroth  is  either  the  town  called 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOSHUA.  163 

Chinnereth  (A.  V.  ;  xix.  35),  which  may  have  given 
its   name   to    the  lake,    or  the  lake  itself,   so   called 
perhaps  from  the  oval,  harp-like  form  (11-13,  a  harp) 
of  its   basin    (Stanley,    Sin.    and   Pal.,  p.    373),    or 
from   1733,  to   be    low,  depressed  ;    but,  according    to 
G.  Grove,  the  name  was  probably  an  old  Canaanitish 
word,    adopted    into    the    Israelitish    language.      St. 
Luke    only     calls    the    lake    "  Gennesaret "   (v.     i)  ; 
St.   Matthew  and   St.    Mark   "  the    Sea   of  Galilee " 
(Matt.  iv.  i  8,  xv.  29  ;   Mark  i.  16,  vii.  31)  ;  St.  John 
"the   Sea  of  Tiberias"   (vi.  i,  xxi.  i),  from   the   city 
Tiberias  ;   now    BaJir    Tubariyeh,  remarkable   for  its 
deep  depression,  being  seven  hundred  feet  below  the 
level   of   the   ocean    ( Rob.,    Pal.,   i.,    613;   Stanley, 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  370)  ;  its  length  is  thirteen  geogra 
phical   miles,  and  its  breadth  six  miles.      r6s^  (see 
ix.    i):   Here  the  north  part  of  that  plain,  extending 
as   far  as  Joppa  ;    it  included    the  fertile  valley  of 
Sharon,      in  nisi?,  "  in  the  highlands  of  Dor "  :    naj, 
i.q.,  sp,  a   height.      The    Sept.  joins    Naphoth   with 
Dor,  and  renders  as  a  proper  name,  e.g.,  Ne^>e8S&jp 
(cf.  Jerome,  Onom.,  "  Dornapheth"}.     The  town   Dor 
was  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  below  Carmel, 
and  about  nine  Roman  miles  north  of  Csesarea,  and 
was  the  extreme  boundary   of  North  Canaan  toward 
the  west  ;  a  royal  city  (xii.  23),  which  gave  its  name 
to  the  district  around  it  (xii.  23;    i  Kings  iv.  i  i).   It 
was  in  the  territory  of  Asher,   but   was  assigned   to 
Manasseh  (xvii.  1 1),  by  whom  its  Canaanite  inhabit 
ants  were  not  driven  out   (Judges  i.  27);    afterwards 
it    was    taken     possession    of    by    the    Ephraimites. 
Solomon  made  it  the  residence  of  one  of  his  twelve 
purveyors     (i     Kings     iv.     1 1).       In    the    time    of 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

the  Maccabees  it  was  a  fortified  town  (i  Mace.  xv.  1 1), 
and  so  under  the  Romans  (Joseph.,  Antiq.^  xiv.,  5,  §  3). 
Pliny  (H.  N.,  v.,  1 7)  and  Stephen  Byzan.  (s.v.  Awpos), 
speak  of  it  as  a  Phoenician  settlement,  and  most 
probably  the  Phoenicians  may  have  selected  the  spot 
on  account  of  the  Murex  trunculus  with  which  its 
rocks  abounded,  and  which  furnished  the  famous 
Tyrian  dye.  In  early  Christian  times  it  was  an 
episcopal  see  of  the  province  of  Palestine  Prima,  but 
in  the  fourth  century  the  city  was  already  ruined 
and  deserted  (Jerome  in  Epitaph.  Paulce).  The 
modern  name  is  Tanttira,  or  Dandora  (Ritter,  Geogr. 
of  Pal,  iv.,  27-8  ;  Reland,  Palest.,  p.  738,  etc.). 

Ver.  3. — "[And  to]  the  Kenaanitc  .  .  .  and  the 
Y'bJnisite  in  the  mountains"  see  on  iii.  10.  The 
"  ft  izzites  "  probably  inhabited  the  hills  above  the 
plain  of  Sharon  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append., 
§  87).  Subau.  "he  sent"  from  ver.  i.  "And  to 
the  Chiwite  under  CJurmon "  :  This  latter  tribe  was 
thus  distinguished  from  the  Chivvites  in  Gibeon,  who 
made  peace  with  Joshua  (ix.  i  5).  Chermon  means 
in  Arabic  a  "  lofty  prominent  peak,"  the  "  nose  "  of 
a  mountain  (Ges.,  Z^r.).  It  formed  the  southern 
extremity  of  Antilibanus,  and  the  northern  boundary 
of  Palestine  on  the  east  of  Jordan.  It  was  called 
by  the  Sidonians  |inb>,  from  rnb,  to  glitter,  and 
by  the  Amorites  Tob*,  from  "i:p,  to  clatter,  both 
nouns  meaning  "  breastplate"  and  referring  to  its 
glittering,  snowclad  summit  (Deut.  iii.  9  ;  Cant. 
iv.  8  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  5)  ;  also  jiob*,  "  the  upraised  " 
(Deut.  iv.  48)  ;  it  was  about  9,500  feet  high,1  and 

1  According  to  Porter  10,000  feet  (see  Art.   "  Hermon  "  in 
Dr.  Smith's  Diet,  of  Bible}. 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  165 

visible  from  most  parts  of  Palestine.  The  modern 
name  is  Jcbel  esh- Sheikh  (with  its  south-eastern  arm 
Jebel  Heisch),  "  the  chief  mountain,"  or  "  mountain 
of  the  old  white-headed  man "  (Stanley,  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  ch.  xii.,  9.403-4),  also  "Jcbel  eth  TJiclj"  "the 
snowy  mountain."  It  has  been  well  called  the 
Mont  Blanc  of  Palestine  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  403). 
The  plural  D'MDi.fl  (Psalm  xlii.  7  [6])  may  refer 
to  the  whole  range  of  its  snowy  heights,  or  to 
its  three  summits,  which  are  about  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  each  other,  and  not  much  different  in 
elevation  (Porter's  Five  Years  in  Damascus,  vol.  i.) 
"  In  the  land  of  Mitspah"1:  Nowhere  else  mentioned 
in  the  Bible,  but  no  doubt  identical  with  "  the  valley 
of  Mitspeh  "  (ver.  8),  a  plain  stretching  from  the  foot 
of  Hermon  south-westwards  towards  the  Bahr  el 
Huleh  (Lake  Merom). 

In  this  valley  or  plain  is  a  hill  called  el-Mutalleh> 
"  the  look  out,"  or  "  the  look  down,"  commanding  a 
fine  view  over  the  Lake  Huleh  and  the  surrounding 
district  (Rob.,  Bibl.  Res.,  iii.,  373).  The  name 
Mits-peh,  or  Mits-pah,  is  given  in  Scripture  to  many 
places  (see  Ges.,  Lex?). 

Ver.  4. — "And  they  went  out"  :  Ny^  is  often  used 
of  going  forth  to  war  (see  Numb.  xxi.  23  ;  i  Sam. 
viii.  20  ;  Job  xxxix.  21),  with  an  ellipsis  of  nont?B!?, 
which  is  supplied  in  viii.  14.  "  Their  hosts"  lit.  their 
camps  (cf.  Exod.  xiv.  24;  Judges  iv.  16).  "  As  the 
sand"  etc. :  A  frequent  simile  in  Hebrew  (except  in 

1  The  •••  in  the  last  syllable  is  changed  into  T  by  the  pause 
accent  (§  29,  4).  As  the  word  in  the  Hebrew  has  the  article 
before  it,  the  literal  rendering  is  "in  the  land  of  the  watch- 
tower  "  (or  eminence). 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

the  later  books  of  the  Old  Testament)  to  denote  a 
large  number  (see  Gen.  xxii.  17,  xxxii.  12  [13]; 
Judges  vii.  I  2),  and  used  in  Rev.  xx.  8  of  the  vast 
forces  of  Gog  and  Magog.  "  Upon  the  brink  (lit.  lip) 
of  the  sea  "  :  The  same  imagery  is  applied  to  a  river 
(xii.  2,  xiii.  9,  16).  "  With  (lit.  and)  horses  and 
chariots "  :  D-1D  and  33"n  are  here  used  collectively. 
Josephus  says  that  the  confederate  forces  amounted 
to  300,000  foot,  10,000  cavalry,  and  20,000  war 
chariots  (Antiq.,  v.,  I,  §  18).  The  chariots,  here 
mentioned  for  the  first  time,  are  described  in  xvii.  16 
as  chariots  of  iron,  i.e.,  strengthened  and  tipped  with 
iron,  as  those  of  the  Egyptians  (Exod.  xiv.  7),  but 
not,  as  some  suppose,  armed  with  scythes  ;  this  latter 
kind  having  been  first  introduced  by  Cyrus  (see  Xen., 
Cyrop.,  vi.,  c.  I,  §  27,  30).  The  later  Jabin  had  nine 
hundred  chariots  of  iron. 

Ver.  5. — -nw?l,  "  and  they  assembled  themselves 
togetJicr  by  appointment":  Niph.  imperf.  of  "Jiv>,  to 
appoint  (cf.  Psalm  xlviii.  4  [5])  ;  the  kings  were  as 
sembled  (•nyfj),  so  the  Chald.  Vers.  ;  or  "  they  agreed 
together"  sc.,  concerning  the  war  and  place  of  battle 
(Keil).  "  Merom"  lit.  "  a  high  place,"  from  D-n,  to  be 
high.  "  The  waters  of  Merom  "  are  generally  taken 
to  mean  the  Lake  Merom,  the  High  Lake,  as  con 
trasted  with  the  lower  "  Lake  of  Gennesareth,"  and 
the  still  lower  "  Lake  of  Asphaltitis."  It  is  supposed 
identical  with  the  Lake  Semechonitis  (Joseph.,  Antiq., 
v.,  5,  i ;  Bel.  Jud.,  Hi.,  10,  7,  iv.  I,  i),  which  may  perhaps 
be  derived  from  the  Arabic  Samak,  "  high  "  (Stanley's 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  xi.,  p.  391,  note  i),  now  the  Bahr  el 
Hiileh  of  the  modern  Arabs,  which  may  derive  its 
name  from  the  depressed  plain  Ard  cl  Hitteh,  in 


VER.  5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  167 

which  it  lies,  and  which  extends  about  fifteen  miles 
between  the  hills  of  Galilee  on  the  west,  and  the 
slopes  of  Hermon  on  the  east.  The  lake  is  nearly 
triangular  in  form,  and  the  Jordan,  which  flows 
through  it,  makes  its  exit  at  the  apex.  Josephus 
calls  it  thirty  furlongs  in  breadth,  and  sixty  in  length 
(Bel.  Jud.,  iv.,  i).  The  tableland  on  the  south-west 
shore  of  the  lake  is  wider  than  that  on  the  south-east, 
and,  therefore,  it  is  probable  that  Jabin  and  his  allies 
encamped  in  that  quarter.  There  is,  however,  some 
uncertainty  as  to  the  locality,  for  Merom  is  not  else 
where  found  in  Scripture,  nor  is  it  mentioned  by 
Josephus,  who  says  that  the  confederate  kings  en 
camped  near  Beroth,  a  city  of  Upper  Galilee,  not  far 
from  Kedes,  and  makes  no  mention  of  water  (Antiq., 
v.,  i,  §  i  8).  Eusebius,  also,  in  the  Onomasticon,  gives 
the  name  as  "  Merran,"  which  he  states  to  be  a 
village  twelve  miles  distant  from  Sebaste  (Samaria), 
and  near  Dothaim  (see  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  ii.,  p. 
332).  Again,  Keil,  after  Knobel,  would  identify 
Merom  with  Meirom,  or  Meirum,  a  celebrated  place 
of  pilgrimage  among  the  Jews,  because  Hillel  and 
other  noted  rabbis  are  said  to  be  buried  there 
(Rob.,  Pal.,  iii.,  p.  333),  about  two  hours'  journey 
north-west  of  Szafed,  upon  a  rocky  mountain,  at 
the  foot  of  which  there  is  a  spring  that  forms 
a  small  brook,  which  flows  away  through  the  valley 
below  Szafed,  and  is  said  to  reach  the  Lake  of 
Tiberias  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bethsaida.  It 
is  doubtful,  however,  whether  this  locality  was  suit 
able,  like  the  level  shores  of  the  Lake  Merom,  for 
the  numerous  chariots  and  horses  of  Jabin.  Dean 
Stanley  adopts  the  more  generally  received  view 


168  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

that    this    latter    is    the     spot    intended    (Sin.    and 
Pal,  ch.  xi.) 

Ver.  6. — "Be  not  afraid,"  etc.,  cf.  viii.  I,  x.  8. 
"  To-morrow  about  this  time  "  :  Hence  it  seems  that 
Joshua,  with  his  wonted  expedition  (cf.  x.  9),  had  set 
out  from  Gilgal,  and  was  within  a  day's  march  of  the 
enemy.  "OUX,  emphatic,  jni  lit.  "  (am)  giving" 
represents  the  execution  of  God's  purpose  as  already 
begun.  D  v^Qi  lit.  pierced  through,  mortally  wounded, 
and  hence  "  slain  "  (cf.  Deut.  xxi.  I,  2,  3).  ~)$v$,  "  tJwu 
sJialt  JiougJi"  i.e.,  shalt  sever  the  houghs,  or  tendons, 
of  the  hind  feet,  and  thus  cause  incurable  lameness ; 
Piel  of  "ipr,  to  root  out  (cf.  Gen.  xlix.  6,  "  houghed 
oxen"  [marg.  reading]  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  4)  ;  but,  as  a  rule, 
the  arteries  were  not  cut  so  as  to  cause  the  animal  to 
bleed'  to  death  (Keil,  note  on  Gen.  xlix.  6).  It  is 
remarkable1  that  in  the  Bible  we  have  not  hitherto 
met  with  the  horse  except  in  Egypt.  In  the  war 
with  the  Amalekites  (Exod.  xvii.),  and  with  the 
Midianites,  an  Arab  tribe  (Numb,  xxxi.),  no  mention 
is  made  of  horses,  nor  in  the  war  with  Sihon  and 
Og  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan,  nor  in  that  with  the 
kings  in  the  south  of  Palestine.  Probably,  therefore, 
the  Egyptians  out  of  policy  may  not  at  this  time 
have  exported  horses  to  those  Asiatic  countries 
adjacent  to  them,  and  hence  the  cavalry  of  the 
northern  Canaanitish  kings  may  have  been  derived 
from  Armenia,  a  country  perhaps  then  famous  for  its 
traffic  in  horses,  as  undoubtedly  it  was  at  a  later 
period  (see  Ezek.  xxvii.  14).  Horses,  at  this  time, 
seem  to  have  been  used  only  for  war,  but  were  for- 

1  Compare  note  of  Dr.  Kitto  in  the  Pictorial  Bible. 


VERS.  7,  8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  fOSHUA.  169 

bidden  to  the  Israelites  (Deut.  xvii.  1 6),  who  in  their 
wars  were  to  rely  on  God,  rather  than  on  creature 
might  (see  Psalm  xx.  7  [8]),  and  had  they  not 
houghed  the  horses  might  have  been  tempted  to 
reserve  them  for  their  own  use. 

Ver.  7. — "And  they  fell  upon  them"  :  hz)  is  also  , 
used  of  a  hostile  attack  in  Job  i.  I  5.  The  Sept.  here 
adds  iv  Tr/  optivy,  which  may  imply  that  Joshua  fell 
upon  them  in  the  mountain  slopes  of  the  plain,  before 
they  could  rally  on  the  level  ground  (Stanley,  Sin. 
and  Pal.,  xi.,  p.  392). 

Ver.  8. — "  Chased  them"  i.e.,  as  they  fled  in  two 
directions,  some  towards  the  north- west, others  towards 
the  north-east.  "Great  Tst-dhon"  (cf.  xix.  28), 
called  the  Great,  nsn,  z>.,  the  populous,  because  at 
that  time  the  capital  of  Phoenicia  ;  allotted  to  Asher 
(xix.  28),  but  not  conquered  by  it  (Judges  i.  31,  iii. 
3),  now  called  Saida,  situated  to  the  west  of  ancient 
Zidon,  and  a  port  of  some  commerce,  but  insecure 
from  the  sanding  up  of  the  harbour.  Since  from  the 
time  of  David  Tyre,  not  Zidon,  comes  prominently 
into  notice  as  the  principal  city  of  Phoenicia  (2  Sam. 
v.  1 1  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  i  2  ;  Jer.  xlvii.  4  ;  Zech.  ix.  2),  we 
have  here  an  incidental  proof  of  the  antiquity  of  the 
Book  of  Joshua.  Mis-r*ph6th-Ma-yim,  unknown. 
The  name  probably  means  "  burnings  of  waters" 
from  Ppb',  to  burn,  and  may  refer  to  hot  springs  or 
baths  (Kimchi),  or  smelting  factories  near  the  waters 
(Ges.,  Thes.,  s.v.).  It  appears  from  xiii.  6  that  the 
place  was  closely  connected  with  Zidon,  and  it  may, 
therefore,  be  the  same  as  Zarephath  (Sarepta,  Luke 
iv.  26),  to  which  the  name  bears  a  resemblance, 
between  Tyre  and  Zidon  (cf.  i  Kings  xvii.  9, 


1 70  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xr. 

"  ZarepJiatJi,  whicli  belongctJi  to  Zidon "  ;  cf.  Article 
in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  p.  384,  and  Conder's  Handbook, 
p.  420).  On  the  other  hand,  Thomson  (Land  and 
Book,  p.  203)  would  identify  it  with  a  collection  of 
springs,  called  Ain-MusJicrifeh,  at  the  foot  of  the 
promontory,  to  which,  with  its  steep  pass,  the  name 
Ras  el  NakJiura  is  given,  the  "  scala  Tyriorum  "  of 
the  Crusaders,  between  Tyre  on  the  north,  and  Acco, 
or  Ptolemais,  on  the  south.  Again,  according  to 
Dean  Stanley  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  392,  note  4),  its  name, 
"  the  flow  of  waters  "  (a  derivation  found  in  Ges., 
Lex.,  from  fill'',  to  drop),  is  naturally  applied  to  the 
exit  of  the  Leontes  from  the  valley  of  Baalbec.  Both, 
however,  of  these  opinions  probably  place  it  too  far 
from  Zidon.  The  meaning  also  of  Misrephoth  else 
where  is  "  burnings,"  not  "  flowings  "  (see  Isa.  xxxiii. 
1 2,  and  cf.  nQTc;,  Gen.  xi.  3  ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  5).  " Andunto 
the  valley  of  Mitspeli  eastward"  see  on  ver.  3.  nrpa, 
lit.  "  a  cleft  place,"  from  l?j?3,  to  cleave,  is  uniformly 
applied  to  the  district  of  Ccele-Syria  (cf.  xi.  17, 
xii.  7)  ;  hence  it  would  seem  rather  to  denote  a  large 
plain  between  mountains  than  a  valley  strictly  so 
called,  to  which  the  word  ppy  more  nearly  corre 
sponds  (Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.,  p.  484). 
"VKtt'n  •  •  •  iy,  see  viii.  22,  xi.  4.  The  meaning  is 
that  Joshua  slew  all  whom  he  overtook  in  the 
pursuit.1 

Ver.  i  o. — The  expression  "  at  that  time  "  being 

1  "  The  battle  of  the  Lake  of  Merom,"  says  Dean  Stanley, 
"  was  to  the  north  what  the  battle  of  Bethhoron  had  been  to  the 
south  ;  more  briefly  told,  less  complete  in  its  consequences, 
but,  still,  the  decisive  conflict  by  which  the  four  northern  tribes 
were  established  in  the  south  of  Lebanon  ;  by  which  Galilee 
with  its  sacred  sea,  and  the  manifold  consequences  therein 


VERS.  11-13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  171 

indefinite,  admits  of  the  supposition  that  the  pursuit 
may  have  lasted  several  days.  "  And  smote  the  king 
tJiereof"  :  Jabin  must,  therefore,  have  escaped  to  his 
capital.  D"1??1?,  "  of  old"  (cf.  Deut.  ii.  10,  12). 

Ver.  ii  (cf.  x.  28,  40). — D'Ti.n,  "utterly  devoting 
(them),"  Hiph.  infin.  absol.  (§  53,  3,  Rem.  2  ;  cf.  |pn, 
iii.  17).  "And  he  burnt  CJia-tsor"  (Hazor),  because 
it  was  the  chief  of  the  confederate  cities,  and  was  too 
strong  to  be  left  in  his  rear  ;  afterwards,  however, 
it  was  rebuilt,  by  whom  is  unknown,  and  mightily 
oppressed  the  Israelites  for  twenty  years  (Judges 
iv.  2,  3). 

Ver.  1 2. — Dnnn,  "  he  iitterly  devoted'.'  "  As  Moses," 
etc.,  i.e.,  as  Moses  by  God's  direction  had  commanded 
(cf.  x.  40).  No  charge,  therefore,  of  undue  severity 
can  be  brought  against  Joshua. 

Ver.  13. — Render  the  first  clause,  "only  the  cities 
ivJiich  stood  each  on  its  ovvn  hill."  The  Sept.  Ke^oj- 
/xartcr/xeVas,  "fortified  with  mounds,"  does  not  express 
the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew,  bn  is  here  not  "  agger," 
but  "  tumulus,"  or  "  collis  ;  "  it  means  primarily  "  a 
heap,"  from  hhfi,  to  heap  up,  and  is  found  in  the 
names  of  several  Babylonish  cities,  situated  near  hills 
or  mounds,  e.g.,  Tel-abib  (Ezek.  iii.  15)  ;  Tel-harsha, 
or  haresha  (Ezra  ii.  59  ;  Neh.  vii.  61);  Tel-melah 
(Ezra  ii.  59  ;  Neh.  vii.  61  ;  Ezek.  iii.  15)  ;  Telassar 
(Isa.  xxxvii.  12);  whence  it  passed  into  Arabic  as  the 

involved,  was  included  within  the  limits  of  the  Holy  Land. 
The  name  of  Joshua  is  preserved  in  a  local  tradition,  which 
points  out  the  tomb  of  Yusha  (Joshua)  near  Mellahah,  at  its 
north-west  extremity,  still  visited  by  the  sect  of  the  Metawileh. 
Also  it  appears  in  the  mountain  Tel  Farash  (Farash  being  an 
Arabic  name  for  Joshua)  on  the  east  of  the  plain."  (Sin.  ana 
Pal.,  xi.,  p.  393.) 


172  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

common  name  for  a  hill  (cf.  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal, 
p.  119).  Though  Canaanite  cities  were  frequently  built 
on  an  eminence,  yet  not  universally  so;  see,  e.g.,  Jericho 
and  'Ay :  hence,  though  Keil  takes  the  contrast  here 
to  be  between  Hazor  and  all  the  other  cities,  it  is  per 
haps  more  natural  to  understand  it  as  made  between 
cities  in  the  plains  and  those  on  eminences.  The 
former  could  not  have  been  so  easily  defended  by  the 
Israelites  as  the  latter,  and,  if  left  ungarrisoned,  would 
probably  soon  have  been  reoccupied  by  the  enemy, 
and  for  this  reason  were  destroyed.  The  sing,  hn  is 
used  with  a  plural  suffix  to  denote  distribution. 
W-1t,  properly  "  except  me,"  but  here  *  is  parag.,  as  in 
Deut.  i,  36,  iv.  12. 

Ver.  14  (cf.  viii.  27,  note). — "  Until  they  (the 
Israelites)  had  destroyed  them."  With  the  infin.  form 
noipn  cf.  viii.  22  (note). 

Ver.  15. — "As  Jehovah  commanded  Moses"  etc., 
see  Exod.  xxxiv.  11-16;  Numb,  xxxiii.  52,  etc.; 
Deut.  vii.  i ,  etc.,  xx.  1 6.  "  So  did  Moses  command 
Joshua"  see  Deut.  iii.  21.  tin  Tprrx!?,  lit.  "he put  not 
away  a  word"  i.e.,  he  left  nothing  unperformed  (cf. 
ver.  i  2,  and  i.  7,  8).  In  this  Joshua  was  a  type  of 
Jesus,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  "  whose  meat  it 
was  to  do  His  Heavenly  Father's  will,  and  to  finish 
His  work"  (John  iv.  34).  Joshua's  triumphant  suc 
cess  also  foreshadowed  that  which  the  Gospel  ever 
since  the  first  Advent  of  Christ  has  been  achieving 
over  the  Jabins  and  Hazors  (the  wisdom  and  power) 
of  this  world  (i  Cor.  i.  21),  but  which  will  not  be 
finally  consummated  till  His  second  Advent. 

Here  terminates  the  account  of  Joshua's  wars,  and 
what  follows  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  is  a  review  of 


VERS.  16,  17.]         THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  173 

the  conquest   of  the   whole    land,   i.e.,    of   Western 
Palestine. 

VERS.  16-23. —  The  Whole  Extent  of  the   Conquered 
Land  from  South  to  North. 

Ver.  1 6. — "  Took  all  that  land"  see  note  on  ver. 
23.  inn,  tJie  mountain,  i.e.,  the  hill  country  of  South 
and  Central  Canaan,  see  ix.  I  (note).  23?.n,  x.  40 
(note).  'M//  the  land  of  Goshen"  :  The  same  as  that 
mentioned  in  x.  41  ;  if  not,  a  portion  of  the  maritime 
plain  of  Judah  (the  Sh^helah1).  It  seems  to  have  lain 
between  it  and  the  Negeb.  nrngri,  see  xi.  2.  VI  "in'-nao  : 
The  reference  is  to  the  northern  highland  of  Palestine, 
as  opposed  to  the  valley  and  the  plain,  and  to  the 
mountains  of  Judah  (ver.  21)  ;  called  "the  mountain 
of  Ephraim  "  (xvii.  15),  a  limestone  range  running 
from  Kirjath-jearim,  where  the  mountains  of  Judah 
terminate,  to  the  plain  of  Jezreel.  When  Joshua 
divided  the  land,  its  summits  were  densely  covered 
with  wood  (xvii.  15).  nh^S^-l,  "  and  the  lowland 
thereof,"  as  opposed  to  the  highland.  Dean  Stanley 
thinks  that  it  refers  to  the  tract  of  Sharon  (cf.  note 
on  ix.  i).  ri— ,  an  old  form  of  3rd  pers.  m.  suffix 
(Parad.,  A.,  p.  276  ;  cf.  n'Ti;,  Gen.  xlix.  1 1)  ;  in  the 
margin  in^D^:-1. 

Ver.  i  7  ( The  Botmdaries  of  the  Conquered  Land  on 
the  Soutli  and  North}. — "  The  mount  Chalaq  "  (Halak, 
Auth.  Vers.),  from  p^n,  to  be  smooth  ;  lit.  "  the  smooth 
(or  bare)  mountain  "  :  Sept.  Alex.  opo§  AXa/c  ;  Vat., 
XeX^cx  ;  mentioned  here  and  in  xii.  7  only.  Site 
uncertain.  Clark  (Bible  Atlas,  p.  15,  notes)  would 

1  See  on  ix.  i. 


174  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

identify  it  with  Jebel-el-Mukrah,  sixty  miles  south  of 
the  Dead  Sea,  so  that  it  would  include  the  whole  of 
the  Negeb  or  south  country  ;  but  others  (Keil,  Fay, 
etc.)  think  it  may  have  been  a  range  of  white  cliffs 
stretching  obliquely  across  the  Arabah,  and  up  which 
was  the  ascent  of  the  pass  called  Akrabbim  (Numb. 
xxxiv.  4  ;  Josh.  xv.  3),  about  eight  miles  south  of 
the  Dead  Sea,  forming  the  south  limit  of  the  Ghor, 
and  the  north  limit  of  the  Arabah.  The  view  of 
these  cliffs  from  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  is  very 
striking.  They  appear  as  a  line  of  hills  shutting  in 
the  valley,  and  extending  up  to  the  mountains  of 
Seir  (Porter,  Art.  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet,  on  Seir). 
G.  Grove,  however,  objects  that  we  should  expect  the 
word  Sela\  rather  than  Hary  to  be  used  in  reference 
to  such  vertical  cliffs  (Art.  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol. 
i.,  p.  741).  Again,  Knobel  identifies  Halak  with 
Madurah)  or  Maderah>  an  isolated  hill  of  curious 
shape,  rising  to  a  height  of  five  hundred  feet,  forming 
the  point  of  separation  between  Wady-el-Fikreh  (a 
valley  running  into  the  Ghor)  and  Wady-el-Marrah 
(a  valley  running  into  the  higher  level  of  the  Arabah). 
But,  as  this  hill  rather  lies  on  the  west  side  of  the 
Wady-el-Fikreh,  it  could  not  be  said  to  go  up  to 
Seir.  From  this  diversity  of  opinion  it  is  evident 
that  the  south  boundary  of  the  land  cannot  be  accu 
rately  determined.  "  The  question,  however,"  says 
Clark  (Bible  Atlas,  notes,  p.  15),  "  is  of  less  practical 
importance  than  it  would  else  be,  owing  to  the  un 
profitable  character  of  the  Negeb."  "  That  goeth 
up  to  Seir,"  cf.  xii.  7.  Se-tr  (Seir  [A.  V.],  rough, 
wooded)  was  a  mountainous  region  extending  from 
the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Elanitic  Gulf.  It  was  occu- 


VER.  i8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  175 

pied  in  succession  by  the  Horites  (Gen.  xiv.  6), 
the  Esauites  (Gen.  xxxii.  3  [4]),  and  the  Edomites 
(Deut.  ii.  4).  Bdal-GadJi  (lord  of  fortune;,  men 
tioned  also  in  xii.  7,  xiii.  5,  and  probably  so 
called  from  the  worship  of  Gad,  or  Fortune  (Ges., 
Lex?).  By  reason  of  the  mention  of  "  the  valley  of 
Lebanon,"  some  (Knobel,  Kitto)  would  identify  it 
with  Baalbec,  between  Lebanon  and  Antilebanon, 
but  there  is  no  evidence  that  Joshua's  conquests 
extended  so  far  north,  and  the  expression  "  under 
mount  Hermon  "  would  lead  us  to  suppose  it  close  to 
that  mountain,  and  probably  the  same  as  the  Baal- 
Hermon  of  Judges  iii.  3  ;  I  Chron.  v.  23  ;  hence 
Raumer,  Robinson,  and  Keil,  perhaps  rightly,  regard 
it  as  the  same  with  Panium,  or  Paneas  (Banjas),  the 
Caesarea  Philippi  of  a  later  time. 

Ver.  1 8. — "Many  days":  Josephus  says  the  war 
lasted  five  years  (Antiq.,  v.,  I,  19),  but  the  rabbis 
more  correctly  say  seven,  for  Caleb,  when  sent  from 
Kadesh-barnea  to  spy  the  land,  was  forty  years  old, 
after  which  he  wandered  thirty-eight  years  in  the 
wilderness,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war  was 
eighty-five  years  old  (see  xiv.  7-10).  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  that  this  and  the  former  chapter  record 
only  the  more  remarkable  events  of  the  war. 

Ver.  19. — np^rn,  not  followed  here  by  -ri£,  as  in 
x.  I,  4,  but  by  ~b^,  "had  submitted  itself  to  by  a 
treaty  of  peace  "  (Ges.,  Lex?). 

Ver.  20. — pin1?,  "  to  harden "  (cf.  Exod.  iv.  21; 
Deut.  ii.  30).  The  meaning  is  not  that  God  merely 
permitted  their  hearts  to  be  hardened,  but  that  He 
decreed  that  such  should  be  the  natural  result  of  their 
own  obstinate  impenitence.  Tin  ]vt?h,  "  in  order  that 


1  76  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 


lie  (Israel)  might  execute  the  ban  upon  them" 
"  mercy"  from  J3n,  to  be  (favourably)  inclined  towards. 
»?,  "but"  't?n  |B»V,  "*&**  /#  (Israel)  ;;«£/tf  destroy  them": 
Their  fate  is  a  warning  to  all  who  by  persistence  in 
sin  "  treasure  up  unto  themselves  wrath  against  the 
day  of  wrath,"  etc.  (Rom.  ii.  5,  etc.). 

Vers.  21,  22.  —  As  the  Anakim  had  been  the 
cause  of  great  terror  to  the  Israelites  (Numb.  xiii.  21, 
etc.),  there  is  here  added  to  the  foregoing  narrative 
an  especial  notice  of  their  extermination. 

Ver.  21.  —  "  At  that  time"  i.e.,  not  after  the  con 
quest  of  the  north  and  south  was  completed  (Rosenm.), 
but  in  the  course  of  the  war  of  many  days  (ver.  1  8). 
"And  cut  off  the  Anakim"  i.e.,  as  Clericus  says,  "  he 
killed  those  who  fell  into  his  hands,  the  rest  he 
expelled,  but  after  a  short  time,  as  we  learn  from 
xv.  14,  they  came  back  again."  D^r.n,  lit.  the  long- 
necked,  from  \>M,  i.g.y  Arabic  "  length  of  neck  "  (and 
stature)  (Ges.,  Lex.}  The  name  does  not  seem  to 
indicate  a  distinct  nation  or  tribe,  but  was  applied  to 
men  of  extraordinary  stature  among  the  Amorites, 
and  seems  to  have  been  borne  by  three  families  in 
particular  (see  Numb.  xiii.  22  ;  Josh.  xiv.  15  ;  Judges 
i.  10).  "inn~iP,  i.e.,  not  merely  from  the  mountains  in 
the  south  of  Judah  (Rosenm.),  where  Debir  and  Anab 
lay,  but  all  the  hilly  country  of  Palestine,  explained 
afterwards  in  this  verse  by  the  expression  "  all  the 
mountains  of  Judah,"  and  "  all  the  mountains  of 
Israel."  On  Hebron  and  Debir  see  x.  3,  38. 
"  'A-nabh"  ("  a  place  abounding  in  grapes  ;  see  331?,  a 
cluster,  rt.  litf,  to  fasten  together),  a  city  in  the  moun 
tain  district  of  Judah  (xv.  50),  a  few  miles  S.S.W. 
of  Hebron,  and  still  retaining  its  ancient  name 


VERS.  22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  177 

(Robinson,  Pal.,  ii.,  194-5).  "  Destroyed  them  utterly 
with  their  cities  "  :  Yet  the  next  verse  shows  that  a 
remnant  of  the  population  escaped,  who  seem  to  have 
afterwards  returned  and  occupied  Hebron,  whence 
they  were  finally  driven  by  Caleb  (xiv.  12,  etc.,  xv. 
13,  14  ;  see  note  on  x.  36-7  *). 

Ver.  22.  —  infJ'N7,  followed  by  a  plural  subject 
(§  147,  a).  "In  the  land  of  the  children  of  Israel"  : 
Called  theirs,  because  they  afterwards  took  possession 
of  it,  and  held  it  at  the  time  when  this  book  was 
written.  "  Gaza"  (see  x.  41)  ;  "  Gatli  "  (a  winepress)  : 
A  royal  city  of  Philistia  (xiii.  3  ;  I  Sam.  vi.  1  7)  ; 
the  native  place  of  Goliath  (i  Sam.  xvii.  4)  ;  twice 
fled  to  by  David  during  his  persecution  by  Saul 
(i  Sam.  xxi.  10-15,  xxvii.  2-4;  Psalm  Ivi.)  ;  cap 
tured  by  David  (i  Chron.  xviii.  i)2;  one  of  the 
cities  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  8)  ;  taken 
by  Hazael,  King  of  Syria,  in  the  time  of  Joash 
(2  Kings  xii.  1  7),  and  again  taken  by  Uzziah 
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  6).  It  appears  to  have  been  an 
inland  city,  on  the  borders  of  Philistia  and  Judah. 
Its  site  is  unknown,  but  probably  identical  with  the 
hill  now  called  Tell  es  Safieh,  ten  miles  east  of  Ash- 
dod,  and  about  ten  miles  south  by  east  of  Ekron 
(see  Smith's  BibL  Diet.,  i.,  p.  656).  'Ash-dddh  ("a 
fortified  place,"  or  "  castle,"  from  "H^,  to  be  strong). 


1  The  early  campaigns  of  Joshua  may,  as  Ewald  thinks, 
have  borne  resemblance  to  sudden  incursions,  irresistible  at 
the  time,  but  not  reducing  the  country  to  complete  subjection 
(Evvald's  Geschichte,  ii.,  39). 

-  In  the  parallel  passage  (2  Sam.  viii.  j)  for  "  Gath  and 
her  towns  "  we  have  Methegh-ha-ammah,  "  the  bridle  of  the 
metropolis"  (Gesenius,  Keil),  or  "the  bridle  of  the  arm," 
i.e.,  the  supremacy  (Ewald  and  Bertheau)  ;  either  a  different 
reading,  or  an  explanatory  rendering. 

12 


1 78  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xi. 

Sept.  and  New  Testament  (Acts  viii.  40),  yA£ojros, 
an  inland  town,  three  miles  from  the  Mediterranean, 
on  an  eminence,  about  eighteen  miles  north  of  Gaza  ; 
allotted  to  Judah  (xv.  47),  but,  if  taken  by  it,  soon 
recovered  by  the  Philistines,  of  whose  worship  of 
Dragon  it  was  the  principal  seat  (i  Sam.  v.  I,  etc.). 
Like  Gaza,  Ashkelon,  and  Ekron,  it  was  often  de 
nounced  by  the  prophets  (see  Jer.  xxv.  20  ;  Amos 
i.  8,  iii.  9  ;  Zeph.  ii.  4  ;  Zech.  ix.  6).  As  it  com 
manded  the  entrance  from  Palestine  to  Egypt,  it  was 
besieged  and  captured  by  Tartar,  the  general  of 
Sargon,  King  of  Assyria,  about  B.C.  716,  probably  to 
frustrate  the  league  between  Hezekiah  and  Egypt 
(Isa.  xx.  i)  ;  again,  after  a  siege  of  twenty-nine  years 
(according  to  Herodotus),  it  was  taken  by  Psamme- 
tichus  (Herod.,  ii.,  157)  about  B.C.  630.  Though 
destroyed  by  the  Maccabees  (i  Mace.  x.  77-84,  xi.  4), 
it  was  afterwards  rebuilt  by  the  Roman  general, 
Gabinius  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  xiv.,  5,  3)  B.C.  55  ;  was  one 
of  the  towns  bequeathed  by  Herod  the  Great  to 
Salome,  his  sister  (Joseph.,  Antig.,  xvii.,  8,  §  i).  In 
Christian  times  it  became  an  episcopal  city,  and  its 
bishop  was  present  at  the  Council  of  Nice.  Now 
Esdtid,  a  small  and  poor  Moslem  village  (Ritter, 
Pal.,  iii.,  220,  etc.). 

Ver.  23  (Completion  of  tJie  Narrative  of  Joshua's 
Conquests]. — "  Took  the  whole  land"  (cf.  ver.  16,  xii.  7, 
8,  etc.)  :  The  statement  was  true  in  a  general  sense  ; 
Joshua  had  overrun  the  whole  land,  and  broken  the 
power  of  the  Canaanites,  and  it  only  remained  for 
the  children  of  Israel  to  follow  up  and  complete  his 
conquests.  Hence  there  is  no  discrepancy  between 
this  assertion  and  xiii.  i,  etc.,  xvii.  14,  etc.,  xviii. 


VER.  23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  179 

3,  xxiii.  5,  12,  13.  "According  to  .  .  .  Moses": 
See  Exod.  xxiii.  22,  27-33  5  Deut.  vii.  12,  22-26, 
whence  it  appears  that  God  had  not  promised  to  exter 
minate  at  once  the  Canaanites,  but  only  by  little  and 
little,  and  had  made  the  fulfilment  of  His  promises 
conditional  on  the  obedience  of  the  Israelites. 
"  Joshua  gave  it  for  an  inheritance"  :  So  by  Jesus,  not 
Moses  ;  by  the  Gospel,  not  the  Law,  we  inherit  the 
promises  (Rom.  xv.  8;  Heb.  xi.  13,  40).  rprn  denotes 
a  lasting  possession,  handed  down  from  father  to 
son  (see  I  Kings  xxi.  3,  4  ;  and  Numb,  xxxvi.  8, 
where  it  is  evidently  not  synonymous  with 
"  According  to  tJieir  divisions  by  their  tribes  "  : 
plur.  of  r\\f?r\ft,  rt.  p^n,  to  divide,  here  denotes  the 
divisions  of  the  twelve  tribes  into  families  and  house 
holds  ;  so  in  xii.  7,  xviii.  10  ;  it  is  also  used  of  the 
courses  or  classes  of  the  priests  and  Levites  (i 
Chron.  xxiii.  6,  xxiv.  I,  xxvi.  1-12);  and  of  mili 
tary  arrangements  (i  Chron.  xxvii.  i).  In  the  last 
clause,  E£t?,  to  rest  (cf.  xiv.  15),  is  not  found  in  the 
Pentateuch. 

The  latter  half  of  this  verse  (23)  is  introductory  to 
the  second  part  of  the  book,  which  treats  of  the  par 
tition  of  the  land. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THIS  chapter  is  designed  to  be  supplementary  to 
chapters  x.  and  xi.  From  chapters  x.  40-42  and 
xi.  12-17  it  is  evident  that  Joshua  must  have 
slain  more  kings  and  conquered  more  cities  than  are 
named  in  those  chapters  ;  and,  therefore,  the  omission 


i8o  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 

is  supplied  in  this  chapter,  which  is  thus  indispens 
able  to  the  completeness  of  the  history.  First,  in 
vers.  1-6  mention  is  made  of  the  kings  and  country 
conquered  by  Moses  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan  ;  and 
next,  in  vers.  7-24,  of  the  conquests  of  Joshua  on 
the  west  of  Jordan.  The  fact  that  the  writer  does 
not  limit  himself  to  an  account  of  the  conquests  of 
Joshua,  but  mentions  those  also  of  Moses  (vers.  1-6), 
shows  that  his  design  throughout  the  book  is  to  relate 
the  conquest  of  Canaan  as  a  proof  of  God's  faithful 
ness  to  His  covenant. 

Ver.  i. — B>»B>n  .  .  .  nnr?,  see  note  on  i.  15.  The 
rt  in  nrntp  is  local  (§  90,  2,  a).  "From  the  river 
(torrent *)  Arnon  "  :  The  boundary  between  Moab 
and  the  Amorites  (Numb.  xxi.  1 3),  afterwards  between 
Moab  and  Reuben  (Deut.  ii.  24,  36),  now  the  Wady 
el  Mojeb,  which  flows  into  the  east  side  of  the  Dead 
Sea.  According  to  Gesenius  (Lex}),  }li"ix  =  J1J"),  rush 
ing,  roaring,  i.e.,  roaring  stream.  uCkermdn"  see  xi.  3. 
"And  all  the  plain"  (see  note  on  Arabah,  iii.  16): 
Here  is  meant  that  portion  of  the  depressed  plain 
now  termed  El-Ghor,  on  the  east  side  of  Jordan. 

Ver.  2. — Chesh-bon  (Heshbon,  Auth.  Ver.),  the 
capital  of  Sihon,  the  King  of  the  Amorites  (see 
Numb.  xxi.  21-26),  assigned  by  Moses  to  Reuben 
(Josh.  xiii.  15,  17),  by  whom  it  was  rebuilt  (Numb. 
xxxii.  37)  ;  afterwards  it  came  into  the  possession  of 
the  Gadites,  probably  (says  Keil)  because  it  stood  on 

1  The  word  ?n3  is  derived  by  Dean  Stanley  from  ??n,  to  per 
forate  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.,  p.  496) ;  it  answers  to  the 
Arab.  "Wady,"  or  watercourse,  which  is  sometimes  an  im 
petuous  torrent,  at  others,  a  brook,  a  dry  channel,  or  valley. 
For  its  distinction  from  1HJ,  see  i.  4  (note). 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  181 

the  border  of  their  inheritance  ;  and  it  was  assigned 
to  the  Levites  (Josh.  xxi.  39).  After  the  captivity 
it  was  retaken  by  the  Moabites,  to  whom  it  had 
originally  belonged  (Numb.  xxi.  26),  and  thus  became 
included  in  the  prophetic  denunciations  against  Moab 
(Isa.  xv.  4,  xvi.  9  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  2,  45-47).  At  a 
later  period,  according  to  Josephus  (Antiq.,  xviii.,  14, 
§  4),  it  was  again  in  the  possession  of  the  Jews.  It 
lay  on  the  border  between  Gad  and  Reuben,  midway 
between  the  Arnon  and  Jabbok,  and  nearly  opposite 
to  the  entrance  of  the  Jordan  into  the  Dead  Sea.1 
The  ruins  of  the  modern  Hesbdn,  or  Hilsban,  twenty 
miles  east  of  the  Jordan,  and,  according  to  Von 
Raumer,  more  than  a  mile  in  circuit,  are  supposed  to 
mark  the  site.  'Aro-er  (="  ruins,"  places  of  which 
the  foundations  are  laid  bare  ;  rt.  "ny,  to  be  bare, 
naked),  a  city  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Arnon,  assigned 
to  the  tribe  of  Reuben  (xiii.  9,  1 6),  of  which  it  formed 
the  most  southerly  city  ;  afterwards  came  into  the 
possession  of  the  Moabites  (Jer.  xlviii.  19);  now  A r air, 
on  the  north  edge  of  the  ravine  of  the  Mojeb  (Clark's 
Bib.  Atlas].  Burckhardt, in  185 2,  found  the  ruins  on 
the  edge  of  a  cliff  overlooking  the  river  (Travels, 
pp.  372-4).  It  was  distinct  from  the  Aroer  before 
Rabbath  Ammon,  in  the  land  of  Gad  (Josh.  xiii.  25), 
but  appears  to  have  been  occupied  on  the  first  ac 
quisition  of  the  territory  by  the  Gadites,  and  by 
them  to  have  been  rebuilt  or  fortified  (see  Keil  on 
Numb,  xxxii.  34,  and  on  Josh.  xiii.  25).  It  is  also 
distinct  from  the  Aroer  in  the  tribe  of  Judah  (i 

1  According  to  Kiepert's  map  it  was  over  4,000  feet  above 
the  Dead  Sea,  and  about  3,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
Mediterranean. 


182  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 


Sam.  xxx.  28).  njPI  ^fni:,  "and  in  the  midst  of  tJie 
torrent  (or  watercourse)  "  (De  Wette,  Fay),  i.e.,  the 
city  lay  partly  on,  and  partly  in,  the  Arnon,  on  an 
island,  now  Araayr.  But  perhaps  the  words  are 
elliptical,  and  more  fully  expressed  in  xiii.  9,  16  by 
"pmn  -qfn?  IETN.  "Mm,  "  <a;«^  (from)  //^  «Vj/  which  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  torrent  "  (valley,  Keil).  The  city  thus 
referred  to  is,  not  Aroer,  but  Ar  Moab  (Numb.  xxi. 
15,  28  ;  Deut.  ii.  36),  near  the  spot  where  the  upper 
Arnon  (Seil  Saideh)  receives  the  tributary  Nahaliel 
(Numb.  xxi.  19),  on  a  hill  between  the  two  torrents, 
where  are  still  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  city  (Burck- 
hardt's  Travels,  pp.  372-4,  and  Art.  "Arnon"  in 
Smith's  Bib.  Dict^]  ;  probably  Balak  went  hither  to 
meet  Balaam  (Numb.  xxii.  36).  It  must  not  be 
confounded  with  Rabbath-Moab,  which  lay  ten  or 
fifteen  miles  south  of  the  Arnon.  See  Hengstenberg 
(Geschichte  Bilcams,  pp.  234,  etc.)  and  also  Ritter,  in 
opposition  to  Reland  and  many  modern  scholars  who 
identify  the  two.  "  Half  -Gilead"  *  i.e.,  a  mountainous 
district  south  of  the  Jabbok.  The  other  half-Gilead 
belonged  to  Og,  and  the  Jabbok  was  the  division 
between  them  (see  note  on  ver.  5,  and  cf.  Deut.  iii. 
12,  13).  As  is  usual  with  geographical  names  in 
Palestine,  Gilead  (Heb.  Gil-'adh)  describes  the  physi 
cal  aspect  of  the  country,  and  means  "  hard,  rocky 
region,"  contrasted  with  Bashan,  "  a  level,  fertile 
tract."  The  name  IJ^i,  "  heap  of  witness  "  (Gen. 
xxxi.  47),  may,  by  a  change  of  vowels,  have  been 
formed  from  this  word.  The  "Jabbok  "  (Yab-b6q, 

1  Lit.  "  half  of  the  Gilead,"  for,  as  the  name  of  a  place,  the 
word  in  Hebrew  generally  has  the  article  (cf.  xiii.  25,  31,  xvii. 
i,  xxii.  9,  see  Gr.,  §  109,  3). 


VERS.  2-3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  183 

either  from  p£3,  to  pour  forth,  to  gush  forth,  or  from 
D2N,  in  Niph.,  to  wrestle  (Ges. ;  Gen.  xxxii.  24),  rises 
in  the  plateau  east  of  Gilead,  and,  after  receiving 
some  tributary  streams,  of  which  one  comes  from 
Rabbath-Ammon,  the  capital  of  the  Ammonites  (2 
Sam.  xi.),  falls  into  the  Jordan,  forty-five  miles  north 
of  the  Arnon,  about  half  way  between  the  Sea  of  Gali 
lee  and  the  Dead  Sea  (Porter,  Art.  in  Smith's  Bib. 
Diet.}.  It  was  crossed  by  Jacob  on  his  road  from 
Haran  (Gen.  xxxii.  22  [23]),  and  is  now  called  Wady 
Zurka,  i.e.,  blue  torrent.  "  The  border  of  the  children  of 
Amman  "  :  Popularly  so  called,  both  here  and  in  Deut. 
iii.  1 6,  because  the  children  of  Ammon  had  held  the 
whole  territory  between  the  Arnon  and  Jabbok,  till 
dispossessed  of  it  by  the  Amorites  (Emorites),  and 
still  continued  to  claim  it  (Judges  xi.  12-22).  Others, 
however  (as  Keil),  think  that  the  border  here  meant 
is  the  Nahr  Ammon,  called  the  Upper  Jabbok,  on 
the  banks  of  which  stands  Rabbath  Ammon,  and 
which,  according  to  them,  is  the  source  of  the  Lower 
Jabbok.  In  its  course  northward  and  westward, 
between  Rabbah  and  Gadara,  it  formed  the  boundary 
between  the  Ammonites  and  the  territory  which  had 
been  wrested  from  them  by  the  Amorites. 

Ver.  3. — Render,  "And  (he  reigned  over)  the 
ArabaJi"  etc.  :  i.e.,  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  comprised 
the  whole  of  the  Arabah  or  Ghor  between  the  Lake 
of  Tiberias  and  the  Dead  Sea.  Jin??,  see  xi.  2. 
"  Beth-jeshimoth  "  (house  of  the  wastes  ;  Heb.  Beth- 
ha1-ycshi-m6th),  in  the  deserts  of  Moab,  at  the  end  of 


1  ?n  is  here  written  for  ?n,  the  dagesh  forte  being  omitted 
(§  20,  3,  b}. 


184  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 

the  Dead  Sea  (Numb,  xxxiii.  48,  49)  ;  allotted  to 
Reuben  (Josh.  xiii.  20),  but  afterwards  in  the  pos 
session  of  Moab  (Ezek.  xxv.  9).  "Ashdotk-Pisgak" 
(Heb.  'Ash-doth-hap-Pis-gah),  not  known,  used  here 
and  in  xiii.  20  ;  Deut.  iii.  17,  as  a  proper  name,  but 
in  Deut.  iv.  49  translated  "  Springs  of  Pisgak"  As 
to  the  meaning  of  Ashdoth  (lit.  "  pourings  out,"  from 
nt?K,  unused,  "  to  pour  out,"  see  note  on  x.  40) 
opinions  differ,  but  whether  translated  springs,  or 
slopes,  or  roots,  it  probably  denotes  some  peculiar 
feature  of  the  country,  at  the  north-east  border  of 
the  desert,  by  the  Dead  Sea.  "  Pisgah  "  x  ("  a  part  " 
or  "fragment,"  rt.  3D3  [unused],  Chald.  to  cut  up, 
divide),  is  unknown,  but  generally  supposed  to  be  a 
ridge  of  the  Abarim  mountains,  westward  from  Hesh- 
bon,  the  most  celebrated  peak  of  which  was  Mount 
Nebo  (see  Numb.  xxi.  20,  xxxiii.  47,  xxvii.  12  ; 
Deut.  xxxii.  49).  The  name  seems  to  have  been 
transferred  under  its  Arabic  form  Feshkhah  to  the 
opposite  headland,  on  the  west  of  the  Dead  Sea. 

Ver.  4. — >I3|,  here,  as  often,  =  the  space  included 
within  certain  borders,  i.e.,  "  territory ;"  the  accus.  after 
•ICTVl,  which  is  understood  from  ver.  I.  Og  (Heb. 
'Ogh,  long-necked,  gigantic  (Ges.,  Lex.},  an  Amoritish 
king  (Deut.  iii.  8,  iv.  47,  xxxi.  4  ;  Josh.  ix.  10), 
whence  it  seems  that  the  Rephaim  (giants),  from 
whom  he  was  descended,  were  not,  as  Bertheau, 
Ewald,  and  Lengerke  say,  aboriginal  inhabitants  of 
Palestine,  but  a  tribe  or  branch  of  the  Amorites  or 
Canaanites,  remarkable  for  their  gigantic  height  (cf. 
note  on  xi.  21).  So  Keil,  "In  the  very  earliest 

1  The  word  is  always  used  in  Hebrew  with  the  article,  "  the 
Pisgah"  (§  109,  3). 


VER.  5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  185 

times  they  {i.e.,  the  Rephidim]  had  obtained  pos 
session  of  Palestine  on  the  east  of  Jordan,  but  a* 
a  later  period  they  were  dispossessed  and  overthrown 
by  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites  (see  Deut.  ii.  20-1). 
Subsequently,  however,  the  Amorites,  having  been 
reinforced  by  their  kinsmen  from  West  Canaan,  again 
obtained  the  upper  hand,  and  under  Sihon  and  Og 
founded  two  powerful  kingdoms,  which  were  subdued 
by  the  Israelites  under  Moses."  "  A sJitaroth"  ix.  10 
(note),  probably  now  Tell-Ashterah,  "rising  to  a  height 
of  from  50  to  100  ft.  above  the  plain,  in  which  ruins 
lie  scattered.  At  the  foot  of  the  hill  are  ancient 
wall-foundations  and  copious  springs  "  (Von  Raumer, 
p.  243).  "  Edrei"  ('Edh-re-'i,  "  strong,"  from  irnx, 
Chald.,  i.q.,  v~n,  "  an  arm,"  with  N  prosthetic),  a  capital 
city  of  Bashan,  situated  on  a  rocky  promontory  at 
the  south-west  corner  of  Argob,  and  on  the  northern 
edge  of  the  Hauran,  or  "  Burnt  Country,"  where  Og 
was  defeated  and  slain  by  the  Israelites  (Numb.  xxi. 
33-35;  Deut.  iii.  1-3),  still  called  Edra  (Porter, 
Damascus,  p.  27  I ,  etc.).  Others,  following  the  doubtful 
testimony  of  Eusebius  (Onom.\  place  it  a  few  miles 
further  south,  at  the  modern  Der'a  ;  but  for  reasons 
against  this  site  see  Smith's  Bible  Diet.,  vol.  i.,  p.  492. x 
Ver.  5.  The  Limits  of  Ogs  Territory. — Salcah 
(Sal-khah),2  cf.  Deut.  iii.  10,  afterwards  the  limit  of 

1  "  Og's  capital  was  in  ordinary  circumstances  almost 
unassailable,  since  it  was,  strange  to  say,  built  in  a  hollow, 
artificially  scooped  out  of  the  top  of  a  hill,  which  the  deep 
gorge  of  the  Hieromax  isolates  from  the  country  round.  Its 
streets  may  still  be  seen  running  in  all  directions  beneath  the 
present  town  of  Adraha."  (Geikie's  Hours  with  the  Bible, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  360.) 

2.  The  D  being  without  daghesh,  the  word  is  here  put  for 
n??°  (Ges.,  Lex.}. 


1 86  THE  BOOfC  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 

the  possessions  of  the  Gadites  (i  Chron.  v.  u), 
situated  on  the  south-east  border  of  Bashan,  now 
Sii  Ik  had  (Porter,  Five  Years  in  Damascus],  a  town  with 
eight-hundred  houses,  and  a  castle  of  basaltic  rock, 
commanding  an  extensive  view  over  the  plain  of  the 
great  Euphrates  desert.  "And  over  all  Bashan" 
extending  from  Gilead  to  Hermon,  and  from  the 
Jordan  valley  to  Salcah,  and  embracing  the  four 
(later)  provinces  of  Gaulanitis,  Auranitis,  Tracho- 
nitis,  and  Batanrea.  The  present  Ard-el-Bathanyeh 
represents  the  last  mentioned  province.  Bashan 
was  famous  for  its  oak  forests  (Isa.  ii.  13;  Ezek. 
xxvii.  6)  and  fat  bulls  and  rams  (Deut.  xxxii.  14; 
Amos.  iv.  i ;  Psalm  xxii.  i  2  [13]).  "  The  Geshurites"  a 
people  north-west  (so  Keil,  Rosenm.,  and  Gesen.,  Thes., 
i.,  308)  of  Bashan,  between  that  land  and  Aram,  and 
on  the  east  side  of  the  Upper  Jordan,  near  Hermon. 
Geshur  means  a  bridge,  and  a  bridge  is  now  found 
in  that  region,  where  the  Jordan  is  crossed  (Ges., 
Lex.}.  But  Porter  places  them  on  the  north-east 
corner  of  Bashan,  adjoining  the  province  of  Argob, 
and  the  kingdom  of  Aram.  David  married  a 
daughter  of  Talmai,  King  of  Geshur,  and  by  her 
was  the  father  of  Absolom  (2  Sam.  iii.  3)  ;  and  to 
Geshur  Absolom  fled  after  the  murder  of  his  brother 
Amnon  (2  Sam.  xiii.  37).  "  The  Maachathites"  men 
tioned  along  with  the  Geshurites  (Deut.  iii.  14),  with 
whom  they  seem  to  have  been  closely  allied  (for 
the  daughter  of  Talmai  was  named  Maachah),  and 
dwelling  probably  on  the  east  of  Geshur,  and  south  of 
Damascus  (Keil).  They  took  part  with  the  Ammon 
ites  against  David  (2  Sam.  x.  6).  "And half- Gilead" 
cf.  ver.  2  :  Before  '•VO  is  either  repeated  Suriy,  or 


VERS.  6-7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  187 

the  preposition  ?  is  understood,  z>.,  he  ruled  over 
the  half-Gilead,  the  other  half  of  which  was  in  the 
dominions  of  Sihon,  the  Jabbok  being  the  line  of 
separation  between  the  two.  That  section,  over 
which  Og  reigned,  lies  between  the  Jabbok  and  the 
Hieromax,  and  is  now  called  Jebel  Ajlun,  while 
that  to  the  south  of  the  Jabbok  forms  the  modern 
province  of  Belka.  The  northern  section  is  most 
thickly  timbered,  the  southern  most  fertile,  and  the 
Arabs  have  a  proverb,  "  Thou  canst  not  find  a  coun 
try  like  the  Belka "  (Tristram,  Land  of  Israel}. 
Sihon  is  represented  by  Josephus  as  the  friend  and 
ally  of  Og  (Antiq.,  iv.,  5,  §  3). 

Ver.  6. —  D-13H,  "smote  them"  (see  Numb.  xxi.  21, 
etc.)  PUP^I  :  Two  MSS.  have  DJ^l,  but  the  fern,  suffix 
Pi—  evidently  refers  to  the  land  on  the  east  side  of 
Jordan.  The  actual  possession  of  this  was  given  by 
Joshua  according  to  Moses's  directions  (Josh.  xxii. 
1-6,  with  Numb,  xxxii.  28). 

VERS.  7-24. — A  Summary  of  the  Kings  and  Coun 
try  conquered  by  Joshua  on  the  West  Side  of  the 
Jordan.1 

Ver.  7. — "From  Baal-gad,"  etc.,  see  note  xi.  17. 
"  A nd  Joshua  gave  it  to  the  tribes  of  Israel"  etc.,  cf. 
xi.  23.  This  similarity  of  statement  is  inconsistent 
with  the  view  of  Hasse,  Bertholdt,  and  others,  who 

1  Though  as  many  as  thirty-one  king's  are  mentioned,  yet 
this  is  not  surprising  when  we  consider  that  in  the  earliest 
times  sovereignties  often  comprised  no  more  than  a  single  town 
and  a  small  surrounding  district.  Thus  in  the  vale  of  Sodom 
were  five  kings,  one  for  each  town  (Gen.  xiv.).  To  the  siege 
of  Troy  a  vast  number  of  petty  king.s  were  sent  from  Greece  and 


188  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA,  [CHAP.  xn. 

regard    the   following   list    as   not   authentic,  but  an 
heterogeneous  fragment. 

Ver.  8. — "  In  the  mountainous  district  .  .  .  in  the 
Arabah"  see  xi.  2  (note).  nni*\s*3,  x.  40.  "i3"]P,  viii. 
!5-  'flnn,  etc.,  ix.  i,iii.  10.  Here,  and  in  ix.  i,xi,3, 
the  Girgashites  are  omitted.  Nothing  is  known  of 
them  beyond  their  name.  Von  Raumer  thinks  that 
they  settled  as  colonists  on  the  west  side  of  the  Jordan 
(see  xxiv.  11).  In  Gen.  x.  16  the  Girgasite  is  men 
tioned  as  the  fifth  son  of  Canaan.  Perhaps  the  race 
became  wholly  extinct  or  absorbed  in  other  tribes. 

Ver.  9. — "Jericho"  vi.  I.     "'Ay"  vii.  2,  viii.  i,  etc. 

Vers.  10-18.  This  list  refers  to  those  who  were 
conquered  by  Joshua  in  Southern  Palestine,  either 
in  the  battle  of  Bethhoron  (x.  I,  etc.),  or  in  the  cam 
paign  immediately  following  it. 

Ver.  10. — Cf.  x.  I,  3, 

Ver.  1 1. — Cf.  x.  3. 

Ver.  12. — Cf.  x.  3.      "King  of  Gezer"  x,  33. 

Ver.  13. — "  King  of  Debir"  see  x.  39.  "King  of 
Geder"  (Gedher):  The  town  has  not  been  before 
mentioned,  and  is  thought  by  some  to  be  the  same 
as  Gedor  (xv.  58),  which  lay  between  Hebron  and 
Bethlehem,  i.q.,  the  modern  Jedur  (Rob.,  Bibl.  Res.,  ii., 
13),  or  identical  with  Gederah  (xv.  36),  in  the  low 
lands  of  Judah  (Keil)  ;  but  perhaps  from  its  being 
named  along  with  Debir,  Hormah,  and  Arad,  it  lay 

her  islands.  Caesar  tells  us  that  in  the  county  of  Kent,  in 
Britain,  were  four  kings  ;  also  the  Silures,  Brigantes,  and  other 
small  tribes,  had  each  their  own  king.  Gaul,  Spain,  and  Ger 
many  were  in  like  manner  subdivided  into  a  vast  number  of 
little  states  or  kingdoms.  Often  one  such  little  state  has  ab 
sorbed  others  into  itself,  or  foreign  invaders  have  united  several 
of  them  into  one  large  kingdom. 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  189 

more  to  the  south,  and  was  the  same  as  the  Gedor 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  Simeonites,  I 
Chron.  iv.  39  (Grove). 

Ver.  14. — "Hormah"  (Ch6r-mah,  "a  devoting"  or 
"  ban,"  a  place  laid  waste,  Ges.)  ;  anc.  called  Zephath 
(the  watch-tower),  Judges  i.  17,  though  called  by 
anticipation  Hormah  in  Numb.  xiv.  45.  The  name 
was  changed  to  Hormah  for  the  reason  given  in 
Numb.  xxi.  3.  It  stood  in  the  south  of  Palestine, 
in  the  territory  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  30),  and  was 
allotted  to  Simeon  (xix.  4).  Perhaps  at,  or  near, 
the  pass  Es  Sufa  (Rob.,  Bib. Res., ii.,  iSi).1  "Arad" 
('A-radh  ;  Numb.  xxi.  1-3  ;  Judges  i.  16,  17),  a  royal 
city,  near  the  wilderness  of  Kadesh,  on  a  small  hill, 
now  called  Tell-Arad  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  101,  201), 
twenty  Roman  miles  south  of  Hebron  (Euseb., 
Onom^)  described  as  a  barren-looking  eminence, 
rising  above  the  country  around. 

Ver.  i  5. — "Libnaht"  see  x.  29.  "Adullam"  ('A-dhul- 
lam,  "the  justice  of  the  people,"  Ges.,  Lex^}.  This 
town  was  evidently  in  the  lowland  (cf.  Gen.  xxxviii. 
I,  "Judah  went  down"  etc.),  between  Jarmuth  and 
Sokoh  (Josh.  xv.  35).  Sept.  'OSoXAayx,  and  so  called 
in  2  Mace.  xii.  38  ;  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron. 
xi.  7)  ;  occupied  by  the  Jews  after  the  return  from 
Babylon  (Neh.  xi.  30).  Near  it  was  the  celebrated 


1  See  Art.  In  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  i.,  p.  826.  "  It  was 
the  great  point  from  which  the  roads  across  the  desert,  after 
having  been  all  united,  again  diverge  towards  Gaza,  and  He 
bron,  and  its  site  is  still  marked  by  the  ruins  of  a  square  tower 
of  hewn  stones,  with  a  large  heap  of  stones  adjoining,  on  the 
top  of  a  hill,  which  rises  a  thousand  feet  above  the  wady  on 
the  edge  of  which  it  stands."  (Dr.  Geikie,  Hours  with  the 
Bible,  vol.  ii.,  p.  331.) 


igo  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 

cave  (i  Sam.  xxii.  I  ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13;  see  Stanley's 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  258,  note  8),  though  monastic  tra 
dition  places  it  near  the  modern  Khureitan,  not  far 
from  Bethlehem,  a  position  which  does  not  satisfy  the 
requirements  of  the  sacred  narrative.  More  recently 
the  site  of  the  town  has  been  identified  by  M.  Cler- 
mont  Ganneau  with  ruins  on  a  height,  overlooking 
the  valley  of  Elah  (i  Sam.  xvii.  19),  called  Aid-el- 
Ma.  Here  "  the  surveyors  "  (employed  by  the  Pales 
tine  Exploration  Fund)  "  found  a  cave  close  to  the 
ruins  of  the  ancient  town,  a  cave  sufficiently  large 
to  have  been  the  habitation  of  David,  while  his  band 
were  garrisoning  the  hold  or  fortress."  {Quarterly 
Statement  of  Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  January,  I  88  i,  p.  44.) 

Ver.  1 6. — "  Makkedah,"  cf.  x.  10,  28.  "  Bethel" 
see  vii.  2,  viii.  17  ;  but,  as  it  is  mentioned  here 
along  with  Makkedah,  which  was  in  Judah,  Grove 
thinks  that  it  is  identical  with  the  Bethel  in  i  Sam. 
xxx.  27,  which  was  in  the  south  of  Judah,  and 
apparently  corresponds  to  the  Bethul  of  xix.  4,  and 
the  Chesil  of  xv.  30.  (See  Smith's  Bibl.  Diet.,  vol. 
i.,  p.  199.) 

Ver.  i  7. — "  Tappuah  "  (Tap-pu-ach,  a  place  fruitful 
in  apples,  n-l&n,  an  apple),  not  to  be  confounded,  as  by 
Rosenmiiller,  with  that  mentioned  in  xvi.  8,  which 
was  on  the  boundary  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  and 
identical  with  En-tappuah  (xvii.  7),  but  situated  in 
the  lowland  of  Judah,  apparently  in  the  same  district 
as  Adullam  and  Jarmuth  (xv.  34),  about  twelve  miles 
west  of  Jerusalem  (Grove),  and  now  called  Teffuh. 
Like  Bethel  in  ver.  16,  the  towns  in  this  verse  and 
ver.  1 8  are  not  mentioned  among  those  taken  after 
the  battle  of  Beth-horon  (x.  28-39),  7et  they  may 


VERS.  i8-2i.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  191 

have  been  in  league  with  the  others  against  Israel. 
"  Heplier"  (Che-pher,  a  digging,  a  well,  from  133,  to 
dig),  unknown,  but  probably  the  town  after  which 
was  named  the  land  of  Hepher  (i  Kings  iv.  10),  near 
Socoh,  in  Judah  (xv.  35)  ;  quite  distinct  from  Gath- 
Hepher  in  Zebulun  (xix.  i  3). 

Ver.  1 8. — "  Aphek"  ('"A-pheq,  strength),  a  name 
given  in  Scripture  to  many  strong  places,  not  all 
necessarily  towns,  but  perhaps  only  encampments,  as 
that  mentioned  in  i  Sam.  iv.  i,  xxix.  i  ;  but  here 
probably  identical  with  Aphekah  (xv.  53),  a  town  in 
the  mountains  of  Judah,  near  Hebron.  "  LasJiaron  " 
(Lash-Sha-ron)  :  Vulg.  "Sharon,"  a  town  which  gave 
its  name  to  the  plain  so  called  (h  being  taken  as  a 
sign  of  the  genitive),  but  which  lies  too  much  to  the 
north.  The  Chald.  and  Arab.  Vers.  regard  the  b  as 
part  of  the  noun,  and  there  seems,  says  Grove  (Art. 
in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet},  no  reason  why  the  construction 
in  this  particular  place  should  differ  from  the  rest  in 
the  list.  By  the  Sept.  (Alex,  and  Vat.)  the  word  is 
omitted.  Site  unknown. 

Vers.  19-24.  The  towns  here  mentioned  were 
connected  with  the  northern  confederacy  (xi.  i,  etc.). 

Ver.  19. — "  Madon"  see  xi.  i.    "Hazor"  xi.  i,  1 1, 

13- 

Ver.  20. — Cf.  xi.  i. 

Ver.  21. — "  Taanach"  (Ta-'a-nakh,  sandy  soil, 
Ges.,  Lex.},  a  town  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  but 
assigned  to  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  (xvii.  1 1  ;  I 
Chron.  vii.  29),  which  did  not  drive  out  the  native 
inhabitants  (Judges  i.  27)  ;  afterwards  bestowed  on 
the  Kohathite  Levites  (Josh.  xxi.  25),  the  scene  of 
Barak's  victory  (Judges  v.  19).  Its  name  is  preserved 


192  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  XH. 

in  the  modern  Tctann&ki  near  Lejjun  (Grove),  a  small 
village,  near  to  some  ruins  in  the  plain  of  Esdraelon. 
"  Megiddo  "  (Meghid-do),  generally  associated  with 
the  preceding  city  (xvii.  II  ;  Judges  i.  27,  v.  19  ;  I 
Kings  iv.  12).  Here  Ahaziah  died  (2  Kings  ix.  27), 
and  Josiah  was  fatally  wounded  in  battle  against 
Pharaoh  Necho  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29).  Now  probably 
el-Lejjzin,  the  Roman  "  Legio "  (Rob.,  BibL  Res.,  i. 
316,  328  ;  Van  de  Velde,  Memoir,  p.  333). 

Ver.  22. — "  Kedesh "  (Qe-dhesh,  sanctuary),  in 
Issachar,  and,  according  to  the  list  in  i  Chron.  vi. 
72,  allotted  to  the  Gershonite  Levites,  but  in  the 
parallel  list  (Josh.  xxi.  28)  called  Kishon.  Being 
mentioned  along  with  Megiddo  and  Jokneam,  it 
seems  more  probably  to  have  been  this  city  in 
Issachar  than  that  of  the  same  name  in  Naphtali 
(xix.  37),  with  which  it  is  identified  by  Keil  and 
others.  "Jokneam  "  (Yoq-ne  'am,  "  possessed  by  the 
people,"  Ges.,  Lex.},  in  Zebulon  (xix.  1 1),  near 
Carmel  ;  assigned  to  the  Merarite  Levites  (xxi.  34); 
probably  the  modern  Tell  Kainion,  at  the  foot  of  the 
east  end  of  Carmel  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  p.  114,  115), 
and  commanding  the  main  pass  from  Phoenicia  to 
Egypt.  Traces  of  this  modern  name  are  found  in 
Cyamon,  Kvd/Jiwi'  (Judith  vii.  3).  "Carmel"  (hak- 
Karmel,  "  the  fruitful  field,"  *  or  "  garden  "),  a  moun 
tainous  range,  on  the  northern  border  of  the  tribe  of 
Asher  (xix.  26),  the  highest  summit  of  which  is 
nearly  1,750  ft.  above  the  sea.  It  was  probably  re 
garded  by  the  ancient  Canaanites  as  sacred,  and  the 

1  This  word  in  Hebrew  commonly  has  the  article,  which  is 
here  involved  in  the  prefix,  prep,  i  (§  102,  2,  b),  "on,  or  in, 
tiie  Carmel." 


VER.  23.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOSHUA.  193 

Israelites  may  have  early  established  there  an  altar 
of  the  Lord  (see  I  Kings  xviii.  30).  Tacitus  (Hist. 
ii.,  ch.  78)  says  that  Vespasian  came  thither  to 
consult  the  oracle  of  the  god  Carmel  (the  god 
having  the  same  name  as  the  mountain  itself),  who 
had  neither  image  nor  temple  ;  "  ara  tantum  et 
reverentia."  In  modern  times  the  mountain  became 
celebrated  for  the  convent  of  Barefooted  Carmelite 
Friars,  built  on  its  west  headland  by  St.  Louis. 
This  convent  was  used  as  a  hospital  by  Napoleon  I. 
when  he  besieged  Acre,  was  destroyed  by  the  Arabs 
after  his  retreat,  and  rebuilt  in  1833.  Carmel  is 
now  called  Jcbel  Mar  Elias,  in  memory  of  the  great 
deeds  of  Elijah,  and  the  same  name  Mar  Elias  is 
usually  given  to  the  convent,  though  dedicated  to 
the  Virgin  Mary.  See  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  p.  279  ; 
Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  352. 

Ver.  23. — "Dor"  xi.  2.  TR  nB3j>,  "///,"  or  "per 
taining  to,  the  highlands  of  Dor"  see  note  on  xi.  2. 
"King-  of  the  nations  of  Gilgal"  (Auth.  Vers.),  or 
"king  of  the  Go-yim  at  Gilgal"  (Keil)  :  D.l-i  being 
taken  as  a  proper  name,  referring  to  an  aboriginal 
tribe.  It  may,  perhaps,  denote  an  aggregate  of  mixed 
and  nomadic  tribes,  to  whom  Gilgal  was  a  centre  and 
capital,  cf.  the  phrase  "  Galilee  of  the  nations  "  (Isa. 
ix.  i  ;  Matt.  iv.  i  5).  Gilgal  (which  cannot  be  the 
Gilgal  near  Jericho)  is  supposed  by  Keil  and  others 
to  be  the  same  as  Galgulis,  six  miles  north  of  Kefr 
Saba,  the  ancient  Antipatris  (Euseb.  and  Jerome, 
Onom^},  on  the  main  road  from  Egypt  and  Phoenicia, 
in  the  plain  of  Sharon,  and  still  to  be  seen  in  the 
modern  village  of  Jiljulch,  or  Jiljulieh,  now  almost  a 
ruin  (see  Robin.,  Bib.  Res.,  p.  i  36).  It  is  distinguished 

13 


194  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xn. 

by  Keil  from  the  village  of  Jiljilia  (see  ix.  6),  sup 
posed  to  be  the  site  of  the  Gilgal  from  which  Elijah 
and  Elisha  went  down  to  Bethel  (2  Kings  ii.  I,  2). 
Over  the  plains  of  Sharon  the  nomadic  Goyim  may 
have  spread  themselves. 

Ver.  24. — "  Tir-tsah"  ("  pleasantness,"  from  n^n,  to 
be  delighted),  in  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  (Clark's  Bib, 
Atlas)  ;  afterwards  the  capital  of  the  ten  tribes,  till 
the  time  of  Omri  (i  Kings  xiv.  17,  xv.  33,  xvi.  S-iS, 
24),  alluded  to  for  its  beauty  (Cant.  vi.  4)  ;  the  scene 
of  Menahem's  conspiracy  against  Shallum  (2  Kings 
xv.  14,  1 6)  ;  probably  the  modern  Tcllfisah,  an 
elevated  and  beautiful  place,  three  miles  north  of 
Nablus  (Shechem).  See  Robinson's  Later  Bib.  Res., 
P-  303  ;  Van  de  Velde,  Syr.  and  Pal.,  iii.,  334. 

The  specification  of  cacJi  king  by  himself  singly  in 
this  chapter,  says  Bishop  Wordsworth,  and  the  sum 
ming-up  of  all  collectively,  may  be  designed  to  remind 
the  reader  of  Holy  Scripture  that  each  individual  par 
ticularly,  and  especially  each  individual  in  a  place  of 
eminence  and  responsibility,  will  be  judged  by  the 
Divine  Joshua  ;  as  He  Himself  says,  "  Behold,  I  come 
quickly,  and  My  reward  is  with  Me,  to  give  to  every 
man  according  as  his  work  shall  be  "  (Rev.  xxii.  I  2) ; 
and  that  this  judgment  will  be  universal. 


VER.  i.]  77fE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  195 


SECOND  PART. 

THE    DIVISION    OF    THE    LAND    OF    CANAAN.** 
(CHAPTERS    XIII.— XXIV.) 


CHAPTER    XIII. 

VERS.  1-7. —  God's  Command  to  Jos/ma  to  Distribute 
tJie  Land  of  Canaan  on  the  West  Side  of  Jordan 
by  Lot  among  the  nine  and  a  half  Tribes  ;  and  an 
Enumeration  of  the  still  Unconquered  Districts. 

Ver.  i . — IJI  Jj5t,  (was)  old  (and)  far  gone  in  years  " : 
Cf.  Gen.  xviii.  11,  xxiv.  i  ;  i  Kings  i.  i  ;  Luke  i. 
6,  1 8  ;  D»pj=  "years"  or  "time  of  life"  (Ges.,  Lex., 
p.  342).  The  expression  denotes  great  age  in  its 
several  stages  even  up  to  the  near  approach  of  death 
(xxiii.  i).  It  never  seems  used  in  Scripture  of  any 
but  holy  persons  ;  the  days  of  the  wicked  are  con 
sumed  in  vanity  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  33)  ;  Bishop  Words 
worth,  nsp-nni.n,  used  adverb.  (§  131,  2).  nri'^h^, 
''  to  take  possession  of  it "  ;  see  on  the  word  t^T,  Ges., 

1  We  are  expressly  told  concerning  seven  of  the  tribes  that 
this  division  was  made  according  to  previously  prepared  records 
(see  xviii.  8,  9),  and  it  is  probable  that  such  was  the  case  also 
in  reference  to  the  other  tribes  on  the  west  of  Jordan.  Topo 
graphical  surveys  of  the  land  may  have  been  made  as  soon  as 
it  had  been  overrun  by  the  armies  of  Joshua.  Otherwise,  as 
Knobel  remarks,  a  single  Hebrew  writer  would  hardly  have 
had  so  accurate  a  knowledge  of  the  land  as  the  author  of  this 
book  displays,  especially  in  regard  to  the  boundaries. 


196  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

Lex,  (i).  For  an  explanation  of  the  assertion  in  the 
last  clause  of  this  verse  see  note  on  xi.  23. 

Ver.  2. — This  verse  to  the  first  half  of  ver.  6  is 
parenthetical,  and  mentions  the  districts  still  uncon- 
quered  in  the  south  and  north.  After  Tristan  supply 
ft$%rh.  "Borders"  (Auth.  Vers.),  lit.  circles,  from  ^?|, 
to  roll  ;  Vulg.  Galilea  ;  but  Sept.  correctly  opia.  The 
reference  seems  to  be  to  carefully  marked  out  districts 
around  the  five  principal  towns  of  the  Philistines.1 
"And  all  Geshuri"  :  A  district  in  the  desert  between 
Arabia  and  Philistia  (i  Sam.  xxvii.  8),  distinct  from  the 
country  of  the  Geshurites  mentioned  in  ver.  i  3,  xii.  5. 

Ver.  3. — "From  the  Sihor"  (Shi-chor,  black,  turbid, 
rt.  nnK',  to  be  black)  :  Though  the  Nile  is  so  called 
(Isa.  xxxiii.  3  ;  Jer.  ii.  18  ;  cf.  Virg.,  Gcorg.,  iv.,  291, 
"  viridem  yEgyptum  nigra  fecundat  arena  "),  yet  here 
the  name  probably  refers  to  the  D.nyp  bry  (Numb, 
xxxiv.  5),  on  the  south  border  of  Philistia,  the  'Pii/o- 
Kopovpa  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  modern  Wady  cl 
Arisii.  In  Josh.  xix.  26  the  same  name  Shichor  is 
given  to  a  border  stream  of  Asher.  The  Nile,  which 
flows  through  the  middle  of  Egypt,  could  not  be  cor 
rectly  described  as  "  before  Egypt."  "  Ekron  "  ('Eq- 
ron,  "  eradication,"  from  ijw,  to  root  out ;  cf.  Zeph. 
ii.  4),  'AKKapwr,  Sept.  ;  Accaron,  Vulg.  ;  the  most 
northern  town  of  Philistia,  assigned  first  to  the  tribe 
of  Judah  (xv.  I  i,  45),  secondly  to  Dan  (xix.  43)  ; 
after  the  death  of  Joshua  conquered  by  Judah  (Judges 
i.  1 8),  but  soon  recovered  by  the  Philistines  (i  Sam. 
v.  10),  and  though  reconquered  by  Samuel  (i  Sam. 

1  No  portion  of  the  territory  of  the  Philistines  was  conquered 
in  the  lifetime  of  Joshua,  nor  after  his  death  was  any  permanent 
conquest  effected  (Judges  iii.  3). 


VER.  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  197 

vii.  14),  yet  afterwards  spoken  of  as  a  Philistine  city 
(i  Sam.  xvii.  5252  Kings  i.  2,  16  ;  Jer.  xxv.  20  ; 
Amos  i.  8,  etc.).  It  was  the  last  place  to  which  the 
ark  was  carried  before  its  return  to  Israel  (i  Sam. 
v.  10),  and  was  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  Beelzebub, 
the  fly-god  (2  Kings  i.  2,  etc.).  Now  Akir,  a  small 
mud  village,  five  miles  south-west  of  Ramleh  (Rob., 
Bib.  Res.)  ii.,  227-9.).  "3!D^,  northward,  Sept.  e^ 
evutvy^v,  because  "  the  north  "  is  on  the  left  of  one 
looking  towards  the  east.  "  (Which)  is  counted  to  tJie 
Canaanite "  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  The  relative,  as  here,  is 
often  omitted  (§  123,  3),  or  "it,"  i.e.,  the  whole  dis 
trict  from  Sichor  to  Ekron,  "shall  be  counted,"  etc. 
The  rendering  of  Keil,  "  To  the  Canaanite  is  reckoned 
(the  territory  of  the)  five  lords  of  the  Philistines,"  dis 
regards  the  athnach  under  2t?nPi.  Though  the  Philis 
tines  were  not  a  Canaanitish,  but  a  foreign  race  (Gen. 
x.  14  ;  Deut.  ii.  23),  yet  their  land  having  originally 
belonged  to  Canaan,  is  here  reckoned  part  of  it. 
*;."ID,  lit.  "  axles  (of),"  the  term  being  used  metaphori 
cally  of  princes,  as  hinges  of  the  state  (cf.  cardinal, 
from  cardo,  a  hinge).  It  is  applied  only  to  the  five 
princes  of  the  Philistines  (cf.  Judges  iii.  3,  xvi.  5,  etc.  ; 
I  Sam.  v.  8,  etc.),  and  is  interchanged  with  D"nb> 
(i  Sam.  xxix.  6,  compared  with  vers.  4,  9).  In 
Arabic  a  cognate  term  is  used  of  a  prince  and  com 
mander  of  an  army.  "  The  GazatJiitcs"  (the  'Az-za- 
thite,  see  x.  41)  :  The  Hebrew  gentilic  being  in  the 
singular  may  agree  with  J~o  understood  (cf.  Sept.  rw 
Fa^atoj,  /c.r.X.)  ;  or  it  may  be  here  used  collectively, 
as  in  Auth.  Vers.  and  Vulg.  "  The  Ashdothites"  (the 
'Ash-do-dhite),  xi.  22.  "The  Eslikalonites"  ('Esh- 
qelo-nite)  :  The  gentile  noun  in  Hebrew  occurs  here 


198  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

only.     Ashkelon1  lay  on  the  seacoast  between  Ashdod 
and    Gaza  ;    it   is   not   named    among   the    Philistine 
towns   assigned  to  Judah   (xv.  45-47  ;  though   men 
tioned    by    Josephus,   Antig.,  v.,    I,   §    22),   but  was 
conquered   by   that    tribe    (Judges    i.     1 8),   yet    soon 
regained  its  independence   (Judges  xiv.  19  ;    i  Sam. 
vi.    17).      Herod   the  Great  was   born    there  (Euseb., 
H.  E.,  i ,  6).      It  was  remarkable  (like  Gaza,  Ashdod, 
and  Ekron)  for  the  extreme  beauty  and   profusion  of 
the  gardens  surrounding  it,  and  for  the  temple  of  the 
Syrian  Venus  with  its  sacred   doves  (Diod.  Sic.,  ii.,  4). 
It  became  a  bishop's   see   in  the  fourth  century,  was 
unsuccessfully  besieged  by  the  crusaders  in  IIOOA.D., 
and  again  in  i  148  A.D.      Baldwin  III.  captured  it  in 
1157,  but   it   was  retaken   by  Saladin   in  1187,  and 
burnt  by  him  in  1191.    Richard  I.  of  England  obtained 
possession   the  same  year,  and   restored  the  fortifica 
tions  in  1192.      "Within   the  walls  and  towers  now 
standing  he  held  his  court  "  (Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.   257).      Sultan   Bibars  destroyed   its  fortifications, 
and   filled   up    its   harbour   in    1270.      The    ruins    of 
massive  walls  and  towers  attest  its  former  strength, 
and  it  still  bears  the  name  Askulan.     "  Tlie  Gittites" 
(Gittite  or  Gathite),  see  xi.  22.    "  The  Avitcs"  ('Av-vim, 
"  those  who  inhabit  desert  places,"  from   nw,  "  over 
turning,"  Ges.),  probably  a  remnant  of  those  who  had 
been  exterminated   by  the   Caphtorim    (Deut.  ii.  23). 
Some  (Ewald  and  Lengerke)  think   that  they  were 
aborigines    of    Palestine,    but,    more    probably,   they 
were  Canaanites,  for  the  border  of  the  latter  extended 
into  Gaza  (Gen.  x.  19). 

1  This  word  is  always  so  pointed  in  the  Hebrew  (see  Ges., 
Lex.}. 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  199 

Ver.  4. — '(O'Fip  :  According  to  the  arrangement 
of  the  Masoretic  text  the  portion  of  Canaan  here 
meant  must  be  that  to  the  south  of  Gaza,  viz.,  the 
country  of  King  Arad  (Numb.  xxi.  i),  bordering  on 
the  deserts  of  Paran,  Zin,  Kadesh,  etc.  ;  but  as  the 
districts  named  in  the  rest  of  the  verse  belong  to 
North  Canaan,  and  not  to  the  quarter  mentioned  in 
vers.  2  and  3,  it  is  better,  with  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  and 
Syr.,  to  join  f^riD  with  the  preceding  verse,  e.g.,  "the 
Avvim  from  (or  on}  the  south"  i.e.,  on  the  south  of 
Philistia  between  Gaza  and  the  district  of  Shur.  So 
Keil.  "  All  the  land  of  the  Canaanites"  i.e.,  all  the 
district  here  referred  to,  viz.,  that  along  the  coast  of 
Phoenicia.  "  MearaJi"  rendered  "cave"  in  x.  18, 
and  so  here  by  Keil  and  others  after  the  Chald.,  Syr., 
and  Arab.  Versions,  and  supposed  by  some  to  be  the 
same  as  Mugr  Jezzin  (the  cave  of  Jezzin),  between 
Tyre  and  Zidon  ;  but  it  seems  unlikely  that  if  a 
cave  was  meant,  the  article  would  have  been  omitted 
in  the  Hebrew.  Probably,  therefore,  a  town  or 
village  is  denoted,  as  in  Auth.  Vers.,  though,  accord 
ing  to  Grove,  there  are  no  traces  left  of  it.  (See  Art. 
by  Grove,  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}.  Lieut.  Conder 
would  identify  it  with  Mogheiriyeh,  north  of  Zidon. 
~!?  ")£>£,  not  as  in  Auth.  Vers.,  "  that  is  beside,"  but 
"which  belongs  to."  "  Unto  Aphek":  The  n7  in  the  Heb. 
noun  is  local(G>. ,§  90, 2, c).  ' A-p/ieg (HGb}  =  strength, 
from  p?X,  to  hold  fast,  was  probably  the  same  city  as 
that  assigned  to  Asher  (xix.  30)  ;  and,  therefore 
different  from  that  in  xii.  18,  of  which  that  tribe 
could  not  take  possession  (Judges  i.  31).  Gesenius 
is  probably  right  in  identifying  it  with  Aphaca,  a  city 
on  the  north-western  slopes  of  Lebanon,  famous  for 


200  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xin 

its  temple  of  Venus,  whose  ruins  are  still  called  Afka 
(Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  606-7)  >  f°r  though  Afka  is 
beyond  the  proper  limits  of  Asher,  yet  so  was  Gebal 
(see  next  verse),  and  so  was  Kedesh  beyond  Judah 
on  the  south.  "  To  tJie  borders  of  the  Amorites"  i.e.,  to 
the  border  of  the  land  which  was  formerly  inhabited 
by  the  Amorites,  and  afterwards  belonged  to  Og, 
King  of  Bashan.  Thus  the  words  give  another  ter 
minus  ad  quern,  viz.,  in  an  easterly  direction,  and 
describe  the  breadth  of  the  unconquered  district 
(Keil). 

Ver.  5. — "  Tlie  land  of  the  Gibtites,"  i.e.,  the  terri 
tory  belonging  to  the  inhabitants  of  Gebal  (mountain) 
in  Phoenicia,  on  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  under 
Mount  Lebanon,  now  called  by  the  Arabs  Jebail, 
which  stands  on  a  rising  ground,  near  the  sea  to  the 
north  of  Beirut.  Gebal  possessed  a  fleet  in  the  time 
of  Alexander  the  Great  (Exp.  Alex.,  ii.,  20),  and  was 
renowned  for  its  temple  of  Adonis  (Strabo,  xvi.,  75  5). 
The  plur.  D»?5|  is  rendered  by  the  Auth.  Vers.  "  stone- 
squarers "  in  I  Kings  v.  18  (32  Heb.),  whence  it 
appears  that  the  Giblites  were  so  employed  by  the 
Tyrians  ;  also  as  "  calkers  "  (A.  V.,  Ezek.  xxvii.  9). 
The  Greeks  called  the  place  Bt/3Xog  or  Bu/3Xos,  hence 
the  Alex.  Sept.  BtySXtot  (i  Kings  v.  I  8).  Here,  and 
in  other  Phoenician  cities,  have  been  found  huge  stones 
like  those  in  the  foundation  of  Solomon's  Temple 
(Ritter's  Geog.  Pal.,  ii.,  2I4-I5).1  "Baal-gad"  see 
xi.  17,  and  xii.  7.  "  Herman"  xi.  3,  17.  "  On  the 

1  The  "Gebal"  mentioned  in  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  7  (8),  seems  to 
have  been  a  different  place.  It  was  probably  a  tract  of  Edom, 
south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  called  Gabilene  by  Josephus, 
Eusebius,  and  Jerome. 


VEP.  6.  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  201 

entering  into  Ha-math"  (Chamath,  "defence,"  or  citadel, 
from  non,  "  to  surround  with  a  wall ")  was  the  name 
of  a  distinguished  city  of  Syria,  on  the  Orontes,  on 
the  northern  frontier  of  the  Holy  Land  (cf.  Numb, 
xiii.  21,  xxxiv.  8  ;  Judges  iii.  3),  the  Epiphania  of 
the  Greeks  (Joseph.,  A ntiq.,  i.,  6,  2).  The  same  name 
"  Hamath  "  appears  to  have  been  given  to  the  terri 
tory  or  kingdom,  as  well  as  to  its  capital  (see  2 
Chron.  viii.  4,  where  Solomon  is  said  to  have  built 
store-cities  in  Hamath),  and  in  this  wider  meaning 
the  name  is  probably  used  here  (Josh.  xiii.  5).  The 
Nf2,  or  pass,  was  the  gate  of  approach  to  Canaan 
from  Babylon  and  all  the  north  (Zech.  ix.  2  ;  Jer. 
xxxix.  5).  The  inhabitants  of  Hamath  were  de 
scendants  of  Ham  (Cham)  (Gen.  x.  i  8).  For  its  con 
nection  with  David  see  2  Sam.  viii.  10,  and  with 
Solomon  i  Kings  iv.  21-24;  2  Chron.  viii.  4.  After 
the  latter's  death  it  seems  to  have  recovered  its 
independence,  but  was  reconquered  by  Jeroboam  II. 
(2  Kings  xiv.  28);  afterwards  it  was  subjugated  by 
the  Assyrians  (2  Kings  xvii.  24,  xviii.  34,  xix.  13  ; 
Isa.  x.  9,  xi.  11),  and  again  by  the  Chaldeans  (Jer. 
xxxix.  5).  It  is  now  Hamah,  the  seat  of  a  Greek 
bishop,  and,  according  to  Winer,  numbers  100,000 
inhabitants.  (Rob.,  Later  Res.,  p.  568  ;  Burckhardt's 
Travels  in  Syria,  pp.  146-7  ;  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
pp.  406-7.) 

Ver.  6. — "  Misrephoth-maim?  cf.  xi.  8  (note).  "All 
the  Sidonians"'.  Put  here  for  the  Phoenicians  gene 
rally  (cf.  Judges  iii.  3  ;  Homer,  //.,  vi.,  298).  pix, 
emphatic.  E£fvTfN,  "  /  "will  dispossess  them  "  (see  iii. 
10,  note)  :  The  pron.  suff.  shows  that  the  first  sen 
tence  of  the  verse  is  put  absolutely  (§  145,  2).  The 


202  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

words  "  only  assign  it"  to  the  end  of  the  verse  are 
connected  with  the  end  of  verse  i  (see  note  at  the 
beginning  of  verse  2).  pi,  "  only"  i.e.,  though  thou 
hast  not  yet  conquered  it.  "Assign  thou  it  by  lot"  lit. 
"  cause  it  to  fall,"  i.e.,  assign  it  by  lot.  There  is  an 
ellipsis  of  tnia  (cf.  xxiii.  4  ;  Ezek.  xlvii.  22),  by 
which  the  verb  is  followed  in  Psalm  xxii.  1 9  ;  Prov. 
i.  14  ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  17.  "As  I  have  commanded"  etc., 
see  i.  6. 

Ver.  7. — This  command  to  apportion  the  land 
among  the  nine  and  a  half  tribes  before  they  had  com 
pletely  subdued  it,  was,  as  Calvin  remarks,  a  pledge 
on  the  part  of  God  that  He  would  put  them  in  pos 
session  of  it,  if  they  were  obedient  to  His  will.  It 
was  a  trial  of  Joshua's  faith.  Before  'VH  is  an  ellip 
sis  of  the  foregoing  prep.  ^  (cf.  the  Heb.  in  i.  12),  and 
for  the  construction  of  the  two  following  nouns  see 
note  on  iii.  14,  viii.  i  I. 

Vers.  8-32. — From  the  mention  of  the  inheritance 
of  the  nine  and  a  half  tribes  on  the  west  of  Jordan 
a  transition  is  made  to  the  inheritance  of  the  two  and 
a  half  tribes  on  the  east.  These  latter  were  regarded 
by  some  ancient  expositors  (Origen,  Horn.  3  ;  and 
Theodoret,  Qu.  16)  as  representative  of  the  ancient 
Jewish  Church,  to  which  the  promises  were  made, 
but  which  did  not  receive  their  accomplishment  till 
Christ  came,  and,  therefore,  had  no  advantage  in  this 
respect  over  the  Christian  Church  (cf.  note  on  xi.  23). 

Ver.  8. — ley,  "  iMth  it"  i.e.,  with  the  half  tribe  of 
Manasseh,  but  that  half  which  had  received  its  in 
heritance  on  the  east  of  Jordan  ;  hence  the  Arab. 
Vers.  paraphrases  "  Nam  dimidia  tribus  altera  Ma- 
nasse,"  etc.  The  words  "  as  Moses  the  servant  of 


VER.  9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  203 

Jehovah  gave  them  "  are  not  a  tautological  repetition 
of  the  clause  "  which  Moses  gave  them,"  but  imply 
that  the  arrangements  which  had  been  made  in 
general  terms  by  Moses  were  now  to  be  exactly 
carried  out  by  Joshua.  For  the  fact  alluded  to  see 
Numb,  xxxii.  33  ;  Deut.  iii.  13. 

Vers.  9-13. — A  general  description  is  first  given 
of  the  borders  of  the  territory  beyond  Jordan,  and 
afterwards  the  cities  assigned  to  each  tribe  are  enu 
merated  (vers.  15-31). 

Ver.  9. — "  From  Arocr,  wJiicJi  is  upon  tJie  bank 
(lit.  lip  or  edge)  of  the  watercourse  of  Arnon,  and 
(from)  the  t  city"  etc.,  see  xii.  2  (note).  "  A  nd  all  the 
plain  "  (Auth.  Vers.)  :  TfB»p,  from  T^,  to  be  straight, 
even,  level,  is  used  with  the  article  for  the  upland 
downs  or  table  land  east  of  Jordan  (cf.  vers.  1 6,  1 7,  2  I  ; 
xx.  8),  apparently  in  contradistinction  to  the  rocky 
soil  and  more  broken  ground  on  the  west,  though  in 
later  times  this  distinction  was  probably  lost,  and 
plains  on  the  west  of  the  Jordan  were  so  called. 
(Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.  §  6,  note  i).  The 
term  is  here  applied  to  the  southern  portion  of  the 
territory  of  the  Amorites,  which  was  assigned  to  the 
tribe  of  Reuben  (Deut.  iii.  10,  iv.  43  ;  Josh.  xx.  8  ; 
Jer.  xlviii.  21),  what  is  now  the  Belka,  or  pasture 
ground,  of  the  modern  Arabs.  The  portion  of  it  from 
Medeba  to  Dibon  is  called  (in  Numb.  xxi.  20)  after 
its  former  inhabitants  "  the  field  of  Moab,"  and  (in 
Numb,  xxiii.  14)  "the  field  of  the  \vatchmen"  (D»3V, 
Keil).  u Medeba"  (Me-dhebha',  "waters  of  rest,"  rt. 
N!n  [unused],  to  rest),  a  town  assigned  to  the  Reu- 
benites  (ver.  1 6),  but  formerly  belonging  to  Moab, 
from  whom  it  was  taken  by  the  Amorites  (Numb. 


204  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xm. 

xxi.  29,  30)  ;  afterwards  recovered  by  the  Moabites 
(Isa.  xv.  2)  ;  before  it  Joab  defeated  the  Ammonites 
(l  Chron.  xix.  7).  It  lay  four  or  five  miles  south 
east  of  Heshbon,  on  a  round  hill,  on  which  there  are 
still  ruins  called  Madeba  (Burckhardt's  Syr.,  p.  625). 
"  Dibon  "  (Di-bhon,  "  pining,"  rt.  n-n,  i.q.,  3$n,  to  pine 
away,  Ges.,  Lex.\  a  Moabitish  city,  about  four  miles 
north  of  the  Arnon,  conquered  by  the  Israelites 
(Numb.  xxi.  30)  ;  assigned  by  Moses  to  the  Reu- 
benites  (ver.  17),  but  apparently  at  first  occupied  by 
the  Gadites,  by  whom  it  was  rebuilt  (Xumb.  xxxii. 
34),  and  from  whom  it  may  have  been  called  Dibon- 
Gad  (Xumb.  xxxiii.  45,  46);  afterwards  recaptured  by 
the  Moabites  (Isa.  xv.  2  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  24).  It  is 
mentioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  in  the  Onomas., 
under  the  names  Dabon  or  Debon,  and  as  a  very 
large  village  beyond  the  Arnon.  Its  extensive  ruins, 
still  called  DJuban,  were  seen  by  Seetzen  and  Burck- 
hardt,  and  here  the  Moabite  stone  was  discovered  by 
the  Rev.  T.  Klein  in  1868. 

Ver.  10. — See  xii.  2  ;   Numb.  xxi.  25. 

Ver.  i  i. — "  (The)  Gilcad"  (hag-Gil-'adh),  i.e.,  the 
whole  of  the  territory  so  called  on  both  sides  of  the 
Jabbok  (xii.  2,  5).  For  the  remainder  also  of  the 
verse  see  note  on  xii.  5. 

Ver.  1 2. — See  xii.  4.  The  form  n-l^ps  at  the  begin 
ning  of  the  verse  (cf.  vers.  21,  27,  30,  31)  is  not 
found  in  the  Pentateuch,  but  n?^2!0  (Numb,  xxxii.  33  ; 
Deut.  iii.  4,  10)  ;  one  proof  that  the  Book  of  Joshua, 
though  resembling  the  Pentateuch  in  style  and  phraseo 
logy,  yet  has  its  own  distinctive  features. 

Ver.  13. — Here  we  have  the  first  notice  of  that 
want  of  faith  and  perseverance  which  was  afterwards 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  205 

the  cause  of  so  much  disaster  to  the  Israelites  (see 
Books  of  Judges  and  of  I  Samuel).  "  But  the 
GesJiurites  .  .  .  until  this  day"  (see  note  on  xii.  5)  : 
Even  in  the  time  of  David  they  appear  to  have  been 
independent  (2  Sam.  iii.  3,  x.  6,  8). 

Ver.  14. — With  what  is  here  said  of  the  portion  of 
Levi  cf.  ver.  33,  xiv.  3,  4.  ^'K,  plural  construe, 
of  nr^x,1  a  sacrifice,  so  called  from  the  fire  by  which 
it  was  burned  (£'$),  used  primarily  of  sacrifices  burnt 
in  honour  of  God,  but,  in  a  wider  sense,  of  all  kinds 
of  sacrifices,  even  of  those  not  burned  (Lev.  xxiv. 
7,  9)  ;  thus  here  it  includes  tithes  and  firstfruits  (Lev. 
xxvii.  30-32,  compared  with  Numb,  xviii.  21-32); 
and  is  rendered  in  the  Chald.  NJiin-ip,  and  by  Jerome 
"sacrificia  et  victimae."  s-in,  "that  (is)"  (§  121,  2, 
with  §  147,  d,  note  *).  "  As  He  said"  etc.,  see 
Numb,  xviii.  20 ;  Deut.  x.  8,  9,  xviii.  2. 

VERS.  15-23. — Inheritance  of  the  Tribe  of  Reuben. 

Their  territory  was  the  most  southern  of  the  allot 
ments  of  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes,  and  adjoined  the 
country  of  Moab,  to  which  it  had  formerly  belonged 
before  its  conquest  by  the  Amorites  (sec  Numb.  xxi. 
26,  etc.).  The  latter,  however,  did  not  wholly  extir 
pate  the  Moabites,  who,  dwelling  at  first  as  a  subject 
race  among  the  Reubenites,  seem  to  have  gradually 
recovered  their  old  supremacy  in  the  land. 

Ver.  15. — After  jPP  supply  fn^.  On  the  distinc 
tion  between  nt?n  and  D2tt>  see  note  on  iii.  12. 
"Reuben"  (Re'u-bhen,  "see  a  son"),  Gen.  xxix.  32 

1  The  word  is  used  in  only  one  other  place  besides  the  Pen 
tateuch,  viz.,  in  i  Sam.  ii.  28,  and  is  there  copied  from  it(Keil). 


206  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xm. 

Ver.  1 6. — Cf.  ver.  9.  The  Chald.,  Sept.,  Syr.,  and 
Arab,  read  11?  for  by,  which  is  probably  an  emendation 
on  account  of  the  j»  before  Tirny  (Maurer).  Medeba, 
see  ver.  9. 

Ver.  17. — "Hcshbon"  xii.  2.  TfK»»5,  cf.  ver.  9 
(note).  "  Dibon"  ver.  9.  u  Bamoth-baal"  lit.  "  the 
high-places  of  Baal,"  more  briefly  written  "  Bamoth  " 
(Numb.  xxi.  19  ;  Isa.  xv.  2),  the  spot  whence  Balaam 
saw  the  outskirts  of  the  camp  of  Israel  (Numb.  xxii. 
41),  and  probably  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Arnon  (cf. 
Onomast.,  s.  v.  Bamoth).  "  Beth-baal-meon"  called 
"Baal-meon"  (place  of  habitation,  Numb,  xxxii.  38), 
and,  in  a  contracted  form,  "  Bcon"  (Numb,  xxxii.  3). 
The  Moabites  seem,  at  a  later  period,  to  have  gained 
possession  of  it,  and  to  have  called  it  Beth-meon 
(Jer.  xlviii.  23)  or  Baal-meon  (Ezek.  xxv.  9).  Now 
probably  Myun,  nearly  two  miles  south-east  of 
Heshbon  (Burckhardt,  ii.,  624). 

Ver.  i  8. — "Ja/iasa"  (Ya-hetsah,  "  a  place  trampled 
down,"  perhaps  "  a  threshing-floor,"  rt.  f  rr,  unused, 
Arab.  "  to  trample  "),  written  Jahaz  Isa.  xv.  4  ;  Jer. 
xlviii.  34,  where  it  is  mentioned  among  the  cities  of 
Moab,  having  been  retaken  by  it.  Close  to  it  Sihon 
was  defeated  by  Moses  and  slain  (Numb.  xxi.  23-4  ; 
Deut.  ii.  32,  33)  ;  it  was  assigned  by  the  Reubenites 
to  the  Merarite  Levites  (xxi.  36  [not  in  the  Hebrew 
text]  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  78  [63  Heb.]).  Its  site  unknown, 
though  Eusebius  (Onom.,  'lecrcra)  says  it  lay  between 
Medeba  and  Dibon  (Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  i.,  p.  91  5). 
"Kedemoth"  (Qedhe-m6th,  "easternmost  parts"),  a 
town  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Jahaza,  now  unknown. 
From  the  adjacent  wilderness  (midhbar),  to  which  the 
town  seems  to  have  given  its  name,  Moses  sent  am- 


VER.  19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  207 

bassadors  to  Sihon  (Deut.  ii.  26).  It  was  given  by 
the  Reubenites  to  the  Merarite  Levites  (xxi.  37  [not 
in  the  Heb.  text]  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  79  [64  Heb.]). 
"  McphaatJi "  (beauty,  from  V&,  to  shine  [the  full 
form  of  the  Heb.  word  is  Hi??'''?,  I  Chron.  vii.  64]), 
in  the  district  of  the  plain  (mishor,  ver.  17),  assigned 
to  the  Levites  (xxi.  37  [not  in  the  Heb.  text]  ; 
i  Chron.  vi.  79  [64]),  apparently  retaken  by  the 
Moabites  (Jer.  xlviii.  21),  mentioned  by  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  (Onom.,  s.  v.,  MrjffrdO)  as  a  Roman 
military  post  for  keeping  the  inhabitants  of  the  desert 
in  check.  Site  unknown. 

Ver.  19. — "  Kirjatha  im"  (Oir-ya-tha-yim,  "double 
city  "),  first  mentioned  in  Gen.  xiv.  5  as  in  possession 
of  the  Emim.  In  the  time  of  Eusebius  it  was  called 
Karias,  and  he  describes  it  as  a  village  of  Christians, 
ten  miles  west  of  Medeba  (Ononiast.,  KapioAei/u,),  but 
Burckhardt  places  it  three  miles  south  of  Heshbon,  in 
the  ruins  known  as  Et-Teym,  half  an  hour  west  of 
Medeba;  so  Keil.  In  Numb,  xxxii.  37,  38,  it  is 
mentioned  as  between  Elealeh  and  Nebo,  and  said 
to  have  been  built  (i.e.,  rebuilt  or  fortified)  by  the 
Reubenites,  but  appears  to  have  been  retaken  at  a 
later  period  by  the  Moabites  (Jer.  xlviii.  23  ;  Ezek. 
xxv.  9).  It  is  possibly  Kureiyat,  close  to  Jebel attarus 
(Grove).  "  Sibinah  "  (Sibh-mah,  "  coolness  "  or  "sweet 
smell,"  rt.  D?'^  [unused],  Arab.,  to  be  cold,  or  i.q.,  Db'3, 
to  be  sweet-scented),  see  Numb,  xxxii.  38  ;  afterwards 
famous  among  the  cities  of  Moab  for  its  vines  (Isa. 
xvi.  8  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  32).  Its  name  is  perhaps  trace 
able  in  the  ruins  es-Sameh,  four  miles  east  of  Heshbon  ; 
but  according  to  Jerome  (Comment,  on  Isa.  xvi.  8) 
it  was  only  five  hundred  paces  from  the  latter  city. 


2oS  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

"Zareth-shahar"  (Tse-reth-hash-sha-char,  "the  splen 
dour  of  the  dawn  "),  mentioned  here  only.  "  On  a 
mount  of  the  valley  "  :  The  valley  may  be  that  of  the 
Jordan  (ver.  27),  or  of  Shittim,  on  the  side  of  the 
Dead  Sea  (Nurnb.  xxxiii.  49).  Seetzen  (Reisen,  ii., 
369)  would  identify  the  town  with  a  place  called 
Sara,  or  Zara,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wady  Zerka 
Main,  about  a  mile  from  the  edge  of  the  Dead  Sea. 
It  is  probable  from  the  name  that  it  stood  upon  a 
sunny  hill  (Keil  and  Rosenm.). 

Ver.  20. — "Beth-pcor"  (house  of  Peor,  an  "open 
ing,"  Numb,  xxiii.  28),  a  place  where  Baal  was  wor 
shipped  (Numb.  xxv.  3,  18).  According  to  Eusebius 
it  was  six  miles  above  Libias  or  Beth-haran,  on  the 
east  of  Jordan,  opposite  Jericho  (Euseb.,  Onomast.}, 
near  the  burial-place  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiv.  6),  but 
not  known.  On  the  two  last-mentioned  names  in 
this  verse  see  xii.  3. 

Ver.  21. — "  And  all  the  cities  of  the  plain"  (table 
land),  i.e.,  all  those  which  had  not  yet  been  mentioned 
in  ver.  17.  "All  the  kingdom  of  Sihon  "  (Si-chon), 
etc.,  i.e.,  so  far  as  it  extended  over  the  plain,  for  the 
northern  portion  of  this  kingdom  was  allotted  to  the 
Gadites  (ver.  27).  "  Whom  Moses  slew  and  the  chief 
tains  of  Midian  "  :  In  Numb.  xxxi.  8  these  chieftains 
are  called  {HO  *3?D,  i.e.,  petty  kings  or  rulers.  "Dukes 
of  Sihon  "  (A.  V.),  duces  (Vulg.),  so  Syr.,  but  D'3'p? 
means  "princes"  in  Psalm  Ixxxiii.  11  (12);  Ezek. 
xxxii.  30  ;  Micah  v.  4,  and  is  so  rendered  here  by 
Gesenius  (Lex.}  and  Rosenm.,  from  ^03,  to  anoint, 
though  the  authority  given  by  Gesenius  (Lex.,  3)  for 
this  meaning  of  the  verb,  viz.,  Psalm  ii.  6,  is  unsup 
ported  by  other  examples.  Hence  Keil  renders 


VER.  22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  209 

"  vassals  of  Si/ton"  from  TJD:)  in  the  sense  of  "  to  pour 
melted  metal  into  a  mould,"  and  then  metaphorically 
"  to  mould  or  enfeoff  any  one  with  power,"  a  meaning, 
which  though  supported  by  Gusset  (Lex.}  and  Heng- 
stenberg  (Psalms,  i.,  p.  35),  is  rather  forced.  More 
usually  i]D3  means  "to  pour  out  a  libation"  (Exod. 
xxx.  9  ;  Hosea  ix.  4),  and  hence,  perhaps,  here  "  to 
dedicate  or  appoint  with  a  libation."  In  any  case 
tributary  princes  are  denoted.  "O^,  "  divellers  in  tlie 
land"  i.e.,  as  tributaries  to  Sihon. 

Ver.  22. — "Balaam"  (Bil-'am,  perhaps  derived,  as 
by  Simonis,  from  1^3  and  Dtf,  "  the  destruction  of  the 
people  ;  '  or  from  1/P2,  to  devour,  with  a  formative  syl 
lable  attached,  and  meaning  "destroyer  "  or  "glutton"). 
"Bear"  written  "  Bosor  "  (2  Peter  ii.  15),  an  Aramaic 
form  of  the  word  which  St.  Peter  may  have  learnt  in 
Babylon.1  Balaam's  residence  was  Pethor  (Numb, 
xxii.  5),  in  Mesopotamia  (Deut.  xxiii.  4).  DDTpn, 
"  the  soothsayer"  (from  DD£,  to  divine2),  always  denotes 
a  false  prophet;  see  Isa.  iii.  2,  where  he  is  distinguished 
from  the  true  prophet.  Yet  there  is  no  sufficient 
reason  for  concluding  with  Philo,  Josephus,  Origen, 
S.  Augustine,  Cor.  a  Lap.,  and  others,  that  Balaam 
was  a  prophet  of  the  devil,  who  was  compelled  by 
God  to  bless  where  he  wished  to  curse  ;  but  rather 
that  he  possessed  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and 
the  gift  of  prophesying,  but  under  the  influence  of 
ambition,  pride,  and  covetousness,  perverted  both  to 
unrighteous  purposes.  arnjp'prr1?^,  "among"  (A.V.),  or 

1  Or  Bocro'p  is  a  Galilean  mode  of  writing  "W3,  the  1?  being 
pronounced  s  (Vitringa,  Observ.  Sacrce,  vol.  i.,  p.  936). 

2  The  original  meaning  seems  to  be  "to  divide,"  or  "to 
partition  out  "  (Ges.,  Lex.). 

14 


210  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xm. 

"  in  addition  to,  their  slain."  Ges.  says  "?K  sometimes 
has  the  meaning  of  adding  or  superadding,  as  in 
Levit.  xviii.  18  (Lex.,  6).  In  the  parallel  place 
(Numb.  xxxi.  8)  there  is  hy  ;  so  in  the  Targum. 

Ver.  23  (The  Boundary  of  the  Portion  of  Reuben  at 
its  North-  West  Extremity}. — "  A  nd  the  border  of  the 
sons  of  Reuben  was  the  Jordan,  and  the  border  thereof." 
7to|  at  the  end  of  the  clause  and  in  ver.  27  =  n^Ujj, 
Chald.  rpo-inj;!  ;  Keil  regards  it  as  explanatory,  and 
gives  to  the  conjunction  -i  before  it  the  force  of  "or 
rather"  i.e.,  the  actual  boundary  was  not  the  river, 
but  the  land  immediately  adjoining  it.  "And  their 
villages"  lit.  "  enclosures,"  rt.  "iyn,  to  surround,  Sept. 
e77avX<,Ses,  farm  premises  (Keil),  enclosed  by  a  fence, 
but  not  by  a  wall  (cf.  Lev.  xxv.  3  i,  and  see  Stanley's 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.,  §  831).  The  plural  feminine 
suffix  jn,  refers  to  any,  which,  though  masculine  in 
termination,  comes  from  a  feminine  noun.  Some 
MSS.  read  D.nnyn,  as  in  ver.  28,  where  the  tnasculine 
suffix  is  used,  as  often,  for  the  feminine,  in  the  3rd 
person  (cf.  iv.  8). 

The  recently  discovered  Moabite  stone  proves 
that  most  of  the  cities  assigned  by  Joshua  to  the 
Reuben ites  were  either  wholly,  or  in  part,  wrested 
from  them  by  the  Moabites,  with  whom  they 
probably  became  gradually  much  intermixed  (see 
Schottmann,  Die  Sicgesdule  Mesa's,  p.  36,  etc.).  The 
prediction  "  Thou  shalt  not  excel "  (Gen.  xlix.  4) 


1  He  remarks  that  topographically  Cha-tser  means  a  village, 
generally  a  Bedouin  village  (Gen.  xxv.  16  ;  Sept.  O-K^I/TJ),  such 
as  are  formed  of  tent-cloths,  spread  over  stone  walls,  the  latter 
often  remaining  long  after  the  tribes  which  they  sheltered,  and 
the  tents  which  they  supported,  have  vanished  away. 


VERS.  24,  25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  fOSHUA.  211 

was  remarkably  fulfilled  in  this  tribe,  as  no  individual 
in  it  is  mentioned  as  having  attained  to  eminence. 
It  degenerated  into  a  tribe  of  shepherds  (Judges  v. 
15,  1 6),  became  alienated  from  its  western  brethren, 
and  at  length  lapsed  into  idolatry  (i  Chron.  v.  25). 

VERS.  24-28. — Inheritance  of  the   Tribe  of  Gad  ("  a 
troop,"  Gen.  xlix.  19  ;  cf.  xxx.  i  i). 

This  tribe  was  of  a  fierce,  warlike  character  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  20  ;  I  Chron.  v.  18-22  ;  xii.  8,  etc.). 

Ver.  25. — "  And  their  border  was  Jaser  (Ya'-zer= 
"  which  Jehovah  aids "),  a  town  taken  from  the 
Amorites  (Numb.  xxi.  32),  rebuilt  by  the  children  of 
Gad  (Numb,  xxxii.  35),  described  by  Eusebius 
(Onomast^)  as  ten  miles  west  from  Philadelphia  (Rab- 
bath-Amman),  and  fifteen  from  Heshbon  ;  identical, 
as  Keil  and  Van  de  Velde,  after  Seetzen,  conjecture, 
with  the  ruins  of  Sir  or  es  Sir,  consisting  of  a  castle, 
and  a  large  walled  pool,  the  latter  probably  the 
remains  of  the  "ir;»  D?  (Jer.  xlviii.  32).  It  was 
assigned  to  the  Merarite  Levites  (Josh.  xxi.  37 
[39]  !  1  Chron.  vi.  66  [Si]),  but  belonged  after  the 
exile  to  the  Moabites  (Isa.  xvi.  8  ;  Jer.  xlviii.  32)  ; 
taken  by  Judas  Maccabasus  (i  Mace.  v.  8).  "All 
the  cities  of  Gilead"  i.e.,  the  southern  half  of  Gilead,  in 
cluded  in  the  territory  of  Sihon,  for  the  northern  half 
came  within  the  territory  of  Bashan,  and  was  assigned 
to  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh.  "  And  half  the  land 
of  the  children  of  Ammon"  i.e.,  that  portion  of  the 
land  between  the  Arnon  and  the  Jabbok,  which 
Sihon  had  wrested  from  them,  and  which  the 
Israelites,  when  they  conquered  Sihon,  took  for  their 
own  ;  but  the  land  which  the  Ammonites  possessed 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

in  the  time  of  Moses  the  Israelites  had  been  for 
bidden  to  attack  (Deut.  ii.  19).  "  Unto  Aroer,  which 
is  before  Kabbah."  u  Arocr"  ('A-ro-er,  naked;  rt. 
"ny,  to  be  bare),  distinct  from  the  city  of  the  same 
name  on  the  Arnon  (xii.  2,  xiii.  9,  16),  in  the  terri 
tory  of  Reuben.  It  is  mentioned  again  in  Judges 
xi.  33  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  5,  only;  site  unknown,  but 
Keil  thinks  it  was  on  the  north-east  of  Rabbah,  in 
the  Wady  Nahr  Amman,  where  Kalat  Zerka  Gadda 
is  marked  upon  Kiepert's  map.  Rabbah  (Great),1  the 
chief  city  of  the  Ammonites,  called  "  Rabbath  of  the 
sons  of  Ammon  "  (Deut.  iii.  1152  Sam.  xii.  26, 
xvii.  27).  It  seems  to  have  been  divided  into  two 
parts,  one  (the  lower  town)  named  the  city  of  waters 
or  the  royal  city,  taken  by  Joab  (2  Sam.  xii.  26,  27)  ; 
the  other  (the  upper  town),  containing  the  citadel, 
and  taken  by  David  (ver.  29).2  At  a  later  period  it 
appears  again  as  an  Ammonitish  city  (Amos  i.  13-15  5 
Jer.  xlix.  3  ;  Ezek.  xxx.  5)  ;  it  was  called  Philadel 
phia  by  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  in  the  third  century  B.C., 
and  by  Polybius,  'PaftftaTap-eva  ;  was  captured  by 
Antiochus  the  Great  (Polyb.,  v.,  1 6),  and  in  later  times 
became  the  seat  of  a  Christian  bishop.  Its  extensive 
ruins  now  bear  the  name  of  Amman,  and  are  about 
twenty-two  miles  from  the  Jordan,  on  the  bank  of  the 
Wady  Zerka,  usually  identified  with  the  Jabbok.  So 
Abulfeda,  Burckhardt,  Seetzen. 

1  Applied  to  a  capital  city  as  great  in  size  and  importance. 
The  same  name,  "  Rabbah,"  was  given  to  Ar,  the  capital  of 
Moab  (Euseb.,  Onomast.,  "Moab"). 

2Josephus  (Antiq.,v\\.,  7,  §5)  says  that  the  citadel  contained 
only  one  small  well  of  water,  which  would  account  for  its 
speedy  capture,  when  communication  with  the  perennial 
stream  in  the  lower  town  had  been  cut  off. 


VER.  26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  213 

•  Ver.  26. — "  Heshbon"  xii.  2.  "  Ramath  -  Jiam- 
mitspch  "  ("  the  high-place  of  the  watch-tower  "),  here 
only  ;  probably  the  spot  where  Jacob  and  Laban 
erected  their  cairn  of  stones  (Gen.  xxxi.  43-53),  and 
identical  with  Ramoth-Gilead  (xx.  8  ;  Deut.  iv.  43)  ; 
where  also  Ahab  was  slain  (i  Kings  xxii.),  and 
Joram,  his  son,  was  wounded  (2  Kings  viii.  28). 
The  site  unknown,  though  supposed  by  Gesenius 
and  Keil  to  be  that  of  the  modern  Szalt,  or  es-Salt, 
situated,  according  to  Porter,  on  a  peak  of  Mount 
Gilead  (Jebel  Jil'ad),  seven  miles  south  of  the 
Jabbok  (Art.  "  Gilead,"  Dr.  Smith's  Bib.  Diet}.  Be- 
tonim  ("  pistachio  nuts,"  so  called  from  being  flat  on 
one  side,  and  bellying  out  on  the  other,  rt.  |O3,  to  be 
empty,  hollow  ;  Gen.  xliii.  1 1),  called  Bothnia  by 
Jerome  in  the  Onomasticon  ;  site  unknown.  "  Maha- 
naim  (Ma-chana-yim,  "double  camp,"  or  "  two 
hosts "),  see  Gen.  xxxii.  2,  north  of  the  Jabbok 
(Keil  ;  Clark's  Bib.  Atlas},  on  the  border  of  Ma- 
nasseh,  but  in  the  tribe  of  Gad  ;  assigned  to  the 
Merarite  Levites  (xxi.  38).  Here  Ishbosheth  was 
crowned  (2  Sam.  ii.  8,  9),  and  hither  David  fled  from 
Absalom  (2  Sam.  xvii.  24)  ;  mentioned  also  as  one 
of  Solomon's  twelve  provision  cities  (i  Kings  iv.  14). 
Now  probably  Mahneh  (Robinson,  Grove).  "  Unto 
the  border  of  Debir  "  :  There  were  two  other  places  of 
the  same  name,  one  in  the  mountainous  part  of 
Judah  (x.  39,  xv.  49)  ;  the  other  between  Jerusalem 
and  Jericho  (xv.  7).  The  h  here  before  the  name  is 
taken  as  a  sign  of  the  genitive  by  all  the  versions, 
but  is  unusual  in  the  Book  of  Joshua  ;  hence  Hitzig 
considers  it  the  error  of  a  copyist,  who  doubled  the 
^  at  the  end  of  the  preceding  word  ;  Keil  would 


214  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

make  it  part  of  the  word,  and  reads  "  Lidhbir." 
Reland  (Pal.,  734),  J.  D.  Michaelis,  and  Knobel 
would  point  the  word  Lo-dhebar,  and  identify  it 
with  the  town  of  the  same  name  (2  Sam.  ix.  4, 
xvii.  27),  whence  provisions  were  brought  to  David 
at  Mahanaim.  Whichever  conjecture  is  adopted,  the 
site  is  unknown  ;  but  if  the  rt.  of  the  word  is  "O^,  to 
lead  to  pasture,  the  town  probably  lay  in  the  grazing 
country,  on  the  high  downs  east  of  Jordan. 

Ver.  27. — P£>y3,  "in  the  valley"  i.e.,  the  valley  of 
the  Jordan,  or  the  Arabah,  which  was  along  the  east 
side  of  the  river  from  the  Wady  Heshbon,  above  the 
Dead  Sea,  to  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  formed  part  of 
the  kingdom  of  Sihon  (xii.  3).  "Betk-aram  "  (Beth- 
haram,  "house  of  the  height"),  written  Beth-Haran 
(Numb,  xxxii.  36),  now  Beit-haran  ;  in  Aramaic, 
Beth-rametha  ;  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Peor,  and  near 
the  entrance  of  the  Jordan  into  the  Dead  Sea  ;  it 
afterwards  was  called  Betharamptha,  and  was  rebuilt 
by  Herod  Antipas,  and  named  by  him  Julias,  or,  ac 
cording  to  Eusebius,  Lirias,  in  honour  of  the  wife  of 
Augustus  (Josephus,  Antiq.,  xviii.,  2,  §  I  ;  Bel.  Jud., 
iv.,  7,  §  6),  now  er-RamcJi.  "  Belh-nimrah "  (house 
of  sweet  waters,  cf.  Isa.  xv.  6),  called  Nimrah,  Numb, 
xxxii.  3,  five  miles  north  of  Libias  (Beth-Haran), 
according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onomast,}.  Per 
haps  identical  with  a  ruined  city  called  Nimrin,  south 
of  Szalt  (ver.  26),  which  Burckhardt  mentions  (Syria, 
P-  355)  as  situated  near  the  point  where  the  Wady 
Shoaib  joins  the  Jordan  (Kitto,  Encydo.  of  Bib.  Lit?) ; 
Grove  says  it  may  possibly  be  Beth-abara  (Smith's 
Bib.  Diet.,  i.,  p.  204).  " Succotli  "  (Suk-koth,  "booths"), 
rt.  ^3p,  to  weave  (Gen.  xxxiii.  17).  Site  unknown. 


VERS.  28,  29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  215 

Jerome  says,  "  Sochoth  is  to  this  day  a  city  beyond 
Jordan  in  Scythopolis"  (Qu.  Heb.  on  Gen.  xxxiii.  17). 
Burckhardt  (note  to  p.  345  [July  2nd])  speaks  of  the 
ruins  of  Sukkot,  near  where  he  crossed  the  river 
Jordan,  and  which  were  evidently  on  the  east  of 
Jordan,  and  entirely  distinct  from  the  Sakut  dis 
covered  by  Dr.  Robinson  (Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  309,  etc.), 
and  by  Van  de  Velde  (Syr.  and  Pal.,  ii.,  343),  on  the 
west  of  the  Jordan.  The  place  is  mentioned  in  con 
nection  with  the  exploits  of  Gideon,  and  was  evidently 
on  the  east  of  Jordan  (Judges  viii.  4,  5,  13-17)  ;  so 
in  Psalm  Ix.  6  (8)  it  represents  the  east  of  Jordan, 
as  Shechem  does  the  west.  "  Zap/ton "  (Tsa-phon, 
"north  "),  near  the  south  end  of  the  Sea  of  Chinnereth. 
Site  unknown.  "  The  rest  of  the  kingdom":  The 
southern  portion  of  that  kingdom  had  been  assigned 
to  the  Reuben ites  (ver.  21).  On  'p-n;!-'!  {Ti»n,  see  ver. 
23.  "  Sea  of  Cltinncretli"  cf.  xi.  2. 

Ver.  28. — "And  their  villages,"  cf.  ver.  23  (note). 

VERS.  29-31. — Inheritance  of  the  Half -Tribe  of 
Manasseh  (Heb.  Menash-sheh,  "  causing  to  for 
get,"  Gen.  xli.  5  i). 

Ver.  29. — After  JJVI,  subau.  rnru,  as  in  ver.  24' 
^np,  "  and  (it,  viz.,  the  possession  assigned  them)  was.' 
This  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  were  descendants  of 
Machir,  son  of  Manasseh,  and  their  territory  on  the 
east  of  Jordan  was  assigned  to  them  probably  on 
account  of  their  valour  (see  xvii.  i),  not,  as  Aben 
Ezra  thinks,  because  they  solicited  it,  for  no  such 
request  on  their  part  is  recorded  in  Numb,  xxxii. 
33-42. 


216  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xin. 

Ver.  30. — "  Ma/tan  aim,"  see  ver.  26  ;  it  was  on 
their  southern  border.  "All  the  kingdom  of  Og" 
comprehending  not  only  the  province  of  Bashan,  but 
Argob  and  the  northern  portion  of  Gilead  (cf.  Deut. 
iii.  13).  Din  denotes  not  "towns"  (Auth.  Vers.),  but 
"tent-villages"  properly  places  where  one  lives  and 
dwells,  from  njn,  life.  The  Bedouins  of  the  present 
day  use  the  same  word  for  their  own  villages 
(Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  Append.,  §  84).  "Jair" 
(Ya-'ir,  "  whom  He  [God]  enlightens  "),  was  descended 
on  the  father's  side  from  Judah,  on  the  mother's  from 
Manasseh  (i  Chron.  ii.  21,  22).  He  was  the  con 
queror  of  Argob  (Deut.  iii.  14).  "  Threescore  cities" 
(cf.  Deut.  iii.  4)  ;  perhaps,  though  at  first  villages, 
they  afterwards  grew  into  cities.  In  I  Chron.  ii.  22 
Jair  is  said  to  have  had  three-and-twenty  cities  (&~V} 
in  Gilead  (cf.  Numb,  xxxii.  41),  which  would  seem 
in  i  Kings  iv.  13  to  be  distinguished  from  these 
sixty  cities  in  Argob. 

Ver.  $i.—"Half  Gilead;'  (lit.  "half  of  the 
Gilead,"  cf.  xii.  2),  viz.,  the  northern  half,  see  ver.  25. 
Ashtaroth  and  Edrei,  see  xii.  4.  ">ff?  "  (belonged)  to 
the  children,  etc.  (even)  to  the  half  of  the  children  of 
Machir"  for  the  other  half  received  their  inheritance 
on  the  west  of  Jordan  (xviii.  2,  etc.).  The  name 
Machir  here  supersedes  that  of  Manasseh  used  in 
ver.  29,  a  token  of  the  power  which  the  descendants 
of  Machir  had  attained. 

Ver.  32. —  n^x,  "these,"  not,  as  the  Sept.  DUTCH,  re 
ferring  to  the  persons  to  whom  the  possessions  were 
assigned,  but  to  the  possessions  themselves  ;  Vulg. 
"  hanc  possessionem,"  which  is  confirmed  by  xiv.  I, 
xix.  51.  "  The  plains  of  Moab  "  (Auth.  Vers.),  rather 


VEK.  33-]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  217 

"  the  dry  regions  of  Moab"  the  sunk  district  in  the 
tropical  depths  of  the  Jordan  valley,  where  the 
Israelites  had  their  encampment  (Numb,  xxxiii.  49), 
and  which  took  its  name  from  that  of  the  great 
valley  itself  (Arabah)  :  see  Art.  "  Moab,"  Smith's  Bib. 
Diet.,  ii.,  p.  392.  131  iriyo  (lit.  "  beyond  tke  Jordan — 
Jericho"  i.e.,  on  the  other  side  of  that  part  of  Jordan 
which  skirted  the  territory  of  Jericho  ;  Vulg.  "  trans 
Jordanem  contra  Jericho  ;"  Revis.  Vers.  "  beyond 
Jordan  at  Jericho ;"  the  same  form  of  expression 
occurs  in  xvi.  I,  xx.  8  ;  also  in  Numb.  xxii.  I, 
xxvi.  3,  63,  xxxiii.  48,  50.  These  trans-Jordanic 
tribes  were  eventually  carried  into  captivity  by  Pul 
and  Tiglath-pileser,  and  placed  in  the  districts  on 
and  about  the  river  Khabur,  in  the  upper  part  of 
Mesopotamia  (i  Chron.  v.  26). 

Ver.  33. — A  repetition  of  ver.  14,  and  omitted  by 
the  Sept. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Commencement  of  the  Account  of  the  Distribution  of 
the  cis-Jordanic  Canaan  among  the  Nine  Tribes 
and  the  Half-  Tribe  of  Manasseh,  which  terminates 
at  xix.  51.  ( Vers.  1-5  are  introductory^) 

Ver.  i. — n?Nl,  see  xiii.  32.  The  account,  however, 
of  the  distribution  does  not  begin  till  the  fifteenth 
chapter.  •'Pnj,  "  distributed  for  a  possession"  followed 
by  an  accus.  of  person  and  of  thing  (§  139,  i). 
The  distribution,  according  to  the  command  in 
Numb,  xxxiv.  16-29,  was  to  be  made  by  the  high 


218  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xiv. 

priest  Eleazar  and  by  Joshua.  Eleazar*  ('El-'a-zar, 
"  whom  God  helps  ")  is  named  here,  and  in  xvii.  4,  xix. 
5  i,  xxi.  i  ;  Numb,  xxxiv.  17,  before  Joshua,  perhaps, 
as  the  representative  of  the  Divine  government  over 
Israel  ;  so  in  Numb,  xxvii.  I  8-2  I  Joshua  is  directed 
to  act  in  accordance  with  his  direction.2  "And  the 
heads  (of  the  houses)  of  the  fathers  of  the  tribes  of 
the  sons  of  Israeli'  n?.  which  is  here  omitted  after 
•c\xn,  is  supplied  in  Exod.  vi.  14  ;  Numb.  vii.  2  ; 
i  Chron.  v.  24,  vii.  2,  7,  40,  ix.  13.  Except  in 
the  first  book  of  Chronicles,  where  probably  it  is 
borrowed  from  an  ancient  source,  the  phrase  does  not 
occur  except  in  the  Pentateuch  and  Joshua.  *?  is 
used  before  ^2  to  prevent  the  repetition  of  the  con 
strue,  state  (cf.  xix.  5  i;  Ges.,  6>.,  §  1 1  5,  2,  b}.  Each 
tribe  had  its  own  prince  (Numb,  xxxiv.  1 8). 

Ver.  2. — "By  lot  (was)  their  inheritance"  (Auth. 
Vers.),  but  ^nia  being  in  the  construe,  form,  Vatablus, 
Keil,  and  Rosenm.  properly  connect  the  words  with 
OH9  in  the  preceding  verse,  and  render  "  by  the  lot  of 
their  inheritance,"  i.e.,  by  casting  lots  for  the  appor 
tionment  of  their  inheritance.  T2,  "  through  "  (by 
means  of),  where  "V  loses  its  force  as  a  noun  (Ges., 
Lex.,  p.  330):  More  commonly  it  is  used  with  rb$ 
(see  Exod.  iv.  i  3),  and  cf.  the  use  of  aTrocrreXXco  with 
Sta  (Rev.  i.  i).  For  the  command  referred  to  see 
Numb.  xxvi.  52-6,xxxiii.  54,  xxxiv.  13. 


1  He  was  Aaron's  third  son  (Exod.  vi.  23,  25),  and  succeeded 
his  father  in  the  high  priesthood  (Numb.  xx.  26-28  ;  Deut.  x. 
6.).  His  death  is  recorded  in  Josh.  xxiv.  33. 

'-'  On  the  other  hand,  Moses  is  named  before  Aaron,  except 
where  priority  of  age  is  indicated,  as  in  Exod.  vi.  20,  26  ; 
Numb.  iii.  i. 


VER.  2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  219 


not,  as  in  the  Sept.,  governed  by  njy,  but  by  n.3  in 
ver.  i,  "zvhick  they  distributed  for  inheritance  to," 
etc.  :  In  Numb,  xxxiv.  I  3  the  same  words  isn  rUK?;n^ 
are  preceded  by  nr6,  and  so  here  in  some  MSS.  and 
editions,  though  probably  it  is  an  interpolation  of 
a  later  date.  On  the  distribution  of  the  land  by 
lot  see  Numb.  xxvi.  53,  etc.  Calvin  and  Clericus 
remark  that  the  lot  determined  the  position  only  of 
the  inheritances,  but  left  their  exact  dimensions  to  be 
afterwards  settled  according  to  the  size  of  the  tribes 
to  which  they  fell  ;  see,  e.g.,  the  alteration  made  in 
the  extent  of  Judah's  territory  (ch.  xix.  1-9).  How 
the  lots  were  drawn  is  nowhere  stated.  There  may 
have  been  two  urns  containing,  the  one,  descriptions 
of  the  several  inheritances,  and  the  other,  the  names 
of  the  nine  and  a-half  tribes  ;  and  the  drawing  from 
each  may  have  been  simultaneous  ;  or  the  prince  of 
each  tribe  may  have  drawn  in  turn  from  the  one  urn 
containing  the  descriptions  of  the  inheritances.  The 
reason  of  this  decision  by  lot  was  not  only  to  prevent 
jealousies  and  disputes  between  one  tribe  and  another 
(Prov.  xviii.  I  8),  but  that  each  tribe  might  be  satis 
fied  that  its  inheritance  had  been  assigned  to  it 
by  God  Himself  (Prov.  xvi.  33).  It  may  be  also 
remarked  that  the  accordance  in  many  particulars 
between  the  prophecies  of  Jacob  and  Moses  respect 
ing  the  inheritance  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  (Gen.  xlviii., 
xlix.  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.),  and  the  distribution  of  the 
territory  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Joshua,  is  a  proof 
of  the  inspiration  of  those  prophecies.  Among 
heathen  nations  a  like  custom  prevailed  in  the 
division  of  territory  among  conquerors  or  colonists 
(see  Herod.,  v.,  77;  vi.,  100;  Thucyd.,  iii.,  50; 


220  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xiv. 

Cic.,  Epist.  ad  Div.,  xi.,  20,  "  sorte  agros  legionibus 
assignare  "). 

Vers.  3-4. — Ver.  3  gives  a  reason  why  the  land 
was  to  be  apportioned  among  nine  and  a-half  tribes 
only,  viz.,  because  two  and  a-half  tribes  had  received 
their  inheritance,  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  but, 
inasmuch  as  the  tribe  of  Levi  received  no  share  of 
territory,  ver.  4  declares  that  the  number  nine  and  a- 
half  was  made  up  by  the  division  of  the  tribe  of 
Joseph  into  two  tribes,  viz.,  Manasseh  and  Ephraim. 

Ver.  4. — Mnr*6l. :  The  1  is  not  here  =  "  there 
fore  "  (Auth.  Ver.),  but  ==  and,  or  with  vh  =  neither. 
"Cities  to  dwell  in"  :  Cf.  Numb.  xxxv.  3,  where  Keil 
remarks  that  the  Levites  had  not  the  whole  of  the 
cities  as  their  own  property,  but  as  many  houses  in 
them  as  their  necessities  required,  which  houses 
could  be  redeemed  (Lev.  xxv.  32-33),  if  sold  at 
any  time,  and  reverted  to  them  without  com 
pensation  in  the  year  of  Jubilee,  even  if  not  redeemed 
before  ;  but  any  portion  of  the  towns,  which  was  not 
taken  possession  of  by  them,  together  with  the 
fields  and  villages,  continued  the  property  of  those 
tribes  to  which  they  had  been  assigned  by  lot 
(see  also  his  note  on  xxi.  12).  "  And  their 
suburbs "  (Auth.  Vers.,  Luther,  and  Vulg.  "  subur- 
bana  "),  rather,  "  their  pasture  grounds"  i.e.,  the  dis 
tricts  around  their  cities  in  which  their  cattle  might 
graze,  from  dha,  to  drive,  to  drive  out.  For  their 
extent  see  Numb.  xxxv.  4-5.  With  the  m.  surf.  DH 
referring  to  D""W  cf.  xiii.  23  (note).  "For  their  cattle 
and  for  their  (other)  possessions " :  The  latter  word 
(Heb.  (VJj?  used  here  coll.)  is  rendered  by  the  Vulg. 
"  pecora  "  (lesser  cattle),  Sept.  KTTJVV),  as  by  Chald. 


VERS.  5,  6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  221 

Vers.,  but  by  the  Syr.  and  Arab.  "  possessions,"  from 
ru|5,  to  possess  (cf.  Gen.  xxxiv.  23  ;  Numb.  xxxv. 
3,  where  ti'-ISl,  "substance,"  is  used  for  it,  as  here  by 
A.  V.).  The  Levites  had  no  territorial  inheritance, 
like  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  in  order  that  their  influence 
on  the  nation  at  large  might  be  increased. 

Ver.  5. — "  As  Jehovah — Moses,"  cf.  ver.  2.  "  And 
tJiey  portioned  out  (divided,  A.  V.)  the  land''  This  is 
a  general  statement  relating  to  the  distribution  of  the 
land,  for  we  learn  from  chapter  xviii.,  etc.,  that  not  all 
the  nine  and  a-half  tribes  received  at  once  their 
inheritance. 

VERS.   6-15. — Before  the   Casting  of  the  Lots  an 
Inheritance  is  assigned  to   Caleb. 

Ver.  6. — "And  the  children  (sons)  of  Jttdah" 
doubtless  not  all  the  tribe,  but  the  principal  men, 
especially  Caleb's  relatives,  whom  he  took  with  him 
as  able  to  testify  to  the  integrity  of  his  conduct.  "In 
("in  the"  §  109,  3]  Gilgal"  i.e.,  the  Gilgal  near 
Jericho  (ix.  6,  note).  "Caleb"  (Ka-lebh),1  " son  of 
fcphunnch"'2  :  A  prince  of  Judah,  and  one  of  those 
appointed  to  portion  out  Canaan  (Numb,  xxxiv.  19). 
Keil  thinks  that  he  was  the  same  as  the  Caleb  in 
i  Chron.  ii.  18,  a  descendant  of  (~}2)  Hezron,  the 
son  of  Pharaz,  and  grandson  of  Judah.  The  house 

1  Perhaps  "  dog,"  i q.  2?3,  from  2?3  (unused),  to  bark  (Ges.). 
and  the  name  may  indicate  fidelity,  courage,  vigilance  ;    or 
"  seizing  vehemently,"  from   ^!?3  (Fiirst),  hence  "  bold,  im 
petuous." 

2  "Y*4hun-nek"  (perhaps  meaning  "for  whom  a  way  is 
prepared,"  see  Pual  of  H5S,  Ges.,  Lex.},  neither  his  father  nor 
ancestors  are  named. 


222  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xiv. 

of  Caleb  may  have  been  incorporated  into  the  house 
of  Hezron  ;  but  doubtless  the  genealogy  in  I  Chron. 
ii.,  iv.  is  involved  in  much  obscurity.  "  The  Kenesite" 
(the  Qeniz-zite,  hunter,  rt.  TJj5,  to  hunt),  cf.  Numb, 
xxxii.  12.  The  term  may  imply  that  Caleb  was  a 
descendant  of  Kenez  ;  and  as  that  was  a  name  borne 
by  the  dukes  of  Edom  (Gen.  xxxvi.  15,42;  i  Chron. 
i.  53),  and  as  in  the  genealogy  of  the  family  of 
Caleb  (i  Chron.  i.,  ii.,  iv.)  there  occur  also  other 
Edomitish  names,  e.g.,  Shobal  (i  Chron.  ii.  50,  52  ;  cf. 
Gen.  xxxvi.  20-23)  ;  Korah  (i  Chron.  ii.  43  ;  Gen. 
xxxvi.  5,  1 6);  Ithran  (i  Chron.  i.  41;  Gen.  xxxvi.  26); 
Elah  (i  Chron.  iv.  15  ;  Gen.  xxxvi.  41)  ;  it  has  been 
surmised  that  the  family  of  Caleb  was  of  Edomite 
extraction,  and  incorporated  as  proselytes  into  the 
family  of  Judah  (see  Smith's  Bibl.  Diet.,  Art.  "  Caleb," 
vol.  i.,  p.  242).  On  the  other  hand,  as  Esau  and  Judah 
were  alike  of  Israelitish  descent,  the  same  names 
might  possibly  be  found  among  the  descendants  of 
both.  'xn  trx,  "the  man  of  God"  =  Nr?3  (cf. 
I  Kings  xiii.  I,  1 8),  and  so  rendered  here  in  the 
Chald.  ;  the  same  title  is  given  to  Moses  in  Deut. 
xxxiii.,  i  ;  Ezra  iii.  2,  and  in  the  inscription  of  Psalm 
xc.  '»nn'S  by,  lit.  "  about  my  and  your  affairs}*  i.e., 
"  concerning  me  and  thee  "  (Auth.  Vers.,  Sept.,  and 
Vulg.).  For  the  promise  referred  to  see  Numb, 
xiv.  24,  30.  The  express  mention  of  Joshua  refutes 
the  assertion  of  Knobel  here  that  he  was  not  one  of 
the  spies.  "  Kadesh-barnea?  x.  4 1 . 

Ver.  7. — 3£W  "  and  I  brought  back"  followed  by 
an   accusative   both   of    person  and  thing   (cf.   xxii. 

1  Properly  "turnings,"  from  "HN,  to  bend,  to  turn. 


VERS.  8-io.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  223 

32.)  rzn^-Qi;,  "  in  (lit.  "with  ")  my  heart"  i.e.,  accord 
ing  to  the  best  of  my  convictions,  without  fear  of 
man,  or  regard  to  any  one's  favour.  The  rendering 
of  the  Sept.,  Kara  rov  vovv  avrov,  "  according  to  his 
mind,"  i.e..,  the  mind  or  wish  of  Moses,  though  sup 
ported  by  one  MS.  of  Kennicott,  and  approved  by 
Clericus,  is  rightly  rejected  by  Maurer  as  containing 
a  most  improbable  statement. 

Ver.  8.  —  "My  brethren"  i.e.,  the  rest  of  the  spies, 
of  course  with  the  exception  of  Joshua,  to  whom  he 
was  speaking.  Vppn,  an  Aramaism  for  -lopn  (§75, 
v.  17),  from  nprp,  i.q.  DDS,  to  melt  (cf.  ii.  ii).1  '•nx^p 
"nnx,  construe,  praegnans  (§  141),  subaud.  nzbh  after 
the  verb,  "  /  fully  followed?  lit.  "  fulfilled  to  follow" 
(cf.  Numb,  xxxii.  I  I,  12  ;  Deut.  i.  36). 

Ver.  9.  —  "Moses  sivare  "  :  Keil  thinks  that,  as  we 
do  not  elsewhere  read  of  this  oath  of  Moses,  it  is 
here  for  the  first  time  recorded  ;  bu£  more  probably 
the  oath  of  God,  as  made  known  through  Moses,  is 
referred  to  (see  Numb.  xiv.  23,  24,  30;  Deut.  i.  34-36, 
in  which  latter  verse  [ver.  36]  a  like  expression  to  that 
in  this  occurs,  viz.,  "  tlie  land  that  he  hath  trod  upon" 
in  allusion,  evidently,  to  the  territory  around  Hebron). 
On  KVDK,  to  denote  strong  affirmation,  see  §  155, 
2,f,  2nd  par. 

Ver.  I  o.  —  "Jehovah  hath  kept  me  alive  "  :  Caleb's 
piety  appears  in  his  thus  attributing  his  preservation 
not  to  his  own  care,  or  strength  of  constitution,  but 
to  the  kind  providence  of  Jehovah.  "  Forty-and-five 
years  "  :  These  are  dated  from  the  autumn  of  the 


1  According  to  Ewald  (Lehrb.,  §  142,  a),  VDOn  is  really  the 
regular  and  earliest  form,  which  the  Hebrew  lost,  but  the 
Chaldee  retained. 


224  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xiv. 

second  year  after  the  exodus.  The  Israelites  wan 
dered  thirty-eight  years  in  the  wilderness  after  that 
date,  and  were  occupied  seven  years  in  subduing 
Canaan  (xi.  1 8,  note),  which  seven  years  are  here 
reckoned  in  their  wanderings,  as  they  had  not  during 
them  any  fixed  settlements,  "^n  TJ/X,  "  during  wJtick 
Israel  walked":  On  "C;x.  in  this  sense  see  Ewald, 
Lehrb.,  §  321,  c.  ;  it  refers  to  the  forty-five  years. 

Ver.  1 1. — '•anw,  "I  am  yet"  (§  100,  5).  ns>»  -  •  •  DV?, 
"  in  the  day  that  Moses  sent  me"  infin.  construc 
tive,  with  subject  and  object,  the  latter  being 
unusually  placed  after  the  infin.  (§  133,  3,  Rem.). 
"TO  :  Being  followed  by  a  monosyllable,  its  accent  is 
retracted  (§  29,  3,  b}.  Niztt  nNV  :  Used  to  express 
the  performance  of  active  duty  (cf.  Numb,  xxvii.  17; 
Deut.  xxxi.  2  ;  i  Kings  iii.  7).  Caleb,  like  Moses 
(Deut.  xxxiv.  7),  was  made,  on  account  of  his  fidelity, 
an  especial  exception  to  the  infirmities  incident  to 
old  age  (Psalm  xc.  10). 

Ver.  12. — m^  for  in,  imper.  with  n  parag.  (§  66, 
i).  "  This  mountain,  i.e.,  the  mountainous  country 
around  Hebron  (xi.  2,  xx.  7).  "  Whereof  Jehovah  spake 
in  that  day":  We  may,  therefore,  conclude  that  Jeho 
vah's  promise  in  Numb,  xiv.,  Deut.  i.,  to  give  Caleb 
an  inheritance  in  Canaan  had  special  reference  to 
Hebron.  "  For  tJiou  didst  hear  in  that  day"  (viz., 
what  Jehovah  spake) :  The  second  *3  is  not  =  "  that  " 
(OTL)  or  "  Jiow "  (Auth.  Vers.),  but  is  co-ordinate 
(Keil),  and  gives  a  farther  reason  why  the  mountain 
should  be  given  to  him,  "  for  (because)  the  Anakim 
are  there  "...  (cf.  the  Sept.  and  Vulg.).  Joshua 
himself  had  been  one  of  the  spies  (Numb.  xiii.  8),  and, 
therefore,  did  not  learn  merely  by  report  that  there 


VERS.  13-15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  225 

were  Anakim  in  Hebron.  ^>-ix,  "perhaps''  but  here 
expressing  hope  and  desire,  as  in  Gen.  xvi.  2 ;  Amos 
v.  15.  TUX  for  'Fix,  "with  me"  (§  103,  i,  Rem.  i), 
subau.  nvi%  D^trrfm.,  "  and  I  drive  (or  root) 
them  out":  The  perfect  here  expresses  assurance 
(§  126,  4).  How  this  declaration  of  Caleb  is  recon 
cilable  with  xi.  21,  22,  see  note  there.  His  address 
(vers.  6- 1 2),  while  removed  alike  from  false  modesty 
and  self-presumption,  blends  gratitude  with  firm  con 
fidence  in  God. 

Ver.  13. — "And  Joshua  blessed  him,"  i.e.,  invoked 
a  blessing  upon  him,  prayed  God  to  prosper  him. 
"Hebron"  (x.  3),  not  only  the  city  so  called,  but  the 
neighbourhood  ;  the  city  was  afterwards  appointed  a 
city  of  refuge  (xx.  7),  and  assigned  to  the  Levites 
(xxi.  1 1). 

Ver.  14. — The  expressions  "  Kenezite"  and  "God 
of  Israel "  have  been  thought  to  indicate  that  Caleb 
was  a  foreigner  and  a  proselyte  (see  note  on  ver.  6). 

Ver.  15. — "Before"  (D'Jfl?),  *.*.,  prior  to  the  date 
at  which  this  book  was  written,  but  not  necessarily 
from  the  time  of  the  city's  origin.  " Kirjath-arba  " 
(Qir-yath-'Ar-ba',  "city  of  Arba  "),  see  note  on  x.  3. 
i?a-iN,  "  hero  of  Baal "  (Fiirst),  for  ^a^x  ;  like  ^xnx, 
"  the  lion  (i.e.,  hero)  of  God  ; "  or,  according  to  Ges. 
(Lex?),  perhaps  "homo  quadratus."  bnjPI  Dnxn,  "  tJie 
greatest  man"  perhaps  in  size  and  strength,  as  well 
as  authority  and  renown.  The  adjective  with  the  art. 
has  here  the  force  of  a  superlative  (§  119,  2),  and 
tnx  =  E"X,  which  is  more  properly  used  of  an  in 
dividual  (cf.  Eccles.  vii.  28).  The  strange  rendering  of 
Jerome  " A  damns  maximns  ibi  inter  Enakim  situs  est" 
is  based  on  a  Jewish  tradition  in  the  Beresh-Rabba, 

15 


226  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

that  Kirjath-arba  means  "  city  of  the  four,"  because 
Adam,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  were  buried  there. 
"And  the  land  had  rest"  etc.  (cf.  xi.  23):  The 
Canaanites  were  so  far  subdued  as  to  be  unable  to 
offer  an  effectual  opposition  to  the  partition  of  the 
land,  of  which  the  author  commences  an  account  in 
the  following  chapter. 


CHAPTERS  XV.— XVII. 
T/te  Lots  belonging  to  Judah  and  Joseph. 

THE  account  of  the  distribution,  which  was  inter 
rupted  at  the  end  of  xiv.  1-5,  is  here  resumed,  and  it 
^s  in  accordance  with  the  preference  given  by  Jacob 
in  his  prophetic  blessing  (Gen.  xlix.)  to  Judah  and 
Joseph,  that  their  descendants  first  received  their 
share  of  the  conquered  territory  (xv.-xvii.).  How, 
says  Kitto,  the  lot  was  taken  at  the  first  division  we 
do  not  know,  but  it  was  probably  the  same  in  principle 
as  in  the  mode  followed  with  respect  to  the  remaining 
seven  tribes  (xviii.).  We  may,  therefore,  conclude 
that,  when  this  first  conquered  portion  of  the  land 
had  been  surveyed  and  found  sufficient  to  furnish 
three  cantons,  all  the  tribes  cast  lots  for  them,  and 
they  fell  to  Judah,  Ephraim,  and  the  half-tribe  of 
Manasseh.  The  difference  was,  that  at  the  first 
division  the  question  was  not  only  what  lot  should 
be  had,  but  whether  any  should  at  present  be  ob 
tained  by  a  particular  tribe  ;  at  the  second  division 
the  former  question  was  only  to  be  determined,  there 
being  then  as  many  lots  as  there  were  tribes  unpro 
vided  for  (Illust.  Bible}. 


VERS.  2,  3.]  THE  BOOK    OP  JOSHUA.  227 


CHAPTER   XV. 

TJte  Inheritance  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah  ("  praised," 
Gen.  xlix.  8  ;  see  irr).  Its  General  Boundaries 
(1-12).  Renewed  Mention  of  Caleb's  Inheritance, 
because  included  in  that  of  Judah  (13-20).  A 
List  of  the  Towns  of  Judah  (21-63). 

Ver.  i.  (The  General  Position  of  'Judah 's  Territory]. 
— 131  *rn,  "  and  there  was  the  lot  to  the  tribe  of  the  sons 
of  Judah  according  to  their  families,  toward  the  frontier 
of  Edom,  toivard  the  desert  of  Zin  soutJiward,  on  the 
extreme  south."  In  xvi.  I,  xix.  I,  vn  is  expressed 
by  N>'.1,  "  there  came  out."  "  By  (according  to)  their 
families"  see  vii.  1 4.  "  Edom  "  ran  parallel  with  the 
desert  of  Zin  on  the  east,  and  "  Zin  "  (not  to  be  con 
founded  with  "  Sin  ")  was  the  north-east  part  of  the 
great  desert  of  Paran.  tpvi  n>*p»,  lit.  "from  the 
extremity  of  the  south"  i.e.,  on  the  extreme  south  ; 
see  on  \Q  Ges.,  Lex.  (3),  c.,  p.  483. 

Vers.  2-4.  The  SoutJicrn  Boundary, — corresponding 
generally  with  that  of  Canaan  (Numb,  xxxiv.  3-5), 
and  including  what  was  afterwards  the  territory  of 
Simeon  (xix.). 

Ver.  2. — '^rrtP,  "from  the  bay  (tongue)  which 
looketh  (turneth)  southward"  (Auth.  Vers.),  i.e.,  from 
that  southern  point  of  the  Dead  Sea  which  now  ter 
minates  in  a  salt  marsh  (cf.  Isa.  xi.  15,  "  tongue  of  the 
Egyptian  Sea  "). 

Ver.  3. — "And  it  went  out  to  the  south  side  to  (of) 
Maaleh-Acrabbim"  :  On  the  composition  of  the  par 
ticles  h,  |p,  !?N,  see  §  154,  2,1).  "  Ma-a-leh  'Aq-rab 


228  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

him"  "the  ascent  of  'Aq-rabbim,"  the  "scorpion  pass"1 
between  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  and  Zin, 
perhaps  the  steep  pass  Nakb  es  Safdh  (Pass  of  the 
Bare  Rock),  by  which  the  final  step  is  made  from  the 
desert  to  the  level  of  the  actual  land  of  Palestine 
(Grove,  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  i.,  p.  42).  "And  passed 
along  (went  across)  to  Zin  "  :  n  local  (cf.  Numb. 
xxxiv.  4).  "  Qa-d/ies/i-Bar-nc-  a"  see  x.  41  (note). 
"  Chets-ron  "  (from  "ivn,  to  enclose),  perhaps  a  collec 
tion  of  nomad-hamlets,  Dnvn,  Deut.  ii.  23  ;  site 
unknown,  rrnx,  "  to  'Addar  "  (rt.  TIN,  to  be  wide), 
perhaps  one  of  the  nomad  hamlets  above  referred  to, 
for  in  the  parallel  passage  (Numb,  xxxiv.  4)  this  and 
the  foregoing  word  are  joined.  It  is  possibly  identical 
with  the  modern  Ain-el  Kudcirdt,  on  the  north  side 
of  the  ridge,  between  Canaan  and  the  desert  (Robin 
son,  i.,  p.  280).  nD3),  "  and  turned  itself"  Niph.  of 
32D.  "Towards  haq-Qar-qa-a"  (with  art.  and  n  loc.), 
lit.  "  the  low-lying  flat,"  eScu^o?  (Symm.),  not  men 
tioned  in  Numb,  xxxiv.  4,  nor  elsewhere  in  Scripture, 
but  Eusebius  (Onomast.}  speaks  of  'A/cap/cots,  and 
calls  it  a  village.  The  Sept.  has  Kara  Sucr/xag 
KaSi^s,  and  may  have  read  tiHi?  n£\ 

Ver.  4.  —  "  Toward*  Ats-mdn"  (robust,  rt.  D>T,  to  be 
strong;  see  Numb,  xxxiv.  5)  :  Its  site  unknown,  though 
the  later  Jewish  Targum  would  identify  it  with  Kesam, 
the  modern  Kasaimeh,  a  group  of  springs  at  a  short 
distance  to  the  west  of  Ain-el  Kudeirat.  Grove  (Bib. 
Diet.}  thinks  it  may  possibly  be  another  fcrm  of  the 
word  Heshmon  (xv.  27).  Eusebius  and  Jerome 


a  scorpion.      It  is  found  in  great  numbers  in  the 
Jordan  valley  below  Jericho  (Von  Raumer,  p.  103). 


VERS.  5,  6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  229 

mention  it  in  the  Onomast.,  but  evidently  it  was  not 
actually  known  to  them.  "  The  torrent  (water-course) 
of  Egypt"  i.e.,  the  Wady  el  Arish,  on  the  confines  of 
Egypt  and  Palestine,  which  empties  itself  into  the 
Mediterranean.  "And  the  goings  out  of  the  boundary 
were  to  the  sea  "  :  D*  here  means  the  Mediterranean. 
For  the  sing,  nvi,  with  a  plural  noun,  see  §  147,  a, 
and  cf.  xi.  22.  The  last  words  of  the  verse,  "this 
s/iall  be  your  southern  boundary"  refer  to  Numb, 
xxxiv  .  2-5,  and  show  that  the  southern  boundary  of 
Judah  was  also  that  of  the  land  promised  to  the 
Israelites. 

Ver.  5  *  (The  Eastern  Boundary}. — This  was  the 
whole  length  of  the  Salt  Sea  to  the  end  (i.e.,  the 
mouth)  of  the  Jordan,  n^,  "  the  extreme  edge  or 
end,"  from  ny|5,  "  to  cut  off  the  end,"  here  denoting 
the  point  of  junction  with  the  Dead  Sea. 

Ver.  5^-11  (The  Northern  Boundary}. — "And  the 
boundary  of  tJie  side  northwards  (was)  from  the  tongue 
of  the  (salt)  sea  from  the  extremity  (i.e.,  the  mouth)  of 
Jordan."  The  northern  boundary  of  Judah  corre 
sponded  with  the  southern  boundary  of  Benjamin, 
traced  in  the  opposite  direction  (xviii.  15-19). 

Ver.  6. — "  Beth-cJiogh-lah"  "  house  of  partridge  " 
(Ges.)  :  Jerome  (Onotnasfy  identifies  it  with  the 
threshing  floor  of  Atad,  between  the  Jordan  and 
Jericho,  the  ruins  of  which  are  probably  still  to  be  seen 
at  or  near  a  magnificent  spring  called  Ain-Hajla  and 
Kusr-Hajla  (Grove).  It  stood  on  the  border  of  Ben 
jamin,  as  well  as  of  Judah,  and  was  assigned  to  the 
former  (xviii.  21).  "Bcth-hd-a-rd-bhah"  (house  of  the 
desert  plain) :  Doubtless  so  called  because  it  lay  in  the 
wilderness  (midh-bar)  of  Judah  (ver.  61).  In  xviii.  18 


230  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

it  is  simply  called  Arabah,  and  in  xviii.  22  is  reckoned 
a  Benjamite  city.  It  probably  stood  on  the  border 
between  the  two  tribes;  now  Kaffr  Hajla.  "  TJie 
stone  of  Bohan" :  Perhaps  erected  to  commemorate 
some  exploit  by  a  Reubenite  leader  in  the  wars  of 
Joshua  (cf.  I  Sam.  vii.  12);  it  was  on  the  border 
of  Benjamin  as  well  as  of  Judah  (xviii.  17),  and 
apparently  on  the  slope  of  a  hill,  but  the  site 
unknown. 

Ver.  7. — "To  Debhir":  Not  the  town  mentioned  in 
vers.  15,  49,  x.  38,  nor  that  in  Gad  (xiii.  26),  but 
perhaps  to  be  sought  in  the  Wady  Dabir,  about  half 
way  between  Jericho  and  Jerusalem  (Keil).  "  Valley 
of  'A-khor,"  vii.  24.  "  And  northward  turning'  toward 
(the)  Gilgal "  :  According  to  Keil,  Gilgal  is  here  the 
same  as  Geliloth  in  xviii.  1 7  ;  but  others,  as  Knobel, 
identify  it  with  the  Gilgal  in  iv.  19.  The  name 
Geliloth  (says  Grove)  never  occurs  again  in  this 
locality,  and  it,  therefore,  seems  probable  that  Gilgal 
is  the  right  reading.  Many  glimpses  of  the  Jordan 
valley  are  obtained  through  the  hills  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  descent  from  Olivet  to  Jericho,  along 
which  the  boundary  in  question  appears  to  have 
run ;  and  it  is  very  possible  that  from  the  ascent  of 
Adhummim,  Gilgal  appeared  through  one  of  these 
gaps  in  the  distance,  over  against  the  spectator,  and 
thus  furnished  a  point  by  which  to  indicate  the 
direction  of  the  line  at  that  part  "  (Art.  in  Smith's 
Bib.  Die.,  vol.  i.,  p.  66 1).  "  IV hick  (is)  over  against  tJie 
ascent  of '  Adliummim"  :  Probably  the  Pass  of  Jericho, 
leading  up  from  the  Jordan  valley  to  Jerusalem. 
According  to  Jerome  (Onom^  "A-dhum-mim"  (red 
places)  alludes  to  the  blood  shed  there  by  robbers, 


VER.  7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  231 

or  according  to  Stanley  (Sin.  and  Pa/.,  424,  note  4) 
to  the  red  colour  of  the  hair  of  some  Arab  tribe 
which  infested  the  pass  (cf.  Sept.  cW/Sacris  Trvppajv). 
Here  was  the  scene  of  the  parable  of  the  good 
Samaritan  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal. ,  424;  Trench  On 
Par,,p.  307-8);  and  the  defence  of  travellers  through 
this  pass  led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Order  of 
the  Templars,  A.D.  1 1 18  (VVilke's  Hist.,  p.  9).  Keil 
supposes  that  the  name  refers  to  the  red  colour  of 
the  rocks,  but  Dean  Stanley  says,  "  There  are  no 
red  rocks,  as  some  have  fancied,  in  order  to  make 
out  a  derivation.  The  whole  pass  is  white  limestone" 
(Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  424,  note  4).  "  On  the  south  side  of 
the  watercourse"  :  Now  the  gorge  of  the  Wady  Kelt 
(Robinson,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  p.  558).  "'En-she-mesh" 
(fountain  of  the  sun):  About  a  mile  below  Bethany, 
on  the  road  to  Jericho,  now  perhaps  Ain-Haud  or 
Ain-Chot,  "  the  well  of  the  apostles."  The  aspect 
of  Ain-Haud  is  such  that  the  rays  of  the  sun  are  on 
it  the  whole  day  (Grove).  'En-roglicl,  "  fountain  of 
the  fuller,"  rt.  hr\,  to  tread  :  Probably  now  "  the  foun 
tain  of  the  Virgin,"  near  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  which 
supplies  the  pool  of  Siloam  (Dr.  Bonar's  Land  of 
Promise,  App.  v.).  Here  Jonathan  and  Ahimaaz 
concealed  themselves  after  the  rebellion  of  Absalom, 
in  order  to  gain  news  for  David  (2  Sam.  xvii.  17), 
and  near  it  Adonijah  held  his  feast  (i  Kings  i.  9). 
Keil,  after  Robinson  and  others,  identifies  it  with  the 
well  of  Job  or  Nehemiah,  at  the  south-east  corner  of 
Jerusalem,  where  the  valleys  of  Hinnom  and  Kedron 
unite  ;  but  see  forcible  reasons  against  this  view  in 
the  work  of  Dr.  Bonar,  above  referred  to,  quoted 
by  Grove  (Art.  Bib.  Die.,  i.,  p.  558). 


2.32  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

Ver.  8. — "And  the  border  went  up  into  the  ravine 
of  the  son  of  Hinnom  "  :  This  ravine1  is  first  men 
tioned  here,  and  next  in  xviii.  16;  written  "ravine 
of  the  sons  of  Hinnom"  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10;  Jer. 
xix.  2,  etc.),  and  "ravine  of  Hinnom"  (Neh.  xi.  30). 
It  surrounded  Jerusalem  on  the  south  and  west. 
Stanley  supposes  that  it  derived  its  name  from 
Hinnom,  an  ancient  hero  who  encamped  in  it  (Sin. 
and  Pal.,  p.  172);  but  Hitzig  and  Bottcher  regard 
Hinnom  as  an  appellative  =  "  moaning,"  "  wailing," 
in  allusion  to  the  cries  of  the  innocent  victims  there 
offered  to  Moloch,  and  to  the  drums  beaten  to  drown 
those  cries.  Tophet,  at  the  south-east  of  the  ravine, 
was  the  scene  of  those  sacrifices  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  3, 
xxxiii.  6),  and  was  defiled  by  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii. 
10).  The  later  Jews  applied  the  name  to  the  place 
of  torment,  hence  ye'ewo,  (D3n  *},  Matt.  v.  22).2  "  To 
the  side  (lit.  shoulder)  of  the  Jebusite  on  the  south": 
The  Gentile  noun  'p-12?  is  either  put  ellip.  for 
*p-l3*n  "W  (Judges  xix.  11),  or  the  name  of  the  tribe 
is  mentioned  instead  of  the  city.  The  word  occurs 
again  in  xviii.  16,  28,  where  it  is  rendered, 
"Jebusi  "  in  the  Auth.  Vers.  "And  the  border  went 
up  to  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  winch  (lieth)  before 
the  ravine  of  Hinnom  westward,  which  (is)  at  the  end 
of  the  valley  of  Rephaim  northward":  "in  here  denotes, 
not  one  particular  mountain,  but  a  rocky  ridge 
curving  westward  on  the  left  side  of  the  road  to 
Joppa  (Keil  ;  cf.  Robinson,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  219).  On 


1  ""I,  see  note,  viii.  i. 

2  Compare  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  i.,  39,  2  ver.,  "  First, 
Moloch,  horrid  king,  etc./'  to  ver.  405. 


VER.  9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  233 

poy  see  note  vii.  24.  This  valley,  or  valley-plain, 
of  Rephahn  was  on  the  west  of  Jerusalem,  and 
extended  as  far  south  as  Bethlehem  (Joseph.,  Antiq., 
vii.,  c.  12,  §  4),  but  at  its  northern  extremity  was 
separated  from  the  ravine  of  Hinnom  by  a  mountain 
ridge.  It  was  famous  for  the  victories  of  David  over* 
the  Philistines  (2  Sam.  v.  18,  22,  xxiii.  13).  The 
Rephaim  were  an  ancient  and  gigantic  tribe  (Gen. 
xiv.  5). 

Ver.  9. — "iNPi,  "  was  marked  out"  or  "  was  described" 
(Ges.,  Lex.},  cogn.  to  i-in,  to  go  round,  whence  "ix'n, 
form,  outline,  juro,  lit.  "  a  place  watered  by  springs," 
but  here— py.  a  fountain  (cf.  Gen.  vii.  1 1,  viii.  2).  "  The 
waters  of  Nephtoach"  ("opening,"  rt.  nris,  to  open),  a 
spring  mentioned  here  and  in  xviii.  1 5  only  ;  now 
probably  Ain-Lifta,  in  a  short  valley  which  runs  into 
the  east  side  of  the  great  Wady  Beit  Hanina  two 
and  a  half  miles  north-west  of  Jerusalem  (Van  de 
Velde,  Memoir}.  The  name  Lifta  is  not  less  suitable 
to  this  identification  than  its  situation,  since  "  N  "  and 
"  L  "  frequently  take  the  place  of  each  other,  and  the 
rest  of  the  word  is  almost  entirely  unchanged  (Art. 
by  Grove  in  Dr.  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}}  "Mount  Ephron" 
not  mentioned  elsewhere  ;  probably  the  range  of 
hills  on  the  west  side  of  the  Wady  Beit  Hanina 
(traditional  valley  of  the  Terebinth),  opposite  Lifta, 
which  stands  on  the  east  side  (Grove).  "  Baalah, 
which  (is)  Kirjath-jearim"  (Auth.  Vers.).  See  note 
on  ix.  17.  It  seems  that  Baalah  (mistress)  was  the 


1  According,  however,  to  Lieut.  Conder's  proposed  alteration 
of  the  boundary  line  of  Judah,  Nephtoach  is  made  identical 
with  the  spring"  'Atdn,  the  Talmudic  Etam,  near  the  pools 
of  Solomon,  south  of  Bethlehem  (Map,  sheet  xvii). 


234  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

early  or  Canaanitish    name    (cf.   xviii.    28,  "  Jebusi, 
which  (is)  Jerusalem  "). 

Ver.  10.  —  Ip3l:,  cf.  ver.  3.  "Mount  Se-tr  (hairy, 
rough)  ;  "  not  that  in  Edom  (xi.  1  7,  xii.  7,  xxiv.  4), 
but  a  shaggy  or  rugged  mountain  ridge  running 
•  south-west  of  Kirjath-jearim.  The  name  may  have 
been  derived  from  an  ancient  incursion  of  the 
Edomites  into  these  parts.  "  Mount  Ye'a-r£w"1 
(mount  of  forests)  :  Possibly  the  ridge  separating 
Wady  Ghuzab  from  Wady  Ismail  (Grove).  "  Kesa- 
lon"  ("  firm  confidence,"  Ges.;  or  rather,  from  ^D3,  in 
reference  to  the  "  loins  "  of  the  mountain),  a  town 
apparently  on  the  shoulder  (side)  of  mount  Yearim, 
probably  Kesla,  eight  miles  west  of  Jerusalem  (Grove, 
Bib.  Die?).  "  Beth-sJiemesh  "  (house  of  the  sun),  called 
"  'Ir-shemesh  "  xix.  41,  when  it  had  afterwards  been 
assigned  to  Dan,  on  whose  border  it  stood  ;  one  of 
the  cities  allotted  to  the  priests  (xxi.  16).  For  its 
further  history  see  i  Sam.  vi.  9,  etc.  ;  I  Kings  iv.  9  ; 
2  Kings  xiv.  1  1  ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  1  8  ;  now  called 
Ain-Shemst  on  the  north-west  slopes  of  the  moun 
tains  of  Judah,  "  a  low  plateau  at  the  junction  of 
two  fine  plains  "  (Rob.,  iii.,  I  5  2),  about  two  miles  from 
the  great  Philistine  plain,  and  seven  from  Ekron 
(ii.,  224-6).  "  Timnah"  ("a  part  assigned,"  rt.  njo, 
to  divide,  Ges.,  unless  the  word  rather  refers  to  some 
natural  feature  of  the  country,  Grove),  written  also 
Timnathah  (xix.  43)  and  Timnath;  assigned  to  Dan 
(xix.  43),  and  thence  Samson  fetched  his  wife  (Judges 
xiv.  i),  probably  distinct  from  the  Timnath  in  Gen. 


1  ~tl^  means  a  wood  of  some  extent,  a  forest,  as  distinguished 
from  B^'n,  a  thicket. 


VER.  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSH  DA.  235 

xxxviii.  1 2,  which  may  have  been  identical  with  the 
Timnah  in  Josh.  xv.  57,  in  the  mountains  of  Judah  ; 
now  perhaps  Tibnek,  at  the  mouth  of  Wady  Surar 
two  miles  west  of  Ain-Shems  (Beth-shemesh)  (Rob., 
Pal.,  i.,  p.  344  ;  Grove). 

Ver.  1 1. — Here  the  border  follows  a  north-western 
course.  "'Eq-ron"  see  on  xiii.  3.  "  SJiik-ffron  " 
(drunkenness,  from  "Oy>,  to  drink  to  the  full),  on  the 
north-west  border  of  Judah,  probably  between 
'Eqron  (Akir)  and  Yabhneel  (Yebna),  see  Smith's 
Bib.  Die.,  iii.,  p.  1273),  or  perhaps  the  modern  Sugheir, 
about  three  miles  south  of  Yabhneel  (Tobler  and 
Knobel).  Because  the  word  in  Hebrew  means 
drunkenness,  Simonis  (Onomast.  V.T.,  p.  348,  coll. 
p.  209)  conjectured  that  the  locality  abounded  with 
vines.  "Mount  Baalali";  Mentioned  here  only  ;  the 
name  must  have  been  given  to  one  of  the  ranges 
near  the  coast,  in  the  vicinity  of  Yebna.  "  Yabh- 
ne-el"  ("may  God  cause  to  be  built"),  called  Yabneh 
in  2  Chron.  xxvi.  6,  where  Uzziah  is  said  to  have 
taken  it  from  the  Philistines,  and  to  have  destroyed 
its  fortifications;  also  Jamnia  in  I  Mace.  iv.  15, 
v.  58,  etc.,  and  in  Joseph.,  Antiq.,  v.,  I,  §  22,  xii.  8, 
§  6.  Once  famous  as  a  school  of  Jewish  learning, 
and  the  seat  of  the  sanhedrim  after  the  fall  of 
Jerusalem  (Philo,  Op.,  ii.,  p.  575);  now  Yebna,  or, 
more  accurately,  Ibna  (Grove),  about  two  miles  from 
the  coast,  and  eleven  miles  south  of  Joppa.  Its  ruins 
stand  on  the  edge  of  the  Nahr  Rubin,  along  which 
ran  the  boundary  line  between  Judah  and  Benjamin 
towards  the  coast  (Robinson,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  227, 
Another  town  of  the  same  name  is  mentioned  in 
xix.  33. 


236  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

Ver.  12. — "And  the  west  border  (was)  to  (or  at]  the 
great  sea  (i.e.  the  Mediterranean)  and  the  adjoining 
territory  (thereof)."  On  7)2})  in  the  last  clause  see 
xiii.  23. 

VERS.    13-20. — Inheritance  of  Caleb. 

This  narrative,  though  involving  a  repetition  of  xiv. 
6- 1  5,  is  properly  inserted  here,  because  Caleb's  in 
heritance  was  included  in  the  territory  assigned  by 
lot  to  Judah,  and  it  was  fit  that  it  should  be  men 
tioned  before  the  enumeration  of  the  cities  of  Judah 
(ver.  2  i,  etc.)  commenced.  As  we  meet  with  the  same 
narrative,  almost  verbatim,  in  Judges  i.  IO-I  5,  among 
the  events  described  in  that  chapter  as  happening 
after  the  death  of  Joshua  (ver.  i),  it  may  have  been 
either  inserted  here  from  the  Book  of  Judges  by  a  later 
hand,  perhaps  by  Ezra,  according  to  Bishop  Patrick, 
or,  according  to  Keil,  both  accounts  may  have  been 
drawn  from  one  common  source.  Caleb's  delay  in 
taking  possession  of  his  inheritance  till  after  Joshua's 
death  might  be  explained  by  his  disinterestedness 
in  preferring  the  public  service  to  his  own  private 
interests  ;  cf.  a  like  unselfishness  on  Joshua's  part 
(xix.  50,  note). 

Ver.  i  3. — "  He  gave  "  :  The  nominative  is  not 
expressed  in  the  Hebrew,  and  is  either,  therefore, 
"Joshua,"  or  the  verb  is  used  impers.  (§  137,  3). 
"  A  portion  among  (in  the  midst  of)  the  children  of 
Judah  "  :  The  expressions  here  used  may  imply  that 
Caleb  was  a  foreigner  by  birth,  and  became  a 
proselyte  (see  note  on  xiv.  6).  "According  totJie  com 
mandment"  etc.  :  Though  that  commandment  is 
nowhere  expressly  recorded,  it  is  consistent  with  the 


VERS.  14-17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  237 

promise  referred  to  in  xiv.  9.  "  Arba,"  see  xiv.  15. 
"  The  father  of  Anak"  i.e.,  the  progenitor  of  the 
Anakim  (see  note  on  xi.  21). 

Ver.  14. — PTI,  Hiph.  imperf.  apoc.  (§  49,  2,  b). 
"  And  drove  out"  see  note  on  t^nin,  iii.  10.  "  Sheshay"1 
etc. :  Probably  names,  not  of  individuals,  but  of  three 
principal  families  of  Anakim,  a  supposition  which 
seems  confirmed  by  the  mention  of  their  names  here 
after  the  first  mention  of  them  in  Numb.  xiii.  22. 
At  the  end  of  the  verse,  'un  ^  v!"  is  added  as  a  still 
further  definition  of  'un  'J.g,  to  prevent  us  from  think 
ing  of  the  actual  sons  of  Anak. 

Ver.  15. — De-bhir,  see  x.  38. 

Ver.  1 6. — vinai,  "  then  will  I  give  " :  \=  "  then  "  in 
the  apod.,  after  a  condit.  protasis  (cf.  Judges  iv.  8  ; 
Psalm  Ixxviii.  34  ;  §  i  55,  I  (*/).  The  perfect  denotes 
the  certain  fulfilment  of  the  promise  (§  126,  4),  Sept. 
Swo-w;  Vulg.  "dabo."  "'Akh-sd/i"  (an  anklet  or 
ring,  worn  as  an  ornament  by  women  round  their 
ankles  (cf.  Isa.  iii.  1 8),  mentioned  also  in  I  Chron.  ii. 
49,  as  Caleb's  daughter,  though  the  genealogy  of 
Caleb  in  that  chapter  is  very  obscure.  Cf.  with 
Caleb's  promise  here  that  of  Saul  in  I  Sam.  xvii.  25, 
xviii.  17,  and  that  of  Creon,  King  of  Thebes,  who 
promised  his  sister  Jocaste  in  marriage  to  him  who 
should  destroy  the  Sphinx  (Hygin.,  Fab.  Ixvii). 

Ver.  17. — "'Ot/i-nt-er  (lion  of  God).  "The  son  of 
Kcnaz,  tJie  brother  of  Caleb "  :  The  Hebrew  accent 
Tiphcha,  after  Tip,  shows  that  in  the  opinion  01 
the  Masorites  the  word  "  brother "  here  refers  to 


1  The     according  to  §  8,  5,  retains  its  consonant  power  (cf. 
vii.  2). 


238  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xv 

Othniel  ;  cf.  the  Vulg.,  "  Othniel,  films  Cenaz,  frater 
Caleb  junior  ;  "  but  the  Sept.,  Arab.,  and  Syr.  regard 
it  as  referring  to  Kenaz,  though  in  Judges  i.  I  3,  iii.  9, 
the  Sept.  agrees  with  the  other  view.  According  to 
the  canon  of  Rabbi  Moses  ben  Nachman  on  Numb. 
x.  29,  designations  of  this  nature  generally  refer  to 
the  principal  foregoing  word  ;  thus  in  Isa.  xxxvii.  2 
(Heb.)  "prophet "  refers  not  to  Amon,  but  Isaiah  (cf. 
Jer.  xxviii.  i).  "Son  of  Kenaz"  probably  =  Kenizzite 
in  xiv.  6.  The  Jewish  law  did  not  expressly  pro 
hibit  marriage  with  a  niece  (see  Lev.  xviii.  12,  xx. 
19,  and  cf.  Talmud  "Jebamoth,"  62a,  6^b~). 

Ver.  i  8. — fixn3,  "  on  her  entering"  into  the  house 
of  Othniel  to  be  his  wife,  •irmpi-n,  "  then  she  urged 
him"  Hiph.  of  n-1D  or  JVD,  not  used  in  Qal.,  perhaps 
"to  be  excited,"  whence  in  Hiph.  "to  excite." 
Knobel  thinks  that  by  rnK>  the  land  belonging  to 
Debir  is  meant,  but  that  would  naturally  be  assigned 
along  with  it,  whereas  the  allusion  is  to  some  piece 
of  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Debir,  plentifully 
supplied  with  water,  mypn,  "  and  she  lept "  or  "  sprung 
down  quickly."  The  dismounting  was  a  mark  of 
respect  (cf.  Gen.  xxiv.  64;  i  Sam.  xxv.  23).  my 
occurs  here  and  in  Judges  i.  14,  iv.  21  only,  in  which 
latter  place  it  is  used  of  a  nail,  and  is  rendered  by 
Gesenius  "  went  down  "  (into  the  earth).  It  is  hardly 
connected,  says  Keil,  with  wy,  to  be  lowly  or  humble 
(Ges.),  but  rather  means  primarily,  according  to  Fiirst, 
"  to  press  or  force  oneself  away,"  being  connected 
with  pJT  — ,  in  Piel,  "  to  leap  forth."  Thus  it  corre 
sponds  here  with  bfsn  in  Gen.  xxiv.  64.  The  Sept. 
/ecu  e/3o^crev  IK  TOV  ovov,  and  the  Vulg.  "suspiravitque 
ut  sedebat  in  asino,"  may  have  arisen  from  a  different 


VER.  19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  239 


reading,  viz.,  pyVR  "  What  wouldest  tJwu  "  (Auth. 
Vers.),  lit.  "  what  is  to  thee  ?  "  As  nothing  is  said  about 
Othniel's  making  the  request  which  Achsah  had  urged 
him  to  make,  x  we  may  suppose  that,  because  he  hesi 
tated,  she  had  determined  herself  to  accost  her  father. 
Ver.  19.  —  nsn?,  "a  blessing"  Sept.  evXoytW  (cf. 
2  Cor.  ix.  5),  a  gift  expressing  goodwill  and  affection, 
or  offered  with  prayers  for  a  blessing  on  the  recipient 
(cf.  Gen.  xxxiii.  1  1  ;  2  Kings  v.  1  5).  'an  fix,  "  a  land 
of  the  south  country"  evidently  with  allusion  to  its 
aridity,  for  233  comes  from  33_3T,  to  be  dry  (Syr.,  Chald., 
and  Sam.),  cf.  Psalm  cxxvi.  4,  where  "the  south"  = 
"  a  dry  or  barren  land."  "OFirn,  either  the  accus.  suff. 
is  used  briefly  for  the  dat.  (§  121,  4),  or  the  verb 
governs  two  accusatives  (Ewald,  LeJirb.,  §  283,  b}. 
The  rendering  of  the  Sept.,  Chald.,  Syr.,  and  Arab., 
"  Thou  hast  given  me  into  a  south  land,"  i.e.,  sent  me 
thither  by  marriage,  though  followed  by  Michaelis, 
Bertheau,  and  others,  is  forced,  but  not  ungrammatical, 
as  333n  Y1$  may  be  an  accus.  loci.  "  Give  me  springs 
of  water"  i.e.,  a  piece  of  land  with  springs  of  water  in 
it  (Keil).  n6a,  lit.  "  bubblings,"  from  ^>\,  to  tumble 
or  roll  over,  perhaps  in  allusion  to  the  globular  form 
in  which  springs  bubble  up  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  5  1  2),  used  here,  and  in  the  parallel  passage  (Judges 
i.  15),  only.  In  Cant.  iv.  i  2  the  shorter  form  *?5  occurs. 
The  Alex.  Sept.  renders  by  T(j)\a9-^aii^,  a  proper 
name  ;  so  Furst.  "  The  upper  and  lower  springs" 
cf.  Bethhoron,  the  "  Nether  "  and  "  Upper  "  (xvi.  3,  5). 
Their  site  was  no  doubt  a  mountain  slope,  which  had 

1  Perhaps  he  might  have  feared  lest  he  should  seem  to  have 
married  Achsah  from  self-interested  motives,  i.e.,  with  a  view 
to  the  dowry  he  might  get  with  her. 


240  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

springs  both  on  its  higher  and  lower  ground,  possibly 
the  modern  Kurmul  (Wilton's  Negeb,  p.  1  6  ;  Speakers 


This  liberality  of  Caleb  to  his  daughter,  while  it 
teaches  us  that  parents  should  make  suitable  provi 
sion  for  their  children,  should  also  remind  us  of  those 
words  of  Christ,  "  If  ye  being  evil  know  how  to  give 
good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more  shall 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to 
them  that  ask  Him"  (Matt.  vii.  1  1). 

VERS.  21-63.  —  A  List  of  Ike  Towns  of  Judah,  ar 
ranged  according  to  the  Four  Districts  into  which 
their  Territory  was  Divided,  viz.,  those  in  the 
Negeb  or  South  Land  (vers.  21-32);  those  in 
the  Shephelah  or  Lowland  Plain  (vers.  33-47),' 
those  in  the  Hill  Country  (vers.  48-60)  ;  and 
those  in  the  Wilderness  (vers.  61,  62). 

Vers.  21-32  {The  Towns  in  the  Neghebh1}.  —  The 
towns  in  this  district  are  arranged  into  four  groupsr 
the  names  in  each  group  being  connected  by  the 
copulative  "  Vav."  First  group  of  nine  towns  (vers. 
21-23). 

Ver.  2  i  .  —  "  A  nd  the  towns  from  (i.e.,  at)  the  ex 
tremity  of  the  tribe-territory  of  JudaJi  towards  the 
border  of  Edom,  in  the  region  lying  towards  the  south 
were  (the  following)."  nz.jsa,  can  only  be  rendered, 
as  above,  by  a  circumlocution.  "  Qabh-tse'el"  (God 
gathers),  probably  the  same  as  Jekabzeel  (Neh.  xi.  25), 
the  birthplace  of  the  hero  Benaiah,  a  slayer  of  lions 
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  20  ;  I  Chron.  xi.  22),  of  which  the 

1  See  note  on  x.  40. 


VERS.  22,  23.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  241 

Negeb  was  a  common  haunt  (Wilton's  Negeb,  p.  42, 
etc.).  "  'E-dJier"  (a  flock)  and  "  Ya-ghur"  (a  lodging, 
rt.  i-in,  to  sojourn)  are  both  unknown  ;  the  latter  name 
is  rendered  in  the  Sept.  'Acratp,  and  is  joined  by 
Wilton  with  Kinah  in  the  following  verse. 

Ver.  22. — "  Qt-ndk"  (perhaps  "a  smithy,"  from  rp 
or  f-ip  [unused],  to  strike  upon,  to  forge  iron),  un 
known.  Knobel  and  Stanley  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  1 60) 
would  connect  the  name  with  the  Kenites,  who  settled 
in  the  south  of  Arad  (Judges  i.  16),  but  this  settlement 
probably  took  place  after  the  period  here  referred  to. 
"  Dt-mo-nak"  mentioned  in  the  Onomasticon,  but 
evidently  unknown  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome  ;  perhaps 
the  same  as  Di-bhon  ("  pining,"  rt.  n-n,  i.q.  to  languish), 
a  town  re-inhabited  by  the  men  of  Judah  after  the 
return  from  captivity  (Neh.  xi.  25)  ;  "M"  and  "  B," 
letters  of  the  same  organ,  are  often  interchanged 
(§  19,  i)  ;  possibly  identical  with  the  ruins  called  el- 
(or  eh-)  Dheib  (Van  de  Velde,  Mem.,  252),  to  the 
north-east  of  Arad.  "  'Adh-d-dhdh  "  (Syr.  "festival  "), 
not  mentioned  in  the  Onomasticon  of  Eusebius  ; 
perhaps  Sudeid  (Robinson). 

Ver.  23. — "  Qe-dhesh"  (sanctuary),  possibly  the 
same  as  Qa-dhesh-Bar-ne-'a  (ver.  3,  Keil).  " Cha- 
tsor"  ("enclosed"),  mentioned  nowhere  else,  and 
unknown  (Rob.,  ii.,  34,  note).  Another  of  the  same 
name  in  Naphtali  (xi.  i).  The  Vat.  Sept.  joins  it 
with  the  following  word,  and  the  Alex.  MSS.  omit  it 
altogether.  "  Yith-nan  "  ("  strong  place,"  rt.  fJV,  to  be 
firm,  stable),  probably  on  the  borders  of  the  desert,  if 
not  actually  in  it,  but  no  trace  of  it  yet  discovered. 
The  word  is  joined  by  the  Alex.  MSS.  of  the  Sept. 
with  Ziph  in  the  next  verse. 

16 


242  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

Ver.  24,  25  {Second  Group  of  Five  or  Six  Towns}. 
— Ver.  24. — " Ztp/i"  (perhaps  "  refining-place,"  rt.  f]-ir, 
in  Arab.  "  to  become  liquid "),  omitted  in  the  Vat. 
Sept.,  and,  therefore,  thought  by  Wilton  (Negeb,  85)  to 
be  an  interpolation,  but  found  in  the  Alex,  and  Peshito 
(Zib)  ;  perhaps  now  Kuseifch  (Knobel  ;  Rob.,  Pal.,  ii., 
191,  195),  south-west  of  Arad.  "  Te-lem  "  (oppression, 
rt.  D^p,  to  oppress),  unknown.  Kimchi,  Raumer,  and 
others,  would  identify  it  with  Telaim  ("  young  lambs," 
rt.  r6tp,  to  be  fresh  [unused],  I  Sam.  xv.  4),  though  this 
latter  word  could  have  been  more  easily  corrupted 
into  the  former  than  vice  versa.  Possibly  now  el- 
Kuseir,  a  spot  in  the  Negeb,  occupied  by  the  Arab 
tribe  Dhullam  (Wilton,  Negeb,  p.  85-9).  "B"al6tk" 
(ladies,  mistresses),  probably  the  same  as  Baalath- 
Beer,  the  Ramath  of  the  south,  assigned  to  the 
Simeonites  (xix.  8),  and  called  simply  Baal  (i  Chron. 
iv.  33),  and  South  Ramoth  (i  Sam.  xxx.  27). 
Knobel  and  Wilton  (Negeb,  pp.  91,  92)  would  identify 
it  with  the  modern  Kurnub. 

Ver.  25. — "  CJui-ts6r-cha-dhat-tah  "  (New  Chatsor), 
probably  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Chatsor 
in  ver.  23.  The  conjunctive  accent  under  Chatsor  in 
the  Hebrew  text,  and  the  absence  of  the  copulative 
1,  authorise  this  rendering  ;  Vulg.  "  Asor  nova  "  ;  but 
omitted  by  Sept.  Some  identify  it  with  el-Hu- 
dhairah  on  the  south  of  Jebel  Khulil  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res., 
i.,  p-  151  ;  Keil).  Qeri-y6tJi  (cities,  hamlets)  :  This 
word  has  in  the  Hebrew  a  great  distinctive  accnet, 
which  is  some  authority  for  its  being  regarded  by  our 
Auth.  Vers.  as  the  name  of  a  separate  city  ;  but, 
on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  copulative  "  Vav" 
between  it  and  the  following  word,  and  with  this 


VERS.  26,  27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  243 


latter  it  is  connected  by  the  Sept.  (at 
the  Syr.,  and  by  Reland,  Maurer,  Keil,  and  others  ; 
the  proper  rendering,  therefore,  probably  is,  "Q*rt- 
yotk-Chcts-ron,  tvhicli  is  Cka-tsor."  The  latter  name, 
meaning  "  an  enclosure,"  or  "  hamlet,"  may  have 
been  the  original  name,  which,  when  the  place  was 
taken  by  the  Anakim  and  fortified,  was  changed  to 
Qeri-y6th,  and  afterwards  by  the  tribe  of  Judah  to 
Qeri-y6th-Chets-ron,  in  honour  of  their  ancestor, 
Chets-ron  (Gen.  xlvi.  12  ;  Ruth  iv.  18).  Possibly 
now  el-Ktiryctein,  south  of  Hebron  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res., 
ii.,  101  ;  Wilton,  Negeb,  pp.  100-106).  The  name 
'IcrKa/noiT^?  (Matt.  x.  4)  is  thought  by  some  to 
mean  nt>1R  &As. 

Vers.  26-28  (Tldrd  Group  of  Nine  Towns}.  — 
Ver.  26.  —  "'A-mam"  (gathering-place),  in  the  south 
of  Judah,  but  quite  unknown.  "  Shema  "  (fame, 
repute)  :  Probably  the  same  as  Sheba,  in  xix.  2 
(where,  as  here,  it  precedes  Moladah),  the  labials  "  M  " 
and  "B  "  being  often  interchanged  (cf.  ver.  22).  M6-la- 
dhah  (birth),  a  town  afterwards  given  to  the  tribe  of 
Simeon  (xix.  2  ;  I  Chron.  iv.  28),  inhabited  after  the 
captivity  by  the  children  of  Judah  (Neh.  xi.  26),  and 
perhaps  identical  with  Malatha,  mentioned  by  Jose- 
phus  as  an  Idumaean  fortress  (Antiq.,  xviii.,  6,  2). 
Now  probably  the  ruins  of  el-Milk,  seventeen  or 
eighteen  Roman  miles  south  of  Hebron  (Rob.,  Bib. 
Res.,  ii.,  20  1  -2  ;  Wilton,  p.  109,  etc.). 

Ver.  27.  —  "  Clftsar-  GaddaJi  "  (village  of  good 
fortune).  Some  think  that  Jurrah,  near  Moladah 
(el-Milh),  is  the  modern  site.  "  Chesh-mon  "  (fatness, 
fat  soil,  rt.  Dtt'n,  to  be  fat),  possibly  identical  with 
Atsmon,  one  of  the  landmarks  of  the  southern 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

boundary  of  Judah  (Numb,  xxxiv.  4  ;  Grove),  or 
with  Chashmonah  (Numb,  xxxiii.  29),  lying  beyond 
the  natural  frontier  of  the  Holy  Land  in  the  extreme 
north  of  the  wilderness.  "  Beth-pa-let  "  (pa  in  pause 
for  pe  ;  "house  of  escape"),  mentioned  with  Moladah 
in  Neh.  xi.  26  as  still  inhabited  by  Judaeans. 

Ver.  28. — "CJftsar-shti-al"  (fox,  or  jackal,  village1), 
given  up  to  Simeon  (xix.  3),  and  after  the  captivity 
inhabited  by  the  children  of  Judah  (Neh.  xi.  27). 
Perhaps  "  Saweh"  in  Van  de  Velde's  Map  (1858), 
may  mark  the  site,  and  be  a  corruption  of  the  original 
name  (Grove).  " &' tr-she-bhd  "  (well  of  the  oath;2 
see  Gen.  xxi.  14,  31,  xxii.  19),  mentioned  in  Judges 
xx.  i  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  11,  as  on  the  southern  frontier 
of  Palestine  ;  given  to  the  Simeonites  (xix.  2),  but  in 
i  Kings  xix.  3  said  to  belong  to  Judah,  the  Simeon 
ites  being  at  that  time  absorbed  into  Judah  ;  after 
the  captivity  still  inhabited  (Neh.  xi.  27).  It  was  in 
the  Wady  es  Seba,  a  wide  watercourse,  twelve  miles 
south  of  Hebron,  where  there  are  still  relics  of  an 
ancient  town,  called  Bir-es-Seba,  with  two  deep  wells 
(Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  p.  204  ;  Wilton,  p.  141)  ;  said  by 
Jerome  to  have  been  extant  in  his  day  (Qu.  ad  Gen., 
xxi.  31).  "  Biz-yd-theyaJi "  (contempt  of  Jehovah),, 
site  unknown. 

1  Doubtless  so  called  because  those  animals  abounded  in  the 
neighbourhood. 

2  Or,  "well  of  seven,"  the  compact  between  Abraham  and 
Abimelech  having  been  ratified  by  the  setting  apart  of  seven 
ewe  lambs  (Gen.  xxi.  28). 

3  So  Gesenius  {Lex.},  who  seems  to  regard  the  final  syllable 
HJ  as  =  PP ;  so  in  the  forms  rPTT  (2  Sam.  xii.  25) ;  HvS^E  (Jer- 
iL  31)  ;  n/nh^y,  rv^n.  (i  Chron.'viii.  24) ;   iT^hl^  (ver.'a;).    Per 
haps,  however,   i"P   in  these  instances   merely  intensifies  the 
form  of  the  word. 


VERS.  29,  30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  245 

Vers.  29-32  (Fourth  Group  of  Thirteen  Tozvns  in  the 
West  Portion  of  the  Negeb}. — Ver.  29. — u Ba-a-la/i" 
afterwards  assigned  to  the  Simeonites  (xix.  3,  where  it 
is  called  Balah,  but  Bilhah  i  Chron.  iv.  29);  identified 
by  Knobel,  Wilton,  and  others,  with  the  present  Deir- 
el-BelaJi,  near  Gaza.  "  'I-yim "  (ruinous  heaps,  rt. 
Hjy,  to  overturn),  not  known  ;  the  same  name  was 
given  to  a  city  of  the  Moabites  (Numb,  xxxiii.  45). 
'"A-tsem"  (firmness,  strength),  in  pause  for  'E-tsem 
(i  Chron.  iv.  29)  ;  afterwards  assigned  to  the  Simeon 
ites  (xix.  3  ;  i  Chron.  iv.  29).  Wilton  (Negeb,  p.  156, 
etc.)  somewhat  arbitrarily  connects  this  word  with  the 
foregoing,  and  traces  the  compound  name  Ije-Azem 
in  the  modern  el-Aujeh,  a  spot  covered  with  ruins, 
near  the  Wady-el-Ain,  in  the  country  of  the  Azazimeh 
Arabs,  whose  name  resembles  Azem. 

Ver.  30. — "'El-to-ladli"  ("whose  posterity  is  from 
God  ").  'El  is  either  the  Arab,  article,  or  means 
"God;"  written  Toladh  (i  Chron.  iv.  29),  the  first 
part  of  a  compound  word  being  often  omitted  for 
brevity,  cf.  D^  for  D^-IT  (Psalm  Ixxvi.  3),  D^i?  for 
D'BB>n  ^ax,  but  supposed  by  Wilton  to  be  near  the 
Wady-el-Thoula,  in  the  extreme  south  of  the  Negeb, 
not  far  from  the  western  extremity  of  the  Jebel-el- 
Mukreh.  He  thinks  that  Isaac  was  born  there,  and 
that  it  was  named  after  that  great  event.  (The Negeb, 
p.  1 80.)  "Kesir  (fool,  impious),  rt.  ^>D3,  to  be  fleshy, 
fat,  applied  in  a  bad  sense  to  languor  and  inertness, 
and  hence  to  folly  (Ges.,  Lex.,  3),  Sept.  Bcu^rpv.,  and, 
therefore,  perhaps  the  same  as  Bethul  (xix.  4),  and 
Bethuel  (i  Chron.  iv.  30),  and  identical  with  the 
Bethel  of  i  Sam.  xxx.  27,  and,  therefore,  not  far 
from  Ziglag.  The  place  may  have  been  called  Kesil 


246  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

(fool)  by  the  Israelites,  because  it  had  been  a  seat  of 
idolatry,  perhaps  of  the  worship  of  Orion  (which  Kesil 
means  in  Job  xxxviii.  3 1  ;  Amos  v.  8),  and  they 
may  have  changed  its  name  to  Bethel  (the  house  of 
God),  as  the  name  of  the  Bethel  in  Benjamin  was 
changed  to  Beth-aven  (Hosea  iv.  15).  Probably  now 
el  KJiulasali,  the  same  as  the  Elusa  of  ecclesiastical 
writers,  about  fifteen  miles  south-west  of  Beersheba 
(Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  202).  Jerome,  in  the  fourth  cen 
tury,  states  that  there  was  here  a  temple  of  Venus 
Astarte,  where  Lucifer,  the  morning  star,  was  wor 
shipped  by  the  Saracens  (Vit.  Hilarion,  c.  25). 
"  CJior-maJi"  see  on  xii.  1 4. 

Ver.  31. — "  Tsiq-lagJi"  written  &j5'¥  in  I  Chron. 
xii.  i,  20,  perhaps  from  pVp  ^,  "wilderness  of  de 
struction  "  (Ges.),1  eventually  assigned  to  Simeon 
(xix.  5)  ;  recovered  by  the  Philistines,  and  given  by 
the  King  of  Gath  to  David,  in  whose  family  it  per 
manently  remained  (i  Sam.  xxvii.  6  ;  Joseph.,  Antiq., 
vi.,  13,  10);  burnt  by  the  Amalekites  (i  Sam.  xxx.  i); 
after  the  captivity  inhabited  by  the  people  of  Judah 
(Neh.  xi.  28).  The  site  unknown,  but  it  appears  from 
I  Sam.  xxx.  9,  10,  21,  to  have  been  north  of  the 
brook  Besor.  Kiepert,  in  his  Map,  places  it  about 
twenty  miles  south-east  of  Beersheba,  and  nearly 
fifty  from  Gath,  on  the  edge  of  the  desert.  "  MadJi- 
man-nali"  (dunghill,  rt.  JEn,  unused,  Arab.,  to  dung), 
not  to  be  confounded,  as  in  the  Onom.  (s.v.  Made- 
mena),  with  Madmena  in  Isa.  x.  31,  which  was  north 
of  Jerusalem,  but  probably  identical  with  Menoi's,  now 
el-Minyay,  on  the  caravan  route  south  of  Gaza.  So 

1  Simonis  derives  it  from  ?3  p\X^,  an  outflowing  of  a  fountain 


VER.  32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  247 

Keil  and  Robinson,  and  Kiepert  (Map,  1856).  This, 
and  the  next  place  "  Sansannah  "  (palm-branch),  are 
supposed  by  Reland,  Keil,  and  others,  to  correspond 
with  "  Beth-ham-mar-ka-bhoth"  (house  of  the  chariots) 
and  " Chatsar-siisak"  (horse  village)  in  xix.  5,  I  Chron. 
iv.  31,  names  which  indicate  that  the  places  so  called 
were  stations  or  depots  for  horses  and  chariots,  pro 
bably  on  the  road  between  Egypt  and  Palestine  (Stanley, 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  1 60),  by  which  the  eunuch  of  Candace 
was  returning  to  Egypt  when  overtaken  by  Philip 
(Wilton).  They  are  perhaps  rightly  identified  with  the 
modern  Minyay  and  Wady-es-Suny,  on  the  caravan 
route  south  of  Gaza.  More  recently  it  has  been  sup 
posed  by  Lieut.  Conder  that  possibly  Madmannah 
may  be  identical  with  the  ruin  Umm  DeivineJi,  north 
of  Beersheba  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund  Map,  sheet  xxiv.). 

Ver.  32. — "  L'b/ia-'dtk"  called  Beth-lebha-'6th 
(house  of  lionesses,  xix.  6),  and  Beth-bir-'i  ("  house 
of  my  creation  "  [perhaps  a  corrupted  form]  I  Chron. 
iv.  31)  :  The  word  indicates  that  the  south  of  Judah 
was  the  resort  of  lions.  Site  uncertain,  though 
Lebben,  the  first  station  between  Gaza  and  Egypt, 
bears  a  resemblance  to  the  name.  Wilton,  with  less 
likelihood,  places  it  at  el-Bey-udh,  near  Mesada  or 
the  Dead  Sea.  "  SJiil-chim "  (armed  men),  written 
by  A.  V.  Sharuhen^  (xix.  6)  and  Shaaraim  (i  Chron. 
iv.  31),  supposed  by  Van  de  Velde  to  be  Tell-SJieriah, 
between  Gaza  and  Beersheba,  but  by  Wilton  to  be 
el-Birein,  near  Wady-es-Serum,  much  further  to  the 

1  Heb.  Sha-ru-chen,  "dwelling  of  grace,"  or  "pleasant 
lodging-place;  "  for  JH  n-l")^,  see  fcOJ?,  Chald. to  loose,  specially 
used  of  those  who  turn  aside  at  evening  to  an  inn  and  loose  the 
burdens  of  their  beasts  ;  hence  "  to  lodge  "  (Ges.,  Lex.}. 


248  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

south,  and  not  far  to  the  north-west  of  Kadesh- 
Barnea.  It  is  not  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and 
Jerome.  "'A-yin"  (a  fountain1),  and  "  Rini-mon  "  (a 
pomegranate)  occur  among  the  cities  of  the  Simeonites 
(xix.  7  ;  i  Chron.  iv.  32),  but  without  a  connecting 
"  Vav,"  though  they  are  evidently  reckoned  as  separate 
cities.  Perhaps  being  close  together,  they  afterwards 
became  one  city  (cf.  the  modern  Mezieres-Charleville), 
for  after  the  captivity  we  find  the  name  "En-Rimmon" 
in  Neh.  xi.  29.  The  fertility  of  the  situation  seems 
indicated  by  the  meaning  of  the  word,  viz.,  "  Fountain 
of  the  pomegranates."  Rimmon  is  supposed  to  be 
identical  with  Um-er-Rufnamim,  i.c.,  "mother  of  pome 
granates,"  about  ten  miles  north  of  Beersheba.  "All 
the  cities  are  twenty  and  nine"  In  the  Hebrew  they 
are  thirty-six,  reckoning  two  only  in  ver.  25  (see 
note).  Of  this  discrepancy  the  best  solution  perhaps 
is  that  of  Keil,  viz.,  that  the  number  nine  is  the  error 
of  some  early  copyist,  who  misread  the  Hebrew 
numeral  letters;  see  a  similar  error  in  xix.  15,  38. 
The  Syrian  version  reads  thirty-six.  In  this  once 
populous  district  there  is  now  only  desolation,  the 
waters  once  supplied  by  the  rains  having  been 
allowed  to  go  to  waste. 

Vers.  33-47  (Towns  in  tJie  Lowland  or  SJiepkelaJi}. 
— These  are  arranged  in  four  groups,  of  which  the 
first  (vers.  33-36)  contains  fourteen  towns,  situated 
in  the  north-east  portion  of  the  shephelah. 


1  Properly,  an  eye,  "  the  spring  in  an  Eastern  country  being 
the  eye  of  the  landscape"  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  509). 
Many  towns  and  places  in  Palestine  are  formed  or  compounded 
of  this  Hebrew  word,  as  is  natural  from  the  importance  of 
living  springs  in  the  East  (id.). 


VERS.  33,  34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  249 


Ver.  33.  —  rbzyz,  see  on  ix.  I  ;  it  here  includes  the 
foot-hills  sloping  off  gradually  into  the  lowland  (x.  40). 
'Esh-td-dl  (perhaps  "  petition,  request,"  as  if  infinitive 
Hithp.  of  an  Arab,  form  from  the  rt.  bxc'  [Ges.]),  and 
Tsor-ali  (place  of  hornets)1  were  border-towns  between 
Judah  and  Dan,  and  were  afterwards  assigned  to  Dan 
(xix.  41);  the  former  is  now  perhaps  Kustul,  east  of 
Kuriet  el-Enab  (Kirjath-jearim  [Grove])  ;  the  latter, 
which  was  the  native  place  of  Samson  (Judges  xiii.  2), 
fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  10),  and  re- 
inhabited  by  the  Jews  after  the  captivity  (Neh.  xi.  9), 
is  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onomast.)  as 
ten  Roman  miles  from  Eleutheropolis,  on  the  way  to 
Nicopolis,  and  is  probably  now  Sfira/i,  at  the  head  of 
Wady  Surah  (Robinson,  Grove).  Between  Tsorah 
and  Eshtaol  was  the  Danish  camp  (Judges  xiii.  25), 
and  the  burial-place  of  Samson  (Judges  xvi.  31). 
"'As/i-na/i"  (strong,  rt.  }EJ>X,  to  be  hard,  strong),  pro 
bably  north-west  of  Jerusalem,  but  unknown.  Another 
town  of  the  same  name  is  mentioned  in  ver.  43. 

Ver.  34.  —  "Za-nd-ach  "  (perhaps  "a  marshy  place  " 
[Ges.],  from  nat,  "  to  have  an  offensive  smell  "),  now 
Zaniia,  not  far  from  Surah  towards  the  east,  and  on 
the  side  of  the  Wady  Ismail  (Grove)  ;  it  was  reoccu- 
pied  by  the  people  of  Judah  after  the  captivity  (Neh. 
xi.  30).  The  other  Zanoach  on  the  mountains  (ver. 
56)  is  unknown.  "'  En-gan-n£mn  (fountain  of  gardens), 
apparently  the  present  ruin  Unim  Jina  (Lieut.  Conder, 
Pal.  Explor.  Fund}.  "  Tap-pA-ach  "  ("  a  place  fruitful 
in  apples  "),  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Beth- 
Tappuach  near  Hebron  (ver.  53),  but  situated  on  the 

1  The  name  seems  to  imply  that  hornets  infested  that  part  of 
the  country. 


250  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

lower  slopes  of  the  mountains  of  the  north-west 
portion  of  Judah,  about  twelve  miles  west  of  Jerusalem 
(Grove).  "  ha-E-nam"  contract,  for  Jia- E-na-yim  (the 
two  fountains),  probably  the  same  as  Enayim  (Gen. 
xxxviii.  14),  which  was  on  the  road  from  Adullam  to 
Timnath. 

Ver.  35. — "YarmAth,"  see  x.  3.  "'A-dhul-latn," 
xii.  15.  "  So-khok"  (hedge),  near  to  Ephesdammim, 
where  the  combat  between  David  and  Goliath  took 
place  (i  Sam.  xvii.  i)  ;  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2 
Chron.  xi.  7),  and  taken  by  the  Philistines  in  the 
reign  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  I  8).  It  is  mentioned 
in  the  Onomast.  under  the  name  Soccoth,  and  described 
as  two  villages,  an  upper  and  lower,  on  the  road  to 
Jerusalem,  about  eight  or  nine  miles  from  Eleuthero- 
polis.  Robinson  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.  21)  identifies  it  with 
esk-Skuweikeh,  on  the  southern  slope  of  Wady  es-Sumt 
(probably  the  valley  of  Elah,  the  scene  of  Goliath's 
death),  a  mile  south-west  of  Yarmuth.  'A-ze-qak, 
see  x.  i  o  :  Though  it  seems  to  have  been  to  the 
north  of  the  shephelah,  near  Beth-horon,  yet  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  speak  of  it  as  lying  between  (ava  jaeow) 
Eleutheropolis  and  Jerusalem,  i.e.,  farther  south,  and 
in  the  mountains  of  Judah ;  but  perhaps,  like  Sokhoh, 
Apheq,  etc.,  there  was  more  than  one  place  of  the 
same  name  (Grove). 

Ver.  36. — "  SJia-a-ra-yim  "  (two  gates),  mentioned 
in  connection  with  the  defeat  of  the  Philistines  after 
the  death  of  Goliath  (i  Sam.  xvii.  52)  ;  it  was  west 
ward  of  Sokhoh,  and  perhaps  identical  with  Tell- 
Zacharia  on  Wady  es-Sumt  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  16). 
"'A-dht-tha-yim"  (twofold  ornament),  unknown. 
'*  hag-Ge  dlie-rah  "  (the  sheepcote),  apparently  in  the 


VERS.  37,  38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  251 

east  part  of  the  shephelah,  because  Azeqah,  Sokhoh, 
etc.,  are  mentioned  just  before  (ver.  35)  ;  perhaps  the 
same  as  the  Gederoth  taken  by  the  Philistines  from 
Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  1 8),  (so  Keil),  and  as  the 
Gedrus  of  the  Onomast.,  situated  ten  Roman  miles 
south  of  Diospolis  (Lydda),  and  identified  by  Lieut. 
Conder  with  the  present  ruin  JedireJi  (Pal.  Explor. 
Ftind,  Map,  sheet  xvi).  Grove  thinks  that  the 
Hebrew  word  here  with  the  art.  indicates  a  sheep- 
breeding  locality.  So  the  following  word  Gedhe- 
ro-tha-yim  (two  sheepfolds)  is  connected  by  the  Sept. 
with  the  preceding,  and  rendered  at  eTrauXec?  OLVTTJS. 
"  Fourteen  cities  "  :  The  correct  number  is  fifteen,  but 
the  discrepancy  may  be  explained  as  in  ver.  32,  or 
Gedherothayim  may  be  taken  as  synonymous  with 
Gederah  (Kimchi,  and  margin  of  Auth.  Vers.). 

Vers.  37-41  (Second  Group,  containing  tJte  Towns 
in  the  Middle  Portion  of  tJie  Shephelah). — Ver.  37. — 
"  Tsfnan"  probably  the  same  as  Tsa-'a-nan  (place  of 
flocks,  Micah  i.  11),  supposed  by  Knobel  to  be  the 
ruins  of  Chirbet-es-Senat,  a  little  north  of  Beit-jibrin 
(Eleutheropolis).  "  Chadha-shah  "  (new)  :  According 
to  the  Talmud  the  smallest  city  in  Judaea,  having 
only  fifty  houses,  perhaps  the  same  as  the  Adasa  of 
I  Mace.  vii.  40,  45,  a  day's  journey  from  Gazera 
(Gezer),  and  thirty  stadia  from  Bethhoron  (Joseph., 
Antiq.,  xii.,  10,  §  5),  but  the  site  unknown  (Grove). 
"  MigJi-dal-GadJi  "  (tower  of  Gad),  unknown,  though 
perhaps  Mejdcl,  two  miles  west  of  Ascalon  (Grove). 

Ver.  38. — "  Dil-an"  (cucumber-field),  possibly 
Ti'na,  about  three  miles  north  of  Tell-es-Safieh,  in 
the  maritime  plain  of  Philistia,  south  of  Ekron  (Van 
de  Velde,  ii.,  1 60).  "  ham-Mits-pch  "  (the  lofty  place) 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

a  name  given  to  many  places  (see  xi.  3).  It  stood, 
according  to  the  Onomast.,  north  of  Eleutheropolis, 
and  may  be  identical  with  the  present  Tell-es-Safiyeh, 
the  Blanche-garde  of  the  crusaders  (Van  de  Velde, 
Grove).  "  Yoq-t/ie'el"  ("  subdued  by  God,"  for  *?$  n$j& 
from  rt.  rm^,  to  serve),  probably  near  to  Lakhish,  but 
undiscovered.  Possibly  the  ruins  Keitulaneh  in  that 
neighbourhood  (Robinson,  iii..  App.  126). 

Ver.  39. —  On  La-kJusli  and  'Egk-ldn  see  x.  3  ; 
near  to  them  was  " Bots-qath"  ("  swelling  ground,"  rt. 
PV3,  to  swell  up),  the  birthplace  of  the  mother  of 
Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii.  I,  where  it  is  written  Boscath 
in  Auth.  Vers.)  ;  site  unknown. 

Ver.  40. — "Kab-b6n"  ("  a  bond,"  rt.  n?2,  to  bind), 
perhaps  the  ruins  called  Kitbeibeh,  about  ten  miles 
south  of  'Eghlon,  and  once  a  strong  fortification  and 
key  to  the  mountainous  passes  (Van  de  Velde), 
whence  probably  the  name.  "  Lack-mas"  Sept. 
AajuoUj  Vulg.  Leheman  :  Thirty-two  copies  have 
D!p!^,  and  here  A.  V.  "  Lahmam."  It  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  Onomasticpn ;  perhaps  now  the  ruined  site 
called  el-Lahem,  discovered  by  Tobler  (Dritte  Wander- 
ung,  p.  129),  a  little  south  of  Beit-jibrin.  " Kith-lisk  " 
(probably  contracted  from  ?£I3  =  bri'3,  a  wall,  perhaps 
as  made  of  compacted  clay  (Cant.  ii.  9),  and  fc^x  (Ges., 
Lex.},  not  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome,  nor  yet 
discovered  by  any  later  traveller.  Possibly  to  be 
found  in  Tell-Chilchis>  S.S.E.  of  Beit-jibrin  (Van  de 
Velde,  Res.,  ii.,  p.  157;  Keil). 

Ver.  41. — "G"dhe-r6th"  (folds),  apparently  not  that 
referred  to  in  ver.  36,  but  in  the  middle  portion  of 
the  lowland  (see  Keil).  Lieut.  Conder  suggests  the 
present  village  Katrali,  near  Yebnah,  as  proposed 


VERS.  42,  43.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  253 

also  by  Col.  Warren,  R.E.  (Map,  sheet  xvi.).  " Beth- 
DagJion  "  (house  of  Dagon),  according  to  Clark's  Bib. 
Atlas  between  Joppa  and  Lydda  ;  perhaps  the  Beth- 
dedsJian  visited  by  Tobler  on  his  fourth  journey. 
Another  town  of  the  same  name  was  on  the  border 
of  Asher  (xix.  27).  "Na-a-mah"  (pleasant)  :  Proba 
bly  Ndaneh,  south  of  Ramleh,1  as  proposed  by  Col. 
Warren,  R.E.  The  situation  is  suitable  (Lieut.  Conder, 
R.E.,  Map,  sheet  xvi.).  "  Maq-qe-dhah"  see  on  x.  10. 

Vers.  42-44  (Third  Group  in  the  Soutli  of  the 
Shephelah). — Ver.  42. — " Libh-nah"  x.  29.  "  'E-tJier  " 
(abundance)  and  '"A-s/ian"  (smoke)  were  afterwards 
given  to  the  Simeonites  (xix.  7).  The  former  may 
be  the  same  as  Tochen  in  I  Chron.  iv.  32,  and  is 
mentioned  twice  by  Eusebius  (Onomast?),  who  also 
confuses  it  with  Yattir  (ver.  48).  The  name  has  not 
yet  been  certainly  identified  with  any  existing  remains, 
but  Van  de  Velde  heard  of  a  Tcl-Athar  in  this  direc 
tion  (Grove,  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  i.),  and  more 
recently  Lieut.  Conder  has  suggested  the  ruin  eVAtr, 
near  Beit  Jibrin,  on  the  west,  as  a  satisfactory  situa 
tion.  'As/ian  is  perhaps  identical  with  Kor-ashan 
(i  Sam.  xxx.  30),  and  with  'Ayin  (Josh.  xxi.  16)  ;  it 
was  one  of  the  cities  of  the  priests  (i  Chron.  vi.  59),  in 
the  south  of  Judah,  on  the  border  of  the  Negeb  (Grove). 

Ver.  43. — "  Yiph-tach"  (he  will  open),  "'Ash-nak" 
(cf.  ver.  3  3),  and  "  N'tstbh  "  (garrison,  or  station)  have 
not  been  discovered.  In  the  Onomast.  a  "  Neesib  " 
is  mentioned  as  seven  or  nine  miles  east  of  Eleuthero- 
polis  (Beit-jibrin),  between  that  city  and  Hebron,  and 

1  Marked  in  Arrowsmith's  Map  of  Modern  Syria  (Southern) 
as  lying  to  the  north-east  of  Yebna,  and  south-east  of  Jaffa,  in 
what  was  afterwards  the  territory  of  Dan. 


254  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

now  called  Beit-Nusib,  on  the  Wady  es  Sur.  This 
position,  however,  is  among  the  mountains,  rather 
than  in  the  shephelah. 

Ver.  44. — "  Qei-lah  "  (fortress)  ;  probably  near  to 
the  borders  of  the  Philistines  (see  I  Sam.  xxiii.  i)  ; 
mentioned  after  the  captivity  (Neh.  iii.  i/).1  Euse- 
bius  and  Jerome  describe  it  in  the  Onomast.  as  existing 
under  the  name  Kr^Xct  or  Ceila,  the  present  Kila, 
about  eight  Roman  miles  to  the  east  of  Eleuthero- 
polis,  on  the  road  to  Hebron  ;  but  this  position,  like 
that  of  Beit-Nusib  (ver.  43)  is  among  the  mountains 
of  Judah,  and  not  in  the  shephelah,  and,  therefore,  is 
properly  rejected  by  Keil  (Comment,  in  loc^).  "  Akh- 
zibh"  (deceit,  Micah  i.  14),  perhaps  identical  with 
Kezibh  (Gen.  xxxviii.  5).  The  ruins  of  Kussabeh,  or 
Kesaba,  a  place  with  a  fountain  about  five  hours 
south-west  of  Beit-jibrin,  may  mark  the  site  (Rob., 
ii.,  391).  "Ma-re-shah"  (chief  city,  i.q.,  n^xip,  "that 
which  is  at  the  head  "),  one  of  the  cities  fortified  by 
Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  8)  ;  near  it  Asa  defeated 
the  Ethiopians  (2  Chron.  xiv.  9)  ;  mentioned  in  the 
Maccabean  wars  (i  Mace.  v.  66),  and  by  Josephus 
(Antiq.,  xii.,  8,  §  6,  xiv.,  4,  §  4)  ;  destroyed  by  the 
Parthians  B.C.  39  (Antiq.,  xiv.,  13,  §  9).  In  the 
fourth  century  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onomast.,  s.v. 
"Masera")  mention  its  ruins  as  lying  two  Roman  miles 
from  Eleutheropolis  (Beit-jibrin),  and  which  appear  to 
correspond  with  the  Maras/i,  discovered  by  Robinson 
S.S.W.  of  Beit-jibrin  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  67,  68).  So 
Tobler,  Van  de  Velde,  and  Grove. 

1  According  to  Geikie  (on  i  Sam.  xxiii.  2)  it  was  a  town  on  a 
steep  hill,  overlooking  the  valley  of  Elah,  or  the  Terebinth,  a 
short  way  south  of  Horeth  and  Adullam  (Hours  with  the  Bible, 
vol.  iii.). 


VERS.  45-43.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  255 

Vers.  45-47  (Fourth  Group:  The  Towns  on  the 
Philistine  Coast}. — Ver.  45. — "  'Eq-ron,"  see  on  xiii.  3. 
"Her  daughters"  i.e.,  her  smaller  towns,  dependent  on 
'Eqron,  the  capital,  and  distinct  from  the  D'HVD,  en 
closures,  or  pastoral  villages. 

Ver.  46. — no*},  "  and  westwards."  T^,  "  upon  the 
side  of"  "'Ash-dodh"  see  xi.  22. 

Ver.  47. — "'Az-sah"  see  x.  41.  '^p-^m,  cf.  ver.  4. 
For  bnjp  should  be  read  the  Qeri  bn$n,  which  is  found 
in  the  ancient  versions,  and  in  more  than  fifty  MSS. 
^n;n,  see  on  xiii.  23.  Note  that  Gath  (xi.  22)  and 
'Eshqelon  (xiii.  3),  though  not  named  here,  were  in 
cluded  in  this  territory.  The  number  of  the  towns  is 
not  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  list,  as  in  that  of  those 
preceding,  because  they  were  probably  still  in  the 
hands  of  the  Philistines.  In  fact,  the  district  of  Phi- 
listia,  though  assigned  to  Judah,  was  never  subdued 
by  it  (see  xiii.  2,  note *). 

Vers.  48-60  (JI"Jie  Toivns  in  the  Hill  Country 
Divided  into  Six  Groups], — This  hill  or  mountain 
district  of  Judah  extended  from  the  Negeb  to  the 
broad  Wady,  Beit-Hanina,  above  Jerusalem,  and  was 
bounded  on  the  west  by  the  shephelah,  and  on  the 
east  by  the  wilderness  of  Judaea.  The  hills  are  lime 
stone,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hebron  rise  to  a 
level  of  3,000  feet  above  the  sea.  On  their  tops  are 
now  ruins  of  ancient  towns,  and  their  sides  bear  traces 
of  former  vegetation.  The  district,  however,  is  not 
so  much  a  region  of  hills,  as  a  gentle  undulating 
table-land,  cut  into  insulated  portions  by  deep  ravines. 
(See  Porter's  Bib.  Atlas \  and  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal. , 
p.  1 6 1,  etc.) 

Vers.  48-51  (First  Group  of  Eleven  Towns  on  the 


256  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

South-West). — Ver.  48. — "Sha-mtr"  ("a  sharp  point 
or  thorn  "),  unknown,  though  perhaps  preserved  in  the 
ruins  of  Um  Shaumerah  (Rob.,  iii.,  App.,  p.  115). 
From  its  mention,  along  with  Yattir,  Sokhoh,  and 
Eshtemoth,  it  was  probably  eight  or  ten  miles  south 
of  Hebron  (Grove).  There  was  a  town  of  the  same 
name  on  the  mountains  of  Ephraim  (Judges  x.  i). 
Yat-tir  (height,  rt.  "in;,  "  to  be  over  and  above  "),  al 
lotted  to  the  priests  (xxi.  14),  and  one  of  the  towns 
to  which  David  sent^  a  present  from  the  spoil  of 
Ziklag  (i  Sam.  xxx.  37)  ;  now  Attir,  ten  miles  south 
of  Hebron  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  494-5).  "  So-khok" 
(a  hedge),  in  the  Wady-el-Khalil,  about  ten  miles 
south-west  of  Hebron,  bearing  like  the  other  So-khoh 
(xv.  35)  the  name  of  esh-Suweikeh  (Grove). 

Ver.  49. — " Dan-nah"  (lowland,  rt.  jn,  to  be  low), 
unknown,  though  probably  south  or  south-west  of 
Hebron.  The  village  Idhnah  in  the  low  hills  appears 
a  suitable  position  (Lieut.  Conder).  ''  Qir-yatk-san- 
nah,"  see  note  on  Debhir  in  x.  38. 

Ver.  50. — "'A-nabk"  (see  on  xi.  21),  north-east  of 
Sokhoh  and  south-west  of  Hebron.  "'Esh-fnioh" 
(obedience,  rt.  tf»^),  on  the  east  of  Sokkoh  and  Anabh  ; 
ceded  to  the  priests  (xxi.  14  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  57),  one 
of  the  towns  to  which  David  sent  a  present  (i  Sam. 
xxx.  27),  now  Es-Semua,  seven  miles  south  of 
Hebron,  an  inhabited  village  with  remains  of  walls 
and  of  an  ancient  castle  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  204-5). 
"'A-ntm"  (fountains),  the  Heb.  DW,  contraction  for 
D^ry,  now  el-GJiuwcin,  the  ruins  of  a  village  south  of 
Semua  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  204). 

Ver.  5  i. — The  three  towns  mentioned  in  this  verse 
are  unknown.  "  Go-shcn  "  :  There  is  nothing  to  con- 


VERS.  52,  53.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  257 

nect  it  with  the  Goshen  mentioned  in  x.  41.  "  Cho- 
lon "  (sandy,  from  ^fn,  sand),  ceded  to  the  priests 
(xxi.  15),  called  Hilen  (Auth.  Vers.,  I  Chron.  vi.  58). 
Another  of  the  same  name  in  Moab  (Jer.  xlviii.  21). 
"  Gi-loli "  (exile,  rt.  rta,  to  emigrate),  the  birthplace 
of  Ahithophel  (2  Sam.  xv.  12),  and  the  place  of  his 
death  (2  Sam.  xvii.  23).  Lieut.  Conder  thinks  it  may 
probably  be  the  ruin  Jala,  in  the  Hebron  mountains 
(Pal.  Explor.  Fund]. 

Vers.  52-54  (Second  Group  of  Towns  to  the  North 
of  tJie  Former  in  the  Country  around  Hebron}. — 
Ver.  52. — "  'A-rdbh  "  (ambush)  ;  Sept.  Alex.,  'Epeo/3, 
and  described  in  the  Onomast.  as  a  village  in  Daroma 
(i.e.,  to  the  south),  called  Eremiththa.  It  has  been 
identified  by  Lieut.  Conder  with  the  present  ruin  er 
Rabiyeh  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund].  "  DA-mah  "  (silence), 
probably  ed-Daume/i,  a  ruined  village,  six  miles  south 
west  of  Hebron  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  2  1 2).  "  'Esh-an  " 
(support),  occurs  here  only,  site  unknown.  Knobel 
conjectures  that  it  is  a  corrupt  reading  for  Shema 
(i  Chron.  ii.  43),  because  the  Sept.  reading  is  So/xa, 
and  hence  he  connects  it  with  the  ruins  of  Simia,  on 
the  south  of  Daumeh  (Keil).  So  Lieut.  Conder  : 
"  Possibly  the  ruin  es  Simla,  near  Dumah  (Domeh), 
south  of  Hebron.  The  situation  is  satisfactory,  and 
the  site  ancient." 

Ver.  53. — "  Ya-niim"  (sleep,  from  D-13,  to  slumber): 
Unknown  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onomast}  ;  pro 
bably  the  village  Beni  Nairn,  east  of  Hebron  (Lieut. 
Conder).  "  Beth-tap-pil-ach  "  (house  of  the  apple  or 
citron),  now  TeffuJi,  about  five  miles  west  of  Hebron, 
where  there  are  olive-groves  and  vineyards  (Rob. 
Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  71).  "  'A-phe-qah  "  (strength)  :  Probably 

17 


258  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

the  same  as  that  in  xii.  i  8  ;  but  distinct  from  that  in 
xiii.  4. 

Ver.  5  4. — "  Chum-tah "  (perhaps  i.q.  Syr.  "  a 
defence,"  or  "a  place  of  lizards"),  unknown.  " ' Qir- 
yath-Ar-ba\"  see  note  on  x.  3.  "  Tsi-6r"  (smallness), 
unknown,  for  the  Tsior  mentioned  by  Eusebius 
(Onomast.\  with  which  Rosenm.  would  identify  it, 
was  between  Aelia  and  Eleutheropolis,  and  not,  as 
this,  upon  the  mountains,  near  to  Hebron. 

Vers.  55-57  (Third  Group  of  Ten  Towns,  East  of 
those  in  the  two  Preceding  Groups,  and  next  to  the  Wil 
derness]. — Ver.  55. — "Ma- on"  (a  dwelling),  gave  its 
name  to  the  wilderness  so  called  (i  Sam.  xxiii.  24)  ; 
was  the  residence  of  Nabal  (i  Sam.  xxv.  2)  ;  now 
Main,  on  a  conical  hill,  eight  or  nine  miles  south-east 
of  Hebron  (Grove).  Geikie  (on  i  Sam.  xxiii.  24) 
says  that  it  was  about  five  miles  south  of  Ziph,  and 
hid  in  the  ravines  of  a  hill  close  by,  which  rises  in  a 
great  hump  of  rock,  2,887  ^eet  above  the  sea  (Hours 
with  the  Bible,  vol.  iii.,  p.  167  ;  Map  of  Palestine,  Pal. 
Fund  Survey,  sheet  xxv.).  " Kar-mel"  (fruitful  field), 
now  Kurmnl,  a  little  to  the  north-west  of  Main.  It 
is  mentioned  as  the  place  where  Nabal  and  Abigail 
had  their  possessions  (i  Sam.  xxv.  2),  and  where 
King  Uzziah  had  his  vineyards  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  10). 
In- the  time  of  Eusebius  and  Jerome  it  was  the  seat 
of  a  Roman  garrison  (Onomast.}.  It  figures  in  the 
wars  of  the  crusades,  having  been  held  by  King 
Amalrick  against  Saladin,  A.D.  1172.  "  ZipJi"  from 
pj-IT  (unused),  probably  i.q.  2-1T,  to  flow  (Arab.),  to 
borrow  (Chald.),  near  to  the  wilderness  so  called, 
whither  David  fled  from  Saul  (i  Sam.  xxiii.  14, 
xxvi.  2,  3),  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  8) ; 


VERS.  56,  57.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  259 

now  Tell  Zif,  three  or  four  miles  south-east  of  Hebron  ; 
it  lies,  says  Robinson  (ii.,  191),  on  a  low  hill  or  ridge 
between  two  small  wadies,  which  commence  here  and 
run  toward  the  Dead  Sea.  Another  Ziph  is  that  in 
ver.  24.  "  Yft-tah"  ("stretched  out,"  from  ntaa), 
allotted  to  the  priests  (xxi.  1 6),  described  by  Eusebius 
(Onomast.}  as  a  very  large  village,  eighteen  Roman 
miles  south-east  of  Eleutheropolis,  now  Yutta,  close 
to  Main  and  Kurmul  (Robinson,  Grove).  Reland 
(Pal.,  870)  would  identify  it  with  the  TrdXts  'louSct 
mentioned  in  Luke  i.  39,  a  city  in  which  Zacharias 
resided,  'lovra  having  perhaps  been  changed  into 
'lovSa,  either  by  error  of  the  text  or  for  euphony's 
sake.  But  this,  though  possible,  has  not  yet  been 
confirmed  by  any  positive  evidence  (Grove  ;  see  also 
Alford's  note  on  Luke  i.  39). 

Ver.  56. — "  Yiz-re'El"  (God  sows),  the  native  place 
of  Ahinoam,  one  of  David's  wives  (i  Sam.  xxv.  43)  ; 
not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Yizreel  in  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon  (xvii.  16,  xix.  18),  but  probably  lying 
south-east  of  Hebron.  So  the  two  following  towns. 
"  Yoq-de'am "  ("  burning  of  the  people,"  Ges.,  Lex.  ; 
or  "  possessed  by  the  people,"  rt.  \r\\>t  in  Syr.  to 
possess,  Ges.  in  T/ies.),  the  site  unknown.  "  Za- 
no-ach"  see  on  ver.  34  ;  perhaps  identical  with 
Sanute  or  Zctn&tali  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  204,  note), 
mentioned  by  Seetzen  (Reisen,  iii.,  29)  as  below 
Senuia  or  Za-nu'ah,  and  about  ten  miles  south-east 
of  Hebron. 

Ver.  57. — "  haq-Qa-yin"  ("the  lance,"  Ges.;  or 
from  }£,  a  nest,  in  allusion  to  its  position,  Grove)  ; 
site  unknown  ;  possibly  the  same  as  Jukin,  on  the 
south-east  of  Hebron  (Rob.,  ii.,  p.  449).  ^Gibh'ah" 


260  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

(hill 1),  a  name  which  under  different  forms  often 
occurs  in  Scripture.  Here  supposed  by  Robinson  to 
be  identical  with  the  village  of  Jebah,  on  a  hill  in  the 
Wady  el-Musurr  ;  but  this  situation  would  be  too  far 
to  the  north-west  (see  Keil  in  loc.}.  It  was  doubtless 
near  to  Karmel  (ver.  55)  and  the  other  towns  in  this 
group.  "  Tini-nak,"  not  that  mentioned  in  ver.  I  o 
(see  note),  but  probably  the  same  as  that  in  Gen. 
xxxviii.  12.  Site  undiscovered. 

Vers.  58,  59  (Fourth  Group,  on  the  North  of  the 
last-mentioned}. — Ver.  58. — "  Chal-chul"  (trembling, 
rt.  'p-in),  called  in  the  Onomast.  "Alula  juxta  Hebron." 
It  still  retains  the  same  name  Halhul  or  Hulhul,  and 
is  about  four  miles  north  of  Hebron  (Rob.,  Later  Bib. 
Res.,  i.,  281).  A  tomb,  said  by  the  Jews  to  be  that 
of  the  prophet  Jonah,  is  to  be  seen  among  the  ruins. 
"  BetJi-tsiir  "  (house  of  rock  2),  one  of  the  towns  which 
Rehoboam  fortified  (2  Chron.  xi.  7),  mentioned  in 
Neh.  iii.  16,  and  in  i  Mace.  iv.  29,  61,  vi.  7,  26,  31  ; 
2  Mace.  xi.  5  ;  according  to  Josephus  (Antiq.,  xiii.,  5,  6) 
the  strongest  place  in  all  Judaea ;  now  Beit-Sdr, 
north-west  of  Halhul  (Rob.,  iii.,  277),  and  command 
ing  the  road  to  Beersheba  and  Hebron.  Near  the 
ruins  of  the  town  is  a  spring,  Ain  edh-Dirweh,  which, 
in  the  days  of  Jerome  and  later,  was  regarded  as  the 

1  From  1733,  i.q.  223,  to  be  curved  like  an  arch,  whence  23? 
something  gibbous.  The  word  HlDa  is  never  applied  to  a  high 
or  extended  mountain,  like  Lebanon  or  Sinai,  while  from  its 
root  it  is  particularly  applicable  to  the  humped  or  rounded  hills 
of  Palestine  (Stanley,  Sin.  a  fid  Pal.,  p.  497). 

a  Root  1-1 V,  to  bind  together.  The  leading  idea  of  the  word 
is  strength  and  solidity,  and  it  is  accordingly  applied  to  rocks, 
irrespective  of  their  height,  height  being  only  in  one  or  two 
cases  (as  Numb,  xxiii.  9 ;  Psalm  Ixi.  2)  associated  with  the 
word  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  498). 


VER.  59.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  261 

scene  of  the  baptism  of  the  eunuch  by  Philip  (Acts 
viii.),  but  as  Beit-sur  is  not  near  the  road  to  Gaza, 
this  legend  is  improbable.  "Gedh6r"  (hedge  or  wall), 
the  home  of  Joelah  and  Zebadiah,  two  of  David's 
mighty  men  (i  Chron.  xii.  7)  ;  now  probably  Jedur, 
between  Bethlehem  and  Hebron  (Rob.,  iii.,  283  ; 
Grove). 

Ver.  59. — "Ma-a-rath"  ("a  place  naked  of  trees," 
rt.  rnr,  to  be  bare)  :  Eusebius  and  Jerome  mention 
the  name  (Onomasticon,  "  Maroth  "),  but  do  not  seem 
to  have  known  the  site.  Lieut.  Conder  would  identify 
it  with  the  present  village  Beit  Ummar  (Pal.  Explor. 
Fund,  Map,  sheet  xxi.).  Perhaps,  as  Grove  suggests, 
the  word  may  be  derived  from  i"nrp,  a  cave,  since 
caves  are  a  characteristic  feature  of  the  mountainous 
districts  of  Palestine.  "  Bctli-a-ndth "  (house  of 
response  or  of  echo),  perhaps  the  modern  Beit-Ain&n, 
near  to  Hallul  and  Beit-Sur,  discovered  by  Wolcott, 
and  visited  by  Robinson  (iii.,  281).  "  'El-fqdn  "  (God 
the  foundation),  quite  unknown.  Here  the  Sept. 
inserts  a  fiftli  group  of  eleven  towns,1  which  lay  to  the 

1  Viz.,  QfKU),  'E<ppa$u'  avrrj  eori  Bat$Xee)i,  4>a-ycbp,  Alrav,  KovXci/, 
Tara^i,  8a>/3j)y  (or  Scopes,  Cod.AleX.},  Kape/x,  TaXejn,  6e(%>  (Bai&jp, 
Cod.  Alex.},  Mai/o^w.  Of  these  0eKa>,  the  well-known  Tekoa, 
or  Tekoah  (pitching,  sc.  of  tents),  was  the  home  of  the  wise 
woman  who  interceded  with  David  (2  Sam.  xiv.  2),  and  of  the 
prophet  Amos  (i.  i),  who  is  said  to  have  been  buried  there.  It 
was  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  6),  and  still  inhabited 
after  the  captivity  (Neh.  iii.  5,  27) ;  now  Tekuah,  on  the  top  of 
a  hill  covered  with  ancient  ruins,  two  hours  to  the  south  of 
Bethlehem.  'E<ppa#a  (fruitful),  i.q.  Beth-le-chem  (house  of 
bread;  Gen.  xxxv.  19,  xlviii.  7;  Ruth  iv.  u  ;  Micah  v.  i). 
Jerome  and  Kalisch  observe  that  the  two  names  have  virtually 
the  same  meaning,  a  view  which  is  favoured  by  Stanley's 
description  of  the  neighbouring  corn-fields  (Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  164).  <£ayo>p,  now  Faghur,  a  heap  of  ruins  south-west  of 
Bethlehem  (Rob.,  Later  Bib.  Res.,  p.  275).  Alrav,  written 


262  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

north  of  the  preceding  group,  and  south  of  Jerusalem. 
This,  according  to  Maurer,  Hengstenberg,  and  others, 
was  an  arbitrary  interpolation  of  the  Sept.  As,  how 
ever,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  writer  of  the  Book  of 
Joshua  should  have  omitted  the  names  of  the  towns 
lying  in  this  locality,1  and  as  some  of  those  towns 
are  still  standing  or  in  ruins,  it  would  seem  more 


Etam  (2  Chron.  xi.  6),  one  of  the  cities  fortified  by  Rehoboam  ; 
the  name  is  still  recognisable  in  Ain-Attar  between  Bethle 
hem  and  Phagor  (Tobler,  Dritte  Wand.,  pp.  88,  89).  KouAoi/, 
now  Kulonich  ;  identified  by  Grove  and  others  with  Emmaus 
(Luke  xxiv.  13),  a  colony  of  the  Romans,  which  as  such  was 
exempted  by  Titus  from  being  sold  (Joseph.,  Bel.  Jud.,  vii.  6, 
§  6) ;  four  and  a  half  miles  west  of  Jerusalem.  Tara/i  is  undis 
covered.  Scopes,  upon  a  ridge  on  the  south  of  Wady  Aly,  now 
Saris,  ten  miles  east  of  Jerusalem.  Kape/i,  now  Ain  Karem, 
a  large  flourishing  village,  two  hours  to  the  west  of  Jerusalem, 
with  a  Franciscan  convent,  dedicated  to  John  the  Baptist,  in 
the  middle,  and  a  fountain  (Rob.,  ii.,  p.  141  ;  Bib.  Res.,  p.  271). 
r«X«/*,  a  different  place  from  the  Gallim  (Isa.  x.  30  ;  i  Sam. 
xxv.  44)  which  lay  north  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 
Bai$!7p,  now  Bitter,  a  small,  dirty  village,  south-west  of  Jeru 
salem,  with  a  beautiful  spring  and  gardens  arranged  in  terraces 
on  the  west  slope  of  the  Wady  Bitter  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  p.  266). 
"irG  means  a  "section"  or  "division,"  and  is  applied  to  a 
country  divided  by  mountains  and  valleys  (see  Cant.  ii.  17),  and 
this  is  the  character  of  the  country  about  Bether  (Konrad 
Furrer,  Wanderings  through  Pal.,  p.  192).  MOJ/O^OJ,  con 
jectured  by  Knobel  and  others  to  be  the  same  as  Manahath  in 
i  Chron.  viii.  6,  an  identification  not  considered  satisfactory  by 
Grove.  (See  on  "  Manahath  "  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}.  It  may 
possibly,  says  Lieut.  Conder,  be  the  village  Malhah,  south-west 
of  Jerusalem,  "  L  "  being  often  put  for  "  N." 

1  Keil  remarks  it  as  a  circumstance  worthy  of  consideration, 
and  one  of  no  little  importance,  that  not  one  of  the  groups  of 
cities  hitherto  named,  embraces  any  part  of  the  country  between 
Bethzur  and  Gedor  on  the  one  side,  and  Jerusalem  on  the  other, 
a  space,  i.e.,  of  about  twelve  Roman  miles  in  length,  and  nearly 
ten  in  breadth.  Yet,  to  judge  from  the  closeness  with  which 
the  whole  of  the  range  of  mountains  was  studded  in  other  parts 
with  cities  and  villages,  it  is  impossible  that  the  only  cities  within 
this  space  should  have  been  the  three  mentioned  in  ver.  59. 


VERS.  60-61.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  263 

probable  that  the  eleven  names  were  originally  in  the 
Hebrew  text,  but  were  omitted  by  a  transcriber,  who 
mistook  the  word  jiTlVD  at  the  end  of  the  missing 
passage  ("  eleven  cities  and  their  villages ")  for  the 
same  word  at  the  end  of  ver.  59.  So  Clericus, 
Capellus,  Knobel,  Keil,  Fay,  etc.  This  omission 
must  have  been  of  very  ancient  date,  since  the  Sept. 
is  the  only  one  of  the  ancient  versions  in  which  the 
missing  passage  is  found. 

Ver.  60  (A  Sixth  Group  of  Two  Towns  and  on  tJie 
North-  West  Border  ofjudah). — "  Qir-yath-Ba-al"  see 
ver.  9,  ix.  17.  "  ha-Rab-bah  "  (The  Great),  unknown. 
Possibly  the  ruin  Rtibba,  west  of  Beit-Ibrin  (Lieut. 
Conder). 

Vers.  61-62  (The  Towns  in  the  Wilderness  \_Midh- 
bar\  between  the  Mountains  and  the  Dead  Sea). — 
This  district  extended  to  Wady  Fikreh  on  the  south, 
and  to  the  region  of  Maon,  Ziph,  and  Bethlehem  on 
the  west.  It  was  the  scene  of  David's  wanderings 
(i  Sam.  xxiii.  24;  Psalm  Ixiii.  i),  of  John  the 
Baptist's  preaching  (Matt.  iii.  i),  and  perhaps  of  our 
Lord's  temptation  (Matt.  iv.).  Here  there  is  scanty 
vegetation,  and  the  limestone  abounds  with  caverns. 
The  small  number  of  towns  mentioned  seems  to 
show  that  it  was  not  much  more  fertile  anciently 
than  now  (Clark's  Bib.  Atlas,  p.  12). 

Ver.  6 1. — " Beth-ha-a-ra-bhah"  see  ver.  6.  u Mid- 
din  "  (measures),  probably  close  to  the  Dead  Sea, 
but  unknown.  "  Se kJia-kJiaJi "  (enclosure),  in  the 
Judean  desert.  Possibly  the  ruin  Sikkeh,  east  of 
Bethany  (Lieut.  Conder,  Map,  sheet  xvii.).  Neither 
of  these  places  is  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and 
Jerome. 


264  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xv. 

Ver.  62. — "  Jian-Nibh-shan  "  (the  soft  soil),  cf. 
Bashan,  mentioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  under 
the  name  of  Nempsan,  or  Nebsan  (Onomast.},  but 
its  position  not  indicated,  nor  has  it  since  been 
discovered.  "  The  City  of  Salt"  probably  in  the 
salt  valley  at  the  south  end  of  the  Dead  Sea  (Rob., 
Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  109),  the  scene  of  repeated  defeats  of 
the  Edomites  (2  Sam.  viii.  13;  2  Kings  xiv.  7  ; 
I  Chron.  xviii.  12;  Psalm  Ix.  2).  "'En-ge-dMn 
(the  fountain  of  the  wild  goat),  so  called  from  the 
numerous  ibexes,  or  Syrian  chamois,  which  inhabit 
the  cliffs  in  this  district.  "  The  oasis,  which  it  forms 
amidst  the  naked  limestone  precipices,  must  be  one  of 
the  most  striking  natural  scenes  in  Palestine"  (Stanley, 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  295).  Anciently  it  was  called 
CJia-tsa-ts6n-ta-mar  (the  pruning  of  the  palm  ;  Gen. 
xiv.  7 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  2),  for  the  spot  was  once  famous 
for  palms  (Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  v.,  17)  ;  it  was  one  of 
David's  retreats  (i  Sam.  xxiii.  29,  xxiv.  i),  and  lay 
near  the  middle  of  the  west  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea 
(Ezek.  xlvii.  i  o)  ;  the  water  of  the  fountain  is  sweet, 
and  the  temperature  of  it  is  81°  Fah.  (Rob.,  ii.,  210)  ; 
now  A  in  Jidy. 

Ver.  63. — As  we  do  not  read  in  this  book  that 
Joshua  captured  Jerusalem,  but  only  that  he  slew  its 
king  (x.  18-26,  xii.  10),  many  think  that  the  event 
here  referred  to  happened  after  Joshua's  death,  viz., 
when,  as  we  read  in  Judges  i.  8,  the  tribe  of  Judah 
captured  and  set  fire  to  Jerusalem.  It  is  true  that 
the  A.  V.  renders  this  latter  passage  "Now  tJie 
children  of  Judah  had  fought"  etc.,  but,  as  M.  Henry 
well  remarks,  "the  original  speaks  of  it  as  a  thing 
now  done,  and  that  seems  most  probable,  because 


VER.  63.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  265 

it  is  said  to  be  done  by  the  children  of  Judah  in 
particular,  not  by  all  Israel  in  general,  whom  Joshua 
commanded."  The  expression  "  could  nof,"  in  xv. 
63,  may  allude  to  the  fact  that  the  stronghold  of  the 
city  lay  within  the  territory  of  Benjamin,  to  whom 
Jebusi  was  allotted  (xviii.  28).  Of  the  Benjamites 
themselves  it  is  said  (Judges  i.  21)  that  they  "  did 
not  drive  out  the  febusites"  which  may  intimate 
inertness  on  their  part  rather  than  inability.  The 
concluding  words  of  ver.  63  are  important  as  proving 
that  the  Book  of  Joshua  was  written  before  the  time 
of  David  (cf.  2  Sam.  v.  6-g). 


CHAPTERS    XVI.-XVIL 

Territory  of  the  Children  of  Joseph,  viz.,  of  EpJiraim 
and  of  the  Half-  Tribe  of  Manasseli. 

THERE  was  one  lot  drawn  for  both,  that  their  terri 
tories  might  be  adjacent,  as  both  tribes  were  closely 
related.  Hence  (i)  the  southern  boundary  of  the 
whole  territory  is  described  (xvi.  1-4)  ;  (2)  the  limits 
of  Ephraim  in  particular  (xvi.  5-10)  ;  (3)  the  limits 
of  Manasseh  (xvii.  1-13).  The  inheritance  of  these 
tribes  comprised  the  fairest  portion  of  the  land  of 
Palestine,  and  Jacob's  prophecy  concerning  them  was 
fulfilled,  "  Let  them  grow  into  a  multitude  in  the  midst 
of  the  earth  (land)"  (Gen.  xlviii.  16). 


266  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xvi 


CHAPTER    XVI. 

VERS.    1-4. — Southern  Boundary  of  tJie   Inheritance 
of  Josephs   Sons. 

Ver.  i. — "And  there  came  ont  the  lot"  etc.,  i.e.,  the 
lot  came  out  of  the  urn  ;  cf,  xix.  i,  17,  24,  etc.  NT1, 
is  here  =  7K  (xviii.  1 1),  and  7"jja  taken  in  connection 
with  the  words  "  from  Jordan,  etc.,"  means  a  portion 
of  land  received  by  lot  (cf.  Judges  i.  3,  and  Ges.,  Lex. 
[2],  p.  165).  F]pr  r?;&,  "for  the  sons  of  Joseph"  i.e.,  the 
kindred  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh.  inn?  f^'p, 
"from  Jordan  at  Jericho"  see  on  xiii.  32.  nrnrp  •  -  •  ^7, 
"  at  the  waters  of  JericJw  eastward"  :  This  is  added  to 
mark  more  clearly  the  point  at  which  the  boundary 
commenced.  The  allusion  is  to  the  celebrated  foun 
tain  called  'Ain-es-Sultan,  healed  by  Elisha  (2  Kings 
ii.  19;  Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  306).  "(To)  the 
wilderness  going  up  from  Jericho  into  *  the  hill  district 
to  Bethel,"  or,  as  Keil,  "  the  wilderness,"  is  put  in 
apposition  to  "  lot "  (i.e.,  the  land  obtained  by  the 
lot),  so  that  the  sense  is,  "  namely,  the  wilderness 
going  up  from  Jericho,"  etc.  For  a  certain  distance 
the  southern  boundary  was  the  same  as  the  northern 
boundary  of  Benjamin.  The  "  wilderness  "  meant  is 
that  of  Bethaven  (xviii.  1 2,  vii.  2),  which  stretched 
between  Wady  Suwar  and  Mutyar  (Van  de  Velde's 
Map}.  ^N-n11?  (see  vii.  2)  according  to  the  Masoretic 
text  is  separated  from  ina,  and  is  rendered  as  an 
accus.  by  the  Sept.,  Arab.,  and  Chald.,  and  by  our 
Revised  Vers. 

1  "Through"  (Rev.  Vers.). 


VERS.  2,  3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  267 

Ver.  2. — "  And  it  went  out  from  BetJiel  to  Luz"  : 
Keil  thinks  that  Bethel  here  stands  for  the  moun 
tainous  district  around  Bethel,  because  in  Gen.  xxviii. 
19,  Luz  (see  on  vii.  2)  and  Bethel  are  names  of  the 
same  town;  but  perhaps  it  denotes  "  the  certain  place" 
(Gen.  xxviii.  1 1)  where  Abraham  had  set  up  an 
altar,  and  which  Jacob  after  his  dream  called  Bethel 
(house  of  God),  which  name,  perhaps  on  account 
of  its  sanctity,  was  afterwards  given  to  the  adjacent 
city  Luz  (see  Art.  "  Luz "  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}. 
"To  the  border  of  the  ArcJiite  to  'Ataroth"  :  Whether 
the  patronymic  "  Archite  "  is  derived  from  Erech,  a 
town  in  Mesopotamia  (Gen.  x.  10),  now  Edessa,  and 
implies  that  a  colony  from  thence  had  settled  in 
these  parts,  can  be  only  matter  of  conjecture ; 
possibly  some  ancient  indigenous  tribe  may  be  so 
called  (Grove).  The  name  is  often  given  to  Hushai, 
David's  friend  (2  Sam.  xv.  32,  xvi.  16,  etc.).  'A-ta- 
rotli,  called  Ataroth-addar  (crowns  of  greatness  or 
largeness;  ver.  5,  xviii.  13),  perhaps  to  distinguish 
it  from  the  tribe  of  Gad  (Numb,  xxxii.  3,  34). 
Robinson  identifies  it  with  the  village  Atdra,  two 
miles  south  of  Bireh  (Beeroth),  a  little  to  the  south 
west  of  Beitin  or  Bethel  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  265). 

Ver.  3. — "  The  Yaphletite  "  (freed  by  the  Lord),  a 
patronymic  (§  86,  5).  Our  A.  V.  renders  "  Japhleti," 
and  seems  to  have  regarded  it  as  a  place.  No  trace 
of  the  name  is  now  to  be  found.  Grove  conjectures 
that  it  may  have  belonged  to  an  ancient  native  tribe 
(see  on  ver.  2,  and  cf.  the  names  Zemaraim,  Ophni, 
Jebusi).  The  "  Yaphlet  "  in  the  genealogy  of  the 
tribe  of  Asher  (i  Chron.  vii.  32,  33)  cannot  be  iden 
tified  with  it.  "  BetJi-clid-ron  the  Nether"  see  on 


268  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xvi 

x.  10.  "  Ge-zer"  (a  place  cut  off,  a  precipice),  x.  33, 
xii.  12  :  Grove  says  that  it  may  possibly  be  in  or 
about  Yasur,  between  Jaffa  and  Ramleh.  "  Towards 
the  sea"  i.e.,  towards  the  Mediterranean. 

Vers.  5-10  (Inheritance  of  Ephraini]. — "'Epk-ra- 
yirn  "  (perhaps  "  double  land,"  "  twin  land  ").  This 
tribe  took  precedence  of  that  of  Manasseh,  according 
to  the  prophecy  (Gen.  xlviii.  20).  It  was  subsequently 
included  in  the  Kingdom  of  Samaria. 

Ver.  5. — This  verse  gives  a  concise  description  of 
the  southern  boundary,  which  had  been  described 
more  fully  in  vers.  1-4.  Only  the  western  half  of 
that  boundary  is  noticed,  commencing  from  Ataroth- 
addar  (ver.  2).  Upper  Bethchoron  is  substituted  for 
Bethchoron  the  Nether  (ver.  3),  the  two  places  being 
near  together  (x.  10),  and  belonging  to  Ephraim. 

Ver.  6. — "And  the  border  went  out  toward  the  sea 
[or  west]  to  ham-Mikh-wfthath  (the  hiding-place1)  on 
the  north" :  The  northern  border  is  here  meant.  In  the 
remainder  of  the  verse,  and  in  ver.  7,  its  direction  from 
a  central  point — perhaps  the  watershed  which  sepa 
rates  the  waters  which  flow  into  the  Mediterranean 
from  those  flowing  into  the  Jordan — is  described  east 
ward,  and  in  ver.  8  its  direction  westward,  Keil  thinks 
that  perhaps  the  original  reading  of  the  first  clause  was 
"  towards  the  north  the  border  went  out  to  Mikhme- 
tkath."  This  town  was  before  Shechem  (xvii.  7),  but 
the  site  is  unknown.  Ta-a-nath-Shi-l6h  ("  approach 
to  Shiloh,"  rt.  n^K,  to  approach,  to  meet),  said,  in  the 
Onomast.,  to  have  been  ten  Roman  miles  from  Nea- 
polis  (Sichem),  and  between  it  and  the  Jordan  ; 

1  Rt.  n£>3  (unused),  probably  i.q.  DH3,  to  lay  up. 


VERS.  7,  8.  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  269 

probably  the  ®r)va  of  Ptolemy  (y.  16,  5),  the  present 
Tana,  Ain  Tana,  a  heap  of  ruins  south-east  of  Nablus 
(Neapolis).  "  And  passed  by  it  on  t/ie  east  of  Ya-?io- 
chak  (rest)."  TnTH,  which  is  omitted  by  the  Syr., 
Sept.,  and  Houbigant,  refers  to  n6t?,  which  is  masc. 
in  form.  The  n  in  nnfJ*,  according  to  Ges.  (Lex.\  is 
local,  but  see  next  verse,  where  it  evidently  forms 
part  of  the  word  ;  also  here  the  preceding  noun  is  in 
the  construct,  form  (§  89).  Perhaps  the  place  is 
identical  with  the  present  Yanun,  three  or  four  miles 
further  than  Taanath-Shiloh  towards  the  east  (Rob., 
Later  Bib.  Res.,  p.  297),  where  there  are  very  ancient 
and  extensive  ruins  (Van  de  Velde). 

Ver.  7.  —  MtA-ta-rdtk"  (crowns),  different  from  the 
Ataroth  in  vers.  2,  5,  which  was  on  the  southern 
boundary.  It  is  probably  to  be  sought  for  in  the 
Ghor  (Keil).  "  To  Na-a-rah  "  (hand-maiden,  damsel), 
rnyj  with  n  loc.1  ;  perhaps  the  same  as  Naaran 
(i  Chron.  vii.  28),  described  in  the  Onomast.  as  a 
small  village  of  the  Jews,  five  miles  from  Jericho, 
probably  on  the  north-east.  "And  it  readied  to  (lit. 
struck  upon)  Jericho"  i.e.,  the  northern  side  of  the  terri 
tory,  for  Jericho  belonged  to  Benjamin  (xviii.  21), 
and  at  this  point  it  coincided  with  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph  (cf.  ver.  i)  and  the 
northern  of  Benjamin  (xviii.  1  2). 

Ver.  8  (  Western  Half  of  the  North  Boundary].  — 
"Tap-pA-ach"  (a  place  fruitful  in  apples),  called  En- 
Tappuach  (xvii.  8),  probably  west  of  Sichem,  and 
distinct  from  the  Tappuach  in  xii.  17.  "To  tJie  water 
course  of  Qa-nah"  (reed),  between  Joppa  and  Cesarea, 


1  Written  nrny:  in  the  Hebrew  text. 


270  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xvi 

perhaps  the  modern  Nahr  el  Kassab,  called  in 
Kiepert's  Map  the  Nahr  el  Falik.  Stanley  says  that 
a  portion  of  the  plain  of  Sharon  is  called  Khassab 
(reedy),  apparently  from  the  high  reeds  which  grow 
on  the  banks  of  the  rivers  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  260). 
nra'n,  "  towards  the  sea,"  i.e.,  the  Mediterranean. 

Ver.  9. — "And  the  cities,  the  places  which  were 
separately  apportioned  to  the  sons  of  Ephraim "  : 
n^jpn,  lit.  "  the  separations,"  rt.  ^na,  to  separate.  If 
the  full  stop  at  the  end  of  the  preceding  verse  is 
removed,  the  verb  "  were  "  need  not  be  inserted  as  by 
our  Auth.  Vers.  before  the  words  "  among  the  inherit 
ance."  The  verse  indicates  that  to  the  inheritance  of 
Ephraim,  as  described  above,  were  added  separate 
cities  from  the  territory  of  Manasseh,  doubtless 
because  the  inheritance  of  Ephraim  was  otherwise 
too  little  for  them. 

Ver.  10. — "Geser"  see  xvi.  3.  "  They  drove  not 
out"  see  Judges  i.  29  ;  I  Kings  ix.  I6,1  and  cf.  xv.  63. 
This  was  in  disobedience  to  God's  express  com 
mand  (Exod.  xxiii.  3  I  ;  Deut.  vii.  2),  and  was  justly 
punished  by  the  corruption  of  morals,  etc.,  arising 
from  association  with  idolaters  (see  Hosea  xii.  7,  8, 
iv.  1 7).  131  *n?l,  "  and  was  reduced  to  the  tribute  of  a 
servant"  i.e.,  became  tributary  dependents,  eyeVovro 
vTTofyopoi  SovXot,  Sept.  (cf.  i  Kings  ix.  21).  The 
'derivation  of  DO  is  uncertain  ;  perhaps  it  is  contracted 
from  D3E,  toll,  tribute,  rt.  DD3,  to  number  ;  like  HDp, 
number,  contracted  from  np3»  (Ges.,  Lex.}.  In  what 
form  the  tribute  was  rendered,  whether  in  money, 
products,  or  service,  is  unknown. 

1  Here  we  have  a  proof  that  the  Book  of  Joshua  must  have 
been  written  before  the  beginning  of  Solomon's  reign. 


VER.  i.]  THE  ROOK  OF  JOSHUA.  271 

CHAPTER    XVII. 
VERS.  1-13. —  The  Portion  of  ManasseJi. 

Ver.  i. — In  the  first  clause  there  seems  assigned  a 
reason  why  an  inheritance  on  both  sides  of  the  Jordan 
was  given  to  Manasseh,  viz.,  because  he  was  the  first 
born  of  Joseph,  and  as  such  was  entitled  to  a  double 
portion,  this  his  birthright  not  being  invalidated  by 
the  preference  shown  to  Ephraim  by  Jacob  (cf.  Deut. 
xxi.  1 5,  etc.).  In  the  second  clause  reference  is 
made  to  the  portion  which  the  half  of  this  tribe 
had  already  received  on  the  east  of  Jordan.  "V^ft1?  is 
first  put  absol.,  and  then  resumed  in  the  i1?  which 
follows  w\  (see  §  145,  2)  ;  render  "to  Ma-khtr,  the 
firstborn  of  Manasseh,  the  father  of  Gil-'adh,  to  him 
were  Gil-adh  and  BasJian  (allotted),  because  he  was  a 
man  of  war."1  Ma-khir  (sold)  here  stands  for  his 
descendants,  by  whom  Gil-'adh  was  conquered 
(Nurnb.  xxxii.  39;  Deut.  iii.  15).  The  expression 
"  father  of  Gil-'adh,"  denotes  lord  or  possessor  of 

1  The  Manassites  at  that  time,  says  Dr.  Geikie,  were  cer 
tainly  the  most  warlike  of  the  tribes.  Machir,  Jair,  and 
Nobah,  its  chiefs,  were  not  shepherds,  like  the  Reubenites, 
but  valiant  warriors,  whose  deeds  are  frequently  recorded 
(Numb,  xxxii.  30 ;  Deut.  iii.  13-15).  These  districts  were  the 
most  difficult  in  the  whole  country,  for  they  embraced  the  hills 
of  Gilead,  and  the  almost  impregnable* tract  known  as  the 
Lejah,  or  "refuge,"  from  the  security  which  its  natural  forti 
fications  afforded.  But  Manasseh  also,  like  Reuben  and  Gad, 
affected  by  its  position  and  its  isolation,  gradually  fell  into  the 
wandering  shepherd  life,  and  ceased  to  be  a  power  in  Israel. 
Nor  did  it  even  remain  true  to  its  ancient  faith,  but,  like  the 
other  tribes  of  the  east  of  Jordan,  gave  itself  up  to  the  local 
idolatry  (i  Chron.  v.  25). — Hours  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii.,  p.  376. 


272  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xvn. 

Gil-'adh,  for  in  the  Hebrew  Gil-'adh  with  the  article, 
as  here,  denotes  the  country  so  called  (cf.  ver.  5,  xiii. 
11,  31  ;  Numb,  xxxii.  40  ;  Deut.  iii.  10,  etc.)  ;  but 
without  the  article  the  person  (xvii.  3  ;  Numb.  xxvi. 
29,  30,  xxvii.  i,  xxxvi.  i  ;  i  Chron.  vii.  17). 

Ver.  2  (List  of  the  Families  which  received  their 
Portion  on  the  West  Side  of  Jordan}. — *rri,  subau.  ^niin, 
from  ver.  i.  Dnnian,  "which  were  left"  i.e.,  who  had 
not  received  their  inheritance  on  the  east  of  Jordan. 
The  six  families  mentioned  are  the  same  as  those  in 
Numb.  xxvi.  30-32,  but  'A-b/ti-e-zer1  (father  of  help) 
is  there  abbreviated  to  lezer,  and  She-mt-dhd  (fame 
of  wisdom)  is  put  before  Che-pher  (a  well  or  pit), 
nns-fn  .  .  .  \3|,  the  male  descendants  :  The  term  "  male" 
is  used  in  antithesis  to  the  female  descendants  men 
tioned  in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  3. — Cf.  Numb.  xxvi.  33,  xxvii.  i.  "  Tseloph- 
chadJi "  ("  first  fracture,  or  rupture,"  perhaps  "  first 
born,"  cf.  IDS).  Some  infer,  from  i  Chron.  vii.  15, 
that  he  was  the  second  son  of  his  father  Hepher. 
He  came  out  of  Egypt  with  Moses,  and  died  in  the 
wilderness,  as  did  all  that  generation  (Numb.  xiv.  35, 
xxvii.  3).  "  Mach-lah  "  (according  to  Ges.,  Lex.,  "  sick 
ness,"  rt.  r6n,  to  be  sick,  or  perhaps  i.q.  r6pn,  gentle 
ness,  the  nand  »  being  transposed).  "No-'a/i"  (motion, 
rt.  r-13).  "Chogh-lah  "  (partridge,  Ges.,  Lex.  ;  cf.  xv.  6). 
•"Mil-kak"  (counsel;  Tjta,  in  Syr.and  Chald., to  consult). 
"  Tir-tsah"  (pleasantness,  rt.  nyi).  All  these  daughters 
married  their  cousins  (Numb,  xxxvi.  11). 

Ver.  4. — "  Before  Elcazar  .  .  .  and  before  Joshua" 


1  From  this  tribe,  though  one  of  the  poorest  or  weakest  in 
Manasseh,  sprang  Gideon,  the  most  renowned  of  the  judges. 


VERS.  5-7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  273 

cf.   xiv.    I,   note.       "Jehovah    commanded"   etc.,    see 
Numb,  xxvii.  6,  7,  xxxvi.  2. 

Vers.  5,  6. — "  Ten  portions"  (lit.  portions  measured 
by  a  line),  viz.,  five  to  the  male  descendants  of 
Gil-'adh,  and  five  to  the  daughters  of  Tseloph-chadh, 
who  represented  the  sixth  family,  viz.,  that  of  Chepher 
(Hepher,  Auth.  Vers.). 

VERS.  7-13. — Boundaries  and  Extent  of  the  In- 
Jieritance  of  Manasse/i,  on  the  Western  Side  of 
the  Jordan. 

Vers.  7-10  (The  Southern  Boundary  coinciding  with 
the  Northern  of  EpJiraini). — Ver.  7. — "'A-sher"  (for 
tunate,  happy),  not  the  tribe  so  called,  but  a  town  at 
the  east  end  of  the  southern  boundary,  now  Yasir  or 
Teyasir,  about  fourteen  miles  from  Nablus  (Shechem), 
on  the  road  toBeisan(Bethshean).  "ham-Mikh-methah" 
see  on  xvi.  6.  "Slfcliem"  (shoulder,  or  ridge1),  see  Gen. 
xii.  6  (where  in  the  Auth.  Vers.  it  is  written  Sichem)  ; 
xxxiii.  1 8,  between  Ebal  and  Gerizim  ;  allotted  to 
Ephraim  (Josh.  xx.  7),  but  assigned  to  the  Levites, 
and  made  a  city  of  refuge  (xxi.  20,  21)  ;  the  capital 
of  Jeroboam  (i  Kings  xii.  25),  afterwards  that  of 
Samaria  ;  generally  supposed  to  be  the  Sychar  of 
John  iv.  5,  but  see  Smith's  Diet,  of  tlie  Bible>  Art. 
"  Sychar."  It  derived  its  name  Shechem  either  from 
its  situation  on  a  ridge,  or  from  Shechem,  the  son  of 
Hamor.  It  is  now  Nabliis  (Neapolis).2  p»»n-ta,  "to 

1  Or  rather  "back,"  the   town  "Shechem"    being,  as  it 
were,    on  the  back   of  Gerizim   (Stanleys    Sin.   and    Pal., 
Append.,  p.  496). 

2  Founded  by  Vespasian,  after  the  ruin  of  the  older  Shechem, 
which  probably  lay  further  eastward,  and,  therefore,  nearer  to 

18 


274  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xvir. 

the  right"  i.e.,  to  the  south  (cf.  I  Sam.  xxiii.  19,  24). 
tl'En-Tap-pAach,"  see  xvi.  8. 

Ver.  8. — taj^s,  "at"  or  "upon  the  border":  It 
seems  that  Tappuach  was  one  of  the  separate  towns 
referred  to  in  xvi.  9  as  assigned  to  Ephraim. 

Ver.  9. — "  The  water-course  of  Qanah,"  see  xvi.  8. 
'H3J13,  "  to  the  south  of  the  water-course"  "  These  cities 
belonged  to  Ephraim  among  the  cities  of  Manas  sell "  : 
The  cities  meant  must  be  those  which  lay  to  the 
south  of  the  water-course,  and  are  identical  with  the 
separate  cities  alluded  to  in  xvi.  9.  "  But  the  border 
[or  territory]  of  Manasseh  was  on  the  north  of  the 
water-course"  i.e.,  Manasseh  possessed  all  the  territory 
and  cities  lying  north  of  the  Qanah,  as  is  explained 
in  the  next  verse.  For  the  construction  of  VV,  with 
vrfxy'n  in  the  last  clause,  see  on  xv.  4. 

Ver.  10. — "  To  the  south  (of  the  water-course  of 
Qanah,  the  land  belonged)  to  Ephraim,  and  to  tJie 
north  to  Manasseh,  and  the  sea  was  his  boundary ; 
and  they  toncJied  upon  Asher  on  the  north,  and  upon 
Issachar  on  tJie  east":  The  subject  of  pi^?*  may 
be  either  the  borders  of  Manasseh  (Clericus),  or 
the  two  tribes  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  regarded 
as  together  representing  the  inheritance  of  Joseph 
(Masius).  The  north  and  east  boundary  may  have 

•  the  opening-  of  the  valley.  The  situation  is  thus  described  by 
Dean  Stanley  :  "A  valley,  green  with  grass,  grey  with  olives, 
gardens  sloping  down  on  each  side,  fresh  springs  rushing 
down  in  all  directions  ;  at  the  end  a  white  town  embosomed 
in  all  this  verdure,  lodged  between  two  high  mountains,  which 
extend  on  each  side  of  the  valley — that  on  the  south,  Gerizim, 
that  on  the  north,  Ebal — this  is  the  aspect  of  Nablous,  the 
most  beautiful,  perhaps  it  might  be  said  the  only  very 
beautiful,  spot  in  Central  Palestine''  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  v., 
P-  233-4) 


VER.  ii.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  275 

been  described  in  this  general  manner,  because  they 
had  not  yet  been  accurately  defined. 

Ver.  1 1. — "Beth-s/f'an  "  (house  of  rest),  in  Issachar, 
about  four  miles  west  of  the  Jordan,  in  the  Ghor,  and 
twelve  miles  south  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  To  its  walls 
were  fastened  the  bodies  of  Saul  and  of  his  sons 
(i  Sam.  xxxi.  10,  12  ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  12).  After  the 
exile  it  was  called  ScytJiopolis  (Judith  iii.  10  ; 
2  Mace.  xii.  29)  ;  in  Christian  times  it  was  the  see 
of  a  bishop,  who  is  mentioned  as  present  at  the 
Councils  of  Nice  and  Constantinople  ;  now  Beisan 
(Grove  ;  cf.  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal. ,  p.  346).  '35-1,  see 
on  xv.  45.  "Yibk-lc'am"  ("devouring  the  people," 
Ges.,  Lex.\  called  Bil-yain  (non-populus,  perhaps, 
i.q.  "a  foreigner")  I  Chron.  vi.  55  (70),  a  Levitical 
town  (xxi.  25),  near  Megiddo  (2  Kings  ix.  27).  It 
was  probably  in  Issachar  (Grove),  and  near  Jenin, 
where  the  village  Je 'lama  now  stands  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res., 
ii.,  319).  1ST  •  •  •  nxi  :  the  change  of  construct,  to 
the  accus.  may  be  explained  by  regarding  *?  \T  as  = 
"  received  "  or  "  had,"  and  the  author,  when  he  wrote 
the  words,  may  have  had  in  his  mind  what  he  ex 
presses  in  ver.  12,  viz.,  that  the  Manassites  could 
not  expel  the  Canaanites  from  those  towns.  ''  Dor  " 
(circle,  habitation),  see  on  xi.  2.  "'En-dor"  (spring  of 
Dor),  the  scene  of  Sisera's  overthrow  by  Barak 
(Psalm  Ixxxiii.  10),  of  Saul's  visit  to  the  witch 
(i  Sam.  xxviii.  7).  Eusebius  (Oncm.}  describes  it  as 
a  large  village,  four  miles  to  the  south  of  Tabor, 
now  Endiir,  a  considerable,  but  now  deserted,  village 
(Grove).  On  "TaanakJi"  and  uM'ghiddon  see  xii.  2  i  ; 
both  were  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel.  naan  '^,  "  the 
three  heights"  :  naj  is  used  coll.,  i.q.  f|f3,  see  xi.  2.  It 


276  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xvu. 

is  probable  that  this  was  an  elevated  district,  com 
prising  the  three  last  mentioned  towns,  cf.  the  names 
Tripolis,  Decapolis,  etc.1  Perhaps  all  the  six  towns 
mentioned  in  this  verse  may  have  been  assigned  to 
Manasseh  in  compensation  for  those  which  it  had 
given  up  to  Ephraim  (xvi.  9). 

Vers.  12,  13.  —  Cf.  xv.  63,  xvi.  10.  In  Judges  i. 
27-8  Endor  is  not  mentioned,  probably  because  it 
was  included  in  the  district  of  Dor.  In  ver.  i  2  the 
term  "  cities  "  is  used  by  hypallage  for  the  inhabit 
ants  of  the  cities,  bxw,  see  on  vii.  7  ;  here  it  seems 
to  imply  consent  to,  or  acquiescence  in,  the  proposals 
made  to  them  (cf.  Exod  .ii.  21  ;  Judges  xvii.  1  1). 
The  Manassites,  not  being  strong  enough  to  dispossess 
them,  may  have  proposed  to  them  that  they  should 
live  peaceably  in  the  land,  to  which  proposal  they 
agreed.  In  ver.  i  3  the  \  before  •13^  is  not  only  con- 
sec.,  but  marks  the  apod.  (§  155,  i,  a).  DO1?,  see 
xvi.  10  ;  Judges  i.  28,  33.  For  the  construe,  of  the 
infin.  absol.  Bnin,  with  the  finite  verb,  see  §  131,  3,  a. 


VERS.  14-18.  —  Complaint  of  the   Children   of  Joseph 
respecting  the   Territory  allotted  to  them. 

Ver.  1  4.  —  C(1?,  "  to  me"  i.e.,  to  the  tribe  of  Ephraim 
and  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  regarded  collectively 
as  one  tribe  (cf.  xvi.  i  ;  Psalm  Ixxvii.  16  [Heb.], 
Ixxviii.  67  ;  Amos  vi.  6).  TTfJ,  a  portion  assigned  by 
casting  a  lot  ;  ban,  a  portion  assigned  by  measure- 

1  "The  word  (J"IQ?.)  would  appear,"  says  Stanley,  "to  be  a 
local  word  applied  to  the  plains  at  the  foot  of  Carmel,  much 
as  Ciccar  and  Geliloth  were  to  the  Jordan  valley  ;  and 
probably  Cinneroth  to  the  district  on  the  shores  of  the  Sea 
of  Galilee  "  (Sin  and  Pal.,  Append.,  p.  494). 


VER.  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  277 

ment  ;  here  the  two  terms  are  used  together  for  em 
phasis.  2~\  Dy,  "a  numerous  people ':  According  to  the 
second  census  made  in  the  time  of  Moses  (Numb,  xxvi.) 
the  tribe  of  Ephraim  numbered  32,500  (ver.  3  7),  that 
of  Manasseh  52,700  (ver.  34)  ;  therefore  the  tribe  of 
Ephraim  and  that  of  half  Manasseh  would  together 
be  fewer  in  number  than  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Dan, 
Issachar,  and  Zebulon  respectively.  The  territory 
assigned  to  them  was  fifty-five  miles  from  east  to  west, 
by  seventy  from  north  to  south,  and  comprised  the 
most  fruitful  portion  of  the  land  of  Canaan  (Stanley, 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  229-30).  Hence  the  complaint 
here  made  was  groundless,  and  arose  from  their 
arrogance  and  selfishness,  other  instances  of  which 
we  have  in  Judges  viii.  I,  xii.  I  ;  2  Sam.  xix.  41  ; 
2  Chron.  xxviii.  9,  etc.1  i^'ir  refers  to  gradation, 
" so  far  as;"  na-TU,  to  time,  "/at/ierto"  (cf.  Exod. 
vii.  1 6). 

Ver.  15. — Joshua  was  himself  an  Ephramite 
(i  Chron.  vii.  27),  but  here  in  his  reply  he  shows  his 
impartiality.  ^,~\  is  used,  perhaps  ironically,  and  = 
"  great "  or  "  mighty."  "iy»n,  "  the  forest"  implying 

1  Bishop  Wordsworth  sees  in  their  character  "  an  example 
of  that  self-idolising'  and  self-aggrandising  spirit  in  nations 
and  in  churches,  which  seek  to  extend  themselves  by  colonisa 
tion  and  conquest,  and  even  by  missionary  enterprise,  not 
so  much  that  they  may  gain  kingdoms  for  Christ,  and  win 
subjects  to  Him,  but  in  order  that  they  may  have  vassals  and 
tributaries  to  themselves."  "  It  may  be  worthy  of  considera 
tion,"  says  he,  "whether  the  sacred  writer  in  this  history 
does  not  read  a  solemn  warning  to  such  nations  as  England, 
which  publicly  and  privately  derives  an  immense  revenue  from 
her  two  hundred  millions  of  subjects  in  India,  and  yet  has  done 
little  hitherto  to  bring  them  into  subjection  to  Christ,  from 
Whom  all  nations  receive  their  power,  and  on  Whom  all  their 
happiness  depends  (Matt,  xxviii.  18)." 


278  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xvn. 

dense  growth  or  an  abundance  of  trees,  from  ~\v\  to 
abound.  The  "  forest  "  is  evidently  here  distinguished 
from  Mount  Ephraim  itself,  and  was  probably  a 
mountainous  (see  ver.  1 8,  where  it  is  called  in),  woody 
region,  lying  to  the  north-west  and  north-east  of 
Mount  Ephraim,  yet  being  an  offshoot  from  it. 
Such  would  be  the  range  \vhich  runs  along  the 
northern  border  of  Manasseh,  and  connects  the 
mountains  of  Gilboa  and  Carmel,  and  which  belonged 
to  the  Perizzites  and  the  Rephaim,  and  is  still  well 
wooded  (see  Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  455  ;  Tristram,  Land 
of  Israel,  422).  'n&TQ-l.  "  and  cut  out  room  for  tJiee 
there"  (Ges.),  Piel  Perf.  for  imper.  (§  126,  6,  c\  from 
fcO3,  to  cut.  "The  Perizzites"  iii.  10.  "The  Re 
phaim"  xii.  4.  }'N  from  px,  to  be  narrow,  but  used 
in  a  different  sense  in  x.  13.  "  Mount  'Eph-ra-yim" 
(double  fruitfulness,  Gen.  xli.  52)  ;  in  is  frequently 
used  of  a  mountainous  district  (cf.  xi.  16).  It  ex 
tended  from  the  great  plain  of  Esdraelon  (Jezreel) 
on  the  north  to  as  far  south  as  Ramah  and  Bethel 
(Judges  iv.  5),  places  but  a  few  miles  north  of 
Jerusalem,  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  In  structure 
the  district  is  limestone,  rounded  hills  separated  by 
valleys,  with  streams  of  running  water,  and  continuous 
tracts  of  vegetation  (see  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  229). 

Ver.  1 6. — K^-N',  "  will  not  suffice"  (Sept.,  Chald., 
and  Syr.,  followed  by  Keil),  Niph.  imperf.  (cf.  Zech. 
x.  10)  ;  and,  in  Qal.  (Numb.  xi.  22  ;  Judges  xxi.  14). 
"  In  the  land  of  the  valley"  including  the  valley  of 
the  Jordan  near  Bethshean,  and  the  broad  valley  of 
Jezreel.  "  Chariots  of  iron"  see  on  xi.  4  :  They  are 
mentioned  here  by  the  descendants  of  Joseph  as  a 


VERS.  17,  18.]          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  279 

reason  why  they  could  not  take  possession  of  the 
plains.  "  TJie  valley  of  Yis-^'El"  (God  sows),  called 
in  Greek  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  or  Esdrelon  (Judith 
i.  8,  iii.  9,  iv.  6),  reaching  in  its  fullest  extent  from 
the  Mediterranean  north  of  Carmel  to  the  Jordan. 
But  the  valley  of  Yiz-re'El  proper  ran  from  the  town 
of  Yizre'El  (the  modern  Zenin\  in  Issachar,  between 
the  mountains  of  Gilboa  and  the  range  of  Little 
Hermon  (Chermon)  to  the  Jordan  eastward.  This 
valley,  the  natural  "  battle-field  of  Palestine " 
(Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  331),  was  the  scene  of  the 
victory  of  Barak  (Judges  v.)  and  of  Gideon  (Judges 
vii.  i,  8,  etc.),  and  of  the  overthrow  of  Saul  and 
Jonathan  (i  Sam.  xxxi.  3,  8). 

Vers.  17-18  (Joshua  repeats  his  previous  declara 
tion  [ver.  15],  intimating,  apparently  with  some  degree 
of  irony,  that  if  they  had  only  sufficient  courage,  they 
could  easily  enlarge  their  territory). — Ver.  1 7. — 
"in^  •  •  •  rvrr,  "  there  will  not  be  to  thee  one  lot  only." 

Ver.  iS.1 — "For  a  mountainous  district  will  be 
thine,  for  it  is  a  forest,  and  thou  wilt  clear  it"  in 
means,  not  Mount  Ephraim,  which  they  already  pos 
sessed,  but  the  woody  mountainous  district  referred 
to  in  ver.  15.  rnfcyh,  "its  outgoings,  i.e.,  the  fields 
and  plains  bordering  on  it  (Keil).  "Although*  ('?) 
they  have  iron  chariots,  although  they  are  strong "  : 
From  this  reply  of  Joshua  to  the  complaint  of  the 
children  of  Joseph  we  may  learn  that  whatever 

1  "This  verse,"  says  Dr.  Geikie,  "seems  to  connect  the 
destruction   of    the    forests    of  .Western   Palestine  with   the 
Israelite  invasion.     But  the  loss  of  the  trees  has   destroyed 
the  water   supply,  to  the  permanent  injury  of  the  country" 
(Hours  with  the  Bible,  vol.  ii.,  p.  432,  note  2). 

2  See  Ges.,  Lex  (6,  e],  p.  393. 


280  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xvni. 

blessings  God  places  within  our  reach,  we  must  use 
our  own  best  efforts  to  secure  them,  though  in 
dependence  on  His  promised  help. 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 

THIS  chapter  records  the  setting  up  of  the  Taber 
nacle  at  Shiloh  (ver.  i)  ;  the  survey  of  the  remainder 
of  the  land  (vers.  2-10)  ;  and  the  inheritance  of 
Benjamin  (vers.  11-28). 

Ver.  i. — "  The  whole  congregation?  see  rny,  ix.  15. 
"  SM-ldh"  ("place  of  rest,"  rt.  n^B>,  to  be  secure), 
written  here  and  in  ver.  8,  nfcfc?,  but  nW  in  i  Kings 
if.  27;  iw,  Judges  xxi.  21  ;  k&,  Judges  xxi.  ip).1 
Hitherto  the  Tabernacle  had  been  at  Gilgal,  but 
now  that  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  was  settled,  it  was 
removed  to  Shiloh,  probably  by  God's  express 
command  (see  Deut.  xii.  ii)?  because  Shiloh  being 
in  a  central  and  secluded  spot  may  have  been  more 
suitable  than  any  other  site.2  Josephus  (Antiq.,  v., 
I>  J9)  gives  another  reason,  viz.,  the  beauty  of  the 
situation,  which  is  not  corroborated  by  modern 

1  The  same  name  written  rb*&  is  given  in  Gen.  xlix.  10  to 
the  Messiah,  Who  is  our  Peace. 

2  "The  most  hallowed  spot  of  that  vicinity,  Bethel,  which 
might  else  have  been  more  naturally  chosen,  was  at  that  time 
still  in  the  hands  of  the  Canaanites  (Judges  i.  23-27),  and  thus 
left  to  choose  the  encampment  of  the  Sacred  Tent,  not  by  old 
associations,  but  according  to  the  dictates   of  convenience, 
the  conquerors  fixed  on  this  retired  spot  in  the  heart  of  the 
country,  where  the  allotment  of  the  territory  could  be  most 
conveniently  made,  north,  south,  east,  and  west,  to  the  different 
tribes  "  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  ch.  v.). 


VER.  i.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  281 

travellers.1  It  lay  north  of  Bethel,  on  the  east  side 
of  the  road  going  up  to  Shechem,  i.e.,  Nablous  (see 
Judges  xxi.  19);  now  called  in  Arabic  "  Seiliin " 
(Robinson's  Pal.,  iii.,  85-89).  Here  the  Tabernacle 
remained  till  the  death  of  Eli  (i  Sam.  iv.)  ;  it  was 
then  removed  to  Nob  (i  Sam.  xxi.  2  [Heb.]),  and 
afterwards  to  Gibeon  (i  Kings  iii.  4).  In  the  reign 
of  Jeroboam  I.,  Shiloh  was  the  residence  of  the 
prophet  Ahijah  (i  Kings  xiv.  2)  ;  but  it  gradually 
declined,  having  been  rejected  by  God  (Psalm 
Ixxviii.  60  ;  Jeremiah  vii.  12,  xxvi.  6),  and  is  men 
tioned  in  Scripture  for  the  last  time  in  Jer.  xli.  5. 
Its  real  site  was  from  the  time  of  Jerome  to  the  year 
1838  completely  forgotten,  and  its  name  transferred 
to  the  commanding  height  of  Gibeon  (Stanley,  Sin. 
and  Pal,  chap,  iv.,  p.  216,  and  v.,  p.  2  3  2).  niflD  ^n'tf-nx, 
"  the  tabernacle  of  tJte  assembly"  so  called  either 
because  God  there  met  with  Moses  (Exod.  xxv.  22), 
or  because  before  it  the  assemblies  of  the  people  were 
held  (Ges.,  Lex^}.  The  word  irtD  is  derived  from  Ittj, 
to  appoint,  and  in  Niph.  to  meet  by  appointment 
(Ges.).  Perhaps  the  rendering  "  tent  of  meeting  or 
of  appointment,"  i.e.,  the  appointed  meeting-place 
between  God  and  man,  would  best  express  the 
meaning.  "And  the  land  was  subdued"  etc.,  cf. 
xi.  23,  xiv.  15.  Hence  the  occasion  was  favourable 
for  the  further  allotment  of  the  land. 


1  Thus  Dean  Stanley  remarks  that  Shiloh  is  utterly  feature 
less,  and  in  this  respect  forms  a  striking  contrast  to  the  sacred 
localities  of  Delphi,  Lebadea,  and  the  Styx  (Sin.  and  Pal., 
v.,  p.  232). 


282  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.         [CHAP,  xvm 


VERS.  2-10.  —  Survey  of  the  Land  which  had  yet 
to  be  apportioned. 


Ver.  2.  —  121  -ippn  vh  T:?;X,  "  whose  inheritance  they  had 
not  (yet)  portioned  out?  p^n  means  "  to  divide," 
especially  by  lot.  (Ges.,  Lex.  ;  cf.  xiv.  5,  xxii.  8),  used 
here  with  an  indeter.  nominative  (§  137,  3). 

Ver.  3.  —  DjRX,  "JF<?,"  emphatic,  as  contrasting  the 
conduct  of  the  tribes  addressed  with  that  of  those 
who  had  already  taken  possession  of  their  inheritances 
The  Part.  D^E-nipp  is  not  only  reflexive  but  intensive  ; 
"  how  long  do  ye  show  yourselves  so  remiss  ?  "  (see 
Ewald's  Gr.,  §  243).  This  remissness  may  have 
arisen  from  their  preference  of  a  nomad  to  a 
settled  life,  and  their  unwillingness  to  wage  an  ex 
terminating  war  against  the  Canaanites.  No  less 
is  it  our  own  duty,  as  Christians,  to  be  up  and 
doing,  sparing  no  pains  to  make  our  calling  and 
election  sure  (2  Peter  i.  10),  and  to  bring  others  to 
the  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth  (Matt,  xxviii.  19). 

Ver.  4.  —  "Set  for  yourselves  three  men  for  each 
tribe"  i.e.,  for  each  of  the  seven  remaining  tribes  : 
Josephus,  therefore,  wrongly  states  the  total  number 
sent  to  have  been  ten,  viz.,  one  for  each  of  the  seven 
tribes,  and  three  surveyors  (Antiq.,  v.,  I,  21).  -nn, 
imper.  of  nrv,  to  give,  but  here  to  set  or  appoint,  as 
in  Deut.  i.  I  3  ;  Vulg.  "  eligite."  -13^1.,  "  and  let  them 
describe  "  :  The  2r\3  means,  not  "  to  measure,"  but 
"  to  write,"  as  in  a  book  (see  ver.  9),  to  give  a  general 
account  of  the  land  which  yet  remained  to  be  divided, 
its  situation,  characteristics,  number  of  cities,  etc., 
without  delineating  the  exact  boundaries  of  each 


VERS.  5-7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  283 

district.1  Dr6rp_  »aV,  "  according  to  their  inheritance" 
i.e.,  not,  as  Rosenm.,  according  to  the  size  of  the  in 
heritance  of  each  tribe  (for  this  could  only  be  deter 
mined  after  the  lots  had  been  drawn),  but  according 
to  the  number  of  the  inheritances  into  which  the  land 
was  to  be  divided,  viz.,  seven  for  the  seven  remaining 
tribes.  This  general  survey  might  have  been  easily 
made  without  rousing  the  jealousy  and  opposition  of 
the  Canaanites. 

Ver.  5. — -ipipn^ni.,  "and  divide  ye  for  yourselves" 
Hithp.  imper.  (§  54,  3,  c].  The  remainder  of  the 
verse  declares  that  this  division  was  not  to  include 
the  territory  already  assigned  to  the  tribes  of  Judah 
and  Joseph,  "ibi^,  "  shall  stand  "  (i.e.,  remain)  "  on  his 
border." 

Ver.  6. — "  Before  Jehovah  our  God"  i.e.,  before  the 
Tabernacle  where  Jehovah  manifested  His  presence 
(cf.  xix.  51).  Thus  greater  sanctity  and  validity  was 
given  to  the  lot. 

Ver.  7. — With  the  assertion  in  the  first  clause  cf. 
xiii.  14,  33,  xiv.  3,  4.  "Priesthood"  is  put  by 
meton.  for  its  emoluments.  The  sing,  suffix  in 
inbra  is  used  coll. 


1  So  William  the  Conqueror,  in  A.D.  1081,  appointed  com 
missioners  to  make  him  an  exact  account  of  all  the  landed 
property  of  his  kingdom.  "  This  monument,  called  Doomsday 
Book,  the  most  valuable  piece  of  antiquity  possessed  by  any 
nation,  is  still  preserved  in  the  Exchequer,  and  though  only 
some  extracts  of  it  have  hitherto  been  published,  it  serves 
to  illustrate .  to  us  in  many  particulars  the  ancient  state  of 
England.  The  great  Alfred  had  finished  a  like  survey  of  the 
kingdom  in  his  time,  which  was  long  kept  at  Winchester,  and 
which  probably  served  as  a  model  to  William  in  this  under 
taking  "  (Hume,  vol.  i.,  chap,  iv.,  p.  295). 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.          [CHAP.  xvm. 

Vers.  8-9  (Execution  of  the  Command]. — Ver.  8. — 
nn?^  is  dependent  on  D'o'pnn,  "  who  went  to  describe." 

Ver.  9. — D11?!?1?,  "according  to  (its)  cities"  see  on 
ver.  4.  The  assertion  of  Josephus  (Antiq.,  v.,  i,  21) 
that  seven  months  were  occupied  in  this  survey 
seems  to  be  arbitrary. 

Ver.    10. — "Cast  lots"   see   on    xiv.   2;    and    on 

pipo  see  xi.  23.  The  portions  allotted  were  un 
equal,  but  were  adapted  to  the  circumstances  and 
requirements  of  those  to  whom  they  were  assigned, 
even  as  in  the  heavenly  Canaan  all  the  children  of 
God  will  be  fully  blessed,  but  each  according  to  his 
capacity  (see  Matt.  xxv.  21-23  ;  i  Cor.  xv.  41). 

VERS.    11-28. — Inheritance   of  Benjamin. 

Vers.  1 1 -20.  (Its  Boundaries}. — Ver.  11. — "  The 
lot  .  .  .  came  up"  i.e.,  out  of  the  urn  (cf.  Lev. 
xvi.  9).  D^nU  hni},  "the  border  of  their  lot"  (i.e., 
of  the  territory  assigned  to  them  by  lot),  "  between 
the  children  of  Judah  .  .  .  of  Joseph?  By  God's 
overruling  providence  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was 
thus  placed  close  to  its  kindred,  the  house  of 
Joseph,  and  close  to  the  tribe  of  Judah,  with  which, 
at  a  later  period,  it  was  to  be  brought  into  very 
intimate  alliance  (i  Kings  xii.  21).  The  territory 
of  no  other  tribe,  except  perhaps  Manasseh,  con 
tained  such  important  passes  into  the  adjacent 
plains,  nor  such  conspicuous  heights,  whether  for 
defence  or  as  high-places  of  worship  (see  Stanley's 
Sin.  and  Pal.,  pp.  200-1). 

Vers.  12-13  (The  Northern  Boundary]. — This 
coincided  with  the  southern  boundary  of  Ephraim, 
as  far  as  Lower  Bethhoron. 


VERS.  13,  14.1  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  285 

Ver.  12. — "And  there  was  for  tJiem  tJie  border  on 
the  side  nortJnvards  from  the  Jordan"  On  the  con 
struction  of  HMDy  '%b,  see  §  90,  2,  a.  HNS  =  ns, 
"  mouth,"  from  nxp,  to  blow,  then  "  side,"  or  "  quarter," 
like  "ora"  from  "  os  "  (cf.  vers.  14,  15).  "And  the 
border  went  up  to  the  side  (lit.  shoulder)  of  Jericho  on 
the  north"  i.e.,  it  included  Jericho  within  the  territory 
of  Benjamin.  "in3,  "into  the  mountains"  see  note  on 
ii.  1 6,  and  cf.  rbv,  followed  by  ?  in  Psalm  xxiv.  3  ; 
Cant.  vii.  9  (Heb.).  'nTjno  :  According  to  the  pointing, 
the  following  word  "  Beth-aven,"  stands  in  apposition, 
and  denotes  not  the  town,  but  the  wilderness  so  called  ; 
e.g.,  "  forwards  tJie  wilderness,  Beth-aven''  But  some 
emended  MSS.  and  Kimchi  read  rninp,  the  construe, 
form  of  ~Q"!P,  with  the  addition  of  n—  loc.  (see  §  90, 
2,  a,  and  cf.  Ges.,  LeJirgcb.,  p.  633),  "towards 
the  wilderness  of  Beth-aven,"  cf.  I  Kings  xix.  15, 
pl;'£n  rn|np,  "  to  the  wilderness  of  Damascus."  On 
Beth-aven  see  vii.  2. 

Ver.  13  (see  on  xvi.  2,  3). — rm1?  ejJia^N,  "to  the 
side  (shoulder)  of  Liizali "  :  Here  the  nT  in  Luzah, 
which  in  the  former  part  of  the  verse  is  local  (§  90,  2) 
forms  the  termination  of  the  word  ;  so  in  the  Samar. 
Vers.,  the  Sept.,  Vulg.,  and  Eusebius  ;  cf.  Timnath, 
Timnathah  (xv.  10),  Riblah,  Riblathah  (see  note  a, 
on  Art.  "  Luz "  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet:}.  Though 
Bethel,  according  to  the  boundary  here  given,  was 
in  Ephraim,  it  appears  from  ver.  22  to  have  been 
assigned  to  Benjamin.  ivi;,  "  and  descended"  i.e., 
went  southward. 

Ver.  14  (The  Western  Border}. — "isni,  see  xv.  9. 
313  2C01:,  "and  turned  on  the  west  side  towards  the  south" : 
On  Kirjath-baal  and  Kirjath-jearim  see  ix.  I7,xv.  9. 


286  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.          [CHAP.  xvin. 

Here,  therefore,  the  border  of  Benjamin  touched  that 
of  Judah.  DT^riK|,  "  the  ivest  quarter"  or  side  towards 
the  sea  (cf.  vers.  12,  15).  nsa  comes  from  nxs,  to 
blow,  and  hence  means  a  quarter  of  the  heavens  from 
which  the  wind  blows. 

Vers.  15-19  (The  South  Boundary). — This  com 
mencing  from  the  city  of  Kirjath-jearim  coincided 
with  the  north  boundary  of  Judah  (xv.  5-9),  but  was 
measured  in  the  opposite  direction,  viz.,  from  west  to 
east. 

Ver.  15. — "And  the  south  quatter  (was)  from  the 
extremity  of  Kirjath-jearim"  etc.  n^,  "  on  the  west "  : 
n—  is  here  taken  in  a  weaker  sense  than  that  of 
'  towards  "  (see  §  90,  2,  b}.  "  Neph-to-ach"  see  on 
xv.  9. 

Ver.  1 6. — 'p-njn  f|r>3,  see  on  xv.  8.  'En-rogel, 
xv.  7. 

Ver.  i  7. — On  'En-shemesh  and  Geli-16th,  see  xv.  7. 
"  Stone  of  Bolian"  xv.  6. 

Ver.  1 8. — ninyn,  "  the  desert  plain"  i.e.,  of  the 
Jordan,  see  iii.  16.  In  the  Auth.  Vers.  it  is  rendered 
"  Arabah,"  and  appears  to  be  identical  with  the  Beth- 
haarabhah  in  xv.  6. 

Ver.  1 9. — "  Beth-chbgh-ldh"  xv.  6.  rui3)',  "  towards 
the  north"  i.e.,  the  boundary  line,  though  taking  an 
eastern  direction,  somewhat  turned  towards  the  north 
'Mnjin  vniKVW,  according  to  this  reading  ^3|n  is  put  in 
appos.  to  the  suffix  of  the  governing  noun,  "  the  out 
goings  of  it,  vis.,  of  the  border"  (§  121,  6,  Rem.  3). 

Ver.  20  (The  Eastern  Boundary). — frux,  "it"  refer 
ring  to  nt?o. 

Vers.  21-28  (The  Towns  of  Benjamin}. — These 
are  divided  into  two  groups,  one  in  the  eastern  portion 


VERS.  21-23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  287 

of  the  tribe,  containing  twelve  towns;  the    other  in 
the  western,  containing  fourteen  towns. 

Vers.  21-24  (.The  Eastern  Towns). — Ver.  21. — 
"  Yeri-c/w"  see  on  ii.  i.  "  BctJi-cJwgJi-lah?  xv.  6.  And 
"'Emeq-Qctsits  "  (the  latter  word,  if  Hebrew,  is  deriv 
able  from  }'V£,  to  cut  off,  and  may  possibly  be 
connected  with  the  general  circumcision,  which  took 
place  at  Gilgal  in  the  same  neighbourhood  [Grove]), 
mentioned  here  only  in  the  Old  Testament  ;  the 
name  is  recognisable  in  the  Wady  el  Kaziz,  on  the 
road  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho.  Possibly  the  Beth- 
Basi  of  i  Mace.  ix.  62,  64  (Grove,  Index  to  Clark's 
Bib.  Atlas). 

Ver.  2  2 . — uB$th-haarabkah?  xv.  6.  "  T/ma-ra-yim  " 
(two  cuttings  off,  or  precipices),  perhaps  in  the 
valley  of  the  Jordan,  and  identical  with  the  modern 
es-Siimrali  (Van  de  Velde's  Map),  about  four  miles 
north  of  Jericho.  Earlier  writers,  however,  suppose 
it  stood  on  Mount  Tsemarayim,  in  Ephraim,1  where 
Abijah  besieged  Jeroboam  (2  Chron.  xiii.  4).  The 
name  in  either  case  may  have  been  derived  from  the 
ancient  tribe  of  the  Tsemarites  (Gen.  x.  18).  Betliel> 
vii.  2. 

Ver.  23. — " ha- Ay-vim"  (the  ruins),  perhaps  built 
by,  or  called  after,  the  Avvites  (see  on  xiii.  3)  ; 
unknown,  but  Knobel  would  identify  it  with  'Ay, 
which  stood  near  Bethel  (vii.  2,  xii,  9),  and  means 
a  heap  of  ruins  or  stones;  cf.  iW  (Neh.  xi.  31),  JV1J 


1  "  The  narrow  territory  of  Benjamin  soon  melts  into  the 
hills  which  reach  to  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  and  which,  from 
the  great  tribe  which  there  had  its  chief  seat,  are  known  by 
the  name  of  '  the  Mountains  of  Ephraim  '  "  (Stanley,  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  p.  229).  Cf.  note  on  Ha-Ramah,  ver.  25. 


288  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.          [CHAP.  xvm. 

(Isa.  x.  28  ;  Ges.,  Lex.}.  "  hdp-Pd-rdh  "  (the  heifer  or 
cow)  :  This  name  may  have  reference  to  pasture- 
land  (cf.  Eleph  in  ver.  28),  and  the  mention  of  the 
"herd"  in  I  Sam.  xi.  5.  Josephus  says  that  the 
smallness  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was  compensated 
by  the  excellence  of  the  land  (Antiq.,  v.,  i).  "Para/i" 
is  said  by  Jerome  (Onomast.,  "  Aphra ")  to  be  five 
miles  east  of  Bethel.  Perhaps  identical  with  Far  ah 
(Robinson,  Van  de  Velde),  half-way  between  Jeru 
salem  and  Jericho.  "  'Oph-rah"  (a  fawn),  different  from 
the  Ophrah  in  Judges  vi.  II,  which  belonged  to  the 
tribe  of  Manasseh,  but  probably  the  same  as  the 
Ophrah  in  the  land  of  Shual  (i  Sam.  xiii.  17),  and 
which  was  called  Ephrain  (2  Chron.  xiii.  19),  and 
'Ec^ocuja,  whither  our  Lord  went  before  His  last 
Passover  (John  xi.  54)  ;  conjectured  by  Robinson 
(Bib.  Res.,  i.,  447)  to  be  the  same  as  et  Taiyibeh, 
a  small  village  on  a  hill,  four  miles  N.N.E.  of  Bethel 
(so  Dean  Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  213). 

Ver.  24. — "Kephar-ha-Am-monay"  (hamlet1  of  the 
Ammonites),  read  in  the  Qeri  and  by  the  Chaldee 
rnfsrn  '3  ;  unknown,  but  somewhere  at  the  head  of 
the  passes  which  lead  up  from  the  Jordan  valley 
to  the  table-land  of  Benjamin.  The  name  seems 
commemorative  of  an  incursion  of  the  Ammonites. 
'•  ha-Oph-ni?  also  unknown,  but  perhaps  so  called  after 
the  Ophnites,  a  non-Israelitish  tribe,  mentioned  here 
only.  Grove  would  identify  it  with  the  Gophna  of 
Josephus  (Bel.  Jud.,  iii.,  3,  §  5),  and  with  the 
present  Jifna,  two  and  a  half  miles  north-west  of 
Bethel.  "  Ga-bha  "  (in  pause  for  Ge-bha',  a  hill), 

1  Rt.  "IQ3,  to  cover,  see  n"V33,  ix.  17,  and  cf.  Lat.  tectum. 


VERS.  25,  26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  289 

identical  with  the  Geba  in  i  Sam.  xiii.  15,  16  ; 
2  Kings  xxiii.  8  ;  Zech.  xiv.  10,  distinguished  from 
Gibeah  of  Saul  (Isa  x.  29).  It  was  assigned  to  the 
Levites  (xxi.  17)  ;  fortified  by  Asa(i  Kings  xv.  22)  ; 
inhabited  after  the  captivity  (Neh.  vii.  30) ;  now  Jeba, 
on  a  hill  opposite  to  Michmash,  about  eight  miles 
north  of  Jerusalem  (Robinson,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  440). 

Vers..2'5-28  {Second  Group  of  Fourteen  Cities,  in 
the  West  Part  of  Benjamin}. — Ver.  25. — "  Gibh-on" 
see  ix.  3.  "hd-Ra-mah"  (the  lofty),  near  to  Ge-bha  and 
Gibh-'on  (Isa.  x.  29),  conjectured  by  Keil  to  be  the 
same  as  the  Ramah  of  Samuel  (i  Sam.  i.  19,  ii.  1 1, 
xxv.  i),  but  this  latter  was  in  Ephraim,  and  was 
also  called  Ramathaim  Zophim  (i  Sam.  i.  i). 
Perhaps,  however,  the  name  Ephraim  at  this  early 
period  may  have  been  extended  over  the  moun 
tainous  region  of  Benjamin,  which  was  in  close 
alliance  with  and  in  dependence  on  it  (see  Art.  by 
Grove  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  ii.,  p.  998).  Now 
er-Ram,  about  five  English  or  six  Roman  miles 
north  of  Jerusalem,  described  by  Robinson  as  a 
wretched  village  on  a  hill,  but  with  remains  of 
columns,  squared  stones,  etc.,  all  indicating  a  former 
importance  (Bib.  Res.,  i.,  576).1  "  B"  'e-rotk  "  (wells), 
see  on  ix.  1 7. 

Ver.  26. — "  ham-Mits-peh  "  (the  watch-tower),  dif 
ferent  from  the  Mitspeh  in  xv.  38  ;  it  was  the  place 
where  Samuel  judged  Israel  (i  Sam.  vii.  5,  the  Maspha 
of  I  Mace.  iii.  46),  and  where  Saul  was  elected  king 

1  "Er-Ram,  marked  by  the  village  and  green  patch  on  its 
summit,  the  most  conspicuous  object  from  a  distance  in  the 
approach  to  Jerusalem  from  the  south,  is  certainly  Ramah  of 
Benjamin"  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  213). 

19 


29o  THE  BOOK  OP  JOSHUA.          [CHAP.  xvm. 

(i  Sam.  x.  17);  it  was  fortified  by  Asa  against 
inroads  from  the  north  (i  Kings  xv.  22)  ;  and  was 
at  a  later  period  the  residence  of  the  Chaldean 
governor  Gedaliah  (2  Kings  xxv.  23,  25  ;  Jer.  xl.  6). 
Now  Neby  Samwil  (prophet  Samuel),  about  five 
miles  north-west  of  Jerusalem,  and  one  mile  south 
of  Gibeon.  "  hak-K'pht-rah"  (the  hamlet),  ix.  17. 
" ham-Md-tsah"  ("the  going  out."  "the  spring-head;" 
Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  App.,  §  52),  probably 
identical  with  Knlonieh,  four  miles  west  of  Jeru 
salem,  and  the  Emmans1  of  the  New  Testament 
(Grove,  Index  to  Clark's  Bib.  Atlas].  A  ruin  called 
Beit  Mizzeh,  west  of  Jerusalem,  and  near  Kulonieh, 
may,  according  to  Lieut.  Conder,  indicate  the  site 
(Map,  sheet  xvii.). 

Ver.  27. — "Re-gem"  ("flower-garden,"  properly 
"  variegated,",  rt.  D[Ti,  to  adorn  with  colours)  perhaps 
Ain-Karim,  west  of  Jerusalem  (Grove).  "  Yir-peEl" 
("God  heals"),  probably,  according  to  Lieut.  Conder, 
the  village  Rafat,  north  of  Jerusalem.  The  name, 
he  says,  is  derived  from  a  similar  root,  and  the  situa 
tion  is  satisfactory  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  sheet  xvii.). 
"  Tar-a-lah"  (perhaps  i.q.  r6inn,  reeling,  or  trembling, 
from  bin,  to  tremble),  only,  like  the  two  foregoing 
towns,  mentioned  here,  but  unrecognised.  The 
genealogy  in  i  Chron.  ii.  43,  44,  may  indicate  that 
it  was  founded  by  a  colony  from  Hebron. 

Ver.  28. — "Tsc-/a"'  (rib,  side),  the  burial-place  and 
probably  the  residence  of  Kish  and  Saul  (2  Sam. 
xxi.  14).  Site  unknown.  "ha-Eleph"  ("the  ox," 

1  Porter,  however,  considers  that  the  site  of  Emmaus  still 
remains  to  be  discovered  (see  Art.  on  "  Emmaus  "  in  Smith's 
Bib.  Diet.,  p.  549). 


VER.  28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  291 

probably  implying  that  the  inhabitants  were  a 
pastoral  people).  The  Alex.  Sept.  joins  it  with 
the  preceding  word,  e.g.,  S^XaXe^)  (ox-rib),  but  in 
the  Heb.  the  1  may  have  been  dropped  by  a  tran 
scriber,  otherwise  the  number  of  towns  would  not 
be  fourteen,  as  stated  in  this  verse,  though  such  a 
miscalculation  might  be  the  error  of  a  copyist  (cf. 
xv.  32,  36).  Lieut.  Conder  would  identify  it  with 
the  present  village  Lifta,  west  of  Jerusalem.  The 
situation  agrees  with  the  boundary  of  Judah  (Pal. 
Explor.  Fund,  1881).  »D-n»ril:,  see  on  xv.  8.  "  TJie 
same  (is)  Jerusalem  "  :  By  comparing  Josh.  xv.  7,  8 
with  xviii.  16,  17,  it  seems  that  the  boundary 
between  Judah  and  Benjamin  (the  north  boundary 
of  the  former,  and  the  south  of  the  latter)  ran  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  the  city  stands,  and, 
therefore,  that  the  city  itself  was  in  Benjamin  ;  but 
any  one  -crossing  the  narrow  ravine  of  Hinnom  set 
foot  on  the  territory  of  Judah.  It  was  doubtless 
this  position  of  Jerusalem,  the  city  where  the  true 
God  was  worshipped,  which  especially  contributed 
at  a  later  period  to  a  close  union  between  these  two 
tribes.  "  Gibh-at$  "  (hill),  probably  the  same  as  the 
Gibh-'ah  of  Benjamin  (Judges  xix.  12,  14),  and  of 
Saul  (i  Sam.  x.  26,  xi.  4;  see  on  ver.  24),  and  sup 
posed  to  have  stood  on  Tiileil-el-Phul^  south-west 
of  Geba,  and  north  of  Jerusalem  (Robinson,  Bib.  Res., 
ii.,  114;  Van  de  Velde,  Strauss,  Keil).  "  (And)  Qir- 
yatk "  (city),  perhaps  Kerteh,  west  of  Jerusalem 
(Scholtz,  Reise,  p.  161),  if  Qir-yath,  as  Keil 
supposes,  be  a  different  town  from  Qiryath-yearim  ; 

1  For  the  derivation  see  note  ',  xv.  57. 


292  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

but  though  this  latter  is  reckoned  among  the  towns 
of  Judah  (xv.  60,  xviii.  14),  yet  being  on  the 
confines  of  Benjamin  (xviii.  14,  15),  it  might  have 
been  conceded  to  that  tribe.  This  view  (says  Grove) 
is  confirmed  by  Qiryath's  being  in  the  construe,  state, 
and  by  the  not  improbable  supposition  that  Dnr1;, 
being  followed  by  Dnu,  might  have  been  over 
looked  by  an  early  copyist.  The  Sept.  has  'lapt/x, 
Qiryath  being  omitted,  and  three  Kennicott  MSS. 
read  DniH  for  Dny.  Some,  however,  join  this  word 
to  the  foregoing,  and  render  "  hill  of  Qiryath,"  but 
on  this  view  we  must  suppose  the  number  of  the 
towns  at  the  end  of  the  verse  to  have  been  in 
correctly  stated  (see  above  on  ha-Eleph). 


CHAPTER    XIX. 

VER.    1-9. —  The   Inheritance    of • Simeon    (Shim-'6n, 
"hearing  v/ith  acceptance,"  Gen.  xxix.  33). 

JACOB'S  prediction  that  this  tribe  should  be  dis 
persed  in  Israel  (Gen.  xlix.  7)  was  partly  fulfilled 
in  its  portion  being  allotted  to  it  within  the  limits 
of  Judah  (ver.  9).  Its  towns  formed  two  groups  : 
(i)  those  in  the  south-land  of  Judah  (2-6)  ;  (2)  those 
partly  in  the  south-land,  partly  in  the  lowlands  of 
Judah  (ver.  7).  To  all  these  towns  were  added  their 
dependent  villages  (ver.  8). 

Ver.  i. — 'an  N£3,  of.  xvdii.  1 1.     -spn?,  not,  as  usually, 
"  in  the  midst,"  but  "  within  "  (cf.  Auth.Vers.). 


VERS.  2-8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  293 

Vers.  2-6  (First  Group}. — For  all  the  towns 
mentioned  in  this  group  see  on  xv.  26-32,  and  cf. 
I  Chron.  iv.  28-32. 

Ver.  2. — "  Beer-Sheba"  see  on  xv.  28.  It  would 
seem  that  having  been  hallowed  by  the  altars  of 
Abraham  and  Isaac  (Gen.  xxi.  33  ;  xxvi.  23-25)  it 
was  a  religious  centre  both  to  Judah  and  Simeon. 
"She-bhci  "  (Shema  in  xv.  26)  is  omitted  in  i  Chron. 
iv.  28,  perhaps  through  the  oversight  of  a  copyist, 
who  may  have  been  misled  by  the  termination  of 
the  preceding  word.  It  is  found  in  all  the  ancient 
versions.  "  Moladhah"  xv.  26. 

Ver.  3. — Cf.  xv.  28,  29. 

Ver.  4. — "  Bfthtil?  written  Bethu-'El  (dweller  in 
God)  i  Chron.  iv.  30,  and  for  which  is  found  Kesil 
in  Josh.  xv.  30  (see  note).  "  Chormah"  see  xii.  14. 

Ver.  5. — See  on  xv.  31. 

Ver.  6. — See  on  xv.  32.  "  Thirteen  cities  "  :  The 
number  is  fourteen,  as  in  the  Syriac  Vers.,  unless 
She-bha'  is  omitted.  A  copyist  may  have  con 
founded  the  Hebrew  letters  for  "  fourteen  "  with 
those  for  "  thirteen  "  (see  note  on  xv.  32). 

Ver.  7  (Second  Group}. — 'A-yin  and  Rimmon,  in 
accurately  here  written  Remmon  (A.V.),  were  in  the 
south  country  of  Judah  (see  xv.  32).  "'Ether  and 
'As/inn"  were  in  the  valley  (xv.  42).  "Four  Towns": 
In  the  parallel  list  in  I  Chron.  iv.  32,  the  number  is 
five,  viz.,  Etam,  Ayin,  Rimmon,  Tochen,  and  Ashan, 
where,  according  to  Grove,  Tochen  is  substituted  for 
Ether  (Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  i.,  p.  558). 

Ver.  8. — "All  the  villages"  for  ivn  see  on  xiii.  23. 
"  Ba-a-lath-Be  V>  "  (having  a  well),  called  here  Ra- 
math-ne-ghebh  (height  of  the  south)  ;  see  on  Bealoth 


294  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

xv.    24.      It   was   apparently  the  extreme  southern 
limit  of  the  territory  assigned  to  Simeon. 

Ver.  9. — ^n,  xvii.  1 4.  Dnn  :n,  "  too  large  for 
them"  (§  119,  i).  The  reason  why  so  small  a 
territory  was  assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Simeon  was 
that  it  had-  greatly  diminished  since  the  census  in 
Numb.  i.  23  (see  Numb.  xxvi.  14).  This  decrease 
was  no  doubt  partly  owing  to  the  mortality  conse 
quent  on  the  sin  at  Baal-peor,  in  which  sin  the 
Simeonites  had  taken  a  leading  part  (Numb,  xxv.).1 

VERS.  10-16. — Inheritance  of  Zebhu-hm  ("habita 
tion,"  Gen.  xxx.  20),  and  its  Boundaries. 

This  tribe  is  omitted  in  the  lists  of  i  Chron.  Its 
territory,  which  embraced  one  of  the  choicest  portions 
of  the  land,  extended  from  the  Sea  of  Galilee  on  the 
east,  to  the  river  Kishon  on  the  west,  and  was 
bounded  on  the  south  by  Issachar,  and  on  the 
north  by  Asher  and  Naphtali.  It  afterwards 
formed  a  portion  of  Lower  Galilee,  and  contained 
the  towns  Tiberias,  Cana,  and  Nazareth  (cf.  Matt. 

iv.  13,  IS)- 

Ver.  i  o. — "  Sa-ridh  "  (a  fissure,  rt.  Tib,  to  make 
an  incision),  not  known  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome 
(Onom^),  but  must  have  been  on  the  south  boundary, 
forming  a  landmark,  whence  the  border  was  drawn 
to  the  west  (ver.  i  i)  and  the  east  (ver.  12).  Knobel, 
who  derives  the  word  as  above,  thinks  it  meant  a 
gully  about  three  miles  south-east  of  Nazareth;  more 

1  A  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  this  tribe  at  a  later  period 
is  given  in  i  Chron.  iv.  39-43  (cf.  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  161). 


VER.  ii,  12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  295 

probably,  however,  it  was  a  town  so  called  from  the 
gully  or  wady  near  which  it  stood.  The  Sept.  reads 
2eSSov/c  (Vat.  MS.)  ;  and  the  original  (says  Lieut. 
Conder)  may  be  thought  to  have  been  Sadid,  in 
which  case  Tell-SJiadud  occupies  a  very  probable 
position  for  the  site  (Map,  sheet  viii.). 

Ver.  ii. —  ns*^,  "towards  tlie  sea"  i.e.,  westward. 
Though  the  border,  according  to  Gen.  xlix.  13,  com 
pared  with  Joseph.,  Antiq.,  v.,  I,  §  22,  reached  to  the 
Mediterranean,  yet  it  seems  from  this  ver.  1 1  that  it 
stopped  short  at  Carmel.  nbino-l,  "  even  to  Mar-a-la/i " 
("  place  of  trembling,"  rt.  ?in,  to  tremble,  perhaps 
so  named  from  an  earthquake)  ;  site  uncertain.  The 
word  n^r  led  Keil  to  infer  that  it  was  somewhere 
on  Carmel.  According  to  Lieut.  Conder  it  would 
occupy  the  position  of  the  present  village  Malul, 
"  L  "  and  "  R  "  being  easily  convertible  (Pal.  Explor. 
Fund,  Map,  sheet  viii.).  5  17321  (cf.  xvi.  7,  xvii.  10), 
the  same  verb  is  also  followed  by  bx  in  the  next 
clause.  "  Dab-ba-sheth "  in  pause  for  Dab-be-sheth 
(a  camel's  hump,  Isa.  xxx.  6,  rt.  EJO^,  to  be  soft, 
round,  Ges.,  Tkes.},  perhaps  so  called  because  it  stood 
on  the  heights  of  Carmel.  /!?53n,  "  the  water-course" 
etc.,  probably  the  Kishon.  "  Yoq-ne 'am"  see 
xii.  22. 

Ver.  1 2  (Eastzvard  Direction  of  tlic  Border). — 
"  Sa-ridh"  as  being  a  central  point  (see  ver.  10)  is 
here  repeated.  "  Kis-lotJi-  Ta-bJwr  "  (loins  or  flanks1 
of  Tabor),  apparently  a  place  on  the  side  of  Tabor, 


1  It  is  common  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  to  personify  the 
features  of  a  country  (cf.  ^fiB,  shoulder,  xv.  8  ;  HiJT^,  ears  of, 
xix.  34 ;  DStf',  back,  xx.  ;). 


296  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

and  possibly  the  same  as  ru^psn  in  ver.  18  (Masius 
and  others),  and  the  vicus  Chasalus  of  the  Onom.,  i.e., 
the  present  village  of  Ik-sal,  two  and  a  half  miles  west 
of  Tabor  (Grove).  "  Da-bkerath  "  ("  pasture "  or 
"  sheepwalk,"  mentioned  in  xxi.  28;  i  Chron.  vi.  57, 
as  being  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  and  as  assigned  to 
the  Gershonite  Levites  ;  now  probably  the  village 
Deburieh  at  the  western  foot  of  Tabor  (Robinson,  Bib. 
Res.,i\.,  350,  351).  "Ya-pht-d"  ("shining,"  from 
i?B\  to  shine,  perhaps  because  seen  from  a  distance)  : 
It  must  have  been  east  of  Deburieh,  though  the  site 
is  unknown  ;  Yafa,  with  which  Robinson  and  Grove 
would  identify  it,  lies  to  the  west  of  that  village. 

Ver.  13. — Render  "  And  from  thence  it  passed 
toward  the  East,  toward  the  rising  of  tlie  sun,  to  Gath- 
chepher "  ("  wine-press  of  the  well  ")  ;  n—  loc.  ;  the 
birthplace  of  Jonah  *  (2  Kings  xiv.  25),  now  el  Mesh- 
had  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  350),  where  the  prophet's 
tomb  is  still  shown,  about  four  miles  north  of  Naza 
reth,  on  the  road  to  Tiberias.  "  To  Eth-qa-tsin " 
("  time  of  the  judge,"  nni;  =  nj?,  with  n  loc.).  Site 
unknown.  "  And  went  out  to  Rimmon  which  rcacheth 
to  Neah  "  :  "iNhtpn,  which  is  made  part  of  the  prop, 
name  in  Auth.  Vers.,2  Sept.,  and  Vulg.,  is  prop,  the 
Pual.  Part,  with  art.  from  "INPI,  "  to  be  marked  out  or 
drawn  "  (cf.  xv.  9).  "  Rimmon  "  (pomegranate),  al 
lotted  to  the  Merarite  Levites  (i  Chron.  vi.  62,  Heb.), 
probably  now  Rummaneh  in  the  plain  of  el-Buttauf, 
six  miles  north  of  Nazareth  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  1 10; 
Von  Raum.,  p.  138).  "  Ne-ah  "  ("shaking"  [Ges., 

1  The  Pharisees,  therefore,  were  mistaken  in  supposing  that 
no  prophet  came  out  of  Galilee  (John  vii.  52). 
•  "  Remnon-methoar." 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  Of  JOSHUA.  297 

Lex\  rt.  IN  3,  to  shake),  unknown,  but  probably  some 
where  to  the  north  of  Rimmon  (Grove). 

Ver.  14  (The  NortJiern  Boundary}. — "  And  the 
border  compassed  it  (i.e.,  Neah)  on  the  north  to  Chan- 
na-thon."  'an  ("  gracious,"  or  "  pleasant  "),  is  probably 
the  same  as  Cana  of  Galilee,  the  native  place  of 
Nathanael  and  scene  of  Christ's  first  miracle  (John 
ii.  i,  II,  iv.  46,  xxi.  2)  ;  now  Kdna  el  Jelil  (Keil). 
"And  its  goings  out  ^vere  the  ravine  of  Yiph-tach-El " 
("God  opens":  On  ^  not  "valley"  (Auth.  Vers.),  but 
"ravine"  or  "glen"  (see  viii.  11).  Yiph-tach-'El  is 
thought  by  Robinson  to  be  identical  with  the  Roman 
Jotapata,  which  Josephus  long  defended  against 
Vespasian  (Joseph.,  Bel.  Jud.,  iii.,  7,  7)  ;  now  Jefdt,  in 
the  mountains  of  Galilee,  half  way  between  the  Bay 
of  Acre  and  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret.  Thus  the 
ravine  of  Yiph-tach-El,  at  which  Zebulon  bordered 
on  Asher,  would  correspond  to  the  Wady  Abilen, 
which  commences  in  the  hills  near  Jefat  (Rob.,  Later 
Bib.  Res.,  p.  IO3,/"),  though  "Wady"  more  accurately 
denotes  a  ^>ro  than  a  ^  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal., 
Append.,  §  2,  38). 

Ver.  i  5. — From  a  description  of  the  boundary  lines 
the  narrative  here  passes  abruptly  to  an  enumeration 
of  the  towns  of  Zebulon.  The  ]  at  the  beginning  of 
the  verse  not  being  followed,  as  in  xviii.  21,  xv.  21, 
by  Dnyn  with  the  substantive  verb,  it  is  probable  that 
the  text  is  here  imperfect  ;  see  also  the  concluding 
portion  of  this  note.  "  Qat-tath"  (small),  and 
"  Na-Jflal "  (probably  pasture,  see  Isa.  vii.  19,  from 
7J13,  to  lead,  cf.  ")2"ip  from  i?1^),  are  perhaps  the  same 
as  Qit-ron  and  Na-halol  in  Judges  i.  30,  but  their 
sites  are  unknown.  In  the  Talmud  (Megilla,  6,  a) 


298  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

Qit-ron  is  identified  with  Zippori,  i.e.,  Sepphoris,  now 
Seffih'ieh.  Na-halal,  in  some  copies  written  Mahalal, 
was  a  Levitical  town  (xxi.  35)  ;  according  to  the 
Jerusalem  Talmud  (Megillah,  i.,  I)  called  in  post- 
biblical  times  Mahlul,  which  has  been  identified  by 
Schwarz  with  the  modern  Malul  in  the  plain  of 
Esdraelon,  four  miles  west  of  Nazareth.  So  Van  de 
Velde  (Memoir,  p.  335),  Grove  (Index  to  Clark's 
Bib.  Atlas,  and  Art.  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}.  "  Shim- 
ron"  see  xi.  i .  "  Yidh-a-laJi  "  (that  which  God  has 
shown,  Ges.,  Lex},  supposed  by  Van  de  Velde  to  be 
Jeda  or  Jeida  on  the  west  of  the  village  Semuniyeh, 
but  Schwarz  (p.  172),  probably  on  the  authority  of 
the  Talmudical  books,  gives  the  name  as  Yidalah  or 
Chirii,  and  would  identify  it  with  the  village  Kellah 
el-Chirif,  about  three  miles  south  of  Beit-lahm  (Grove). 
"  Beth-le-chem  "  (house  of  bread),  probably  the  resi 
dence  of  Ibzan  (Judges  xii.  8),  now  the  miserable 
village  of  Beit-laJim,  six  miles  west  of  Nazareth 
(Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  p.  113).  The  town  of  the  same 
name  in  the  south  is  often  distinguished  from  it  by 
the  addition  of  the  word  Judah  (Judges  xvii.  8,  9, 
xix.  1 8  ;  Ruth  i.  i),  and  Ephratah  (Micah  v.  2). 
"  Twelve  towns  and  their  milages "  :  As  five  towns 
only  are  mentioned  in  this  verse,  and  those  in  vers. 
10-14  were  border  places,  some  of  them  not  belong 
ing  to  Zebulon,  and  as  Kartah  and  Dimnah,  though 
towns  of  Zebulon  (xxi.  34,  35),  and  also  Nazareth, 
are  entirely  omitted,  the  opinion  of  Michaelis,  Keil, 
and  others,  is  probably  correct,  viz.,  that  there  is  a 
gap  in  the  text  here,  as  in  xv.  59,  xxi.  36. 


VERS.  17,  18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  299 

VERS.  17-23.  —  Inheritance  of  Yis-sas-khar  ("  he 
brings  wages,"  ~tiw  NB",  Gen.  xxx.  1  8). 


His  allotment  was  bounded  on  the  north  by 
Zebulon,  on  the  east  by  Jordan,  on  the  west  by 
Manasseh  and  Asher,  on  the  south  by  Manasseh, 
and  contained  the  rich  and  noble  plain  of  Esdraelon 
or  Jezreel.  Like  the  territory  of  Zebulun,  it  after 
wards  formed  part  of  Lower  Galilee.1  In  vers. 
18-23  a  list  is  given  of  the  principal  towns  instead 
of  a  delineation  of  the  boundaries  of  the  tribe  ;  but 
these  latter  may  be  easily  traced  from  those  of  the 
surrounding  tribes. 

Ver.  i  8.  —  "  And  their  border  was  toward  Yiz-re'El" 
i.e.,  extended  to  and  beyond  it.  "  Yiz-t^'El"  (God 
sows),  a  town  in  the  plain  so  called  (xvii.  16),  de 
scribed  in  the  Onomast.  as  situated  between  Scytho- 
polis  and  Legio  ;  now  Zerint  a  poor  and  small 
village,  standing  on  a  hill  commanding  a  splendid 
and  extensive  view  (Rob.,  iii.,  161)  ;  'it  formed  part 
of  the  kingdom  of  Ishbbosheth  (2  Sam.  ii.  8,  9),  and 
was  noted  as  the  principal  residence  of  Ahab  (i  Kings 
xviii.  45,  46,  xxi.  i).  "Kesul-I6th  "  ("  loins,"  the  town 
being  perhaps  on  the  slopes  of  a  mountain),  see  on 
ver.  12.  "  Shii-nem"  contrac.  from  D?J-1B5>  (two  resting- 
places),  where  the  Philistines  encamped  before  the 
battle  of  Gilboa  (i  Sam.  xxviii.  4)  ;  the  native  place 

1  In  this  province  our  Redeemer  spent  the  greatest  portion 
of  the  time  He  sojourned  here  on  earth,  and  hence  was  called 
a  Galilean.  Here  He  appointed  His  apostles  to  meet  Him 
after  His  resurrection  (Matt,  xxviii.  7,  16),  and  of  this  same 
country  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  apostles  were  natives,  and, 
therefore,  were  called  by  the  angels  "  men  of  Galilee  "  (Acts 
i.  11). 


300  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

of  Abishag  (i  Kings  i.  3),  and  celebrated  in  connec 
tion  with  Elisha  (2  Kings  iv.  8,  viii.  I,  etc.)  ;  now 
Solam  or  Sulem,  a  village  on  the  south-west  slope  of 
the  range  of  Jebel  ed-Duhy,  commonly  called  from 
tradition  "Little  Hermon "  (Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  336, 
note  2),  three  miles  north  of  Jezreel  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res., 
ii.,  324). 

Ver.  19. — "  CJfpha-ra-yim  "  (two  wells),  perhaps 
the  Chepher  mentioned  in  xii.  17,  but  according  to 
the  Onom.  (s.v.  "  Aphraim  "),  villa  Affarcea,  six  miles 
north  of  Legio  (el-Lejjun),  and  identified  by  Knobel 
with  the  village  el  Alfuleh,  west  of  Shunem,  and 
five  miles  north-east  of  Lejjun  (Keil).  Lieut.  Conder 
would  identify  it  with  the  ancient  ruined  site  el 
Farriyeh  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund}.  "  Shi- on  "  ("  over 
turning,"  see  rt.  NIK',  Ges.,  Lex},  undiscovered,  but, 
according  to  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onontast.},  "  villa 
juxta  montem  Thabor,"  possibly  Chirbet  Schiin,  one 
and  a  half  miles  north-west  of  Deburieh  (Grove,  Art. 
in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet}.  "  '  A-na-charatk  "  ("  a  narrow 
way,"  rt.  n3N,  i.q.  p3n,  to  be  narrow),  identified  by 
Lieut.  Conder  with  the  village  en  Na'urah"  "  in  cor 
rect  relative  position  to  other  towns  of  Issachar " 
(Pal.  Explor.  Fund}. 

Ver.  20. — "  ha-Rab-bith  "  (the  great  place),  perhaps 
Arab-boneh,  south  of  Gilboa  (Rob.,  iii.,  p.  157);  but 
Lieut.  Conder  proposes  the  present  village  Raba, 
south-east  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  as  a  suitable 
position  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  Map,  sheet  xii.),  "  Qish- 
yon  "  (hardness,  rt.  nc;pT,  to  be  hard,  and,  therefore, 
according  to  Ges.,  Thes.,  1211,  1243,  not  to  be 
connected  with  the  river  Kishon,  "  winding,"  rt.  trip, 
to  be  bent),  allotted  to  Gershonite  Levites  (xxi.  28), 


VER.  21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  301 

but  unknown  ;  for  it  Kedesh  is  substituted  in  I  Chron. 
vi.  72  (57  Hcb.).  'E-bketsl  (white,  shining,  rt.  pa, 
to  be  white),  mentioned  here  only ;  possibly  (says 
Grove)  a  corruption  of  Thebez,  now  Tubas,  not  far 
from  Engannim,  and  Shunaim  ;  but,  according  to 
Lieut.  Conder,  probably  the  present  ruin  el  Beida, 
at  the  north  end  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon.  The 
Arabic  exactly  corresponds  to  the  Hebrew,  with  the 
same  meaning,  "  white  "  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund}. 

Ver.  21. — "  Re-meth  "  (height),  called  Ramoth  in 

1  Chron.  vi.  58   (73  A.V.),  and  Yarmuth  in  ch.  xxi. 
29,  where  it  is  named  as  a  Levit.  city.     These  may 
be  different  names    of  the  same  town.     "'En-gan- 
nim "    (fountain    of  gardens),    also    allotted    to  the 
Levites    (xxi.   29),   called   'A-nem  (i  Chron.  vi.    58, 
73    A.V.),    probably    the    same    as    the    Fii/aia    of 
Josephus    (Bel.  Jud.,   iii.,    3,    4),    and   now  Jenin,  in 
the  midst  of  gardens  and  orchards,  on  the  southern 
side  of  the  plain  of  Jezreel  (Rob.  and  Keil).      It  is 
evidently,  says  Stanley,  identical  with  BetJigan  (Sept. ; 

2  Kings   ix.   27),  translated   "the  garden-house"  in 
Eng.  Vers.  (Sin.  and  Pal,,  p.    349,   note   2).     "'En- 
chad-dah  "  (fountain  of  sharpness,  i.e.,  of  speed),  on 
the   border   of    Issachar,   near   Engannim.      Van   de 
Velde  would  identify  it  with  Ain-Haud,  on  the  west 
side  of  Carmel,  and  about  two  miles  from  the  sea  ; 
but  this,  says  Grove,  is  surely  out  of  the  limits  of 
the  tribe   of  Issachar,  and   rather  in   Asher  or   Ma- 
nasseh.     According  to  Lieut.  Conder,  it  is  probably 
the  present  ruin  Kefr  Adda,  south-west  of  the  plain 

1  Written  in  the  Hebrew  text  f  3X,  the  first  syllable  in  pause 
forK. 


302  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

of  Esdraelon.    "  Bcth-pats-tsets"  (house  of  dispersion), 
unknown. 

Ver.  22, — "And  the  border  reached  to  "  (lit.  struck 
upon),  cf.  xvi.  7.  "  Ta-bhor'  (either  "a  stone-quarry" 
or  "  a  lofty  place  "  [Ges.,  Lex\  a  town  built  on  the 
mount  so  called,  on  which  considerable  ruins  were 
found  by  Robinson  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  352,  etc.).  In  I 
Chron.  vi.  77  (A.V.)  it  is  said  to  be  in  the  tribe  of 
Zebulun,  and  to  have  been  assigned  to  the  Levites, 
but  it  is  not  mentioned  as  a  Levite  town  in  Josh.  xxi. 
Being  on  the  borders  of  both  tribes,  it  may  possibly 
have  been  regarded  as  belonging  to  both  (Keil). 
"  And  S/ia-cIftsA-mah,"  for  which  the  Qeri  reads  S/ta- 
chatsi-mah,  "  lofty  places  " x  rt.  pnB>,  "  to  raise  oneself 
up "  (Ges.,  Lex?))  a  town  unknown,  but  apparently 
between  Tabor  and  the  Jordan.  "  Beth-she-mcsli " 
(house  of  the  sun),  to  be  distinguished  from  the  one 
in  Judah  (xv.  10),  and  in  Naphtali  (v.  38);  perhaps  (as 
Knobel  and  Keil  conjecture)  the  present  ruined  village 
of  Bessum  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  369)  ;  or,  according  to 
the  later  researches  of  Lieut.  Conder,  the  ruined  site 
'Ain  esh  Shemsiyeh,  in  the  Jordan  valley.  "Sixteen 
tozvns"  a  number  which  would  not  be  correct,  unless 
Tabor  was  reckoned  as  belonging  to  Issachar. 

VERS.  24-31. — Inheritance  of'A-sher  (fortunate" 
or  happy). 

The  territory  of  this  tribe  contained  some  of  the 
richest  soil  in  all  Palestine  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  265),  and  in  its  fruitfulness  fulfilled  the  predictions 
of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlix.  20)  and  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxxiii. 

1  The  ah  is  properly  local,  and  denotes  motion,  "  to  Shacha- 
tsim  "  (Grove). 


VER.  25.]  TPIE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  303 

24)  ;  it  had  also  mines  of  iron  and  copper  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  2 5 ,  and  cf.  the  note  on  Misrephoth-maim,  xi.  8). 
It  extended  from  Zidon  to  the  south  of  Dor  (see  on 
xi.  2),  on  the  confines  of  Manasseh,  and  was  bordered 
by  Zebulon  and  Issachar  on  the  south-east,  and  by 
Naphtali  on  the  north-east.  Here  it  is  described 
principally  by  an  enumeration  of  its  towns,  and  the 
description  begins  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Accho 
(Ptolemais),  on  the  Mediterranean  coast,  which,  though 
not  included  among  the  towns  here  named,  is  men 
tioned  in  Judges  i.  3  i  as  belonging  to  Asher.  From 
this  central  point  the  description  proceeds  first 
towards  the  south  (vers.  26,  27),  and  then  towards 
the  north  (vers.  28-30).  The  position  of  many  of 
the  towns  is  unknown. 

Ver.  25. — "  Che!-qath"  (portion),  a  town  allotted 
to  the  Gershonite  .Levites  (xxi.  31),  called  Chu-qoq 
(i  Chron.  vi.  60,  Heb.  ;  77,  A.  V.),  perhaps  by  an 
error  in  copying,  or  because  it  had  both  names,  but 
not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Chuq-qoq  on  the 
boundary  of  Naphtali  (xix.  34)  ;  conjectured  by 
Schwarz  to  be  the  village  Yerka,  about  eight  miles 
north-east  of  Accho  (Akka ;  Van  de  Velde's  Map}. 
"  CJfli "  (a  necklace,  from  rhn,  to  be  polished),  per 
haps  Jit/is,  between  Yerka  and  Accho  (Knobel). 
"  Be-ten  "  (perhaps  "  valley,"  i.q.  KoiXct?.  By  Eusebius 
(Onomast.,  Barwu)  called  Be/3erou>,  a  village,  eight 
Roman  miles  east  of  Accho  (Ptolemais).  This  seems 
to  indicate  the  village  el  Baneh  (Lieut.  Conder,  Pal. 
Explor.  Fund).  "'Akh-shaph"  see  xi.  i.  Knobel 
would  identify  it  with  Accho  (Ptolemais),  with  which, 
however,  it  has  nothing  in  common  but  the  letter  3  ; 
possibly,  says  Grove,  it  may  be  Kesaf,  nearly  midway 


304  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

between  Tyre  and  Banias,  but  he  thinks  the  position 
too  inland,  and  suggests  Kiiaifa  at  the  foot  of  Carmel, 
the  Sept.  rendering  Kecu£  perhaps  exhibiting  the 
name  in  the  process  of  change  from  the  ancient  to 
the  modern  form  (see  Art.  on  "  Asher,"  note  a,  in 
Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}.  Lieut.  Conder,  however,  would 
identify  it  with  the  present  village  el  Yasif,  north-east 
of  Acre.  "  It  is  often  mentioned  in  Egyptian  records, 
and  the  proposed  site  agrees'both  with  these  and  with 
the  biblical  indications  of  situation  "  (Map,  Hi.). 

Ver.  26. — "  'A  l-lam-  me-lekh"  (the  king's  oak): 
The  name  has  been  preserved  in  Nahr  el  Malek,  or 
Malik,  which  falls  into  the  Kishon  near  Haifa  (Rob., 
Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  113).  "'Am-adh"  (eternal  people), 
apparently  (says  Lieut.  Conder)  the  ruin  el-Amiid, 
north  of  Acre  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund  Map,  sheet  iii.). 
"  Mish-al"  (prayer),  a  Levite  town  (xxi.  30),  written 
"Mashal"  (i  Chron.  vi.  59  [74]).  According  to  the 
Onomast.  (s.v.  "  Masan  "),  it  was  on  the  coast,  near  to 
Carmel,  as  seems  indicated  also  in  the  remainder  of 
the  verse.  Probably,  says  Lieut.  Conder,  the  ruin 
MaisleJi,  near  Acre  (Map,  sheet  iii.).  "  Kar-mel"  see 
on  xii.  22.  "  SJii-chor-libli-nath "  (black-white), 
though  taken  for  two  separate  places  by  the  Sept., 
Vulg.,  and  Syr.,  yet  is  more  generally  regarded  as  a 
river.  According  to  Masius,  Michaelis,  and  Stanley 
(Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  505),  it  is  identical  with  the  Belus, 
or  glass  river  (so  called  from  the  glass  there  made 
from  the  sand),  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Acre,  but  as 
this  situation  is  too  far  removed  from  the  southern 
boundary  of  Asher,  more  probably  the  reference  is  to 
the  NaJir-Zerka  (blue  river),  which  flows  into  the 
Mediterranean  about  eight  miles  south  of  Dor  (see 


VER.  27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA  305 

on  xi.  2),  at  the  southern  extremity  of  Asher.  The 
epithet  "  blue "  might  correspond  to  "  black  and 
white."  As  Shichor  is  a  name  given  to  the  Nile 
(Isa.  xxiii.  3  ;  Jer.  ii.  I  8),  its  use  here  may  have  a 
reference  to  the  ancient  commerce  of  Phoenicia  with 
Egypt. 

Ver.  27. — In  this  verse  the  southern  boundary 
is  traced  from  the  Nahr-Zerka  eastward. — "  Beth- 
Da-g/wn  "  (house  of  Dagon)  :  The  site  is  uncertain, 
but  Lieut.  Conder  would  identify  it  with  the  present 
ruin  Tell  D'aiik,  "  in  correct  relative  position  near  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Belus  "  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund}.  The 
name  seems  to  signify  that  it  was  a  Philistine  colony; 
there  was  another  town  of  the  same  name  in  Judah 
(xv.  41).  "  ZebJiii-lun  "  (habitation),  not  a  town,  as 
Rosen m.  says,  but  the  tribe  so  called,  which  formed 
one  of  the  boundaries  of  Asher  (cf.  xvii.  10,  xix.  34). 
"  Yiph-tach- El"  see  on  ver.  14.  " Bcth-ha-e-megn 
(house  of  the  valley),  according  to  Robinson  (iii.,  103, 
107,  1 08),  'Amkah,  about  eight  miles  to  the  north 
east  of  Akka  (Acre),  but  if  his  identification  of  Jefat 
with  Yiph-tach-El  be  correct,  the  site  of  Beth-ha- 
e-meq  must  be  sought  for  farther  south  than  Amkah 
(Grove).  "Ne'z-E/"  (perhaps  i.q.  hwu*  t?K-1l?:,  perhaps 
"  treasure  of  God,"  Ges.,  Lex.*),  possibly  Mi-ar,  a 
village  on  a  lofty  mountain  brow,  between  Jefat  and 
Kabul.  The  change  of  "  N  "  into  "  M,"  and  of  "  L  " 
into  "  R,"  is  frequent,  and  Mi-'ar  retains  the  Ayin  of 
Neiel  (Grove,  Smith's  Bib.  Diet}.  "Ka-bhtil"  probably 
identical  with  the  KW^  Xa/3<yA.Gj  of  Josephus  ( Vit., 
§  43),  now  Kabul,  about  ten  miles  south-east  of  Acre 
(Rob.,  Later  Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  p.  88),  and  on  the  borders 
of  Galilee.  It  was  probably  in  the  neighbourhood  of 

20 


306  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

the  district  called  "the  land  of  Cabul "  (i  Kings  ix. 
i  3).  In  the  Hebrew  the  term  Cabul  has  no  certain 
meaning,  but  in  the  Phoenician  tongue  it  means  "  dis 
pleasing  "  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  viii.,  5,  §  3). 

Vers.  28-30  (The  Northern  District  of  Asher). — 
Ver.  28. — lt'Ebh-r6n"  (passage-ford),  unknown,  but 
apparently  near  Zidon.  Fourteen  MSS.  read  "Abdon," 
which  occurs  in  xxi.  30  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  59  (74),  and 
possibly  i  may  have  been  written  by  mistake  for  T 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  all  the  ancient  versions  accord 
with  the  Masoretic  text  in  reading  Ebh-ron,  except 
the  Vat.  Sept.,  which  has  'EX/3w^.  Since  some  towns, 
viz.,  Akko,  Achlabh,  and  Chelbah,  are  omitted  in  this 
list  (see  Judges  i.  31),  perhaps  by  the  error  of  a 
copyist,  Abdon  may  also  have  fallen  out.  "Rechobh  " 
(wide  space),  evidently  near  Zidon,  but  the  site  un 
discovered.  Another  town  of  the  same  name  is 
mentioned  in  ver.  30,  and  both  are  different  from  the 
Rechobh  in  Numb.  xiii.  ?.  i ,  which  was  probably  near 
Tell  el  Kady  (Laish  or  Dan)  and  Banias  (cf.  Judges 
xviii.  28  ;  see  Smith's  Diet,  of  the  Bible],  "  Cham- 
mon  "  (warm  or  sunny),  apparently  not  far  from  Zidon. 
Schultz  would  identify  it  with  the  modern  village  of 
Hamitl,  near  the  coast,  about  ten  miles  below  Tyre, 
but  both  etymology  and  site  are  doubtful -(Grove). 
Lieut.  Conder  suggests  the  ruin  Hima,  south-east  of 
Tyre,  a  situation  which  appears  to  him  satisfactory. 
"  Qa-nah"  (reed),  perhaps  Ain-Kana,  eight  miles 
south-east  of  Saida  (Zidon;  Van  de  Velde's  Map}. 
"  Great  Tsi-dhon"  see  xi.  8.  It  does  not  appear  that 
the  Asherites  were  ever  able  to  expel  the  inhabitants 
of  any  of  the  Phoenician  towns,  or  to  render  them 
tributary  (see  Judges  i.  31,  32).  The  character  of 


VER.  29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  307 

the  tribe  was  the  reverse  of  warlike  (Stanley,  Sin. 
and  Pal.,  p.  265),  for  thus  in  the  war  against  Sisera, 
while  Zebulun  and  Naphtali  "hazarded  their  lives 
unto  the  death,"  Asher  "  abode  in  his  breaches,"  i.e., 
in  his  creeks  and  harbours  (Judges  v.  17,  18). 

Ver.  29. — "And  the  border  turned  to  ha-Ramah  " : 
The  Vulg.  reads  "  Horma,"  but  the  other  ancient 
versions  agree  with  the  Masoretic  text,  hence  n  de 
notes  the  article  which  is  prefixed  to  the  name  by 
way  of  distinction.  Probably  the  Ramah  is  meant 
which  is  marked  in  Arrowsmith's  Bib.  Atlas  as  lying 
on  the  coast  between  Zidon  and  Tyre,  about  three 
miles  east  of  Tyre,  according  to  Van  de  Velde's 
Map  (see  also  Grove,  Art.  "  Ramah  "  [4],  Smith's 
Bib.  Diet?).  With  less  probability  Robinson  places 
it  more  than  ten  miles  south-east  of  Tyre  (Bib.  Res., 
iii.,  64).  "  To  the  fortified  city  of  Tsor"  (lit.  "  to  the 
city,  the  fortress  of  Tsor  ")  :  Tsor  ("  rock,"  i.q.  i-iv), 
Greek  Tupos,  "  Tyre,"  is  here  mentioned  in  the  Bible 
for  the  first  time,  and  the  allusion,  according  to  Keil, 
is  not  to  the  insular  but  the  inland  city.  Justin 
(xi.,  10)  records  a  tradition  of  the  inhabitants  that 
there  was  a  city  on  the  mainland  before  there  was 
one  on  the  island.  Tsor  would,  indeed,  more 
properly  apply  to  a  city  built  upon  a  rocky  island 
than  to  one  on  a  fertile  plain  ;  but  if  the  island 
formed  part  of  the  territory  of  the  inland  city,  the 
latter  might  have  taken  its  name  from  it.  It  is  now 
called  Star.  "And  the  border  turned  to  Chdsah,  and 
the  outgoings  thereof  ^were  at  the  sea  from  the  district 
towards  Akh-zibh?  "  Chd-sali  "  (a  refuge),  mentioned 
nowhere  else.  It  is  marked  in  Arrowsmith's  Bib. 
Atlas  as  lying  on  the  sea-coast  below  Tyre,  but 


308  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

Keil  regards  it  as  an  inland  city.1  Vsnrp,  "from  the 
district"  i.e.,  by  the  side  of  it  (Keil).  ^n,  which 
means  lit.  "  land  measured  by  a  line,"  is  here  taken 
in  the  general  sense  of  territory,  as  in  Deut.  iii.  4. 
The  boundary,  says  Keil,  took  an  inland  course  from 
the  maritime  cities  of  Zidon  and  Tyre  to  Chosah, 
and  it  was  only  at  Akh-zibh  that  Asher's  inheritance 
was  bordered  on  the  west  by  the  sea.  "'Akh-zibh" 
("  a  winter  torrent,"  and  hence  "  deceptive,"  as  soon 
drying  up,  rt.  2T3,  to  lie  ;  from  it  Asher  could  not 
drive  out  the  Canaanites,  Judges  i.  31)  ;  afterwards 
Ecdippa  (Joseph.,  B.  /.,  i.  13,  §  4  ;  Plin.,  Nat.  Hist., 
v.,  17),  now  Zib,  on  the  coast,  eight  or  nine  miles 
north  of  Acre.  Another  town  of  the  same  name 
belonged  to  Judah  (xv.  44). 

Ver.  30. — "' Urn- mah"  (junction),  unknown,  though 
possibly  Alma  in  the  highlands  on  the  coast,  about  five 
miles  E.N.E.  of  Ras  en  Nakhura  (Grove).2  " Aphcq" 
see  on  xiii.  4.  "  RechobJi"  unknown  ;  see  the  same 
name  in  ver.  28.  It  is  uncertain  which  of  the  two 
towns  was  assigned  to  the  Levites  (xxi.  30;  i  Chron. 
vi.  60  [75])  ;  but  probably  this  here  mentioned  was 
retained  possession  of  by  the  Canaanites,  as  recorded 
in  Judges  i.  31,  for  there  it  is  also  mentioned  along 
with  'A-phiq,  probably  i.q.  'Apheq.  "  Twenty  and 
tivo  cities  "  [towns]  :  The  number  does  not  correspond 
with  the  list  given  in  vers.  25-30,  but  perhaps  there 
may  be  some  omission  in  the  text  (see  on  ver.  28). 


1  According  to  Lieut.  Conder,  it  is  apparently  the  present 
ruin  Ozziyeh,  on  the  coast  south  of  Tyre. 

-  So  Lieut.  Conder  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  Map,  sheet  iii.). 


VERS.  32,  33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  309 


VERS.  32-39.—  The  Inheritance  of  Naph-ta-li} 

The  territory  of  this  tribe  was  mostly  mountainous 
(xx>  7),  but  contained  also  the  rich  plains  of  Merj- 
Ayiin,  and  the  well-watered  country  about  Bariias 
and  Hasbeya,  the  springs  of  Jordan.  Celebrated  as 
the  birthplace  of  Barak  (Judges  iv.),  and  the  scene 
of  Joshua's  victory  over  the  King  of  Hazor  (xi.)  ; 
bounded  on  the  west  by  Asher,  on  the  south  by 
Zebulon  and  Issachar,  on  the  east  by  the  Sea2  of 
Gennesaret  and  the  Jordan,  on  the  north  by  the 
ravine  of  the  Litany,  or  Leontes,  and  the  moun 
tainous  ranges  of  Lebanon.  At  a  later  period  it  was 
comprised  in  the  district  called  Upper  Galilee,  where 
our  Lord  and  His  apostles  chiefly  exercised  their 
ministry  (Matt.  iv.  13,  14,  etc.). 

Ver.  .33.  —  In  this  verse  the  boundary  is  traced  on 
the  west,  north,  and  east.  "  Chelepk  "  (exchange),  un 
known,  but  conjectured  by  Van  -de  Velde  to  be 
identical  with  Bcitlif,  on  the  boundary  between 
Naphtali  and  Asher,  east  of  Ras  Abyad,  "  the  white 
promontory,"  and  west  of  Kedesh.  "From  the  oak- 
forest  in  Tsa-a-nan-nim*  "  :  Here  $>x,  an  oak,  is 
probably  a  noun  of  multitude  (quercetum,  Junius  and 
Tremellius)  ;  in  Judges  iv.  I  I  the  Hebrew  word  is 
interchanged  with  j1?8j  which,  according  to  Michaelis, 


'  Meaning  "my  strife,"   rt.  ^ns,  not  used  in  Qal,  but  in 
Niphal,  where  it  signifies  to  wrestle,  to  strive  (see  Gen.  xxx.  8). 

2  This  is  doubtless  the  sea  (DJ)  referred  to  in  the  prophecy 
of  Moses   (Deut.    xxxiii.  23),   and  rendered    "west"   in  the 
Authorised  Version. 

3  This  word  is  written  differently  in  Judges  iv.  n,  but  the 
Qpri  of  that  passage  adopts  the  form  here  used  as  more  accurate. 


3io  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

Rosenm.,  Kcil,  and  Del.,  means  a  terebinth-tree, 
though  Gesenius  (Lex.,  p.  50)  doubts  this  distinction. 
'ttX,  "  removings,"  from  jrv,  "  to  move  tents,"  "  to  go 
forward  "  (Ges.,  Lex.},  and  hence  a  place  where  tents 
stand  ;  near  Kedesh  Naphtali  (Judges  iv.  i  i),  north 
west  of  the  Sea  of  Merom  (Stanley,  Jewish  Church, 
324,  Localities,  197).  Robinson  found  this  district 
still  wooded  with  oak  trees  (Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  447). 
"  'A-d/ia-mi  of,  the  pass  "  *  :  Possibly  Deir-el-Athmar 
(red  cloister),  a  place  still  inhabited,  and  deriving 
its  name  from  the  colour  of  the  soil  in  the  neigh 
bourhood,  about  eight  miles  north-west  of  Baalbec 
(Knobel).  3|53,  lit.  a  cavern,  from  n^,  to  excavate, 
and  hence  "  a  pass  between  mountains."  But  the 
Sept.,  the  Jerus.  Talmud,  and  Reland  (Pal.,  545) 
separate  the  two  words  and  refer  them  to  two  towns, 
as  in  the  A.V.,  the  site  of  neither  of  which  is  known 
(Clark's  Bib.  Atlas}.  "Yabh-n'^l,"  cf.  xv.  1 1,  where 
the  same  name  occurs  as  one  of  the  towns  of  Judah, 
perhaps  here  the  same  as  Janmeia,  or  Jamnith, 
mentioned  by  Josephus  among  the  villages  in  Upper 
Galilee  (Bel.Jud.,  ii.,  20,  §  6).  "Lag-gum"  ("stopping 
up  the  way,"  i.e.,  a  fortified  place,  from  an  Arab.  rt. 
"  to  stop  up  the  way,"  Ges.,  Lex.},  apparently  between 
Yabhneel  and  the  Jordan,  but  unknown.  "And  its 
outgoings  were  the  Jordan  "  :  The  Upper  Jordan,  i.e., 
the  Nahr  Hasbany,  a  source  of  the  Jordan,  is  meant. 
'  Ver.  34. — In  this  verse  the  boundary  line  is  traced 
on  the  south  of  Naphtali. — "Turned  westwards','  i.e., 
from  the  Jordan.  "  To'Az-noth-Ta-bhor"  ("  ears  [i.e. 


1  So  Keil,  following  the  accentuation  of  the  Hebrew  text, 
which  connects  the  first  word  with  the  second. 


VER.  34-1  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  311 

probably  summits]  of  Tabor "),  mentioned  by  Eusebius 
(Onomast.}  as  a  village  lying  in  the  plain  on  the  con 
fines  of  Diocaesarea  (probably  the  modern  Seffurieh  ; 
Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  337)  ;  the  site  is  undiscovered, 
but  may  have  been  on  the  east  slope  of  Tabor,  near 
the  Jordan.  "  To  Chiiq-qoq"  ("decreed  portion"),  men 
tioned  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  (Onomast.,  "  Icoc."), 
but  unknown  to  them  ;  perhaps  Yakuk,  a  village 
on  the  mountains  of  Naphtali,  about  seven  miles 
S.S.W.  of  Safed,  and  at  the  head  of  Wady  el  Amud 
(VValcott,  and  Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  p.  82).  An  ancient 
Jewish  tradition  places  the  tomb  of  Habakkuk  here. 
"  A  nd  reached  to  (struck  upon)  Zebuhin  on  the  south, 
and  reached  to  AsJicr  on  the  ivest,  and  to  Judah  on  the 
Jordan  toivard  the  sun  rising  "  :  Some  (as  Bachiene) 
have  supposed  that  "  Judah  "  here  denotes  a  town  on 
the  east  border  of  Naphtali,  or  a  town  in  Issachar 
(Knobel),  or  in  Asher  (Fay),  yet  it  would  be  strange 
that  the  mention  of  two  tribes,  Asher  and  Zebulun, 
which  imply  territories,  should  be  followed  immedi 
ately  by  that  of  a  single  town.  Still  less  satisfactory 
is  the  conjecture  of  Masius  that  the  tribe  of  Judah  is 
meant,  and  that  the  expression,  "  Judah  upon  Jordan," 
signifies  that  Naphtali  traded  with  Judah  by  means 
of  the  Jordan,.  If  the  reading  in  the  Hebrew  text  is 
correct,  the  best  interpretation  is  that  of  Von  Raumer 
(Pal.,  405-410),  which  is  adopted  by  Keil  and  others, 
viz.,  that  "Judah  here  denotes  the  '  Havoth-Jair ' ' 
(Numb,  xxxii.  41),  called  "Judah"  here  because 
Jair,  the  possessor  of  these  villages,  was  a  descendant 
of  Judah  on  the  father's  side  through  Hezron 
(i  Chron.  ii.  5,  21,  22\  As,  however,  this  explana 
tion  can  hardly  be  said  to  clear  up  the  difficulty  of 


312  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

the  passage,  Maurer,  and  after  him  Bunsen,  regards 
rn-liT2  as  a  corruption  for  D>13^1  ("and  their  boundary"), 
referring  to  xvii.  10,  xix.  22  ;l  but  Clericus  simply 
omits  it  on  the  authority  of  the  Vat.  Alex.,  and  Aid. 
MSS.  of  the  Sept.  fnifn,  according  to  Keil,  is  in 
appos.  to  rrnrP2,  in  the  sense  of  "Judah  of  the  Jordan," 
like  "Jordan  of  Jericho,"  in  Numb.  xxii.  I,  xxvi.  3, 
and  ought  not  to  have  been  separated  by  the  Masoretic 
pointing ;  but,  according  to  Maurer's  reading,  the 
rendering  will  be,  "  and  their  border  was  Jordan  on  the 
east,"  or,  omitting  "  Judah,"  "  the  Jordan  (was)  toward 
the  sun  rising,"  i.e.,  formed  the  east  border.  • 

Vers.  35-38  (The  fortified  cities  of  Naphtali}. — 
"  The  general  character  of  the  cities  in  this  region  is 
that  they  stand  on  rocky  spurs  or  ridges,  above  peace 
ful  basins,  high  among  the  hills  "  (Stanley's  Sin.  and 
Pal.,  xi.,  p.  390). 

Ver.  3  5 . — '?»  ny,  "  cities  of  fortification."  "  hats- 
Tsid-dim"  ("the  sides"),  wrongly  read  nn*n  (the 
Tyrians)  by  the  Vat.  Sept.,  and  jm  by  the  Peshito 
Syr.,  under  the  notion  that  the  next  name  Tser  was 
Tyre  ;  but  Tyre  and  Tsi-dhon  were  included  in  the 
allotment  of  Asher,  and  not  of  Naphtali  (xix.  28,  29). 
The  Jerusalem  Talmud  identifies  it  with  Kefr  C/iittai, 
which  Schwarz  takes  to  be  the  present  Hattin  at  the 
northern  foot  of  the  well-known  Kurn  Hattin,  or 
"  Horns  of  Hattin,"  a  few  miles  west  of  Tiberias 
(Grove).  "  Tser"  probably  on  the  south-west  side  of 
the  Lake  of  Gennesareth,  but  unknown.  "  Cham- 
mat/i"  (warm  baths),  near  Tiberias,  on  the  west  of 
Gennesareth,  called  -Chammoth-Dor  (xxi.  32),  and 

1  See  also  Grove's  Art.  "Judah"  in  Smith's  Diet,  of  the 
Bible,  p.  1156,  note  b. 


VER.  36,  37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  313 

Chammon  (i  Chron.  vi.  61,  Heb.,  76,  Auth.  Vers.), 
and  identical  with  Emmaus  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  xviii.,  ii., 
3  ;  Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  373,  note  6).  "  Raq- 
qath  "  (bank,  shore),  not  known,  though,  according  to 
the  Talmud,  occupying  the  site  where  Tiberias  was 
afterwards  built.  The  nearest  approach  to  the  name 
is  Kerak,  formerly  Tarichaese,  close  to  the  embouchure 
of  the  Jordan  (Grove).  " Kin-ne-rct/i"  see  on  xi.  2. 
All  trace  of  the  town  is  lost,  but  Knobel  thinks  that 
it  stood  in  the  plain  of  Gennesareth,  on  the  shore  of 
the  lake,  where  now  stands  the  KJian-Manijeh.  For 
a  glowing  description  of  the  plain  see  Joseph.,  Bel. 
Jud.,  ch.  x.,  8. 

Ver.  36. — "'A-dha-mah"  (red  earth),  unknown, 
but  possibly  Ras  el  Ahmar,  i.e.,  red-head,  on  the 
north  of  Safed  (Robinson,  Bib.  Res.,  p.  69  ;  Knobel). 
" hd-Ra-maJi"  distinct  from  the  Ramah  in  ver.  29, 
perhaps  the  modern  RameJi,  between  Akka  (Ptolemais) 
and  the  north  end  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  and  about 
eight  miles  S.S.E.  of  Safed  (Robinson,  Bib.  Res., 
iii.,  78).  It  stands  on  a  bold  spur  of  the  Galilean 
Antilebanon,  and  is  supposed  by  Stanley  to  be  the 
"  city  set  upon  a  hill"  (Matt.  v.  14  ;  Sin.  and  Pal., 
p.  429)  ;  but  Grove  remarks  that,  though  the  spot  is 
distinguished  by  a  very  lofty  brow,  commanding  one 
of  the  most  extensive  views  in  all  Palestine  (Rob., 
p.  78),  and  answering  perfectly  to  the  name  of 
Ramah,  yet  the  village  of  Ramah  itself  is  on  the 
lower  slope  of  the  hill  (Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  vol.  ii., 
p.  1000).  "  Cha-tsor?  see  on  xi.  i. 

Ver.  37. — "  Qe-dhesk  "  (sanctuary),  not  to  be  con 
founded  with  that  in  xii.  22  (see  note).  It  is  called 
Qe-dhesh-Naphtali  (the  home  of  Barak,  Judges  iv. 


314  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

6,  10  ;  was  captured  by  Tiglath-Pileser  (2  Kings 
xv.  29)  ;  now  Kades,  ten  miles  north  of  Safed,  and 
four  to  the  north-west  of  the  upper  part  of  the 
Sea  of  Merom.  "  'Edh-r2-t"  distinct  from  that  in 
xii.  4.  Apparently  the  present  village  Y'ater.  The 
relative  position  is  suitable,  and  the  letters  "  T  "  and 
"D"  often  interchanged  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  1881). 
"'En-Cha-ts&r"  (fountain  of  the  village  of  the  fenced 
place),  probably.  Ain  Hazur,  south  of  Ramah. 

•  Ver,  38. — "  Ylr-dn"  (place  of  terror),  unknown, 
though  possibly  Yan^n,  to  the  west  of  Lake  Merom 
(Grove).  "Migh-dal-  'El "  (tower  of  God),  conjectured 
by  some  to  be  the  same  as  Magdala  (Matt.  xv.  39), 
on  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (Stanley,  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  382, 
note  2),  and  now  the  wretched  village  el-Mejdel 
(Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  ii.,  396,  397)  ;  but  as  this  site  would 
be  outside  the  ancient  limits  of  Naphtali,  and  within 
those  of  Zebulun,  Grove  would  rather  identify  it  with 
Mujeidel  on  Wady  Kerkerah,  near  Yarun,  eight  miles 
due  east  of  the  Ras-en-Nakurah  (Scala  Tyriorum). 
"  Cho-rem  "  (devoted,  sacred),  possibly  Hnrah,  a  low 
tell  with  ruins,  between  Ras  en  Nakhurah  and  the 
Lake  Merom,  near  Yarum  (Grove).  "  Beth-d-natk  " 
(house  of  response,  or  echo),  according  to  Eusebius 
and  Jerome  (Onomast.}  a  village  called  Batanea, 
fifteen  miles  east  of  Ca^sarea,  but  not  discoverable. 
"  Bcth-shc-mcsh"  distinct,  of  course,  from  that  in  Judah 
(xv.  10),  and  from  that  on  the  border  of  Issachar 
(ver.  22),  but  the  site  unknown.  Neither  from  this 
fortress,  nor  from  Beth-anath,  could  Naphtali  expel 
the  Canaanites  (Judges  i.  33).  The  total  number  of 
towns  given  in  this  verse,  viz.,  sixteen,  does  not  tally 
with  the  number,  viz.,  nineteen,  mentioned  in  the  list 


VERS.  40-42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  315 

(vers.  35-38).  Probably  some  names  are  missing, 
for  Kartan  or  Kirjathaim,  though  mentioned  in  xxi. 
32,  and  in  I  Chron.  vi.  61  (76),  is  not  found  in  the 
list. 

VERS.   40-48. — Inheritance    of  Dhan    (judge, 
Gen.  xxx.  6). 

Dhan  was  own  brother  to  Naphtali,  which  may  be 
a  reason  for  his  being  here  mentioned  after  him, 
unless  it  be  in  anticipation  of  his  occupying  after 
wards  a  northern  position  (ver.  47).  His  inheritance 
was  smaller  than  that  of  any  of  the  other  tribes,'  but, 
being  mainly  in  the  shephelah,  was  one  of  the  most 
fertile  in  Palestine.  Here  its  towns  only  are  enume 
rated,  because  its  boundaries  were  determined  by 
those  of  the  neighbouring  tribes  of  Ephraim,  Judah, 
and  Benjamin,  already  described.  Of  its  towns 
several  were  taken  out  of  Ephraim  and  Judah. 

Ver.  41. — "  Tsor-ah"  and  "'Esh-td-6l,"  see  xv.  33. 
"ir-ske-incs/i"  (city  of  the  sun),  called  also  Beth- 
shemesh,  xv.  10. 

Ver.  42. — "  SJid-d-lab-bin  "  ("place  of  foxes,"  cf. 
Chatsar-shual,  xv.  28,  and  the  incident  recorded  in 
Judges  xv.  4),  more  often  written  Sha'albim  (i  Kings 
iv.  9  ;  Judges  i.  35)  ;  the  inhabitants  seem  to  have 
been  called  Shaalbonites  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  32  ;  i  Chron. 
xi.  33)  ;  from  it  the  Danites  could  not  expel  the 
Emorites  (Judges  i.  35).  Site  unknown,  but  maybe 
that  of  'Esalin,  lying  next  to  Surah,  the  ancient 
Tsor'ah  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  first  edit.,  iii.,  App.,  120,  b]. 
It  is  mentioned  indeed  by  Eusebius  and  Jerome  in 
the  Onomast.  (Selab),  as  a  large  village  in  the  district 


316  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

of  Sebaste  (i.e.,  Samaria),  and  then  called  Selaba ;  but 
there  is  no  reason  to  conclude  that  any  of  the  towns 
of  the  Danites  were  near  Samaria,  nor  could  the 
position  here  assigned  to  Shealbim,  viz.,  between 
Irshemesh  and  Ajalon,  be  thus  accounted  for.  (See 
Art.  by  Grove  on  "  Shaalbim  "  in  Smith's  Bib.  Dict^) 
"  'Ay-ya-l6n?  see  x.  1 2.  "  Ylth-lah  "  (height,  rt.  nbn, 
to  suspend),  mentioned  in  the  Onomast.  as  'Ie0Acu>, 
but  without  any  description  or  indication  of  position. 
According  to  Knobel,  the  name  may  possibly  be  pre 
served  in  the  Wady  Atallah,  west  of  Yalo  (Ajalon  ; 
Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  pp.  143,  144)  ;  but  Lieut.  Conder 
suggests  the  ruin  Beit  Tnl  in  the  low  hills  west  of 
Jerusalem  as  a  probable  site. 

Ver.  43. — "  'E-lon  "  (oak  or  terebinth),  called  'Elon- 
beth-chanan  (i  Kings  iv.  9),  perhaps  Ellin,  near  Tim- 
nath  (Knobel),  mentioned  by  Robinson  (Pal.,  vol.  iii., 
App.,  p.  120);  but,  according  to  Lieut.  Conder, 
probably  the  present  village  Beit  Ellti  (Pal.  Explor. 
Fund,  1881).  "  Tim-na-tkdh"  xv.  10.  "'Eg-ron? 
xiii.  3. 

Ver.  44. — "  'El-te-gek  "  ("  to  which  God  is  fear,  or 
object  of  fear,"  rt.  Ki?.]ji,  unused,  Arab.  "  to  fear  "),  a 
city  of  the  Levites,  written  Njp.Jji'px,  a  Levite  city  (xxi. 
23)  ;  apparently  Beit  Likia  in  the  territory  of  Dan. 
In  the  list  of  the  victories  of  Sennacherib  (Assyrian 
Discoveries,  pp.  302-5),  the  "  plains  of  Eltekeh  "  are 
mentioned  with  towns  of  Dan.  This  agrees  with  the 
situation  of  the  modern  village  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund, 
1881).  "  Gib-tftlidn"  (height),  a  city  of  the  Levites 
(xxi.  23),  held  by  the  Philistines  in  the  early  days  of 
the  monarchy  (i  Kings  xv.  27,  xvi.  15);  probably 
the  present  village  Kibbiali,  at  the  foot  of  the  hills 


VERS.  45.  46-1          THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  317 

near  Lydda.  "  The  situation  agrees  with  the  context  " 
(Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  1881).  "  Bd-&-lath?  fortified  by 
Solomon  (i  Kings  ix.  18  ;  2  Chron.  viii.  6)  ;  not  far 
from  Gezer  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  viii.,  6,  §  i).  Probably 
the  present  village  Belain,  in  a  suitable  position  west 
of  Bethhoron,  and  commanding  the  main  road  to 
Jerusalem  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  1881,  Map,  sheet  xiv.). 

Ver.  45. — "Y'hiidk"  (praise),  not  mentioned  by 
Eusebius  and  Jerome,  perhaps  identical  with  el- 
Yehudiyeh  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lydd  (Lydda, 
Acts  ix.  38),  placed  in  Van  de  Velde's  map  seven 
miles  east  of  Jaffa,  and  five  north  of  Lydd  ;  see 
Rob,  Bib.  Res.,  iii.,  45).  "  Bene-B/ieraq"  ("sons  of 
Berak,  or  of  lightning,"  whether  Danites  or  early 
settlers  dispossessed  by  them  is  unknown).  Scholz 
(R.,  p.  256)  would  identify  it  with  the  present  Ibn- 
Abrak,  two  miles  from  Yehudh.  Eusebius  and  the 
Vulg.  divide  the  name  into  two,  and  the  former  says 
that  BapaKai  was  a  village  near  Azotus.  "  Gath- 
rtm-mon  "  (press  of  the  pomegranate),  according  to 
Eusebius  (Onomast.)  twelve  miles  on  the  road  from 
Diospolis  (Lydda)  to  Eleutheropolis,  probably  near 
Thimnathah,  afterwards  given  to-  the  Kohathite 
Levites  (xxi.  24).  Site  undiscovered. 

Ver.  46. — "  Me-hay-  Yar-qon  "  (the  waters  of  pale 
ness  or  greenness),  unknown,  but  the  next  name  may 
be  a  corrupt  repetition  of  it  (Grove).  "Ha-Raq-qon" 
(the  thinness,  rt.  \>\r\,  to  spread  out  by  beating,  to 
make  thin,  Ges.,  Lex.}.  The  situation  of  Tell  er 
Rakkeit  appears  suitable,  north  of  Jaffa,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  river  Aujeh.  Probably  the  same  as 
Mejarkon  (Lieut.  Conder,  Map,  sheet  xiii.).  "  With 
tlie  border  over  against  Yapho  "  (beauty)  :  Yapho  was 


318  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.          *  [CHAP.  xix. 

a  very  ancient  Philistine  city,  thought  by  the  ancients 
to  be  older  than  the  Flood  (Pomp.  Mela,  i.  1 1  ; 
Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.,  v.,  13)  ;  Greek  'IOTTTT^,  the  well- 
known  port  of  Palestine  (2  Chron.  ii.  16  ;  Ezra  iii.  7  ; 
Jonah  i.  3  ;  Acts'  ix.  36,  x.  8),  often  mentioned  in  the 
Books  of  Maccabees,  annexed  by  Pompey  to  the 
province  of  Syria  (Joseph.,  Antiq.,  xiv.  4,  §  4),  but 
restored  by  Csesar  to  Hyrcanus  (xiv.  10,  §  6).  It 
afterwards  became  part  of  Herod's  kingdom  (xv.  7,  3) 
and  that  of  Archelaus  (xvii.  1 1,  §  4),  on  whose  depo 
sition  it  reverted  to  the  province  of  Syria.  Having 
been  destroyed  by  C.  Cestius  (Joseph.,  Bel.  Jud.,  ii. 
i  8,  §  10),  it  was  subsequently  rebuilt,  and  became  in 
fested  by  Jewish  pirates  (Strabo,  xvi.,  759)  in  conse 
quence  of  which  Vespasian  levelled  it  with  the 
ground,  and  erected  a  camp  there  where  the  citadel 
had  been  (Bel.  Jud.,  iii.  9,  §§  3,  4).  It  appears,  how 
ever,  that  a  new  town  gradually  sprung  up.  The 
name  of  the  place  now  is  Jaffa,  containing  about  four 
thousand  inhabitants,  and  is  celebrated  for  its  groves 
and  gardens  (see  Stanley's  Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  243, 
note  ;  p.  256  ;  Thomson's  The  Land  and  the  Book, 
p.  511,  etc.). 

Ver.  47. — "  And  the  border  of  the  sons  of  Dan  went 
on t  from  them"  i.e.,  beyond  them,  or  beyond  the  in 
heritance  allotted  to  them  ;  cf.  Masius,  "  The  Danites 
emigrated  beyond  themselves,  i.e.,  beyond  the  inherit 
ance  in  which  they  were  first  placed  by  the  Divine 
lot,  and  set  out  in  search  of  other  possessions."  So 
De  Wette,  Keil,  and  others.  The  fact  that  the  Dan 
ites  were  unable  to  expel  the  Amorites,  but  were 
driven  by  them  into  the  mountains  (Judges  i.  34), 
would  account  for  this  emigration,  which,  as  we  read 


VERS.  49,50.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  319 

in  Judges  xviii.  30,  took  place  in  the  time  of  Jeho- 
nathan,  the  grandson  of  Moses  (see  Keil  on  Judges 
xviii.  i,  30).  "Le-shem  "  ("a  kind  of  precious  stone," 
Ges.)  called  Laish  (Judges  xviii.  7,  27),  near  the 
western  source  of  the  Jordan,  four  miles  from  Panium, 
or  Csesarea  Fhilippi.  "And  called  LcsJiem  'Dan' 
after  the  name"  etc.  (cf.  Judges  xviii.  29  J)  :  The 
name  Dan  (judge)  is  preserved  in  that  of  the  village 
"  Tell-el-Kadi"  ("  mound  of  the  judge"),  which  now 
occupies  its  supposed  site.  Here  Jeroboam  I.  set  up 
one  of  his  golden  calves  (i  Kings  xii.  29).  On  the 
question  of  the  identity  of  this  Dan  with  that  in  Gen. 
xiv.  1 4,  see  Art.  by  Grove  in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet., 
pp.  386-7. 

VERS.  49,  50. — Inheritance  of  Joshua. 

Ver.  49. — Vrpp,  here,  i.q.  Piel,  "  to  give  to  be  pos 
sessed  "  (cf.  Numb,  xxxiv.  17,1  8).  "b,  "  according  to 
its  borders? 

Ver.  50. — "According  to  the  command  (mouth)  of 
JeJwvah  "  :  Though  no  express  mention  is  made  in 
the  Pentateuch  of  this  command,  it  is  probable  from 

1  So  "  Datos,"  or  "  Baton,"  was  called  "  Philippi  "  after  its 
conquest  by  Philip  of  Macedon  ;  "Byzantium"  was  named 
"Constantinople"  after  Constantine  the  Great;  and  "Zankle," 
in  Sicily,  had  its  name  changed  to  "  Messene  "  by  the  Mes- 
senians  (Herod.,  vii.,  164).  The  brief  account  in  Josh.  xix.  47 
of  a  transaction  afterwards  more  fully  recorded,  was  added, 
Scott  the  commentator  thinks,  to  complete  the  description  of 
the  inheritance  at  length  possessed  by  the  tribe  of  Dan. 
Probably  the  event  occurred  soon  after  the  death  of  Joshua, 
and  the  addition  to  the  narrative  might,  he  says,  have  been 
made  by  Phinehas  (Judges  xx.  28).  It  is  not  probable  that 
the  idolatry  of  Micah  and  of  the  Danites  would  have  been 
connived  at  by  Joshua. 


320  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xix. 

Josh.  xiv.  6  that  it  was  given  at  the  same  time  as  the 
command  respecting  Caleb.1  Modesty  and  disin 
terestedness  may  have  kept  Joshua  from  claiming  his 
inheritance  sooner.  "  Tim-nath-se-rach  "  ("  a  portion 
over  and  above,"  Ges.,  Lex.,  pp.  595,  868),  called  in 
Judges  ii.  9  Timnath-Cheres  (portion  of  the  sun), 
because,  say  the  Rabbis,  a  representation  of  the  sun 
was  carved  on  Joshua's  tomb  in  memory  of  the 
miracle  of  Gibeon  (Josh.  x.  12);  though  others  (as 
Fiirst,  i.,  442)  interpret  Cheres  as  "  clay,"  and 
relating  to  the  nature  of  the  soil  ;  while  others  again 
(as  Ewald)  consider  it  an  error,  which  arose  from  a 
transposition  of  letters.  The  Vulg.,  Syr.,  Arab.,  and 
several  Heb.  MSS.,  read  Serach,  as  in  Josh.  xix.  50. 
It  is  described  in  Josh.  xxiv.  30  as  being  in  Mount 
Ephraim,  on  the  north  side  of  the  hill  Gaash  ;  thus 
Joshua  received,  like  Caleb,  an  inheritance  amid  his 
own  tribe.  The  site  has  been  supposed  to  be  where 
now  stands  Tibneh,  six  miles  west  of  Jifneh,  and 
about  seventeen  miles  north  of  Jerusalem  (Dr.  Eli 
Smith's  BibL  Sacra,  1843),  but  for  a  later  view  see 
note  on  xxiv.  30. 

Ver.  5  i. —  Conclusion. — The  ^  before  nii3»  is  a  sign 
of  the  genitive,  which  is  used  to  avoid  the  repetition 
of  the  construe,  state  (cf.  xiv.  i).  "In  SJiiloh  before 
the  Lord"  cf.  xviii.  10.  nns,  an  adverb  accus.  of  place 
(§118,  i). 

1  Possibly,  however,  there  is  a  reference  here  to  the  Urim 
which  Joshua  in  Numb,  xxvii.  21  is  bidden  to  consult.  That 
we  read  not  in  this  book  of  his  doing  so  on  other  occasions  is 
explained  by  the  fact  that  he  had  already  received  directions 
in  those  commands  which  God  had  given  to  Moses,  whose 
minister  he  was  ;  see,  e.g.,  i.  7,  viii.  35,  xi.  15. 


VERS.  1-3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  321 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Appointment  of  the  Six  Cities  of  Refuge. 


Ver.  i.  —  The  word  lavi  connecting  this  chapter 
with  the  preceding  shows  that  this  appointment  of 
the  cities  of  refuge  took  place  immediately  after  the 
allotment  of  the  land. 

Ver.  2.  —  Dab  vy,  "give  (i.e.,  appoint)  for  you." 
tD^pp,  asylum  or  refuge,  Sept.  ^uyaSeiov  (f)wya$evTr)- 
piov  KOLTaffrwyij,  from  B?!?,  to  draw  together,  to  con 
tract,  to  draw  in,  and  hence  to  receive  (a  fugitive  to 
oneself),  i.q.  Chald.  vh\).  The  asylums  of  the  Greeks 
and  Romans,  and  the  sanctuaries  of  mediaeval  Europe, 
were  somewhat  analogous  to  these  cities  of  refuge, 
but  the  main  distinction  was  that  the  latter  protected 
criminals  from  unmerited,  the  former  often  from 
merited,  punishment.1  At  the  same  time,  the  restraint 
put  upon  the  unintentional  man-slayer  by  his  con 
finement  to  a  city  of  refuge  sufficiently  marked  God's 
disapproval  of  the  sin  of  homicide,  while  the  exemp 
tion  of  him  from  death  tempered  justice  with  mercy. 
"  Whereof  I  spake  to  you"  see  Exod.  xxi.  13  ;  Numb. 
xxxv.  2,  6,  13  ;  Deut.  xix.  i,  etc. 

Ver.  3.  —  'D-1^,  "  that  tlie  slayer  vvho  killeth  (smiteth) 
a  person  by  mistake  in  ignorance  may  flee"  etc.,  cf. 

1  Tacitus  says  that  in  the  time  of  Tiberius  "  crebescebat 
Grsecas  per  urbes  licentia  atque  impunitas  asyla  statuendi  • 
complebantur  templa  pessimis  servitiorum  ;  eodem  subsidio 
obaerati  adversum  creditores  suspectique  capitalium  criminum 
receptabantur.  Nee  ullum  satis  validum  imperium  erat  coSr 
cendis  seditionibus  populi  flagitia  hominum,  ut  ceremonias 
Deum,  protegentis  "  (Tacit.,  Ann.,  iii.,  60). 

21 


322  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xx. 

Numb.  xxxv.  15-24;  Deut.  xix.  4-13,  where  the 
distinction  between  wilful  and  unintentional  homicide 
is  accurately  drawn,  rvn,  from  n^n,  to  break  or  dash 
in  pieces,  to  kill,  nJ3?>,  from  JJ2>,  to  err,  to  go  astray. 
K>S3,  "person"  (Ges.,  Lex.,  4,  p.  560).  D^n  h$i,  "  t/ie 
avenger,  of  blood  " :  ^>K3,  from  7N3,  "  to  redeem,"  perhaps 
originally  "  to  demand  back,"  and  hence  "  to  extri 
cate."  As  this  blood  revenge  and  redemption  of  an 
inheritance  were  the  duty  of  a  near  relative,  ^3  meant 
also  "  one  near  of  kin  "  (Numb.  v.  8  ;  Levit.  xxv.  25  ; 
Ruth  iii.  12).  The  Sept.  interprets  by  6  dyxioreuow 
TO  al/xa,  "  one  who  by  right  of  kindred  avenges 
blood."1 

Ver.  4. — "  A  nd  he  shall  flee  to  one  of  these  cities, 
and  shall  stand  at  the  entrance  of  the  gate"  etc.  Pin?., 
see  xix.  51.  Judges  sat  in  the  gate  (Deut  xvi.  18). 
inrrrriN  15-1%  "  shall  speak  his  words"  i.e.,  plead  his 
cause  (cf.  2  Sam.  xix.  30  [Heb.]  ;  Psalm  cxxvii.  5  ; 
Jer.  xii.  i).  fBP^I,  "  and  they  shall  receive  him,"  lit., 
shall  gather  him  :  The  verb  here  implies  "  to  receive 
under  one's  care  and  protection  "  (cf.  Deut.  xxii.  2  ; 
Psalm  xxvii.  10).  The  meaning  is,  that,  immediately 
on  his  arrival  at  the  city,  the  judges  should  investi 
gate  his  case,  and  if  there  appeared  prima  facie 
grounds  for  believing  him  innocent,  he  should  be 
allowed  to  reside  in  the  city  till  the  trial  took  place 
before  a  larger  tribunal  (ver.  6).  "  Shall  give  him  a 
place"  etc.  :  According  to  Maimonides  all  the  forty- 
eight  Levitical  cities  had  the  privilege  of  asylum,  but 


1  The  a-y^ioreur,  being  nearest  of  kin,  could  claim  the  in 
heritance,  and  thus  differed  from  the  crvyyei^?,  who  had 
no  such  claim,  and  from  oiKelot,  connexions  by  marriage 
(Ammonius). 


VERS.  5-7.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  323 

the  six   refuge  cities  were   required  to   receive   and 
lodge  the  homicide  gratuitously  (Calmet  on  Numb. 

XXXV.). 

Ver.  5. — ^},  "and  if"  (or  "when"),  "  cumque," 
Vulg.  n)fffi£}  lit.,  "  then  they  shall  not  shut  up"  i.e., 
shall  not  deliver  (cf.  <7fy/cA.eia>,  Rom.  xi.  32  ;  Gal. 
iii.  22),  Hiph.  fut. 

Ver.  6. — "  Until  he  shall  stand  (Qal.  infin.  with 
suff.)  before  the  congregation"  rny,  from  "i|T.  "  to 
appoint,"  here  means  the  congregation  of  elders  or 
representatives  of  the  people  in  a  city.  It  seems 
that  when  the  avenger  of  blood  arrived  at  the  city  of 
refuge,  and  claimed  the  man-slayer,  the  latter  was 
removed  for  trial  to  the  congregation  to  which  he 
belonged,  or  to  the  place  where  the  deed  had  been 
committed;  and  if  there  it  was  decided  that  the  deed 
was  accidental,  he  was  taken  back  to  the  city  of 
refuge,  where  he  was  to  remain  till  .the  death  of  the 
high-priest  (so  Keil).  The  high-priest,  who  was 
anointed  with  the  holy  oil  (Numb.  xxxv.  25),  was  a 
type  of  Christ,  and  his  death  may  have  been  regarded 
as  typical  of  that  of  Christ,  who  "  through  the  Eternal 
Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God  "  (Heb. 
ix.  14).  This,  therefore,  may  explain  why  the  full 
expiation  of  the  man-slayer's  guilt  was  connected 
with  the  high-priest's  death. 

Ver.  7. — •ICJHi?!!,  "  and  they  consecrated"  i.e.,  set  apart 
as  for  a  holy  purpose.  The  cities  of  refuge,  being 
Levitical  cities,  were  regarded  as  peculiarly  the  pro 
perty  of  God.  "  Qe-dhesh"  see  on  xix.  37.  W?|3,  lit., 
"  in  the  circuit"  Sept.  Iv  rrj  FctXiXcua,  ;  the  name 
applies  here  to  the  small  circuit  of  country  around 
Qe-dhesh,  in  which  were  afterwards  the  twenty  cities 


324  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xx. 

given  by  Solomon  to  Hiram  (i  Kings  ix.  1 1).  At  a 
later  period  Galilee  embraced  the  whole  of  the 
northern  part  of  Palestine.  In  Isa.  viii.  23  (ix.  l)  it 
is  called  DJT3n  b^|,  on  account  of  the  many  Gentiles 
there  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  15).  "In  Mount  Naphthali"  : 
Named  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible.  The  mountainous 
district  which  formed  the  chief  portion  of  the  terri 
tory  of  Naphthali,  answering  to  Mount  Ephraim  in 
the  centre,  and  Mount  Judah  in  the  south  of  Palestine. 
This  mountainous  district,  the  modern  Belad-Besharah, 
or  "  land  of  good  tidings,"  contains  some  of  the  most 
beautiful  scenery  and  fertile  soil  in  Palestine  (Porter, 
363).  "  Shechem"  \  In  the  centre  of  the  land  (see 
on  xvii.  7).  "  Qiryath-Arba  which  is  Chebhron?  in 
the  south  (see  x.  3,  xiv.  15).  "ina,  "in  the  mountain 
district  of  Judah?  cf.  xi.  21. 

Ver.  8  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  41-43). — This  repetition  is 
here  made  to  complete  the  narrative  ;  so  in  xii.  i, 
etc.,  the  account  of  the  conquest  of  the  land  is  re 
peated,  and  that  of  its  division  on  the  east  of  Jordan 
in  xiii.  8,  etc.  "  Be-tser"  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  43),  Sept. 
Bocrdp,  not  discovered  ;  probably  the  same  as  the 
Bosor  of  i  Mace.  v.  36.  *ib>*B3,  see  xiii.  9.  "  Ramotk 
in  Gil-adh"  identified  with  "  Ramath-Mitzpeh  "  (xiii. 
26).  "Colon"  (Golan,  Qeri),  cf.  Deut.  iv.  43  :  Ac 
cording  to  Eusebius  (Onomast.}  a  very  large  village 
in  Batanaea.  It  evidently  gave  its  name  to  the  dis 
trict  Gaulanitis,  east. of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  (Joseph., 
Antiq.,  viii.  2,  §  3,  and  Bell.  Judg.,  i.,  4,  §  4).  The 
word  is  recognised  in  the  present  Djaulan,  mentioned 
by  Burckhardt  (Syria,  p.  286),  as  giving  name  to  a 
district  lying  east  of  the  Lake  of  Tiberias. 

These  cities  of  refuge  on  both  the  sides  of  Jordan 


VER.  9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  325 

were  so  situated  that  the  distance  from  one  to  the 
next  was  about  sixty  miles.  A  way,  or  convenient 
road,  was  prepared,  that  they  might  be  reached  by 
the  man-slayer  with  greater  expedition  (see  Deut. 
xix.  3),  and  the  Rabbis  say  that  at  the  cross  roads 
posts  were  erected,  which  pointed  the  way  to  them, 
and  bore  the  inscription  "  Refuge,  Refuge."  The 
Gemara  also  notices  that  the  cities  on  each  side  of 
the  Jordan  were  nearly  opposite  each  other,  in  ac 
cordance  with  the  direction  to  divide  the  land  into 
three  parts  (Deut.  xix.  3  ;  Reland,  iii.,  p.  662). 

Ver.  9. — rnw»n  ny,  not,  as  Kimchi,  "  urbes  con- 
gregationis,"  i.e.,  cities  where  the  men-slayers  were 
gathered  together,  nor,  as  Ges.  (Lex.},  "  urbes  asyli," 
but  "  cities  of  appointment,"  from  1ti\,  to  appoint  (cf. 
Chald.,  Sept.,  Vulg.,  and  Arab.).  "And  for  the 
stranger"  etc.  (cf.  Numb.,  xxxv.  15).  ill  is  translated 
TrpocnjXvTos  by  the  Sept.  in  both  places,  though  in 
itself  it  denotes  simply  one  who  turns  aside  from  his 
own  country  to  abide  in  a  foreign  land. 

It  is  generally  supposed  that  the  cities  of  refuge, 
besides  being  intended  to  be  a  check  on  the  ancient 
custom  of  blood  revenge,  which  still  prevails  in  the 
East,  were  also  typical  of  Christ  ;  and,  whether 
designed  to  be  so  or  not,  they  remarkably  illustrate 
the  security  which  is  only  to  be  had  by  belief  in  Him 
(see  e.g.,  Zech.  ix.  12  ;  Heb.  vi.  18  ;  Rom.  viii.  i). 


326  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxi. 

CHAPTER    XXI. 

Appointment  of  Cities  for   the   Priests  and  Levites} 

Vers.  1-3  (Demand  of  tJie  Levites  that  Cities  should 
be  assigned  to  theiri}. — Ver.  I. — JTQ&J  ^iO,  see  on 
xiv  i .  This  application  on  the  part  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  Levites  seems  to  have  been  made,  not  because 
the  claims  of  the  Levites  had  hitherto  been  overlooked 
(Calvin),  but  because  now  the  fitting  time  had  come 
for  asserting  them. 

Ver.  2. — "  In  the  land  of  Canaan  "  :  Not  added  to 
distinguish  the  Shiloh  here  mentioned  from  any  other 
city  of  the  same  name,  but  in  allusion  to  the  letter  of 
the  instructions  given  by  the  Lord  to  Moses  in  Numb, 
xxxiv.  29,  xxxv.  10.  " Jehovah  commanded"  etc., 
cf.  Numb.  xxxv.  1-8.  D^^p,  see  on  xiv.  4. 

Ver.  3. — It  would  seem  from  Numb.  xxxv.  6  that 
the  cities  which  had  been  appointed  as  cities  of 
refuge  were  first  assigned  to  the  Levites,  and  that 
afterwards  were  added  to  them  forty-two  other  cities. 
This  distribution  of  the  Levites  among  the  rest  of 
the  tribes  was  a  wise  and  merciful  regulation,  for  thus 

1  A  list  of  these  cities  is  also  given  in  i  Chron.  vi.,  which 
differs  in  many  respects  from  that  in  this  chapter.  The  dis 
crepancy  may,  however,  be  accounted  for  partly  from  the 
springing'  up,  in  course  of  time,  of  new,  and  disappearance 
of  old,  towns  ;  partly  from  changes  in  names  ;  and  partly  from 
faulty  readings.  Moreover,  though  the  number  of  cities 
mentioned  in  i  Chron.  vi.  is  only  42,  yet  in  vers.  60-63  (Heb. 
45-47)  it  is  stated  that  the  children  of  Aaron  received  13,  and 
the  rest  of  the-  Kohathites  10  ;  the  Gershonites  13  ;  and  the 
Merarites.  12  cities  ;  and,  therefore,  in  all  there  must  have  been 
48  cities,  as  stated  in  Josh.  xxi.  41. 


VER.  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  327 

the  people  could  easily  resort  to  them  as  their  author 
ised  instructors  in  religion,  and  more  especially  those 
who  had  fled  to  a  city  of  refuge  would  have  the 
benefit  of  spiritual  admonition,  instruction,  and 
comfort. 

Vers.  4-8. — In  these  verses  we  have  an  account 
of  the  number  of  cities  assigned  to  the  three  great 
branches  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  according  to  their  re 
spective  families,  with  especial  mention  of  the  number 
assigned  to  the  priests,  who  were  of  the  Kohathite 
branch  (ver.  4). 

Ver.  4. — "  The  families  of  the  Q'hathites  "  :  These 
were  the  families'  of  Amram,  Izhar,  Hebron,  and 
Uzziel  (Exod.  vi.  1 8),  of  which  that  of  Amram  was 
subdivided  into  the  descendants  of  Moses  and  Aaron. 
To  the  line  of  the  latter  belonged  the  priesthood 
(Numb,  xviii.  1-7),  and  to  them  were  assigned  thirteen 
cities  out  of  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Simeon,  and  Benja 
min  ;  God  doubtless  overruling  the  allotment,  since 
by  the  position  of  those  cities  the  priesthood  would 
be  established  near  the  future  Temple  at  Jerusalem. 
Hence,  too,  after  the  revolt  of  Israel,  the  priesthood 
and  authorised  worship  would  naturally  remain  in  the 
tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  (2  Chron.  xiii.  9-12). 
To  the  objection  that  thirteen  cities  were  too  many 
for  the  number  of  Aaron's  descendants  at  this  time, 
it  has  been  well  pointed  out  by  Keil  and  others,  that 
the  appointment  looked  forward  to  the  future  increase 
of  those  descendants  ;  that  already  they  were  nume 
rous,  since  Aaron  at  the  time  of  the  exodus  was 
eighty-three  years  old,  and  his  descendants  might 
have  entered  upon  the  fourth  generation  seven  years 
after  his  death  ;  also  the  cities  were  small,  not  ex- 


328  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxi. 

clusively  inhabited  by  Levites,  and  many  of  them  still 
in  the  hands  of  the  Canaanites.  Almost  the  same 
reply  is  applicable  to  the  similar  objection  that  the 
sum  total  of  the  Levites,  viz.,  twenty-three  thousand, 
did  not  require  the  allotment  to  them  of  so  many  as 
forty-eight  cities. 

Ver.  5. — "  The  rest  of  tJie  sons  of  QehatJi"  i.e., those 
who  were  sprung  from  Moses,  Izhar,  Hebron,  and 
Uzziel.  The  rebellion  of  the  non-priestly  portion  of 
the  Qehathites  had  resulted  in  the  diminution  of  their 
numbers,  cf.  Numb.  iii.  27  with  Numb.  xxvi.  5  7,  etc., 
and  hence  ten  cities  sufficed  for  them. 

Vers.  9-19  (List  of  the  Cities  assigned  to  the 
Priests:  I,  in  Judah  and  Simeon,  vers.  9-16,  Nine 
Cities;  2,  in  Benjamin,  vers.  17-19,  Four  Cities: 
Total,  Thirteen  Cities). — Ver.  9. — &nfv,  " one  calls"  : 
The  indeter.  3rd  pers.  (§  137,  3). 

Ver.  10. — N  'O}1?  vn,  the  nominative  is  either  "the 
cities,"  supplied  from  the  former  verse,  or  "  the  lot," 
supplied  from  the  parenthesis  at  the  end  of  this  verse. 
n3B"Ni,  "first,"  an  adv.,  the  ancient  form,  but  more 
commonly  written  rub^N"!,  as  in  the  margin. 

Ver.  1 1. — "  The  city  of  'Arba'"  etc.,  see  on  xiv.  I  5. 
pfjyn,  more  commonly  read  pjr.n,  xv.  13. 

Ver.  1 2. — "  But  the  fields  .  .  .  they  gave  to  Kalebh  " : 
In  xiv.  13,  14,  he  is  only  said  to  have  received  the 
city,  but  from  this  verse  we  learn  that  he  gave  up  the 
city  to  the  Levites,  but  retained  the  fields  and  valleys 
belonging  to  it,  except  the  necessary  pasturage  around 
the  city  for  the  cattle  of  the  Levites  (see  Numb. 
xxxv.  2).  Hence  Keil  infers  that  those  who  tilled 
these  fields  lived  also  in  the  Levitical  city,  and  that 
the  Levites  had  only  certain  dwellings  assigned  them 


VERS.  13-18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  329 

in  it,  which  were  their  inalienable  property   (Levit. 
xxv.  32-34). 

Ver.  13. — "  Chebh-ron,  the  city  of  refuge"  etc.  (cf. 
I  Chron.  vi.  57,  Auth.  Vers.)  :  The  words  "  to  be"  in 
serted  by  the  A.  Vers.  before  "  the  city,"  etc.,  are  not 
in  the  original.  Chebh-ron  was  already  a  city  of 
refuge  (see  xx.  7,  and  note  on  ver.  3  above).  On  the 
words  miq-lat  and  ro-tseach,  see  xx.  2,  3.  "Libh-nah" 
in  the  lowland  (x.  29,  xv.  42). 

Vers.  14,  I  5  (The  cities  here  mentioned  were  in  the 
mountainous  district  of  Judah,  xv.  48-51). — Ver.  15. 
— " Cho-lon"  written  Chilen  i  Chron.  vi.  43,  A.V.  58. 

Ver.  1 6. — '"A-yin"  (xv.  32),  allotted  to  Simeon 
(xix.  7),  in  place  of  which  is  found  'Ashan,  a  city  in 
the  lowland  of  Judah  (xv.  42  ;  I  Chron.  vi.  44  [59]), 
which  is  probably  the  correct  reading  (Keil).  "  Yut- 
tah"  in  the  hill  country  (see  xv.  55),  omitted  in 
i  Chron.  vi.  44  (59).  "  Beth-shemesh"  on  the  northern 
boundary  of  Judah  (xv.  10).  "Out  of  those  two 
tribes"  viz.  Judah  and  Simeon  (ver.  9). 

Vers.  17-19  (Cities  of  the  Priests  in  the  Tribe  of 
Benjamin}. — Ver.    1 7. — "  Gibh-6n  "    (omitted    in     i 
Chron.    vi.    45    [60]),    see    on    ix.    3.       "  Ge-bha\" 
xviii.  24. 

Ver.  1 8. — u>A-na-th6th"  (possibly  "echoes"),  and 
"  'Al-mon "  (hiding-place),  written  'Al-le-meth,  i 
Chron.  vi.  45  (60),  are  not  found  in  the  list  of  Ben- 
jamite  cities  (xviii.  21-28),  perhaps  being  omitted  as 
of  little  importance.  Anathoth  was  the  birthplace 
of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i.  i),  and  thither  Abi- 
athar  was  banished  by  Solomon  (i  Kings  ii.  26).  It 
is  now  Andta,  about  three  or  four  miles  N.N.E.  of 
Jerusalem  (Rob.,  Bib.  Res.,  i.,  437-8).  'Almon  is 


330  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxi. 

unknown,  but  is  possibly  Almit,  about  a  mile  north 
east  of  Anata  (Grove). 

Vers.  20-26  (The  Cities  of  the  N on- Priestly  Qeha- 
thites,  viz.,  four  from  Ephraim,  vers.  20-22,  and  four 
from  Dan,  vers.  23,  24,  and  two  from  West-Manasseh, 
ver.  25.  Total,  Ten  Cities]. — Ver.  20. — The  ^  before 
nin^tpp  means  "  as  to  "  (Rosenm.),  or  here  with  *rp, 
denotes  possession,  and  the  1  before  VP  has  the  force 
of  "  also."  For  the  construction  with  a  plural  nomi 
native  see  on  xv.  4. 

Ver.  2  i . — " Shechem"  xvii. 7.  "  Ge-zer"  x.  3 3 , xvi.  3 . 

Ver.  22. — "  Qibh-tsa  yim"  ("two  heaps,"  from  f3j?, 
to  collect),  unknown.  It  is  read  Yoq-ne'am 
("  gathered  by  the  people,"  from  or  and  nipfj,  to  col 
lect),  i  Chron.  vi.  53  (68),  probably  another  name  for 
the  same  place,  and  not  to  be  confounded  with  Yoq- 
ne'am  in  ver.  34.  It  would  seem  (says  Grove)  from 
i  Kings  iv.  1 2  to  have  been  at  the  extreme  east  of  the 
tribe  of  Ephraim  (Art.  "Jokneam,"  in  Smith's  Diet,  of 
the  Bible).  Lieut.  Conder  suggests  Tell  Abu  Kabi*is  (a 
name  radically  identical  with  Kibzaim),  near  Bethel, 
as  a  not  impossible  site.  " Beth-cko-ron"  whether 
upper  or  lower,  or  both,  is  not  stated  (see  x.  10). 

Vers.  23,  24. — On  the  four  cities  here  named  see 
xix.  42-45.  The  two  in  ver.  23,  viz.,  'Elteqe'  and 
Gib-bethon,  are  not  mentioned  in  i  Chron.  vi.  53  (69). 

Ver.  2  5 . — "  Out  of  the  half-tribe  of  West  Manasseh." 
"  Ta'-nakh,"  written  Ta-'a-nakh  (xii.  21)  :  Instead  of 
it  we  find  'A-ner  in  i  Chron.  vi.  55  (70),  evidently 
an  error  (Keil).  "  Gath-rimmon "  (xix.  45),  but  in 
i  Chron.  vi.  5  5  (70),  D^?,  written  El?'??.'1  (Josh.  xvii. 
1 1),  the  correct  reading,  according  to  Keil,  who  thinks 
that  Gath-rimmon  may  have  crept  into  the  text  from 


VER.  27-32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  331 

the  preceding  verse  ;  yet  Gath-rimmon  is  the  reading 
in  the  Vulg.,  Syr.,  Arab.,  and  Chald.  Targ.  Possibly 
the  town  had  both  names. 

Vers.  27-33  (Cities  of  tJie  Ger'shunnites  ;  To fa/, 
Thirteen  Cities). — Ver.  27  (From  the  Half -Tribe  of 
Manasseh  in  Bashan). — "Go-Ian"  see  xx.  8.  "  Beesh- 
frah"  contract,  in  the  Heb.  from  irvi^irrva  (so  Winer), 
and,  therefore,  as  rV3  often  falls  away,  undoubtedly 
the  same  as  the  Ashtaroth  of  Og  (xii.  4,  ix.  10)  ;  so 
it  is  written  in  I  Chron.  vi.  56  (71). 

Vers.  28,  29  (From  the  Tribe  of  Issachar). — Ver.  28. 
— "  Qish~yon?  see  xix.  20.  "  Da-bherath"  xix.  12. 

Ver.  29. — "  Yar-milt/i"  and  "  '  En-gan-nim"  xix.  2  I 
(note). 

Vers.  30,  31  (From  the  Tribe  of A  slier). — Ver.  30. 
— "  Mish-al"  see  xix.  26  ;  written  Mashal,  I  Chron. 
vi.  59  (74).  "'Abh-ddn"  perhaps  the  same  as 
'Ebh-r6n  (xix.  28). 

Ver.  31. — "  CAel-qatk,"  xix.  25.  "  R'ckobh"  xix. 
28  ;  i  Chron.  vi.  60  (75). 

Ver.  32  (From  the  Tribe  of  Nap JitaK). — "  Qe-dhesh 
in1  Galil"  cf.  xix.  37,  xx.  7.  "  Cham-moth-dor"  see 
note  on  xix.  35.  "  Qar-tan"  an  obsolete  dual  form 
(contrac.  from  nrn£)  of  rnj5,  for  which  occurs  the  later 
form,  D?nn:i?  (two  cities),  I  Chron.  vi.  61  (76)  ;  cf.  jrn 
(2  Kings  vi.  13),  contrac.  from  J^nn  (Gen.  xxxvii.  17). 
It  is  not  mentioned  among  the  cities  of  Naphtali 
(xix.  35,  etc.),  but  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  identical 
with  Rakkath  (xix.  35).  The  name  "  Iscariot "  has 
also  been  derived  from  it.  (See  the  Art.  on  "  Judas  " 
in  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.}. 

1  The  preposition  in  the  Hebrew  here  includes  the  article, 
"  in  the  Galil." 


332  TPIE  BOOK  OP  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxi. 

Vers.  34-40  (Merarite  Cities :  Total,  Twelve  Cities}. 
— Vers.  34,  35  (Out  of  the  Tribe  of  Zebulun). — Ver. 
34. — "  Yoq-ne'am"  see  xii.  22,  xix.  1 1  ;  the  name  is 
omitted  in  I  Chron.  vi.  62  (77).  "  Qar-taJi"  perhaps 
the  Qattah  of  xix.  i  5  j1  otherwise,  like  Dimnah  (ver. 
35),  not  mentioned  in  the  list  of  Zebulonite  cities  in 
xix.  10-16,  nor  in  i  Chron.  vi.  Knobel,  indeed, 
and  others  would  identify  Dimnah  with  Rimmon  or 
Rimmono,  xix.  13  ;  I  Chron.  vi.  62  (77),  but  the 
text  in  Chronicles  is  undoubtedly  corrupt,  since  it 
records  only  two  names,  Rimmon  and  Tabor.  So 
Keil. 

Ver.  35. — "  Na-ha-lal"  xix.  15;  omitted  in  I 
Chron.  vi.  62  (77). 

Vers.  36,  37  (Out  of  the  Tribe  of  Reuben}. — Ver.  36. 
— "  Be-tser"  cf.  xx.  8.  For  the  three  other  cities 
see  xiii.  18.  Though  these  verses  (36,  37)  are 
omitted  in  some  MSS.  on  the  authority  of  Kimchi 
and  the  greater  Masora,  yet  they  are  found  in  all  the 
ancient  versions,  and  in  one  hundred  and  forty-nine 
MSS.  collated  by  Kennicott,  and  in  forty  collated  by 
De  Rossi.  Also,  if  omitted,  the  cities  of  the  Merar- 
ites  would  not  be  twelve  as  stated  in  vers.  7,  40,  nor 
the  total  number  of  the  cities  of  refuge  forty-eight,  as 
stated  in  ver.  41.  Probably  the  omission  arose  from 
the  similar  ending  of  vers.  35,  37. 

Vers.  38,  39  [Vers.  36,  37,  in  some  Heb.  MSS.] 
(Out  of  the  tribe  of  Gad]. — Ver.  38. — "  Ramoth  in 
(the)  Gil'adh"  (xx.  8),  called  Ramath-mizpeh  (xiii. 
26).  "  Ma-chanayim  "  (xiii.  26). 

1  Such  differences  in  writing  or  pronouncing  a  name  are 
not  uncommon  (cf.  Eshtemoh  and  Eshtemon,  xv.  50,  xxi.  14; 
Baalah  and  Balah,  xv.  29,  xix.  3). 


VERS.  39-42.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  333 

Ver.  39. — "  Cheshbon"  xiii.  17.  "  Ya'-tser"  xiii. 
25.  The  word  "73  before  D11"]^  is  omitted  in  the  Syr. 
and  Arab.  vers. 

Ver.  40  (38  in  some  Heb.  MSS.). — The  word  "so" 
(Auth.  Vers.)  in  the  first  clause  is  not  in  the  Heb., 
and  the  construction  of  the  clause  is  broken.  Render 
the  last  clause  "  and  tJteir  lot  was  tzvelve  cities." 

Ver.  41  (39). — "  Forty  and  eight  cities"  :  According 
to  the  command  which  had  been  given  (Numb.  xxxv. 
7).  Note  that  48  =  12  x  4,  and  twelve  is  signifi 
cant  of  the  Church  (Rev.  vii.  5-8,  xxi.  12,  14),  and 
four  of  universality  (see,  e.g.,  Rev.  vii.  I,  "four  winds," 
i.e.,  winds  coming  from  every  quarter  (cf.  Jer.  xlix. 
36,  37  ;  Dan.  vii.  2).  Hence  Bishop  Wordsworth 
well  remarks  here,  "  This  dispersion  of  the  ministry 
of  the  ancient  Church  into  twelve  times  four  cities,  in 
all  the  tribes  of  the  inheritance  of  Israel,  which  typi 
fied  the  whole  earth  regarded  as  a  Church  of  God, 
evangelised  by  one  and  the  same  Gospel,  was  pro 
phetic  and  figurative  of  the  diffusion  of  the  Apostolic 
Church  of  Christ  into  all  parts  of  the  world.  It 
represented  its  catholicity  and  its  apostolicity.  The 
refuge  provided  in  the  cities  of  refuge,  accessible  to 
all  Israelites,  represented  the  one  faith  in  Christ,  the 
true  Refuge,  preached  to  all  ;  and  the  diffusion  of  the 
one  tribe,  that  of  Levi,  teaching  the  same  truths  in 
all  parts  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  represented  the 
Christian  ministry,  bearing  the  same  evangelical 
message,  of  Christ  crucified,  to  all." 

Ver.  42  (40). — m  fiy,  "city,  city"  i.e.,  each  city 
(§  1 20,  5).  After  this  verse  the  Sept.  inserts  a 
clause,  partly  repeated  from  xix.  49,  50,  but  with  the 
additional  statement,  probably  derived  from  a  Jewish 


334  THE  ROOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxr. 

tradition,  that  Joshua  buried  in  Timnath-serah  the 
knives  with  which  he  had  circumcised  the  people 
after  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  (see  v.  2).  This 
latter  statement  is  also  found  in  the  Sept.  Vers.,  at 
the  end  of  xxiv.  30. 

Vers.  43-45. — A  conclusion  to  chaps,  xiii. — xxi., 
and  referring  back,  not  only  to  xi.  23,  but  to  i.  2-6. 
and  connecting,  as  Keil  says,  the  two  halves  of  the 
book  together. 

Ver.  43. — "He  had  sworn  to  give  unto  their  fathers" : 
see  Gen.  xii.  7,  xv.  I  8.  Though  many  parts  of  the 
land  were  still  occupied  by  the  Canaanites  (see  xiii.  i, 
etc.),  yet  the  whole  territory  had  been  apportioned 
out  among  the  tribes  of  Israel,  who  had  so  far  con 
quered  the  Canaanites  that  none  of  them,  at  the  time 
here  referred  to,  offered  any  further  resistance  ;  and 
when  they  subsequently  gained  ascendency,  their 
success  was  due  to  the  sloth  and  cowardice  of  the 
Israelites.  God  had  never  promised  the  latter  to 
exterminate  their  enemies  at  once,  but  gradually 
(Exod.  xxiii.  29  ;  Deut.  vii.  22),  and  on  condition  of 
their  own  fidelity  to  Himself  (cf.  note  on  xi.  23). 

Ver.  44. — "  And  Jehovah  gave  rest  to  them  round 
about"  (i.e.,  as  long  as  Joshua  and  the  elders,  his  con 
temporaries,  lived,  Judges  i.  i,  ii.  7)  "according  to  all 
which  He  had  sworn"  etc.  (see  Exod.  xxxiii.  14  ; 
Deut.  iii.  20,  xii.  9,  10,  xxv.  19).  "  And  tJiere  stood 
not  a  man"  etc.,  cf.  i.  5. 

Ver.  45. — ^8J~S&,  lit.,  "fell  not"  cf.  xxiii.  14  ;  more 
fully  with  the  addition  of  nvnx  (2  Kings  x.  10). 
man  "i:nn  ^sp,  "  of  all  the  good  word"  comprising 
all  the  gracious  promises  which  God  had  made  to  the 
Israelites  (cf.  i  Kings  viii.  56).  For  JV3,  some  MSS. 


VERS.  i-4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  335 

read  ^3,  Sept.  rot?  vtot?.  N3,  "  came  to  pass  "  (used 
also  of  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  see  I  Sam.  ix.  6  ; 
Deut.  xiii.  2  [3],  xviii.  22  ;  Judges  xiii.  12).  St.  Paul 
assures  the  Christian  believer  that  "  all  the  promises 
of  God  in  Christ  are  Yea,  and  in  Him  Amen,  to  the 
glory  of  God"  (2  Cor.  i.  20). 


CHAPTER    XXII. 

The  Dismissal  of  tJie  trans- J or danic  Tribes  to  their 
own  Inheritance,  and  their  Erection  of  an  Altar 
near  tJie  Jordan. 

Ver.  I. — TN,  see  on  viii.  30.  The  time  referred  to 
was  probably  that  when  Joshua,  having  effected  the 
conquest  of  Canaan,  had  portioned  out  the  land,  and 
had  assigned  to  the  Levites  their  cities,  for  thus  in 
ver.  9  these  trans-Jordanic  tribes  are  said  to  have 
returned  from  Shiloh,  where  the  children  of  Israel 
had  assembled,  in  order  that  the  distribution  of  their 
several  inheritances  might  be  completed  (xviii.  i). 
For  nt2K>  many  MSS.  in  Kennicott  and  De  Rossi  read 
B2EJ,  which  reading  may  have  arisen  from  the  occur 
rence  of  this  latter  term  in  vers.  7,  9,  10.  On  the 
distinction  between  the  two  words  see  on  iii.  12. 

Ver.  2. — Cf.  Numb,  xxxii.  20,  etc.;  Josh.  i.  12-15. 

Ver.  3. — n.T  used  adverbially  and  =  now  (§  122,  2, 
2nd  par.,  ft).  "  Ye  have  kept  the  observance  of  tlie 
commandment"  i.e.,  ye  have  kept  all  which  the  com 
mandment  of  the  Lord  required  to  be  observed  (cf. 
Gen.  xxvi.  5  ;  Levit.  viii.  3*5). 

Ver.  4. — D3^  o^,  cf.  vii.  10.      For  »j>  many  MSS. 


336  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxn. 

and  editions  read  -irp,  as  in  Numb.  xiv.  25  ;  Deut. 
i.  7,  but  this  latter  verb  is  not  construed  both  with  h 
and  — ^K.  D^nx  may  refer  to  their  habits  as  pastoral 
tribes  (Stanley's  Sin,  and  Pal.,  viii.,  p.  326),  though 
they  appear  to  have  had  also  fenced  cities  (Numb. 
xxxii.  17),  and  the  Chald.  Vers.  here  renders  "cities," 
Sept.  oi/cov5.  Being  the  ancient  term  for  a  "  dwell 
ing,"  the  word  may  be  here  used  generally  for  homes 
(cf.  Deut.  xvi.  7  ;  Judges  vii.  8  ;  I  Sam.  xiii.  2  ; 
2  Sam.  xix.  8). 

Ver.  5. — Joshua  here  repeats  the  substance  of  the 
commands  given  by  Moses  in  Deut.  vi.  5,  x.  i  2,  xi.  i  3, 
22,  xxx.  16,  20).  nnnx.  cf.  xxiii.  11,  is  the  infin. 
with  a  fern,  ending,  or  a  verbal  noun  governing  the 
accus.  (§  133,  i). 

Ver.  7. — The  renewal  here  of  the  statement  about 
the  inheritance  of  the  two  half-tribes  of  Manasseh  may 
be  intended  to  give  a  completion,  or  finish,  to  this  por 
tion  of  the  narrative.  It  was  usual  with  the  Hebrew 
writers  to  repeat  the  mention  of  a  fact  rather  than  to 
refer  to  it  as  already  mentioned  ;  see,  e.g.,  the  oft- 
repeated  statement  that  the  Levites  had  no  share  in 
the  land  of  Canaan  (xiii.  14,  33,  xiv.  3,  xviii.  7).1 
After  103,  understand  Tn-jng-  "inyp,  "on  (lit.  "out  of") 
the  other  side"  z>.,  the  side  opposite  to  Bashan,  which 
was  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan.  The  Qeri  has  "i3#2, 
the  more  usual  form.  03^!  •  •  •  '3  D3i:,  "and  also  when 
.  .  .  then  he  blessed  them"  As  it  is  unlikely  that 
Joshua  should,  on  account  of  his  relationship  to  the 
half-tribe  of  Manasseh  (which  was  descended,  like 
himself,  from  Joseph)  have  blessed  them  apart  from 

1  Cf.  Speaker's  Com.,  and  Keil  in  loc. 


VERS.  8,10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  337 

the  other  trans-Jordanic  tribes  (ver.  6),  this  statement 
may  be  another  instance  of  the  repetition  alluded  to 
above,  and  serves  to  introduce  the  further  particulars 
mentioned  in  ver.  8. 

Ver.  8. — Q11??^,  from  D?3,  i.q.  D33,  to  collect.  The 
occurrence  of  this  word  here  shows  that  it  is  not  a 
word,  as  Gesenius  (Lex?)  says,  of  the  later  Hebrew.1 
The  allusion  is  to  the  riches  of  which  they  had  spoiled 
the  Canaanites.  With  the  command  about  the  divi 
sion  of  the  spoil  cf.  Numb.  xxxi.  25,  etc.;  I  Sam. 
xxx.  23-25). 

Vers.  9-12  (The  Erection  of  an  Altar  on  the 
Banks  of  the  Jordan  by  the  trans-Jordanic  Tribes, 
and  the  Offence  thereby  given  to  the  other  Tribes}. 
— Ver.  9. — Shiloh  is  here  described  as  being  "in  the 
land  of  Canaan,"  in  order  to  mark  the  antithesis 
between  it  and  the  land  of  Gilead,  which  is  here  put 
for  the  whole  of  the  trans-Jordanic  territory  (cf.  Numb, 
xxxii.  i,  29  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  I  ;  Judges  v.  17,  etc.). 
nrntnx'J  "i^,  "  in  which  they  had  been  made  possessors" 
lit.  had  been  held  fast  or  established  :  Cf.  Numb. 
xxxii.  30,  where  the  Niph.  form  is  used  in  the  same 
passive  sense,  whereas  in  Gen.  xxxiv.  10,  xlvii.  27,  it 
is  reflective,  "  to  fix  themselves  firmly  or  settle." 

Ver.  10. — '»n  rif^l,  lit.  the  circles  (cf.  xiii.  2)  of 
Jordan?  i.q.  H1.L1  ">??  (Gen.  xiii.  i  o,  1 1 ),  or  simply 
I33n  (Gen.  xiii.  12,  xix.  17)  ;2  here  that  portion  of  the 


1  Though  found  in  2  Chron.  i.  n,  12  ;  Eccles.  v.  18,  vi.  2, 
and   common  in   Aramaean,    it  cannot  be  inferred  with  any 
certainty  that   it  therefore  belongs  to  a  later  period  of  the 
Hebrew  language  (Keil,  Introd.,  p.  35). 

2  Both  words  probably  relate  to  the  windings  of  the  stream 
(see  Reland's    Pal.,   i.,   c.  43,  p.    274).      Of  Geliloth    Dean 

22 


338  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxn. 

Ghor  which  was  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Jordan 
(Keil  and  others).  The  words  "  which  are  in  the  land 
of  Canaan  "  show  that  the  altar  spoken  of  at  the  con 
clusion  of  the  verse  must  have  been  erected,  not  as 
Josephus  (Antiq.,  v.,  i)  says,  on  the  eastern,  but  on 
the  western  side  of  Jordan.  If  on  the  eastern  side, 
it  could  not  so  well  have  served  for  a  testimony  that 
the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  had  a  part  in  Jehovah  (see 
vers.  21-29).  i"1^")^  ''f'"1?)  lit-  "great  as  to  appearance."^- 
Ver.  1 1. — ^10'S:*,  lit.  "in  the  face  or  front  of"  "  in 
the  fore- front  of"  (Rev.  Vers.).  n&£j"^J :  The  prep, 
here  implies  tarriance  in  after  motion  (Ges.,  Lex.,  B., 
47) ;  cf.  !?,  Ges.,  Lex.,  B.,  and  the  use  of  ets  and  e?  for 
ev,  examples  of  which  we  have  in  the  Greek  Testa 
ment  (see  Matt.  ii.  23;  Mark  i.  9;  Luke  .xi.  7). 
"».^  I5r^,  "  at  the  side  of  the  sons  of  Israel"  or,  "  on 
the  side  that  pertaineth  to  the  children  of  Israel  " 
(Rev. .Vers.).  "I3T  means  a  "side"  in  Exod.  xxxii. 
15,  also  several  times  in  this  book  it  is  used  in 


Stanley  says  that  of  the  five  times  in  which  it  occurs  in 
Scripture,  two  are  in  the  general  sense  of  "coast"  or 
"border"  (Josh.  xiii.  2;  Joel  iii.  4),  "all  the  coasts  of 
Palestine,"  and  three  especially  relate  to  the  course  of 
Jordan  (viz.,  Josh.  xxii.  10,  u,  Ezek.  xlvii.  8).  The  word  may 
perhaps  find  an  analogy  in  the  Scotch  term  "links,"  which 
is  used  of  the  snake-like  windings  of  a  stream,  as  well  as  with 
the  derived  meaning  of  a  coast  or  shore.  In  later  times  no 
doubt  the  words  were  taken  merely  as  provincial  terms  for 
"  region,"  and  as  such  were  translated  both  in  the  Sept.  and 
New  Testament  17  Trepix&pos,  "the  surrounding  neighbour 
hood  "  (p.  284,  note  5), 

1  Lieut.  Conder  would  identify  its  site  with  the  remains  of 
an  altar-like  structure  on  a  lofty  conical  peak,  called  Kurn 
S^trtab^h,  about  twenty  miles  north  of  Jericho,  in  the  valley  of 
the  Jordan,  where  the  river,  in  its  descent  from  its  upper  level, 
winds  round  several  islets  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  Monthly 
Statement,  Oct.  1874). 


VERS.  12,  13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  339 

reference  to  the  region  on  the  west  of  Jordan  (see 
v.  i,  ix.  i,  xii.  7,  xxii.  7).1 

Ver.  12. — •'pn|3*i  :  This  word  seems  to  indicate 
that,  after  the  land  of  Canaan  had  been  apportioned, 
the  cis-Jordanic  tribes  had  dispersed  to  their  several 
inheritances.  "  To  go  up  against  them  to  war  "  :  For, 
if  their  suspicions  of  the  apostacy  of  the  trans-Jordanic 
tribes  had  been  correct,  they  would  have  been  justi 
fied  in  so  doing  (see  Deut.  xii.  4,  i  3,  xiii.  7,  etc.). 

Vers.  13-20  (Before  declaring  War  the  Israelites 
send  Ambassadors  to  demand  an  Explanation  [herein 
they  obeyed  Deut.  xiii.  14]). — Ver.  13. — "Pt-nechas" 
(mouth  of  brass),  see  Exod.  vi.  2  5  ;  Numb.  xxv.  7, 
etc.,  xxxi.  6,  etc.  jnsn  refers  to  Eleazar,  see  accents, 
and  cf.  Sept.  and  Vulg.,  though  the  title  is  given  in 

1  The  following  remarks  of  Grove  (in  Dr.  Smith's  Bib.  Diet., 
iii.,  p.  1033)  merit  attention  : — "  The  pile  of  stones  which  they 
(the  eastern  tribes)  erected  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Jordan 
to  mark  their  boundary — to  testify  to  after-ages  that  though 
separated  by  the  rushing  river  from  their  brethren  and  the 
country  in  which  Jehovah  had  fixed  the  place  where  He  would 
be  worshipped,  they  had  still  a  right  to  return  to  it  for  His 
worship — was  erected  in  accordance  with  the  unalterable 
habits  of  Bedouin  tribes,  both  before  and  since.  It  was  an 
act  identical  with  that  in  which  Laban  and  Jacob  engaged 
at  parting, — with  that  which  is  constantly  performed  by  the 
Bedouins  of  the  present  day.  But  by  the  Israelites  west  of 
Jordan,  who  were  fast  relinquishing  their  nomad  habits  and 
feelings  for  those  of  more  settled  and  permanent  life,  this  act  was 
completely  misunderstood,  and  was  construed  into  an  attempt 
to  set  up  a  rival  altar  to  that  of  the  Sacred  Tent.  The  incom 
patibility  of  the  idea  to  the  mind  of  the  western  Israelites 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  the  disclaimer  of 
the  two  and  a  half  tribes,  and  notwithstanding  that  disclaimer 
being  proved  satisfactory  even  to  Phinehas,  the  author  of 
Joshua  xxii.  retains  the  name  Mizbeach  for  the  pile,  a  word 
which  involves  the  idea  of  sacrifice,  i.e.,  of  slaughter  (see 
Gesen.,  Thes.,  402),  instead  of  applying  to  it  the  term  '  gal,' 
as  is  done  in  the  case  of  the  precisely  similar  '  heap  of 
witness'  (Gen.  xxxi.  46)." 


340  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxn. 

ver.  30  to  Pinechas  as  the  presumptive  successor  of 
Eleazar. 

Ver.  14. — "^7/^(they  sent)  ten  princes  with  him, 
a  prince  for  each  house  of  a  father  according  to  all  the 
tribes  of  Israel"  \  The  repetition  of  "tn$  denotes  dis 
tribution  (§  1 08,  4),  and  the  tribes  on  the  west  of 
Jordan  are  enumerated  as  ten,  because  the  half-tribe 
of  Manasseh  is  reckoned  as  one.  "And  each  one 
was  a  head  of  their  father-houses  "  :  The  expression 
JTDNTI3,  instead  of  3i>PEQ,  is  a  mode  of  forming  the 
plural  of  compound  nouns  more  usual  in  the  Syr. 
(Ges.,  Lex.,  10,  p.  116);  the  fern.  plur.  expresses 
dignity  (§  107,  3,  c]  ;  hence  we  might  here  render 
"  chief-houses."  "  Among  the  thousands  of  Israel"  : 
So  Auth.  Vers.,  but  Rosenm.  takes  D"1?^  to  denote 
"families"  (cf.  vii.  14,  note),  and  renders  "according 
to  the  families  of  Israel." 

Ver.  1 6. — rnrv  rny  (cf.  Numb,  xxvii.  1 7,  xxxi.  1 6  ; 
in  Psalm  Ixxxii.  i,  7>N  rny,  "congregation  of  God"), 
appropriately  so  called,  because  it  was  by  zeal  for  the 
honour  of  Jehovah  that  they  were  moved  to  make 
this  remonstrance.  7BD,  see  on  vii.  I  :  This  term  is 
applied  especially  to  sins  of  unfaithfulness,  such  as 
idolatry,  which  rob  God  of  the  glory  which  is  His 
due  (see  Levit.  xxvi.  40;  Deut.  xxxii.  51).  "  'in 
that  ye  have  built  for  you  an  altar  that  ye  might  rebel"}. 
etc.  :  "nip  is  a  much  stronger  expression  than  ^>rip 
(Keil)  ;  it  is  used  of  rebellion  against  human  rulers 
(Gen.  xiv.  4  ;  2  Kings  xviii.  7,  20,  xxiv.  i,  20);  but 
here,  and  in  Ezek.  ii.  3  ;  Dan.  ix.  9,  of  rebellion 
against  Jehovah  (Ges.,  Lex.). 

Ver.  1 7. — ifirnx,  an  accus.  (§  117,  2).  Render 
"  Is  there  too  little  for  us  as  regards  the  iniquity  of 


VERS.  18-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  341 

Peor,from  which  we  have  not  cleansed  ourselves1  even 
ttnto  this  day  ?  "  The  reference  is  to  Numb.  xxv.  3, 
etc;,  and  it  is  intimated  that  the  Israelites  were  still 
in  their  hearts  inclined  to  this  sin  of  idolatry  (xxiv. 
14-23).  "And"*  the  plague  came  upon  the  congregation 
of  Jehovah"  i.e.,  the  whole  congregation  was  involved 
in  the  punishment  of  the  transgressors. 

Ver.  1  8.  —  "And  (yet)  ye  are  turning  tJiis  day  from 
(following)  after  Jehovah,  and  it  sJiall  come  to  pass  yc 
rebel  this  day  against  Jehovah,  and  to-morroiv  He  will 
be  ivroth  with  (will  break  forth  against)  the  whole  con 
gregation"  "  Ye  rebel"  i.e.,  "  if  ye  rebel  .  .  .  then," 
etc.,  cf.  Gen.  xxxiii.  i  3,  "  and  (if)  men  should  over 
drive  them,"  etc. 

Ver.  19.  —  •*$$(,  "and  truly"  cf.  Gen.  xliv.  28  (Ges., 
Lex?),  nxpp,  "  unclean"  because  many  of  its  inhabit 
ants  were  heathen,  and  it  had  not  the  Tabernacle  of 
Jehovah  in  it.  "  Unto  tJie  land  of  the  possession  of 
Jehovah"  cf.  Levit.  xxv.  23  ;  Psalm  Ixxxv.  I.  pt?;, 
"hath  dwelt  and  does  still  dwell"  (§  126,  3).  -ITqN'n, 
Niph.  imper.,  "  take  possession."  •1-hprr'px  :  Here  con 
strued  first  with  3,  and  then  with  an  accus.  (cf.  Job 
xxiv.  13,  Tferynb,  "who  rebel  against  the  light"']. 
Hi^ap,  "besides"  see  §  154,  2,  last  par.,  cf.  Numb. 
v.  20  ;  Psalm  xviii.  32  (Heb.). 

Ver.  20.  —  This  verse  is  connected  with  ver.  18,  the 
preceding  verse  (19)  being  parenthetical.  The  argu 
ment  is  from  the  less  to  the  greater.  If  by  the  sin 
of  Achan  alone  wrath  came  on  all  the  congregation, 


Hithpael  of  "IHB,  to  be,  or  to  become  clean  ;  the  H 
before  to  assimilated  (§  54,  2,  ft). 

2  The  I.  should  not  be  rendered  "  although,"  as  in  the  Auth- 
Vers. 


342  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxn. 

a  fortiori  might  the  like  result  be  expected  from  the 
sin  of  two  tribes  and  a-half.  Ufy?  •  •  •  N-irn,  "  and  he 
was  one  man  ;  he  perished  not  (alone)  in  his  iniquity." 
So  D.  Glass  and  Sept.  (Alex.).  Achan's  sin  caused 
the  defeat  before  'Ay  (vii.  5),  and  the  destruction  of 
his  children  (vii.  24).  For  $b  the  Vulg.  reads  -I1?, 
utinam.  ifl|,  lit.  "breathed  out  life":  For  the  middle 
consonant  see  §72,  Rem.  10. 

Vers.  21-31  (The  trans- J or danic  Tribes  satis 
factorily  refute  the  Charge  brought  against  theni). 
— Ver.  22. — Some  (e.g.,  Maurer  here,  and  Dean 
Perowne  on  Psalm  1.  i)  render  the  three  first  words 
"  The  God  of  Gods,  Jehovah"  but  the  Pesiq  after  the 
first  and  second  nouns  shows  that  in  the  opinion  of 
the  Masorets  the  nouns  should  be  construed  separately, 
e.g.,  "  The  Almighty,  God,  Jehovah"  cf.  Psalm  1.  I, 
where  b$,  as  here,  is  separated  by  the  accent  from 
OWN  ;  also  the  Hebrew  form  of  expression  for  "  The 
God  of  Gods "  would  rather  be  DVi^n  v6x,  as  in 
Deut.  x.  i  7  ;  Psalm  cxxxvi.  2.  Probably,  therefore, 
we  have  here  three  separate  titles,  rising  in  sublimity, 
to  express  the  infinite  majesty  of  the  Deity,  viz.,  'El 
=  "  The  Mighty  One  ; "  'Elohim  (perhaps  from  the 
obsolete  rt.  H'PN,  to  worship,  to  adore,  to  fear)  =  "The 
Supreme  Being  worthy  to  be  feared  ; "  Yehovah  = 
'  The  truly  existing  One,  The  covenant  God."  So 
Keil,  Delitzsch,  and  Hengstenberg.  121  irp  N-in,  "  He 
knowelh,  and  Israel,  he  shall  know ;  if  in  rebellion, 
and  if  in  apostacy"^  etc.  :  Supply  DNTTIK  -1JW,  from 
ver.  24,  the  ellipsis  being,  as  Keil  remarks,  in  accord 
ance  with  the  broken  speech  of  suddenly  accused 

1   Sept.  eV  aTTocrracria. 


VERS.  23-26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA  343 

innocence.  The  apodosis  to  the  sentence  beginning 
at  DN  is  contained  in  the  closing  words  of  ver.  23, 
"  Let  Jehovah  Himself  require  it."  The  exclamation, 
"  Save  tis  not  this  day"  at  the  end  of  ver.  22,  is 
parenthetical,  and  a  direct  appeal  to  God  for  the 
purpose  of  asserting  more  strongly  their  innocence. 

Ver.  23. — nt337,  this  and  the  following  infinitives 
carry  on  the  oath,  e.g.  (if  we  have  done  this),  "  to 
build  for  us,"  etc.  DK  in  adjurations  has  the  effect  of 
a  negative  particle;  &6  DN  of  an  affirmative  (§  155, 

2,/)- 

Ver.  24. — "And  if  not  from  anxiety,  for  a  reason? 
etc.  ruin,  "  fear,  anxiety,"  rt.  ^,  i.q.  u&n,  to  melt, 
and  hence  "to  be  afraid,"  "to  be  anxious  "  (Ges.,  Lex.}. 
-tt,  a  cause  or  reason"  cf.  v.  4.  "tb&6,  " saying "  (or 
"  thinking,"  Ges.,  Lex.,  2,  p.  61).  "in»,  "hereafter"  cf. 
Josh.  iv.  6,  21.  'D3^>  no,  cf.  2  Sam.  xvi.  10  ;  Matt, 
viii.  29,  TL  TIIM.V  /cat,  trot ;  xxvii.  19  ;  John  ii.  4. 

Ver.  25. — "And  (shall  moreover  say)  Jehovah  hath 
appointed  the  Jordan  as  a  boundary  between  us  and 
between  you, ye  sons  of  Reuben"  etc.  For  brevity's 
sake  no  mention  is  made  of  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh. 
"  A  nd  (so)  your  sons  shall  make  our  sons  cease  from 
fearing  Jehovah?  KT  is  the  m.  Qal.  infin.  of  NT> 
which  with  prefix  *?  is  generally  contracted  to  &O^ 
("see  i  Sam.  xviii.  29).  In  the  Pentateuch  the  fern, 
form  nto?  is  always  used,  e.g.,  in  Deut.  iv.  10,  v.  26, 
vi.  24,  etc. 

Ver.  26. — "  And  so  we  said  (we  thought)  let  us  do 
(this)  for  us  to  build  the  altar"  etc.  :  A  Hebrew  mode 
of  expression  for  "  let  us  build,"  or  rvJ'ya  may  be  ren 
dered  "  let  us  prepare  "  (see  Ges.,  Lex.}.  Sometimes 
is  followed  by  the  finite  verb  with  1,  as  in  Gen. 


344  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxii. 

xxxi.  26.  raj,  a  bloody  sacrifice,  which  was  not,  like 
the  holocaust,  entirely  consumed  by  fire. 

Ver.  27. — "But  that  it  may  be  a  witness"  etc. 
(Auth.  Vers.),  or,  "  it  shall  be  a  witness  "  (Rev.  Vers.) : 
So  the  altar  built  by  Moses,  and  called  Jehovah-Nissi 
(Exod.  xvii.  15,  1 6),  was  not  an  altar  for  sacrifice, 
but  a  memorial  altar.  vjp^>,  "  before  His  face"  i.e., 
before  His  tabernacle. 

Ver.  28. — "And  we  said  that  it  shall  be,  when  they 
shall  say  (thus)  to  us  and"  etc.  •13~!J?5O,  "  then  we  will 
say"  either  in  our  own  persons,  or  in  those  of  our 
descendants.  JV^n-nx,  lit.  "  the  structure"  or  "  the 
building"  rt.  n:i3,  to  build  ;  then  "  the  pattern  according 
to  wJiich  a  thing  is  made"  (Exod.  xxv.  9,  40  ;  2  Kings 
xvi.  i  o)  ;  then,  as  probable  here,  "  the  image  or  like 
ness  of  a  thing  "  (cf.  Deut.  iv.  1 6- 1 8  ;  Ezek.  viii.  i  o) ; 
Sept.  6jLtotw/Aa.  The  Vulg.  renders  "  Ecce  altare," 
either  having  omitted  JV^Frnx,  or  having  understood 
it  in  its  primary  sense  of  a  structure,  as  in  Psalm 
cxliv.  12,  a  rendering  adopted  by  Rosenmiiller. 

Ver.  29. — The  words  131  rh"hn  are  rendered  by 
Gesenius  (Lex.,  p.  280)  "woe  be  to  us  (profane  or 
accursed  be  it  to  us]  from  Him  (i.e.  Jehovah),  if  we 
should  sin  against  Jehovah  " :  Cf.i  Sam.  xxiv.  7  (Heb.); 
i  Sam.  xxvi.  1 1  ;  i  Kings  xxi.  3.  This  is  prefer 
able  to  the  rendering  of  Masius  and  others,  "  Far 
be  it  from  us  to  rebel"  etc.,  where  -li?  is  regarded 
as  redundant.  "n.f>P,  "  apart  from"  or  "  besides " 
(cf.  Gen.  xxvi.  i  ;  Numb.  xvii.  14  [Heb.]). 

Ver.  30. — "It  was  good  in  their  eyes"  a  Hebrew 
form  of  expression,  well  rendered  as  to  sense  by  the 
Auth.  Vers.,  "  it  pleased  them"  Sept.  ripecrev  avrot?. 

Ver.  31. — rrtrp  •  .  •  *s,  " that  Jehovah  (is)  in  the  midst 


VERS.  32-34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  345 

of  us"  i.e.,  is  propitious  to  us,  for  to  Him  they  justly 
attributed  the  preservation  of  the  trans-Jordanic 
tribes  from  the  iniquity  of  which  they  had  suspected 
them.  "i£'$,  '•'because"  (Ges.,  Lex.,  B.,  3,  p.  89),  more 
fully  "iE'8  ir».  TN,  "  then  "  =  "  therefore  "  (cf.  Jer.  xxii. 
15  ;  Psalm  xl.  8  ;  Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  25),  or  "then  (when 
ye  acted  as  ye  did)  ye  delivered,"  etc. 

This  satisfactory  vindication  of  the  two  and  a-half 
tribes  from  the  charges  brought  against  them  teaches 
us  how  careful  we  should  be  in  our  judgment  of 
others,  lest  we  condemn  those  whom  God  approves. 
"Judge  nothing  before  the  time"  (i  Cor.  iv.  5); 
"  Who  art  thou,  that  judgest  another  man's  servant," 
etc.  (Rom.  xiv.  4,  I  3). 

Vers.  32-34  (The  Return  of  the  Ambassadors  and 
the  Naming  of  the  Altar). — Ver.  32. — -IT^l,  followed 
by  an  accus.  of  person  and  thing  (cf.  xiv.  7). 

Ver.  33. — "And  they  thought  (or  spake)  no  more  of 
going  up":  Cf.  ver.  24,  and  for  the  omission  of 
mention  of  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  in  this  and 
next  verse,  see  ver.  25  (note). 

Ver.  34. — "And  the  sons  of  Reiiben  .  .  .  named 
the  altar, ( It  is  a  witness  between  us '  "  :  Though  11?  is 
supplied  after  na?p  in  the  Syr.,  Arab.,  and  Auth.  Vers., 
and  in  some  MSS.,  it  is  not  found  in  the  Sept.  and 
Vulg.,  nor  in  most  MSS.  The  first  ^  is  a  sign  of 
quotation,  the  Greek  ort  in  oratio  directa,  and  may 
be  omitted  in  English  (see  Ges.,  Lex.,  B.  c.,  p.  391). 
Thus  the  words  contain-both  the  name  and  the  expla 
nation,  or  a  name  not  inscribed  upon  the  altar,  but 
intended  to  explain  both  its  design,  and  importance  ; 
they  (the  Eastern  tribes)  gave  the  altar  the  name  of 
"  witness  between  us,"  because  it  was  to  be  a  witness 


346  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.          '[CHAP.  xxni. 

that  they  also  acknowledged  and  worshipped  Jehovah 
as  the  true  God  (Keil).  So  the  pile,  which  Jacob 
and  Laban  erected,  was  called  Gal-'edh,  "  the  heap  of 
witness"  (Gen.  xxxi.  47). 

Note  that  in  this  chapter  the  testimony  borne 
by  Joshua  to  the  courage  and  fidelity  of  the  trans- 
Jordanic  tribes,  their  zeal  and  that  of  the  rest  of  the 
Israelites  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  the  absence  of 
any  recrimination  on  the  part  of  the  trans-Jordanic 
tribes  when  vindicating  their  character  from  a  false 
suspicion,  and  the  readiness  with  which  their  apology 
was  accepted,  were  all  highly  creditable,  and  seem  to 
indicate  that  the  nation  at  this  time  was  under  the 
influence  of  a  truly  religious  spirit. 


CHAPTERS    XXIII.— XXIV. 

Joshua's  two  farewell  addresses:  I,  to  the  rulers 
and  authorities  of  Israel  (chap,  xxiii.)  ;  2,  to  all  the 
people  (chap.  xxiv.).  The  former  address  may  be 
divided  into  two  parts  ;  in  the  first  of  which  (ver.  2  b- 
I  i)  Joshua  encourages  the  rulers,  etc.,  to  persevere  in 
the  conquest  of  Canaan  by  promises  of  continued 
assistance  from  God  ;  in  the  second  (vers.  12-16)  he 
warns  them  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience. 

Both  addresses  (chaps,  xxiii. -xxiv.)  strikingly  dis 
play  Joshua's  piety,  zeal,  and  deep  acquaintance  with 
human  nature.  They  may  be  compared  with  Moses's 
farewell  addresses  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  to 
which  reference  in  them  is  often  made.  Our  heavenly 
Joshua,  before  He  left  this  earth,  gave  a  parting 
charge  to  His  apostles  (Acts  i.  4). 


VERS.  1-3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  347 


CHAPTER    XXIII. 

Vers.  i- 1 1. — Ver.  i. — 131  Oi?J»,  "from  (i.e.,  after) 
many  days"  (cf.  Gen.  iv.  3  ;  -Ezek.  xxxviii.  8). 
"  After  that  Jehovah  had  given  rest"  etc.  (see  xxii. 
3,  4,  xxi.  43,  44)  :  This  clause  appears  to  be  in  appo 
sition  to  the  foregoing,  from  which  it  is  separated 
by  a  distinctive  accent.  The  i  before  y^fiT  should 
be  rendered  "  and,"  not  "  that,"  as  in  A.V.,  for  the 
apodosis  begins  at  ver.  2.  With  the  phrase  1:1  \\>\  cf. 
xiii.  i.  Here  it  indicates  the  still  further  advance  of 
Joshua's  age,  so  that  he  might  any  day  anticipate  his 
death  (cf.  ver.  14). 

Ver.  2. — 131  JO[3?i,  "  that  Joshua  called  all  Israel,  its 
elders"  etc.  The  h  after  N^j?  need  not  be  translated 
(cf.  Gen.  xx.  8  ;  Levit.  ix.  i,  where  it  is  untranslated 
in  the  Auth.  Vers.).  The  terms  "  elders,  heads,"  etc., 
are  explanatory,  .being  put  in  apposition  to  "  all 
Israel."  The  place  to  which  Joshua  summoned  them 
was  eitherTimnath-serah  (xxix.  50)  or,  more  probably, 
Shechem  (xxiv.  i),  the  centre  of  the  land,  and  the 
place  of  the  sanctuary.  The  D^T.  were  the  repre 
sentatives  of  Israel  ;  the  D^&o  were  the  heads  of 
tribes,  families,  and  houses,  from  whom  were  taken 
the  judges  and  overseers  (Dnpb*,  i.  10),  see  on  vii.  14. 
In  the  last  clause  the  words  "/  am  old"  etc.,  imply  a 
reason  why  he  should  lose  no  opportunity  of  exhorting 
them,  nor  they  of  attending  to  his  counsel. 

Ver.  3. — Dp';?*?,  not,  as  Auth.  Vers.  and  Rosenm., 
"  because  of  you"  i.e.,  on  your  account,  but  "  before 


34$  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxm. 

you"  i.e.,  driving  them  out  before  you  ;  a  constructio 
prsegnans  (Keil).  "  For  JelwvaJi,  your  God,  (is)  He 
that  hath  fought  for  you"  :  See  the  promise  of  Moses 
(Deut  i.  30,  iii.  22).  So  in  our  Christian  warfare  the 
remembrance  of  what  God  has  done  for  us  in  former 
times,  and  His  promises  for  the  future,  should  en 
courage  and  make  us  steadfast  both  in  trust  and 
obedience. 

Ver.  4. — $l?9n,  see  on  xiii.  6,  and  cf.  Psalm  Ixxviii. 
55,  where  in  like  manner  nations,  instead  of  their 
land,  are  said  to  be  allotted,  ui  !"6nj?,  "for  a  posses 
sion  to  your  tribes"  "From  the  Jordan  and  all  the 
nations  wlticJi  I  have  cut  off,  and  the  great  sea  ^vards 
the  setting  of  the  sun  "  :  "  The  nations  "  are  mentioned 
instead  of  their  territory,  because  they  were  given  to 
the  Israelites  to  be  destroyed  ;  and  "  the  Jordan  "  and 
"  the  Great  Sea  "  mark  the  boundary  of  Canaan  from 
east  to  west. 

Ver.  5. — oann.;,  "will  expel  them"  from  snn,  to 
thrust  out  (cf.  Deut.  vi.  19,  ix.  4)  :  Chateph-qamets  is 
used  instead  of  sheva  (§  60)  on  account  of  the  weak 
ness  of  the  guttural  n  (cf.  Numb.  xxxv.  20).  On  the 

form  Dfi^-  see  on  *•  x  5- 

Ver.  6. — Dflptni,  "  therefore  (and  so)  be  ye  very 
strong"  :  The  perfect  is  here  used  as  an  imperative, 
the  preceding  clause  implying  a  cause  (§  126,  Rem. 
i,  2nd  par.).  With  the  exhortation  cf.  i.  7. 

Ver.  7. — Kia,  followed  by  ?,  means  "  to  hold  inter 
course  with"  (Ges.,  Lex.,  p.  106),  cf.  ver.  12.  ?  *V3jn, 
"  to  make  mention  of"  viz.,  as  an  object  of  religious 
affiance  (cf.  Isa.  xlviii.  i  ;  Psalm  xx.  7  [8]).  w«K?o  tib, 
"  cause  ye  not  to  swear"  viz.,  "  by  the  name  of  their 
gods."  Swearing  by  the  name  of  a  god  was  always 


VERS.  8-12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  349 

regarded  as  an  evidence  of  belief  in  that  god  (see 
Deut.  vi.  13,  x.  20).  "i?y  relates  to  outward  worship 
by  sacrifice  and  ceremonies  ;  niqntpn,  to  the  bending 
before  God  in  prayer,  and  invocation  of  His  name  ; 
the  two  are  generally  connected  together,  as  here  (cf. 
Exod.  xx.  5,  xxiii.  24  ;  Deut.  iv.  19,  v.  9,  etc.  ;  Keil). 

Ver.  8. — DK  ra,  "btit"  after  a  neg.  (cf.  Psalm  i.  2,  4). 
"  As  ye  have  done  imto  this  day"  :  An  assertion  to  be 
understood  in  a  general  sense  only,  for  there  had 
been  many  individual  exceptions.  Note  how  by 
judicious  praise  Joshua  encourages  them  to  per 
severance,  lest  they  should  lose  a  reward  for  the  good 
which  they  had  already  wrought. 

Ver.  9. — 131  wyi,  "  and  Jehovah  hath  driven  out 
from  before  you"  etc.  :  This  was  a  fulfilment  of  Deut. 
iv.  38,  vii.  i,  ix.  i,  xi.  23.  DflKI.,  "  and  you"  :  Put 
absol.  (§  145,  2).  "No  man  liath  stood"  :  A  fulfil 
ment  of  the  promise  in  Deut.  vii.  24,  xi.  25. 

Ver.  10. — "^T.,  "c/iaset/i":  Cf.  the  promise  in  Levit. 
xxvi.  7,  8  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  7.  The  second  clause  of  the 
verse  is  a  repetition  of  ver.  3  b. 

Ver.  1 1 . — "  A nd  take  good  heed  to  your  souls" 
'B31?  here  means  "  for  the  sake  of  your  souls"  (cf.  Deut. 
iv.  15  ;  Keil).  "  To  love  Jehovah"  see  Deut.  vi.  5, 
x.  12,  xi.  13  :  Likewise  under  the  New  or  Christian 
Covenant  love  and  obedience  are  united  (John  xiv.  i  5, 
xv.  14). 

Vers.  1 2- 1 6  (Warning  against  Apostasy}. — Ver. 
12. — "But  if  ye  do  in  any  wise  return"  viz.,  from 
following  Jehovah  (cf.  xxii.  1 8).  'ffifj,  "  and  if  ye  make 
marriages  with  them  "  :  This  was  prohibited  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  1 2-1 6;  Deut.  vii.  3).  }nn  means  primarily 
"  to  cut  off,"  "  to  circumcise  "  (Ges.,  Lex^>  and  then, 


350  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxm. 

because  marriage,  like  circumcision,  was  a  kind  of 
covenant,  "  to  contract  affinity  with  anyone  ; "  cf.  the 
meaning  of  the  cognate  word  in  Arabic,  and  see 
Hooker,  Eccles.  Pol.,  v.,  62,  §  21,  note  7  (end).  In 
Hithpael  it  means  to  intermarry  either  by  giving  or 
receiving  a  daughter  in  marriage,  and  is  here  followed 
by  ?,  as  in  Deut.  vii.  3  ;  i  Sam.  xviii.  22,  23,  26,  27; 
Ezra  ix.  14.  W  Dpsn-1,  "and  ye  come  among  them" 
i.e.,  enter  into  fellowship  with  them  (cf.  ver.  7). 

Ver.  13. — PIS'?  :  ns  means  a  snare  or  net,  rt.  nns, 
to  spread  out,  cf.  Tro/ytg,  Luke  xxi.  35  ;  Psalm  Ixix. 
23  (Heb.)  ;  Isa.  viii.  14,  where  it  occurs  also  with 
^JTID,  a  trap,  from  E>JV,  to  lay  snares.  t3t?b»,  "a  scourge," 
from  the  Pilel  of  t3-i£;,  to  lash  ;  elsewhere  the  form 
t31B>  is  used  (see  Prov.  xxvi.  3  ;  I  Kings  xii.  1 1,  etc.). 
The  expression  "  a  scourge  in  your  sides,  and  thorns," 
etc.,  is  similar  but  stronger  than  that  in  Numb, 
xxxiii.  55.  "Joshua  crowds  his  figures  together  to 
depict  the  misery  and  oppression  which  would  be 
sure  to  result  from  fellowship  with  the  Canaanites, 
because  from  his  knowledge  of  the  fickleness  of  the 
people  and  the  wickedness  of  the  human  heart  in  its 
natural  state,  he  could  foresee  that  the  apostasy  of 
the  nation  from  the  Lord  which  Moses  had  foretold 
would  take  place  but  too  quickly  ;  as  it  actually  did, 
according  to  Judges  ii.  3,  etc.,  in  the  very  next 
generation  "  (Keil).  "  Until  your  perdition  from  off 
the  good  land."  D?"!^,  Qal.  inf.  (short  o  [T]),  with 
suffix  (§  6 1,  i)  ;  with  the  language  of  this  threat  cf. 
Deut.  xi.  17,  xxviii.  21,  in  which  latter  place  n!p*jx 
(properly  ground  in  respect  of  culture)  is  used  as 
here. 

Ver.  14. — nrn,  "this  day"  art.  emphatic  (§  109), 


VERS.  15,  16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  351 

meaning  here  that  the  time  was  close  at  hand  (cf. 
Deut.  ix.  i).  "  The  way  of  all  the  earth"  cf.  I  Kings 
ii.  2.  "All  the  eartJi"  =  all  mankind,  as  in  Gen. 
xi.  i  ;  i  Sam.  xvii.  46  ;  I  Kings  x.  24  ;  i  Chron. 
xvi.  2  3  ;  Psalm  htvi.  4.  "  Not  one  word  ("i^n)  hath 
failed"  :  Cf.  xxi.  45  ;  i  Kings  viii.  24,  56.  So  when 
through  Christ,  the  glorious  Antitype  of  Joshua, 
believers  are  put  in  possession  of  the  heavenly 
Canaan,  they  will  be  able  from  their  hearts  to  testify 
that  not  one  word  (promise)  of  God  hath  failed  to  be 
accomplished. 

Ver.  15. — jnn  ...  ^3,  "every  evil  word"  i.e.,  every 
threatening,  in  allusion  particularly  to  Levit.  xxvi. 
14-33  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15-68,  xxix.  14-28,  xxx.  1-15. 
DDpTK,  see  Ges.,  Gr.  (§  I  17,  2).  This  is  the  original 
and  regular  form,  which  was  contracted  into  D?J!tN  at 
a  later  period  (Ewald,  Lehrb.,  §  264,  a}. 

Ver.  1 6. — "  When  ye  transgress  .  .  .  and  go  and 
serve  .  .  .  then  sJiall  the  anger  of  Jehovah"  etc.  The 
word  ^n  here  denotes  continuance  and  progress  in 
impiety.  The  last  clause  of  the  verse  is  nearly  a 
verbatim  repetition  of  that  in  Deut.  xi.  1 7. 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 

Joshua's  Second  Farewell  Address.  This  was  spoken 
to  all  the  Tribes  of  Israel  in  the  Persons  of  their 
Representatives  assembled  at  SJiechem. 

Vers.  1-15  {Joshua  rehearses  the  benefits  wJdch  God 
had  conferred  upon  their  nation  from  its  origin  up  to 
that  time,  and  tliereupon  claims  for  God  their  hearty 


352  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP,  xxiv 

and  entire  allegiance ;  he  leaves  it,  however,  to  their 
own  choice  to  serve  God  or  not}. — Ver.  i . — n»3^,  "  to 
SJiechem"  see  on  xvii.  7.  A  few  MSS.  of  the  Sept. 
have  Shiloh  for  Shechem,  but  the  Syr.,  Vulg.,  and 
the  Chald.  Targum  accord  with  the  Hebrew  text. 
As  Shechem  was  the  place  where  Abraham  and 
Jacob  had  erected  an  altar  to  God  (Gen.  xii.  6,  7, 
xxxiii.  1 8.  20),  and  close  to  which  the  solemnity 
recorded  in  Josh.  viii.  30-35  had  taken  place,  it  was 
natural  that  it  should  have  been  chosen  on  this 
occasion  as  calculated,  by  its  associations,  to  impress 
the  minds  of  the  Israelites  (cf.  Dean  Stanley's  Sin. 
and  Pal.,  p.  239).  .Dntpb',  see  i.  10,  xxiii.  2.  -n-yyv, 
"presented  themselves"  from  2¥TS  "  to  place  "  (cf.  Job 
i.  6).  'Kn  *ysb  :  This  expression  does  not  warrant  the 
inference  of  Rosenm.  and  Knobel  that  the  ark  had 
been  removed  on  this  occasion  from  Shiloh  to 
Shechem.  Neither  it,  nor  ^  *}£?,  which  occurs  in 
reference  to  the  Tabernacle  (xviii.  6,  xix.  51),  need 
sometimes  imply  more  than  a  general  allusion  to 
God's  presence  as  giving  solemnity  to  a  place  or 
ceremony  (Hengstenberg,  Beitrage,  iii.,  p.  13,  etc., 
quoted  by  Keil  ;  cf.  Judges  xi.  I  i).  It  is,  however, 
to  be  remarked  that  a  sanctity  attached  to  Shechem, 
because  Joshua  had  erected  an  altar  on  Mount  Ebal, 
near  to  it  (see  viii.  30). 

Ver.  2  ( The  first  proof  of  God's  favour — A  braham's 
call}. — "All  the  people"  probably  as  many  individuals 
out  of  each  tribe  attended  as  were  able.  "  God  of 
Israel"  fitly  so  termed,  since  Joshua  is  about  to 
rehearse  the  benefits  which  God  had  conferred  on 
His  people  Israel  from  ancient  times  up  to  that 
present  day,  when  He  had  put  them  in  possession  of 


VERS.  3,  4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  353 

the  land  of  Canaan.  "  The  river  "  (not  "  the  flood,"  as 
in  Auth.  Vers.),  i.e.,  the  Euphrates,  called  "  the  river," 
/car'  IJ-Qxfiv,  as  in  Gen.  xxxi.  2 1  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  3  I  ; 
see  note  on  i.  4.  The  abode  of  their  fathers  was  (i) 
Ur  of  the  Chaldees  ;  (2)  Charan  of  Mesopotamia 
(Gen.  xi.  28,  31).  D^Wip,  "from  time  immemorial'' 
rnn  from  rnri,  Chald.,  to  delay  (Ges.,  Lex.~),  Sept. 
Qappa.  He  was  the  father  of  Abraham,  Nachor, 
and  Haran  (Gen.  xi.  27),  but  the  two  first  only  are 
mentioned  here,  because  from  them  the  Israelites 
were  descended,  viz.,  from  Abraham  on  the  paternal, 
and  from  Nachor  on  the  maternal  side  (Gen.  xxii.  23, 
xxix.  10,  1 6).  "  And  tJiey  served  other  gods:  "  Perhaps 
the  teraphim  (penates)  mentioned  in  Gen.  xxxi.  19, 
34.  According  to  the  Jewish  tradition  Abraham  did 
not  participate  in  this  idolatry,  and  being  persecuted 
in  consequence  was  obliged  to  leave  his  native  land 
(Targum  Jonathan,  on  Gen.  xi.  23),  or  rather  was 
called  away  by  God,  that  he  might  escape  from  the 
surrounding  idolatry. 

Ver.  3. — ^?TKJ,  "and  I  led"  lit.  "I  made  to  go." 
nnxi,  "  and  I  multiplied"  3ix,  Hiph.  imperf.  apoc., 
for  which  the  Qeri  has  the  more  usual  form  n|~iN. 
"Isaac"  is  explanatory  of  the  foregoing  word  "seed," 
for  in  Isaac  was  his  seed  to  be  called  (Gen. 
xxi.  12). 

Ver.  4. — "A  nd  I  gave  unto  Isaac  Jacob  and  Esau  "  : 
In  answer  to  Isaac's  earnest  prayer,  and  after  he  had 
been  married  twenty  years  (Gen.  xxv.  21,  26  ;  Psalm 
cxxvii.  3).  "  And  I gave  unto  Esau  Mount  Seir"1 : 
See  Gen.  xxxvi.  8  ;  Deut.  ii.  5,  12.  Nothing  is  said 

1  =  hairy,  rough.  It  extended  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  the 
Elanitic  Gulf. 

23 


354  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxiv. 

here  of  the  gift  of  Canaan  to  the  posterity  of  Isaac, 
because  Joshua  assumes  that  as  well  known  to  the 
Israelites,  and,  therefore,  only  adds  the  statement  in 
the  last  clause  of  the  verse  in  order  to  introduce  what 
follows  in  vers.  5-7. 

Vers.  5-7  (Second  Proof  of  God's  Favour,  viz.,  the 
Deliverance  from  Egypt], — Ver.  5. — "And  I  smote 
Egypt"  i.e.,  its  land  and  people.  S|3J  is  used  of  a 
plague,  e.g.,  that  of  frogs  (Exod.  vii.  27,  viii.  2),  and 
of  the  smiting  of  the  firstborn  of  Egypt  (Exod.  xii. 
23,  27).  In  Exod.  iii.  20  ro3  is  used  in  the  same 
sense.  "ip??,  "  according  to  that  which  "  (Auth.  Vers.), 
or  "  according  to  tJie  plagues  which"  subaudi  ntD.asn 
from  the  preceding  f|3K.  The  Sept.  Alex,  seems  to 
have  read  "i^N.2,  which  it  loosely  renders  eV  cr^eiots 
ots  liroLTfja'a,  cf.  the  Vulg.,  "  et  percussi  ALgyptum 
multis  signis  et  portends."  "And  afterwards  I 
brought  you  out"  viz.,  out  of  Egypt,  thus  fulfilling  the 
promise  in  Exod.  iii.  20. 

Ver.  6. — ns»n,  "  to  the  sea"  i.e.,  the  Arabian  Gulf, 
here  called  /car'  i^oyrpt,  D*n,  as  in  Exod.  xiv.  2,  but 
f]-1D'D^  at  the  end  of  this  verse  (cf.  ii.  I  o,  note). 

Ver.  7. — "And  they  cried  unto  Jehovah":  See 
Exod.  xiv.  i  o.  "And  He  put  darkness  " :  The  abrupt 
change  from  the  first  person  in  vers.  3-6  to  the  third 
person  here  is  common  in  Hebrew  (cf.  Psalm  xxii.  27 
[Heb.],  Ixxxi.  16  ;  Zech.  xiv.  5).  ^?N.»,'"  darkness"  rt. 
^DN,  to  set,  to  be  obscure  ;  the  noun  is  used  here 
only,  but  the  compound  n^D^p,  "  the  darkness  of 
Jehovah,"  occurs  in  Jer.  ii.  31.  The  allusion  is  to 
the  pillar  of  the  cloud  (Exod.  xiv.  20).  "  And  ye 
dwelt  .  .  .  many  days"  i.e.,  for  forty  years  (Numb. 
xiv.  33). 


VERS.  8-12.]  THE    BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  355 

Vers.  8-10  (Third  Proof  of  God's  Favour — the  Con 
quest  of  the  Land  of  the  Amorites,  and  tlie  Frustration 
of  tJie  Designs  of  Balak}. — Ver.  8. — nN-QNi,  with  n 
parag.,  instead  of  the  Qeri  K»3gJ-  *Bnpi,  "  and  ye  pos 
sessed,"  Vulg.  "  et  possedistis "  :  See  the  history  of 
this  conquest  in  Numb.  xxi.  21-35. 

Ver.  9. — Dn^l,  "and  lie  fought"  not  with  weapons 
of  war  (see  Judges  xi.  25),  but  by  employing  Balaam 
to  curse  them,  as  said  in  the  next  clause. 

Ver.  10. — "nra  "^a*!,  "and  he  continued  to  bless" 
(§  I 3  r>  3>  b}'  "  And  I  delivered  you  out  of  his  hand" 
/.<?.,  the  hand  of  Balak,1  who  wished  to  destroy  Israel, 
if  he  could  (Numb.  xxii.  6,  1 1). 

Vers.  11-13  (Fourth  Proof  of  God's  Favour — the 
Passage  of  the  Jordan,  and  the  Conquest  of  Jericho  and 
of  the  Nations  of  Canaan}. — Ver.  n. — 'T  ^ya,  "in 
habitants  2  (not  "  lords,"  Knobel)  of  Jericlw "  (Ges., 
Lex.},  Sept.  01  /carot/cowreg  'lept^w  (cf.  Judges  ix.  6  ; 
2  Sam.  xxi.  12).  " FougJit"  i.e.,  from  the  walls,  for 
no  mention  is  made  of  a  battle  outside  the  city.  The 
same  verb  applies  to  the  seven  nations,  or  tribes, 
which  are  next  mentioned,  and  which  are  not  to 
be  regarded  as  put  in  apposition  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Jericho,  as  though  they  had  severally  taken 
part  with  them  in  the  defence  of  the  city  (Jarchi)  ; 
rather  1  should  be  supplied  before  ^bxrj  (Keil  and 
Rosenm.). 

Ver.  12. — nin-yn,  "  the  hornet"  :  (Art.  collec.)  from 
iny,  "  to  strike  down,"  with  which  is  connected  the 
idea  of  "  to  pierce  ):  (Ges.,  Lex}  ;  see  the  promise  in 

1  =  "the  spoiler,"  from  p?3,  to  make  empty. 

2  Owners  or  citizens. 


356  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA,  [CHAP.  xxiv. 

Exod.  xxiii.  28  ;  Deut.  vii.  20,  where,  as  here,  the 
word  "  hornet "  is  used  not  literally  (Bochart  and 
Rosenm.),  but  figuratively,  to  denote  that  effective 
terror  (Keil)  with  which  God  inspired  all  the  sur 
rounding  nations  (Deut.  ii.  25  ;  Josh.  ii.  1 1).  In 
like  manner,  "  bees  "  (or  "  wasps  ")  are  spoken  of  as 
the  cause  of  terror  (Deut.  i.  44  ;  Psalm  cxviii.  1 2  ; 
cf.  //.,  xvi.,  259,  etc.)1  "And  it  drave  them  out": 
"  Them  "  refers,  according  to  the  Auth.  Vers.,  to  "  the 
two  kings  of  the  Amorites  "  mentioned  in  the  next 
clause,  but  Keil  and  Rosenm.  rightly  understood  \ 
before  these  words  (cf.  ver.  1 1).  Not  merely  the 
seven  tribes  on  the  west  side  of  Jordan,  but  the  two 
kings  of  the  Amorites  on  the  east  side,  were  driven 
out.  "  Not  by  thy  sivord,  and  not  by  thy  bow"  see 
Psalm  xliv.  4  (Heb.),  "  they  got  not  the  land  ...  by 
their  own  sword,"  etc. 

Ver.  i  3. — "  In  wJiicJi  ye  did  not  labour"  i.e.,  to 
render  it  fruitful.  r;j  means  "  to  labour  with  toilsome 
effort."  DTin,  lit.  olive  trees,  though  meaning  here 
olive  plantations,  for  which  Hebrew  has  no  one  word  ; 
hence  rightly,  as  to  sense,  the  Auth.  Vers.  renders 


1  Though  Bochart  (Hieroz.,  lib.  iv.,  c.  13)  has  collected 
examples  from  ancient  authorities  of  numerous  bodies  of  men 
being  driven  away  by  noxious  insects ;  and  the  Book  of 
Wisdom  (xii.  8,  9)  supports  this  view  of  the  expulsion  of  the 
Canaanites  ;  yet  the  majority  of  commentators  understand  the 
term  "  hornet "  to  be  used  here  (Josh.  xxiv.  12)  metaphorically. 
This  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  there  is  in  the  Book  of 
Joshua  no  historical  mention  of  the  Canaanites  having  been 
thus  driven  out.  Also  in  Exod.  xxiii.  28  the  word  "  hornets  " 
is  parallel  with  the  word  "fear  "  in  ver.  27.  And  besides  the 
examples  given  above  of  the  use  of  the  word  "bees,"  the 
word  cestrus,  a  gad-fly,  is  used  poetically  to  denote  madness 
or  frenzy. 


VERS.  14,  15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  357 

"olive-yards,"   Sept.    eXaioW?,  Vulg.  oliveta.     With 
this  verse  cf.  the  promise  in  Deut.  vi.  10,  1 1. 

Vers.  14,  15  (An  Appeal  to  t/ie  Israelites  to  renounce 
Idolatry,  and  to  cleave  to  tJie  Service  of  JeJiovah — 
Josliuds  own  Resolve}. — Ver.  14. — nny),  "and  now" 
i.e.,  on  the  ground  of  God's  past  benefits  to  your 
nation  (cf.  Psalm  cv.  45,  where,  after  having  rehearsed 
God's  mercies  to  the  Israelites,  the  Psalmist  declares 
the  design  of  those  mercies,  viz.,  "  that  they  [the 
Israelites]  might  observe  His  statutes  and  keep  His 
laws  ").  •IN'V,  imper.  of  NT>,  but  pointed  like  a  verb,  rh 
for  -lan?  (cf.  I  Sam.  xii.  24  ;  Psalm  xxxiv.  10  [Heb.]). 
•n?y,  see  on  *ny  xxiii.  7,  Sept.  Xar/aevcrare.  D^pn, 
prim,  an  adjec.,  "  perfect,  complete,"  but  here  used 
as  a  substantive,  "integrity"  (cf.  Judges  ix.  16,  19, 
where  the  Sept.  renders  it  by  TeXetdr^rt).  np.N,  "  sted- 
fastness,"  from  JON,  to  prop,  to  support,  and  hence 
faithfulness,  truth,  sincerity.  God  requires  the  same 
qualifications  in  His  servants  now  (Matt.  vi.  24  ; 
John  iv.  23,  24).  "  The  gods  .  .  .  on  tJie  other  side 
of  tJie  river"  see  on  ver.  2.  "And  in  Egypt"  see 
Ezek.  xx.  7,  8,  xxiii.  3,  8,  IQ.1 

Ver.  15. — "And  if  it  is  evil  in  your  eyes"  :  Sept. 
et  Se  fJLT)  apecrKeL  v^lv.  'D3^  -nq?,  "  choose  for  your 
selves  whom  ye  will  serve"  (cf.  I  Kings  xviii.  2i): 
We  have  not  the  liberty  to  choose  whether  we  will 
serve  or  not ;  all  the  liberty  we  have  is  to  choose  our 
master  (Bishop  Sanderson,  iii.,  314).  DVi^N-ng,  i.e., 
the  teraphim  or  penates  (ver.  2).  The  "  Emorites  " 
are  probably  put  for  the  Canaanites  generally,  who 


1  The  golden  calf,  or  steer  (?3#),  was  probably  an  imitation 
of  Apis,  or  some  other  of  the  sacred  bulls  of  Egypt. 


358  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxiv. 


were  worshippers  of  Baal.  The  choice  thus  given  to 
the  Israelites  was  intended  to  test  their  sincerity, 
that  they  might  not  thoughtlessly  pledge  themselves 
to  the  service  of  God.  "  But  I  and  my  house"  etc. : 
As  Joshua  does  not  appear  to  have  been  married,  his 
"  house  "  probably  refers  to  his  servants  (cf.  "  house 
hold  "  in  Gen.  xviii.  19). 

Vers.  16-24  (Tlie  Determination  of  Israel  to  serve 
Jehovah}. — Ver.  16. — -1^  rMn  (cf.  xxii.  29),  here  fol 
lowed  by  JO  with  an  infin.  "Far  be  it  from  us  that 
we  should  forsake"  (Ges.,  Lex.},  cf.  Gen.  xviii.  25, 
xliv.  7,  17. 

Ver.  1 7. — n^n,  Hiph.  part,  with  art.,  "  ivJw  brought 
up"  answering  to  •"nxytn  I^N.  (Exod.  xx.  2).  "  The 
house  of  bondmen":  So  in  Exod.  xx.  2.  "  TJiose 
great  signs"  viz.,  those  referred  to  in  vers.  8-12. 

Ver.  1 8. — •l^tf'D]!,  "also  we"  in  reference  to  Joshua's 
words  (ver.  15),  "  I  and  my  father's  house." 

Ver.  19. — $79*m6,  "ye  will  not  be  able,"  i.e.,  without 
true  conversion  of  heart.  There  is  an  implied  allusion 
to  their  fickleness  and  proneness  to  rebel.  D'ehp,  plur. 
adj.,  because  Elohim  is  a  plur.  excellentiae,  denoting 
God  in  the  fulness  and  multiplicity  of  the  Divine 
powers  (§  1 08,  2,  b  ;  cf.  Hosea  xii.  I  [Heb.]  ;  Prov. 
ix.  10).  N13£  occurs  here  and  in  Nah.  i.  2  only,  i.q. 
N2|5  (Exod.  xx.  5,  xxxiv.  iv.  14;  Deut.  iv.  24,  v.  9, 
vi.  I  5),  a  jealous  God,  who  will  not  transfer  to  another 
the  honour  due  unto  Himself  (Isa.  xlii.  8,  xlviii.  1 1). 
N^rK^j  followed  here  and  in  Exod.  xxiii.  2  I  ;  Psalm 
xxv.  1 8,  by  a  dat,  but  generally  by  an  accus.  of  the 
thing  ;  "  will  not  grant  forgiveness  to  your  trans 
gressions" 

Ver.   20. — rs,   "when"      133   ^£,   " strange  gods" 


VERS.  21-25.]  THE    BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  359 

(lit.  gods  of  a  foreign  country),  so  in  Gen.  xxxv.  2  ; 
Jer.  v.  1 9.  3Kh:,  "  then  He  will  turn"  i.e.,  will  assume 
a  different  disposition  towards  you.  rn^9),  "  and  tuill 
consume  you"  lit.  "will  finish"  or  "  make  an  end  of" 
you.  "  After  that  He  hath  done  you  good"  i.e.,  not 
withstanding  the  past  tokens  of  His  goodness  to  you. 

Ver.  2  r . — &6,  "  nay"  as  in  v.  1 4. 

Ver.  22. — After  DHtf  in  the  last  clause  is  an  ellip 
sis  of  -iJrjJN.  (we  are)  which  is  supplied  in  the  Syr.  and 
Arab,  versions. 

Ver.  23. — "  Put  away  the  strange  gods  which  are 
among  you"  Keil,  after  Levi  ben  Gerson,  Augustine, 
and  Calvin,  takes  D3?~)p?  to  signify  "  within  you,"  i.e., 
in  your  hearts,  because  it  is  said  in  xxiii.  8  that  the 
people  had  cleaved  to  the  Lord  "  unto  this  day,"  and 
in  xxiv.  31,  that  they  "served  the  Lord  all  the  days 
of  Joshua."  This  meaning,  however,  seems  forced, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  better  to  suppose  that  Joshua 
alludes  to  secret  idolatry  practised  by  individuals, 
though  there  was  no  national  public  recognition  of 
strange  gods.  It  is  true  that  nothing  is  said  of 
delivering  up  these  idols  to  be  destroyed,  as  was  done 
in  similar  cases  (see  Gen.  xxxv.  4  ;  I  Sam.  vii.  4), 
but  it  would  be  rash  to  argue  from  the  silence  of  the 
sacred  narrative  that  no  such  surrender  might  have 
taken  place. 

Vers.  25-28  (Joshua  renews  the  Covenant,  etc.,  and 
dismisses  the  People}. — Ver.  25. — "Made  a  covenant" 
i.e.,  renewed  the  one  which  had  been  made  at  Sinai 
(Exod.  xxiv.  3,  etc.),  and  renewed  by  Moses  in  the 
plains  of  Moab  (Deut.  xxviii.  69  [xxix.  I,  Auth. 
Vers.]).  "And  he  set  for  them  (i.e.,  the  people)  a 
statute  and  an  ordinance"  BStpp,  prop,  judgment, 


360  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxiv. 

and  hence  a  law  or  ordinance  (Exod.  xxi.  I,  xxiv.  3  ; 
Levit.  xviii.  4).  There  is  a  reference  to  Exod.  xv.  25, 
and  the  meaning  probably  is  that  Joshua  ratified  the 
covenant  as  a  Divine  statute  and  ordinance,  by  which 
the  Israelites  were  bound  to  obedience  as  a  condition 
of  receiving  the  blessings  of  the  covenant. 

Ver.  26. — nWi  nnn^rrns  refers  not  only  to  the 
words  spoken,  but  to  all  the  transactions  connected 
with  the  renewal  of  the  covenant.  "  Tlie  book  of  the 
law  of  God"  i.e.,  the  Pentateuch,  which  was  laid  up 
in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  close  by  the  ark  of  the 
covenant,  probably  in  a  chest  (see  Deut.  xxxi.  24,  26). 
This  was  done  not  only  for  the  safe  custody  of  the 
book,  and  in  testimony  of  its  Divine  authority,  but  as 
a  protest  against  a  breach  of  the  covenant,  of  which 
the  ark  was  a  symbol,  by  idolatry  (see  Dr.  Pusey, 
On  Daniel,  pp.  308,  309).  "  Took  a  great  stone  and 
set  it  up,"  cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  18  ;  Josh.  iv.  20-22  ; 
i  Sam.  vii.  12).  rta<n,  " tfic  oak"  (Ges.,  Lex.};  so 
Vulg.,  but  Sept.  "  the  terebinth "  :  The  noun  literally 
means  "  a  thick  tree,"  rt.  ^x,  properly  to  roll,  hence 
to  be  round,  thick  (cf.  "?-ix  and  n^x)  ;  the  article  pro 
bably  alludes  to  the  oak  or  terebinth  of  Moreh  (Gen. 
xii.  6),  where  Abraham  pitched  his  tent,  and  raised 
an  altar,  and  where  Jacob  buried  the  idols  of  his 
household  (Gen.  xxxv.  4 ;  see  note  on  xxiv.  i). 
J*  Bnpp?,  "  in  the  sanctuary  of  JehovaJi "  :  The  allusion 
is  not  to  the  Tabernacle,  for  that  was  at  Shiloh 
(xviii.  i),  but  to  the  spot  sanctified  by  the  altar 
erected  by  Abraham,  and  afterwards  by  Jacob.  So 
Keil,  Hengstenberg,  and  others.1 

1  Dean  Stanley  thinks  that  the  place  indicated  was  the  same 
as  that  where  Jacob  buried  the  images  and  ornaments  of  his 


VERS.  27-30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  361 

Ver.  27. — "For  it  liatli  heard":  An  example  of 
vivid  personification  (prosopopeia,  cf.  Detit.  xxxii.  i  ; 
Isa.  i.  2  ;  Jer.  ii.  12).  "  Lest  ye  deny  your  God"  viz., 
in  feeling,  word,  or  deed  (Keil).  The  same  verb  B>n3 
occurs  in  vii.  1 1 . 

Vers.  29-33  (Death  and  Biirial  of  Joshua  and 
Eleasar,  and  mention  of  the  Burial  of  JosepJis  Bones}. 
— Ver.  29. — "An  hundred  and  ten  years  old"  (cf. 
Joseph.,  Antiq.,  v.,  i,  29)  :  The  same  age  as  that  of 
Joseph  (Gen.  1.  26). 

Ver.  30. — "  Timnath-serach"  see  note  on  xix.  50. 
"  On  the  north  side  of  Mount  Ga'ash "  :  The  word 
BWJ  meaning  "  shaking,"  "  earthquake,"  from  t?r|,  "  to 
push,  to  thrust,"  and  in  the  pass.  "  to  be  concussed, 
to  be  moved  "  (Ges.,  Lex^  occurs  again  with  "in  in 
Judges  ii.  9,  and  with  ^ru  (torrent-beds,  or  wadys  of 
Gaash),  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  30  ;  i  Chron.  xi.  32. 
Eusebius  and  Jerome  record  the  name  (Onomast., 
"  Gaas "),  but  evidently  had  no  knowledge  of  the 
situation.  There  is,  however,  a  remarkable  consent 
of  Jewish,  Samaritan,  and  Christian  tradition,  trace 
able  from  the  fourth  century  downwards,  which  points 
to  a  village  called  Kafr  Hdris,  south  of  Shechem, 
as  representing  the  burial-place  of  Joshua.  Lieut. 
Conder  ascertained  that  this  tradition  is  still  extant 
among  the  Samaritans,  and,  although  it  appears  little 
understood  by  the  peasantry,  a  sacred  shrine  exists 
outside  the  village  of  Kefr  Haris  to  which  the  name 
Neby  Luslia  (no  doubt  a  corruption  of  Yehusha  or 

Mesopotamian  retainers  (Gen.  xxxv.  4),  and  that  the  tree  or 
spot  appears  to  have  been  known  in  the  time  of  the  Judges, 
as  the  traditional  site  of  these  two  events,  by  the  double  name 
of  "  the  oak  of  the  enchantments  ''  or  "  the  oak  of  the  pillar  " 
(Sin.  and  Pal.,  p.  142). 


362  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxiV 

Joshua)  is  applied.  Ancient  tradition  also  places  the 
tomb  of  Nun  at  this  same  village,  and  a  second  sacred 
place,  called  Neby  Nun,  was  found  close  to  the  sup 
posed  site  of  the  tomb  of  Joshua  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund, 
Quarterly  Statement,  1881). 

To  this  verse  the  Sept.  and  Arab,  append  the 
legend  that  the  stone-knives,  with  which  Joshua  had 
circumcised  the  Israelites  (chap,  v.),  were  buried  with 
him  (cf.  xxi.  42  [40]). 

Ver.  31. — "  The  elders"  i.e.,  the  rulers  and  leaders. 
•WT,  "  had  seen  or  experienced  "  :  Cf.  the  statement  in 
this  verse  with  Judges  ii.  7.  The  good  example  set 
by  individuals  in  high  station  and  authority  may 
influence  a  whole  people. 

Ver.  32. — "And  the  bones  .  .  .  Egypt"  (see  Gen. 
1.  25  ;  Exod.  xiii.  19).  "Buried  they  in  Shechem" 
a  place  consecrated  by  Abraham's  altar  (Gen.  xii.  7), 
the  oldest  sanctuary  in  the  land.  "  /;/  a  portion  of 
the  field *  wJiicJi  Jacob  had  bought  .  .  .  for  a  hundred 
qest-tali  "  (cf.  Gen.  xxxiii.  1 9).  All  the  ancient  ver 
sions,  except  Targg.  Jerusalem  and  Jonathan,  render 
na^p,  "  a  lamb,"  whence  it  has  been  thought  to  have 
been  a  coin  bearing  the  impression  of  a  lamb.  But 
more  probably  the  word  signifies  something  weighed 
out,  from  DBfy  an  unused  root,  i.q.  V&\>,  in  Arab.  "  to 
divide,"  or  "to  distribute  equally," and,  therefore,  might 
denote  money.  Thus  here  Gesenius  (Z^r.)  renders 
"  a  hundred  measures,  or  portions  of  silver."  This 
interment  of  Joseph's  bones  probably  took  place  when 
the  apportionment  of  the  land  had  been  completed, 

1  i"li??D,  a  plot ;  or  portion,  properly  "a  smooth  piece  "(cf. 
Gen.  xxvii.  16,  from  p?n,  to  be  smooth  (Ges.,  Lex.). 


VERS.  33-]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  363 


but  was  not  mentioned  before,  that  the  thread  of  the 
narrative  might  not  be  broken  (Keil).  To  this  day 
the  tomb,  whether  correctly  or  not,  is  pointed  out 
under  the  shadow  of  Mount  Ebal  (TJie  Land  and  the 
Book,  p.  473). 

Ver.  33. — "'Et-'a- zar" :  See  note  on  xiv.  I. 
Whether  his  death  was  shortly  before,  or  after,  that 
of  Joshua,  Scripture  does  not  tell  us.  Josephus  says 
it  occurred  about  the  same  time  as  Joshua's,  twenty- 
five  years  after  the  death  of  Moses  (Antiq.,  v.,  I,  §  29). 
"  In  the  hill  o/Pi-nechas"  or  "  in  Gibh-at/i-Pi-nec/tas," 
possibly  a  town  so  called.  "  This  "  (says  Grove)  "may 
be  the  Jibia  on  the  left  of  the  Nablus  1  road,  halfway 
between  Bethel  and  Shiloh  ;  or  the  Jeba  north  of 
Nablus  (Rob.,  ii.,  265,  note  312).  Both  would  be  '  in 
Mount  Ephraim,'  but  there  is  nothing  in  the  text  to 
fix  the  position  of  the  place,  while  there  is  no  lack  of 
the  name  among  the  villages  of  Central  Palestine  " 
(Art.  "Gibeah"  in  Dr.  Smith's  Bib.  Diet.,  I.,  p.  692). 
At  the  present  day  Samaritan,  Jewish,  and  Christian 
tradition  identifies  the  Gibeah  of  Phinehas  with  the 
village  of  AwertaJi,  four  miles  south-east  of  Nablus, 
and  here,  or  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  are  shown  the 
monuments  of  Phinehas  and  Eleazar.  These  were 
visited  by  Lieut.  Conder  and  his  fellow-explorers,  and 
the  former  monument  is  described  as  bearing  marks 
of  great  antiquity,  and  the  latter  as  having  been 
rebuilt  (Pal.  Explor.  Fund,  Quarterly  Statement,  I  88 1).2 

1  That  is,  Shechem. 

"  The  tomb  of  Eleazar  is  "  a  rude  structure  of  masonry  in  a 
court  open  to  the  air.  It  is  18  ft.  long,  plastered  all  over,  and 
shaded  by  a  splendid  terebinth.  That  of  Phinehas  is  ap 
parently  an  older  building,  and  the  walls  of  its  court  have  an 
arcade  of  round  arches,  now  supporting  a  trellis,  covered  with 
a  grape  vine,  and  the  floor  is  paved  "  (Tent  Work,  p.  41). 


364  THE  BOOK  OF  fOSHUA.  [CHAP.  xxiv. 


Here  appropriately  closes  the  Book  of  Joshua,  but 
several  editions  and  MSS.  of  the  Sept.  add  some 
particulars  relative  to  Pinechas  and  the  apostacy  of 
the  children  of  Israel  after  Joshua's  death,  which  have 
been  manifestly  taken  from  Judges  ii.  6,  11,  and 
iii.  7,  12,  etc.,  and  are  not  found  in  any  of  the  MSS. 
and  editions  of  the  Book  of  Joshua. 


GEOGRAPHICAL    NAMES. 
(SPELT   AS   IN  THE  AUTHORISED  VERSION.) 


ABDON,  xxi.  30 

Abez,  xix.  20 

Achor,  Valley  of,  vii.  24,  26,  xv.  7 

Achshaph,  xi.  i,  xii.  20,  xix.  25 

Achzib,  xv.  44,  xix.  29 

Adadah,  xv.  22 

Adam,  iii.  16 

Adamah,  xix.  36 

Adami,  xix.  33 

Adar,  xv.  3 

Adithaim,  xv.  36 

Adullam,  xii.  15,  xv.  35 

Adummim,  xv.  7,  xviii.  17 

Ai,  vii.  2-5,  viii.  1-29,  ix.  3,  x.  i,  2,  xii. 

Aijalon,*  xix.  42,  xxi.  24 

Valley  of,  x.  12 

Ain,  xv.  32,  x;x.  7,  xxi.  16 

Akrabbim,  The  Ascent  of,  xv.  3 

Alammelech,  xix.  26 

Allon,  xix.  33 

Almon,  xxi.  18 

Amad,  xix.  26 

Amam,  xv.  26 

Ammon,  xii.  2,  xiii.  10 

Amorite,  ii.  10,  iii.  10,  v.  i,  vii.  7,  ix.  : 

x.  5,  6,  12,  xi.  3,  xii.  2,  xiii.  4,  10,   : 

xxiv.  8,  12,  15,  18 
Anab,  xi.  21,  xv.  50 
Anaharath,  xix.  19 
Anathoth,  xxi.  18 
Anim,  xv.  50 

Aphek  xii.  18,  xiii.  4,  xix.  30 
Aphekah,  xv.  53 
Arab,  xv.  52 
Arabah,  iii.  16,  xviii.  18 
Arad,  xii.  14 
Archi,  xvi.  2 

Arnon,  xii.  i,  2,  xiii.  9,  16 
Aroer,  xii.  2,  xiii.  9,  16,  25 
Ashan,  xv.  42,  xix.  7 
Ashdod,  xi.  22,  xv.  46,  47 
Ashdoth-Pisgah,  xii.  3,  xiii.  20 
Ashdoth,  x.  40,  xii.  8 
Ashdothites,  xiii.  3 
Asher,  xvii.  10,  u,  xix.  24,  31,  34,  xxi.  6, 
Asher,  xvii.  7 
Ashnah,  xv.  33,  43 
Ashtaroth   (in  Bashan),    ix.   10,    xii. 

xiii.  12 

—  (in  Manasseh),  xiii.  31 
Ataroth,  xvi.  2,  7 
Ataroth-Addar,  xvi.  5,  xviii.  13 
Avites  or  Avim,  xiii.  3,  xviii.  23 
Azckah,  x.  10,  n,  xv.  35 
Azem,  xv.  29,  xix.  3 


Azmon,  xv.  4 
Aznoth-Tabor,  xix.  34 
Ba'alah,  xv.  9,  10,  xv.  29 
Ba'alath,  xix.  44 

—  (Mount),  xv.  u 
Ba'alath-Beer,  xix.  8 
Baal-Gad,  xi.  17,  xii.  7,  xiii.  5 
Baal-Meon,  xiii.  17 
Balah,  xix.  3 
Bamoth-Baal,  xiii.  17 
Bashan,  ix.  10,  xii.  4,  5,  xiii.  n,  la,  30,  31, 

xvii.  i,  5,  xx.  8,  xxi.  6,  27,  xxii.  7 
Bealoth,  xv.  24 
Beeroth,  ix.  17,  xviii.  25 
Beer-Sheba,  xv.  28,  xix.  2 
Beeshterah,  xxi.  27 
Bene-Berak,  xix.  46 
Benjamin,  xviii.  n,  20,  21,  28,  xxi.  4,  17 
Beten,  xix.  25 
Bethanath,  xix.  38 
Bethanoth,  xv.  59 
Beth-Arabah,  xv.  6,  61,  xviii.  22 
Beth-Aram,  xiii.  27 

Beth-Aven,vii.  2,  xviii.  12  (wilderness  of) 
Beth-Baal-Mcon,  xiii.  17 
Beth-Dagon,  xv.  41,  xix.  27 
Beth-El,  vii.  2,  viii.  9,  12,  17,  xii.  9,  16, 

xvi.  2,  xviii.  13,  22 
Beth-El  (Mount),  xvi.  i 
Beth-Emek,  xix.  27 
Beth-Hcgla,  xv.  6,  xviii.  19,  21 
Beth-Horon,  x.  10,   n,  xvi.  3,  5,  xviii. 

13,  14,  xxi.  22 

Beth-Jeshimoth,  xii.  3,  xiii.  20 
Beth-Lebaoth,  xix.  6 
Beth-Lehem  (in  Zebulun),  xix.  15 
Beth-Marcaboth,  xix.  5 
Beth-Nimrah,  xiii.  27 
Beth-Palet,  xv.  27 
Beth-Pazzez,  xix.  21 
Beth-Peor,  xiii.  20 
Beth-Shean,  xvii.  n,  16 
Beth-Shemesh,  xv.  10,  xxi.  i6(injudah); 

xix.  22  (in  Issachar);  xix.  38  (in  Naph- 

tali) 

Beth-Tappuah,  xv.  53 
Bcthul,  xix.  4 
Beth-Zur,  xy.  58 
Betonim,  xiii.  26 

Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  xx.  8,  xxi.  36 
Bizjothjah,  xv.  28 
Bohan,  Stone  of,  xv.  6,  xviii.  17 
Bozkath,  xv.  39 
Cabbon,  xv.  40 
Cahul,  xix.  27 


*  Written  also  Ajalon. 


366 


GEOGRAPHICAL  NAMES. 


Cain,  xv.  57 

Canaan,  v.  12,  xiv.  i,  xxi.  2,  xxii.  9,  10, 
ii,  32,  xxiv.  3 

Canaanite  or  Canaanites,  iii.  10,  v.  i, 
vii.  9,  ix.  i,  xi.  3,  xii.  8,  xiii.  3,  4, 
xvi.  10.  xvii.  12,  13,  16,  18,  xxiv.  n 

Carmel  (i,  the  mountain),  xii.  22,  xix. 
26,  (2,  a  town)  xv.  55 

Chephar  Ha-Ammonai,  xviii.  24 

Chephirah,  ix.  17,  xviii.  26 

Chesalon,  xv.  10 

Chesil,  xv.  30 

Chesulloth,  xix.  18. 

Chinnereth,  xix.  35 

Chinneroth,  xi.  2 

Chinnereth,  Sea  of,  xiii.  27,  or  Chinne 
roth,  Sea  of,  xii.  3 

Chisloth  Tabor,  xix.  12 

Dabareh,  xxi.  28 

Dabbasheth,  xix.  n 

Daberath,  xix.  28,  xxi.  28 

Dan  (i,  the  tribe),  xix.  40,  47,  48,  xxi. 
5,  23 ;  (2,  the  city  of  Dan),  xix.  47 

Dannah,  xy.  49 

Debir  (i,  in  the  highlands  of  Judah), 
x-  38,  39.  xi.  21,  xii.  13,  xv.  15,  49, 
xxi.  15  ;  (2,  on  the  northern  boundary 
of  Judah),  xv.  7 ;  (3,  connected  with 
the  boundary  of  Gad),  xiii.  26 

Dibon  (on  the  east  of  Jordan),  xiii.  9,  17 

Dilean,  xv.  38 

Dimnah,  xxi.  35 

Dimonah,  xv.  22 

Dor,  xi.  2,  xii.  23,  xvii.  n. 

Dumah,  xv.  52 

Ebal,  Mount,  viii.  30,  33 

Eder,  xv.  21 

Edom,  xv.  i,  21 

Edrei,  xii.  4,  xix.  37 

Eglon,  xy.  39,  x.  3,  23,  34,  xii.  12 

Egypt,  ii.  10,  v.  4,  5,  6,  9,  ix.  9,  xiii.  3, 
xxiv.  4,  5,  6,  7,  14,  17,  32 

Egypt,  River  of,  xv.  4,  47 

Ekron,  xiii.  3,  xv.  ii,  45,  46 

Ekronites,  xiii.  3 

Eleph,  xviii.  28 

Elon,  xix.  43 

Eltekeh,  xix.  44,  xxi.  23 

Eltekon,  xv.  59 

Eltolad,  xv.  30,  xix.  4 

Enam,  xv.  34 

Endor,  xvii.  n 

En-gannim,  xv.  34  (in  the  low  country 
of  Judah);  xix.  21  (on  the  border  of 
Issachar) ;  xxi.  29  (allotted  to  Levites) 

Engedi,  xv.  62 

En-haddah,  xix.  21 

En-Hazor,  xix.  37 

En-Rogel,  xv.  7,  xviii.  16 

En-Shemesh,  xv.  7,  xviii.  17 

En-Tappuah,  xvii.  7 

Ephraim,  xiv.  4,  xvi.  4,  5,  8,  9,  xvii.  8,  9, 
10,  17,  xxi.  5,  20 

Ephraim  (Mount  of),  xvii.  15,  xix.  50, 
xx.  7,  xxi.  21,  xxiv.  30,  33 

Ephraimites,  xvi.  10 


Ephron,  Mount,  xv.  9 

Eshean,  xv.  52 

Eshkalonites,  xiii.  3 

Eshtaol,  xv.  33,  xix.  41 

Eshtemoa,  xxi.  14 

Eshtemoh,  xv.  50 

Ether,  xv.  42,  xix.  7 

Euphrates,  i.  4 

Gaash,  xxiv.  30 

Gaba,  xviii.  24 

Gad,  iv.  12,  xiii.  24,  28,  xviii.  7,  xx.  8, 

xxi.  7,  38,  xxii.  9,  10,  n,  13,  15,  21,  25, 

3<>-34 

Gadites,  i.  12,  xii.  6,  xiii.  8,  xxii.  i 
Galilee,  xx.  7,  xxi.  32 
Gath,  xi.  22 
Gath-Hepher,  xix.  13 
Gath-Rimmon  (i,  in  Dan),  xix.  45,xxi.  24; 

(2,  in  Western  Manasseh),  xxi.  25 
Gaza,  x.  41,  xi.  22,  xv.  47 
Gazathites,  xiii.  3 
Geba,  xxi.  17 
Geder,  xii.  13 
Gederah,  xv.  36 
Gederoth,  xv.  41 
Gederothaim,  xv.  36 
Gedor,  xv.  58 

Geliloth,  xviii.  17,  xxii.  10,  n 
Gerizim,  Mount,  viii.  33 
Geshurites,  xii.  5,  xiii.  n,  13 
Geshuri,  xiii.  2 

Gezer,  x.  33,  xii.  12,  xvi.  3,  10,  xxi.  21 
Gibbethon,  xix.  44,  xxi.  23 
Gibeah,  xv.  57 
Gibeath,  xviii.  28 
Gibeon,  ix.  3,  17,   x.  i,  2,  4-6,  10,  12,  41, 

xi.  19,  xviii.  25,  xxi.  17 
Giblites,  The,  xiii.  5 
Gilead,  xii.  2,  5,  xiii.  n,  25,  31,  xvii.  5,  6, 

xx.  8,  xxi.  38,  xxii.  9,  13,  15,  32 
Gilgal,  iv.  19,  20,  y.  9,  10,  ix.  6,  x.  6,  7,  g, 

15,  43,  xii.  23,  xiv.  6,  xv.  7 
Giloh,  xv.  51 

Girgashites,  iii.  ip,  xxiv.  ii 
Gittah-Hepher,  xix.  13 
Golan,  xx.  8,  xxi.  27 
Goshen,  x.  41,  xi.  16,  xv.  51 
Hadattah,  xv.  25 
Halak,  Mount,  xi.  17,  xii.  7 
Halhul,  xv.  58 
Hali,  xix.  25 
Hamath,  xiii.  5 
Hammath,  xix.  35 
Hammon,  xix.  28 
Hammoth-Dor,  xxi.  32 
Hannathon,  xix.  14 
Haphraim,  xix.  19 
Havoth-Jair,  xiii.  30 
Hazar-Gaddah,  xv.  27 
Hazar-Shual,  xv.  28,  xix.  3 
Hazar-Susah,  xix.  5 
Hazor  (i,  in  North  Palestine),  xi.  i,  10, 

ii,  13,  xii.  19,  xix.  36  ;  (2,  in  the  South 

of  Judah),  xv.  23  ;  (3,  Hazor-hadattah), 

xv.  25 
Hebron  (i,  in  Judah),  x.  3,  5,  23,  36,  39, 


GEOGRAPHICAL   NAMES. 


367 


xi.   21,  xii.    10,   xiv.  13-15,  xv.   13,  54, 

xx.  7,  xxi.  ii,  13  ;  (2,  in  Asher),  xix.  28 
Heleph,  xix.  33 
Helkath,  xix.  25,  xxi.  31 
Hepher,  xii.  17 

Hermon,  Mount,  xi.3, 17,  xii.  1,5,  xiii.s,  n 
Heshbon,  ix.  10,  xii.  2,  5,  xiii.  10,  17,  21, 

26,  27,  xxi.  39 
Heshmon,  xv.  27 
Hinnom,  Valley  of,  xv.  8,  xviii.   16 ;  or 

Valley  of  son  of  Hinnom,  xy.  8 
Hittite  and  Hittites,   i.  4,  iii.  10,  ix.  i, 

xi.  3,  xii.  8,  xxiv.  n 
Hivite  and  Hiyites,  iii.  10,  ix.  i,  7,  xi.  3, 

19,  xii.  8,  xxiv.  ii 
Holon,  xv.  51,  xxi.  15 
Horem,  xix.  38 
Hormah,  xii.  14,  xv.  30,  xix.  4 
Hosah,  xix.  29 
Hukkok,  xix.  34 
Humtah,  xy.  54 
Ibleam,  xvii.  n 
Idalah,  xix.  15 
lim,  xv.  29 
Iron,  xix.  38 
Irpeel,  xviii.  27 
Ir-Shemesh,  x!x.  41 
Israel,  Mountain  or  Mountains  of,  xi. 

16,  21 

Issachar,  xvii.  10,  ii,  xix.  17,  23,  xxi.  6,  28 
Ithnan,  xy.  23 
Ittah-Kazin,  xix.  13 

Jaazer,  xiii.  25 
abbok,  The  Brook,  xii.  2 
Jabneel  (i,  on  north  boundary  of  Judah), 
xy.  ii  ;  (2,  on  boundary  of  Naphtali), 
xix.  33 
Jaeur,  xv.  21 

Jahaza,  Jahazah,  xiii.  18,  xxi.  36 
Janohah,  xvi.  6,  7 
Janura,  xy.  53 
laphia,  xix.  12 

Japho,  xix.  46 
armuth  (i,  in  the  lowlands  of  Judah), 
xv.  35,  x.  3,  5,  23,  xii.  n  ;  (2,  in  Issa 
char),  xxi.  29 

Jattir,  xv.  48,  xxi.  14 

Jazer,  xxi.  39 

Jearim,  Mount,  xv.  10 

Jebusi,  xviii.  16,  28 

Jebusite,  The,  xi.  3,  xv.  8,  63  Also,  as 
a  usual  formula  for  the  conquered 
people,  iii.  10,  ix.  i,  xii.  8,  xxiv.  n 

Jehud,  xix.  45 

Jericho,  ii.  i,  2,  3,  iii.  16,  iv.  13,  19,  y.  10, 
13,  vi.  i,  2,  25,  26,  vii.  i,  viii.  2,  ix.  3, 
x.  i,  28,  30,  xii.  9,  xiii.  32,  xvi.  i,  7, 
xviii.  12,  21,  xx.  8,  xxiv.  ii 

Jericho,  The  plains  of,  iv.  13,  v.  10 

Jerusalem,  x.  i,  3,  5,  23,  xii.  10,  xv.  8, 

63,  xviii.  28 
Jcthlah,  xix.  42 

Jezreel.(i,  in  Issachar),  xix.  18,  also  the 
Valley  of  Jezreel,  xvii.  16;  (2,  in 
Judah),  xv.  56 

Jiphtah,  xv.  43 


Jiphtah-El,  The  Valley  of,  xix.  14,  27 
Jokdeam,  xy.  56 
Jokneam,  xii.  22,  xix.  ii,  xxi.  34 
Jokthe-el,  xv.  38 

Jordan,  i.  2,  n,  14,  15,  ii.  7,  10,  iii.  i,  8, 
">  iS-'S)  17.  »v.  i,  3,  5,  7-10,  16-20,  22, 


8,  23,  27,  32,  xiv.  3,  xv.   5,  xvi.  i,  7, 
xvii.  5,  xviii.  7,  12,   19,  20,  xix.  22,  33, 
34,  xx.  8,  xxii.  4,  7,  10,  n,  25,  xxiii.  4, 
xxiv.  8,  ii 

Judah,  vii.  i,  16-18,  xi.  21,  xiv.  6,  xv.  i, 
12,  13,  20,  21,  63,  xviii.  5,  ii,  14,  xix.  i, 

9,  xx.  7,  xxi.  4,9,  ii 
Judah  upon  Jordan,  xix.  34 
Juttah,  xv.  55,  xxi.  16 
Kabzeel,  xv.  21 

Kadesh-Barnea,  x.  41,  xiv.  6,  7,  xv.  3 
Kanah,  xix.  28 

Kanah,  The  River,  xvi.  8,  xvii.  9 

Karkaa,  xv.  3 

Kartah,  xxi.  34 

Kartan,  xxi.  32 

Kittath,  xix.  15 

Kedemoth,  xiii.  18,  xxi.  37 

Kedesh  (i,   in  the  south  of  Judah),  xv. 

23 ;    (2,   in  Issachar),    xii.   22 ;  (3,   in 

Galilee,   a  city  of  Naphtali),  xix.  37, 

xx.  7,  xxi.  32 
Keilah,  xv.  44 
Kerioth,  xxv.  25 
Keziz,  The  Valley  of,  xviii.  21 
Kibzaim,  xxi.  22 
Kinah,  xv.  22 
Kirjath,  xviii.  28 
Kirjathaim,  xii.  19 
Kirjath  Arba,  xiv.  15,  xv.  13,  54,  xx.  7, 

xxi.  ii 

Kirjath-Baal,  xv.  60,  xviii.  14 
Kirjath- Jearim,  ix.  17,  xv.  9,  xviii.  14,  15 
Kirjath-Sannah,  xv.  49 
Kirjath-Sepher,  xv.  15,  16 
Kishon,  xix.  20,  xxi.  28 
Kithlish,  xv.  40 

Lachish,  x.  3,  5,  26,  31,  33,  xii.  n,  xv.  39 
Lahmam,  xv.  40 
Lakum,  xix.  33 
Lasharon,  xii.  18 

Lebanon,  i.  4,  ix.  i,  xi.  17,  xii.  7,  xiii.  5,  6 
Lebaoth,  xy.  32 
Leshem,  xix.  47 
Libnah,  x.  29,  31,  32,  39,  xii.  15,  xv.  42, 

xxi.  13 

Lo-Debar,  xiii.  26 
Luz,  xvi.  2,  xviii.  13 
Maacahites,  xii.  5,  xiii.  ii,  13 
Maaleh  Acrabbim,  xv.  3 
Maarath,  xv.  58 
Madmannah,  xv.  31 
Madon,  xi.  i,  xii.  19 
Mahanaim,  xiii.  26,  30,  xxi.  38 
Makkeddah,  x.  10,  16,  17,  21,  28,  29,  xv.  41 
Manasseh,  i.  12,  iv.  12,  xii.  6,  xiii.  7,  29, 

31,  xiv.  4,  xvi.  4,  g,  xvii.  1-3,  5-12,  17, 

xviii.  7,  xx.  8,  xxi.  5,  6,  25,  27,  xxii.  i, 

7,  9-n,  13,  15.  21,  30,  31. 


368 


GEOGRAPHICAL  NAMES. 


Maon,  xv.  55 

Maralah,  xix.  n 

Mareshah,  xv.  44 

Mearah,  xiii.  4 

Medeba,  xiii.  9 

Megiddo,  xii.  21,  xvii.  n 

Me-Jarkon,  xix.  46 

Mephaath,  xiii.  18,  xxi.  37 

Merom,  The  waters  of,  xi.  5,  7 

Michmethah,  xvi.  6,  xvii.  7 

Middin,  xv.  61 

Midian,  xiii.  21 

Migdal-El,  xix.  38 

Migdal-Gad,  xv.  37 

Misheal  and  Mishal,  xix.  26,  xxi.  30 

Misrephoth-Maim,  xi.  8,  xiii.  6 

Mizpeh,  Land  of,  xi.  3  ;  Valley  of,  xi.  8  ; 

in  the  lowlands  of  Judah,  xv.  38  ;  in 

Benjamin,  xviii.  26 
Moab,  xxiv.  9 

Moab,  The  plains  of,  xiii.  32 
Moladah,  xy.  26,  xix.  2 
Mozah,  xviii.  26 
Naamah,  xv.  41 
Naarath,  xvi.  7 
Nahallal,  xix.  15,  xxi.  35 
Naphtali,   xix.   32,   39  ;    xx.    7   (Mount 

Naphtali)  ;  xxi.  6,  32 
Neiel,  xix.  27 
Nekeb,  xix.  33 

Nephtoah,  The  water  of,  xv.  9,  xviii.  15 
Nezib,  xv.  43 
Nibshan,  xv.  62 
Nile,  The  (i,  Shichor),  xiii.  3  ;  (2,  River 

of  Egypt),  xv.  4 
Ophni,  xviii.  24 
Ophrah,  xviii.  23 
Parah,  xviii.  23 
Perizzites,  The,  xi.  3,  xii.  8,  xvii.  15  ;  also 

iii.  lo,  ix.  i,  xxiv.  n 
Philistines,  xiii.  2,  3 
Rabbah  (in  Eastern  Palestine),  xiii.  25  ; 

(in  Judah),  xv.  60 
Rabbith,  xix.  20 
Rakkath,  xix.  35 
Rakkon,  xix.  46 
Ramah  (i,  in  Benjamin),  xviii.  25 ;  (2,  in 

Asher),  xix.  29  ;  (3,  in  Naphtali),  xix.  36 
Ramath-Mizpeh,  xiii.  26 
Ramath  of  the  South,  xix.  8 
Ramoth  in  Gilead,  xx.  8,  xxi.  38 
Red  Sea,  ii.  10,  iv.  23,  xxiv.  6 
Rehob,  xix.  28,  30,  xxi.  31 
Rekem,  xviii.  27 
Remeth,  xix.  21 
Remmon,  xix.  7 
Remmpn-Methoar,  xix.  13 
Rephaim,  Valley  of,  xv.  8,  xviii.  16 
Rimmon,  xv.  32 
River  of  Egypt,  xv.  4,  47 
Salcah,  xii.  5,  xiii.  n 
Salt,  City  of,  xv.  62 
Sansannah,  xv.  31 
Sarid,  xix.  10,  12 

Sea,  The  Salt,  iii.  16,  xii.  3,  xv.  2,   5, 
xviii.  19 


Sea,  of  the  plain,  iii.  16,  xii.  3 

Secacah,  xv.  61 

Seir,  (i,  on  the  east  of  the  Arabah),  xi.  17, 

xii.    7,   xxiv.  4;    (2,  on   the   northern 

boundary  of  Judah),  xv.  10 
Shaalabbin,  xix.  42 
Shahazimah,  xix.  22 
Shamir,  xv.  48 
Sharuhen,  xix.  6 
Sharaim,  xv.  36 
Sheba,  xix.  2 
Shebarim,  vii.  5 
Shechem,  xvii.  7,  xx.  7,  xxi.  21,  xxiv.  i, 

25,  32 

Shema,  xv.  26 
Shephelah,  ix.  i,  x.  40,  xi.  2,  16,  xii.  8, 

*V'  33 

ohicron,  xv.  n 
Shihon,  xix.  19 
Shihor-Libnath,  xix.  26 
Shilhim,  xv.  32 
Shiloh,  xviii.  i,  8-10,  xix.  51,  xxi.  2,  xxii. 

9>  I2 

Shimron,  xi.  i,  xix.  15 
Shimron-Meron,  xii.  20 
Shinar,  'vii.  21 
Shittim,  ii.  i,  iii.  i 
Shunem,  xix.  18 
Sibmah,  xiii.  19 
Sidonians,  xiii.  4,  6 
Sihor,  xiii.  3 

Simeon,  xix.  i,  8,  9,  xxi.  4,  9 
Socoh,  xv.  35,  48 
Succoth,  xiii.  27 

Taanach,  xii.  21,  xvii.  ii,  xxi.  25 
Taanath-Shiloh,  xvi.  6 
Tappuah,  xii.  17,  xv.  34,  xvi   8,  xvii.  8 
Tappuah,  The  Land  of,  xvii.  8 
Taralah,  xviii.  27 
Telem,  xv.  24 
Timnah,  xv.  10,  57 
Timnathah,  xix.  43 
Timnath-Serah,  xix.  50,  xxiv.  30 
Tirzah,  xii.  24 
Tyre,  xix.  29 
Limmah,  xix.  30 

Zaanannim,  The  plain  of,  xix.  33 
Zanoah,  xv.  34,  56 
Zaphon,  xiii.  27 
Zaretan,  iii.  16 
Zareth-Shahar,  xiii.  19 
Zebulun,  xix.  10,  16,  27,  34,  xxi.  7,  34 
Zelah,  xviii.  28 
Zemaraim,  xviii.  22 
Zenan,  xv.  37 
Zer,  xix.  35 
Zidclim,  xix.  35 
Zidon,  xi.  8,  xix.  28 
Ziklag,  xv.  31,  xix.  5 
Zin,  xv.  3 

Zin,  The  wilderness  of,  xv.  i 
Zior,  xv.  54 
Ziph  (i,  in  the  south  of  Judah),  xv.  24 ; 

(2,  in  the  highlands  of  Judah),  xv  55 
Zorah,  xv.  33,  xix.  41 


